{"id": "31843", "revid": "50994209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31843", "title": "Uruguay", "text": "Country in South America\nUruguay, officially the Oriental Republic of Uruguay, is a country in South America. It shares borders with Argentina to its west and southwest and Brazil to its north and northeast, while bordering the R\u00edo de la Plata to the south and the Atlantic Ocean to the southeast. It is part of the Southern Cone region of South America. Uruguay covers an area of approximately . It has a population of almost 3.5 million people, of whom nearly 2 million live in the metropolitan area of its capital and largest city, Montevideo.\nThe area that became Uruguay was first inhabited by groups of hunter gatherers 13,000 years ago. The first European explorer to reach the region was Juan D\u00edaz de Sol\u00eds in 1516, but the area was colonized later than its neighbors. At the time of European arrival, the Charr\u00faa were the predominant tribe, alongside other groups such as the Guaran\u00ed and the Chan\u00e1. However, none of these groups were socially or politically organized, which contributed to their decline. Amid territorial disputes, the Portuguese established Col\u00f4nia do Sacramento in 1680, and the Spanish founded Montevideo as a military stronghold. Uruguay secured its independence between 1811 and 1828, following a four-way struggle involving Portugal, Spain, and later the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata and the Empire of Brazil. In 1830, the country enacted its constitution and was formally established as an independent state.\nDuring the early years following its independence, Uruguay remained subject to foreign influence and intervention, along with a series of internal conflicts and political turmoil. From the second half of the 19th century, the country saw significant waves of European migration\u2014mainly from Spain, Italy, and France\u2014which greatly influenced its demographics and laid the foundation for modern-day Uruguayan culture and society. National politics were dominated by two political parties: the Colorado Party and the National Party, which clashed in several civil wars during the 19th century and are collectively known as the 'Traditional Parties'. In the early 20th century, a series of pioneering economic, labor, and socialreforms that laid the foundations of an advanced welfare state. Combined with a period of sustained political stability, these developments earned the country the reputation of being the \u201cSwitzerland of the Americas.\u201d A series of economic crises and the fight against far-left urban guerrilla warfare in the late 1960s and early 1970s culminated in the 1973 \"coup d'\u00e9tat\", which established a civic-military dictatorship until 1985. Uruguay is today a democratic constitutional republic, with a president who serves as both head of state and head of government.\nUruguay is highly ranked in international measurements of democracy, government transparency, economic freedom, social progress, income equality, per capita income, innovation, and infrastructure. It is classified as a high-income economy and has fully legalized cannabis\u2014the first country in the world to do so\u2014as well as same-sex marriage, abortion and euthanasia. Uruguay is also a founding member of the United Nations, the OAS, and Mercosur.\nEtymology.\nThe country of \"Uruguay\" takes its name from the R\u00edo Uruguay in the Indigenous Guaran\u00ed language. There are several interpretations, including \"bird-river\" (\"the river of the \"uru\"\", via Charruan, ' being a common noun for any wild fowl). The name could also refer to a river snail called ' (\"Pomella megastoma\") that was plentiful across its shores.\nOne of the most popular interpretations of the name was proposed by the renowned Uruguayan poet Juan Zorrilla de San Mart\u00edn, \"the river of painted birds\"; this interpretation, although dubious, still holds an important cultural significance in the country.\nIn Spanish colonial times and for some time thereafter, Uruguay and some neighboring territories were called ' (\"Eastern Bank [of the Uruguay River]\"), then for a few years the ' (\"Eastern Province\").\nSince its independence, the country has been known as \"\"\", which literally translates to \"Republic East of the Uruguay\" [River]\". However, it is officially translated either as the \"Oriental Republic of Uruguay\" or the \"Eastern Republic of Uruguay\".\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nHuman presence in the region now known as Uruguay dates back approximately 13,000 years, with evidence of hunter-gatherer communities. It is estimated that at the time of the first contact with Europeans in the 16th century, there were about 9,000 Charr\u00faa and 6,000 Chan\u00e1 and some Guaran\u00ed island settlements.\nThere is an extensive archeological collection of man-made tumuli known as \"Cerritos de Indios\" in the eastern part of the country, some of them dating back to 5,000 years ago. Very little is known about the people who built them as they left no written record, but evidence has been found in place of indigenous agriculture and of extinct indigenous woolly dogs.\nColonial rule.\nThe Portuguese were the first Europeans to enter the region of present-day Uruguay in 1512. The Spanish arrived in present-day Uruguay in 1515 but were the first to set foot in the area, claiming it for the crown. The indigenous peoples' fierce resistance to conquest, combined with the absence of valuable resources, limited European settlement in the region during the 16th and 17th centuries. Uruguay then became a zone of contention between the Spanish and Portuguese empires. In 1603, the Spanish began introducing cattle, which became a source of regional wealth. The first permanent Spanish settlement was founded in 1624 at Soriano on the R\u00edo Negro. In 1680, the Portuguese built a fort at Colonia del Sacramento.\nMontevideo, the current capital of Uruguay, was founded by the Spanish in 1726 as a military stronghold. Its natural harbor soon developed into a commercial area competing with R\u00edo de la Plata's capital, Buenos Aires. Uruguay's early 19th-century history was shaped by ongoing fights for dominance in the Platine region between British, Spanish, Portuguese, and other colonial forces. In 1806 and 1807, the British army attempted to seize Buenos Aires and Montevideo as part of the Napoleonic Wars. Montevideo was occupied by British forces from February to September 1807.\nIndependence struggle.\nIn 1811, Jos\u00e9 Gervasio Artigas, who became Uruguay's national hero, launched a successful revolt against the Spanish authorities, defeating them on 18 May at the Battle of Las Piedras. In 1813, the new government in Buenos Aires convened a constituent assembly where Artigas emerged as a champion of federalism, demanding political and economic autonomy for each area and the Banda Oriental in particular. The assembly refused to seat the delegates from the Banda Oriental; however, Buenos Aires pursued a system based on unitary centralism.\nAs a result, Artigas broke with Buenos Aires and besieged Montevideo, taking the city in early 1815. Once the troops from Buenos Aires had withdrawn, the Banda Oriental appointed its first autonomous government. Artigas organized the Federal League under his protection, consisting of six provinces, five of which later became part of Argentina.\nIn 1816, 10,000 Portuguese troops invaded the Banda Oriental from Brazil; they took Montevideo in January 1817. After nearly four more years of struggle, the Portuguese Kingdom of Brazil annexed the \"Banda Oriental\" as a province under the name of \"Cisplatina\". The Brazilian Empire became independent of Portugal in 1822. In response to the annexation, the Thirty-Three Orientals, led by Juan Antonio Lavalleja, declared independence on 25 August 1825, supported by the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata (present-day Argentina). This led to the 500-day-long Cisplatine War. Neither side gained the upper hand, and in 1828, the Treaty of Montevideo, fostered by the United Kingdom through the diplomatic efforts of Viscount John Ponsonby, gave birth to Uruguay as an independent state. 25 August is celebrated as Independence Day, a national holiday. The nation's first constitution was adopted on 18 July 1830.\n19th century.\nAt the time of independence, Uruguay had an estimated population of just under 75,000. The political scene in Uruguay became split between two parties: the conservative \"Blancos\" (Whites), headed by the second President Manuel Oribe, representing the agricultural interests of the countryside, and the liberal \"Colorados\" (Reds), led by the first President Fructuoso Rivera, representing the business interests of Montevideo. The Uruguayan parties received support from warring political factions in neighboring Argentina, which became involved in Uruguayan affairs.\nThe \"Colorados\" favored the exiled Argentine liberal Unitarios, many of whom had taken refuge in Montevideo, while the Blanco president Manuel Oribe was a close friend of the Argentine ruler Manuel de Rosas. On 15 June 1838, an army led by the Colorado leader Rivera overthrew President Oribe, who fled to Argentina. Rivera declared war on Rosas in 1839. The conflict would last 13 years and become known as the Guerra Grande (the Great War). In 1843, an Argentine army overran Uruguay on Oribe's behalf but failed to take the capital. The siege of Montevideo began in February 1843 and lasted nine years. The besieged Uruguayans called on resident foreigners for help, which led to a French and an Italian legion being formed, the latter led by the exiled Giuseppe Garibaldi.\nIn 1845, Britain and France intervened against Rosas to restore commerce to normal levels in the region. Their efforts proved ineffective, and by 1849, tired of the war, both withdrew after signing a treaty favorable to Rosas. It appeared that Montevideo would finally fall when an uprising against Rosas, led by Justo Jos\u00e9 de Urquiza, governor of Argentina's Entre R\u00edos Province, began. The Brazilian intervention in May 1851 on behalf of the \"Colorados\", combined with the uprising, changed the situation, and Oribe was defeated. The siege of Montevideo was lifted, and the \"Guerra Grande\" finally came to an end. Montevideo rewarded Brazil's support by signing treaties that confirmed Brazil's right to intervene in Uruguay's internal affairs.\nIn accordance with the 1851 treaties, Brazil intervened militarily in Uruguay as often as it deemed necessary. In 1865, the Triple Alliance was formed by the emperor of Brazil, the president of Argentina, and the Colorado general Venancio Flores, the Uruguayan head of government whom they both had helped to gain power. The Triple Alliance declared war on the Paraguayan leader Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez. The resulting Paraguayan War ended with the invasion of Paraguay and its defeat by the armies of the three countries. Montevideo was used as a supply station by the Brazilian navy, and it experienced a period of prosperity and relative calm during the war.\nThe first railway line was assembled in Uruguay in 1867, and a branch consisting of a horse-drawn train was opened. The present-day State Railways Administration of Uruguay maintains of extendable railway network.\nThe constitutional government of General Lorenzo Batlle y Grau (1868\u201372) suppressed the Revolution of the Lances by the Blancos. After two years of struggle, a peace agreement was signed in 1872 that gave the Blancos a share in the emoluments and functions of government through control of four of the departments of Uruguay. This establishment of the policy of co-participation represented the search for a new formula of compromise based on the coexistence of the party in power and the opposition party. Despite this agreement, the Colorado rule was threatened by the failed Tricolor Revolution in 1875 and the Revolution of the Quebracho in 1886.\nThe Colorado effort to reduce Blancos to only three departments caused a Blanco uprising of 1897, which ended with creating 16 departments, of which the Blancos now had control over six. Blancos were given \u2153 seats in Congress. This division of power lasted until President Jose Batlle y Ordonez instituted his political reforms, which caused the last uprising by Blancos in 1904 that ended with the Battle of Masoller and the death of Blanco leader Aparicio Saravia.\nBetween 1875 and 1890, the military became the center of power. During this authoritarian period, the government took steps toward the organization of the country as a modern state, encouraging its economic and social transformation. Pressure groups (consisting mainly of businessmen, \"hacendados\", and industrialists) were organized and had a strong influence on the government. A transition period (1886\u201390) followed, during which politicians began recovering lost ground, and some civilian participation in government occurred. After the Guerra Grande, there was a sharp rise in the number of immigrants, primarily from Italy and Spain. By 1879, the total population of the country was over 438,500. The economy reflected a steep upswing (if demonstrated graphically, above all other related economic determinants) in livestock raising and exports. Montevideo became a major financial center of the region and an entrep\u00f4t for goods from Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay.\n20th century.\nThe Colorado leader Jos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez was elected president in 1903. The following year, the Blancos led a rural revolt, and eight bloody months of fighting ensued before their leader, Aparicio Saravia, was killed in battle. Government forces emerged victorious, leading to the end of the co-participation politics that had begun in 1872. Batlle had two terms (1903\u201307 and 1911\u201315) during which he instituted major reforms, such as a welfare program, government participation in the economy, and a plural executive.\nGabriel Terra became president in March 1931. His inauguration coincided with the effects of the Great Depression, and the social climate became tense as a result of the lack of jobs. There were confrontations in which police and leftists died. In 1933, Terra organized a coup d'\u00e9tat, dissolving the General Assembly and governing by decree. A new constitution was promulgated in 1934, transferring powers to the president. In general, the Terra government weakened or neutralized economic nationalism and social reform.\nIn 1938, general elections were held, and Terra's brother-in-law, General Alfredo Baldomir, was elected president. Under pressure from organized labor and the National Party, Baldomir advocated free elections, freedom of the press, and a new constitution. Although Baldomir declared Uruguay neutral in 1939, British warships and the German ship fought a battle not far off Uruguay's coast. The \"Admiral Graf Spee\" took refuge in Montevideo, claiming sanctuary in a neutral port, but was later ordered out.\nIn 1945, Uruguay formally signed the Declaration by the United Nations and entered World War II, leading the country to declare war on Germany and Japan. Following the end of the war, it became a founding member of the United Nations.\nAn armed group of Marxist\u2013Leninist urban guerrillas, known as the Tupamaros, emerged in the 1960s, engaging in activities such as bank robbery, kidnapping, and assassination, in addition to attempting an overthrow of the government.\nCivic-military dictatorship.\nPresident Jorge Pacheco declared a state of emergency in 1968, followed by a further suspension of civil liberties in 1972. In 1973, amid increasing economic and political turmoil, the armed forces, asked by President Juan Mar\u00eda Bordaberry, disbanded Parliament and established a civilian-military regime. The CIA-backed campaign of political repression and state terror involving intelligence operations and assassination of opponents was called Operation Condor.\nAccording to one source, around 180 Uruguayans are known to have been killed and disappeared, with thousands more illegally detained and tortured during the 12-year civil-military rule from 1973 to 1985. Most were killed in Argentina and other neighboring countries, with 36 of them having been killed in Uruguay. According to Edy Kaufman (cited by David Altman), Uruguay at the time had the highest per capita number of political prisoners in the world. \"Kaufman, who spoke at the U.S. Congressional Hearings of 1976 on behalf of Amnesty International, estimated that one in every five Uruguayans went into exile, one in fifty were detained, and one in five hundred went to prison (most of them tortured).\" Social spending was reduced, and many state-owned companies were privatized. However, the economy did not improve and deteriorated after 1980; the gross domestic product (GDP) fell by 20%, and unemployment rose to 17%. The state intervened by trying to bail out failing companies and banks.\nReturn to democracy (1984\u2013present).\nA new constitution, drafted by the military, was rejected in a November 1980 referendum. Following the referendum, the armed forces announced a plan for the return to civilian rule, and national elections were held in 1984. Colorado Party leader Julio Mar\u00eda Sanguinetti won the presidency and served from 1985 to 1990. The first Sanguinetti administration implemented economic reforms and consolidated democracy following the country's years under military rule. The National Party's Luis Alberto Lacalle won the 1989 presidential election, and a referendum endorsed amnesty for human rights abusers. Sanguinetti was then reelected in 1994. Both presidents continued the economic structural reforms initiated after the reinstatement of democracy.\nThe 1999 national elections were held under a new electoral system established by a 1996 constitutional amendment. Colorado Party candidate Jorge Batlle, aided by the support of the National Party, defeated Broad Front candidate Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez. The formal coalition ended in November 2002, when the Blancos withdrew their ministers from the cabinet, although the Blancos continued to support the Colorados on most issues. Low commodity prices and economic difficulties in Uruguay's main export markets (starting in Brazil with the devaluation of the real, then in Argentina in 2002) caused a severe recession; the economy contracted by 11%, unemployment climbed to 21%, and the percentage of Uruguayans in poverty rose to over 30%.\nIn 2004, Uruguayans elected Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez as president while giving the Broad Front a majority in both houses of Parliament. V\u00e1zquez stuck to economic orthodoxy. As commodity prices soared and the economy recovered from the recession, he tripled foreign investment, cut poverty and unemployment, cut public debt from 79% of GDP to 60%, and kept inflation steady. In 2009, Jos\u00e9 Mujica, a former left-wing guerrilla leader (Tupamaros) who spent almost 15 years in prison during the country's military rule, emerged as the new president as the Broad Front won the election for a second time. Abortion was legalized in 2012, followed by same-sex marriage and cannabis in the following year, making Uruguay the first country in the modern era to legalize cannabis.\nIn 2014, Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez was elected to a non-consecutive second presidential term, which began on 1 March 2015. In 2020, after 15 years of left-wing rule, he was succeeded by Luis Alberto Lacalle Pou, a member of the conservative National Party, as the 42nd President of Uruguay. On 1 March 2025, Yamandu Orsi took office as Uruguay's new president, as the left-wing coalition of the Broad Front returned to power after a five-year interruption.\nGeography.\nWith of continental land and of territorial waters, Uruguay is the second-smallest sovereign nation in South America (after Suriname) and the third smallest territory (French Guiana is the smallest). The landscape features mostly rolling plains and low hill ranges (\"cuchillas\") with a fertile coastal lowland. Uruguay has of coastline. The highest point in the country is the Cerro Catedral, whose peak reaches AMSL in the \"Sierra Carap\u00e9\" hill range. To the southwest is the R\u00edo de la Plata, the estuary of the Uruguay River (the river which forms the country's western border).\nA dense fluvial network covers the country, consisting of four river basins, or deltas: the R\u00edo de la Plata Basin, the Uruguay River, the Laguna Mer\u00edn, and the R\u00edo Negro. The major internal river is the R\u00edo Negro (\"Black River\"), dammed in 1945, resulting in the formation of the artificial Rinc\u00f3n del Bonete Lake in the heart of Uruguay. Several lagoons are found along the Atlantic coast.\nMontevideo is the southernmost national capital in the Americas and the third most southerly in the world (after Canberra and Wellington). Uruguay is the only country in South America situated entirely south of the Tropic of Capricorn, and is the southernmost sovereign state in the world when ordered by northernmost point of latitude. There are ten national parks in Uruguay: Five in the wetland areas of the east, three in the central hill country, and one in the west along the Rio Uruguay. Uruguay is home to the Uruguayan savanna terrestrial ecoregion. The country had a 2019 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 3.61/10, ranking it 147th globally out of 172 countries.\nClimate.\nLocated entirely within the southern temperate zone, Uruguay has a climate that is relatively mild and fairly uniform nationwide. According to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification, most of the country has a humid subtropical climate (Cfa). Only in some spots of the Atlantic Coast and at the summit of the highest hills of the Cuchilla Grande the climate is oceanic (Cfb).\nThe country experiences four seasons, with summer from December to March and winter from June to September. Seasonal variations are pronounced, but extremes in temperature are rare. Summers are tempered by winds off the Atlantic, and severe cold in winter is unknown. Although it never gets too cold, frosts occur every year during the winter months, and precipitation such as sleet and hail occur almost every winter, but snow is very rare; it does occur every couple of years at higher elevations, but almost always without accumulation. As would be expected with its abundance of water, high humidity and fog are common.\nThe absence of mountains, which act as weather barriers, makes all locations vulnerable to high winds and rapid changes in weather as fronts or storms sweep across the country. These storms can be strong; they can bring squalls, hail, and sometimes even tornadoes. The country experiences extratropical cyclones but no tropical cyclones, due to the fact that the South Atlantic Ocean is rarely warm enough for their development. Both summer and winter weather may vary from day to day with the passing of storm fronts, where a hot northerly wind may occasionally be followed by a cold wind (pampero) from the Argentine Pampas.\nEven though both temperature and precipitation are quite uniform nationwide, there are considerable differences across the territory. The average annual temperature of the country is , ranging from in the southeast to in the northwest. Winter temperatures range from a daily average of in the south to in the north, while summer average daily temperatures range from in the southeast to in the northwest. The southeast is considerably cooler than the rest of the country, especially during spring, when the ocean with cold water after the winter cools down the temperature of the air and brings more humidity to that region. However, the south of the country receives less precipitation than the north. For example, Montevideo receives approximately of precipitation per year, while the city of Rivera in the northeast receives . The heaviest precipitation occurs during the autumn months, although more frequent rainy spells occur in winter. But periods of drought or excessive rain can occur anytime during the year.\nNational extreme temperatures at sea level are in Paysand\u00fa city (20 January 1943) and Florida city (14 January 2022) and in Melo city (14 June 1967).\nGovernment and politics.\nGovernment.\nUruguay is a representative democratic republic with a presidential system. The Uruguayan Constitution establishes a separation of powers intended to provide a system of checks and balances and members of government are elected for a five-year term by a universal suffrage system. Uruguay is a unitary state: justice, education, health, security, foreign policy and defense are all administered nationwide.\nThe Executive branch is exercised by the president of the Republic who serves both as head of state and head of government, along with a Council of Ministers of 14 members. Together with the Vice President, the President is elected through a direct popular vote for a five-year term, with no possibility of immediate re-election. Each party presents a single presidential ticket\u2014determined through primary elections\u2014and the winning ticket must receive an absolute majority of votes.\nThe Legislative branch is constituted by the General Assembly, a bicameral legislature made up of the Chamber of Representatives and the Chamber of Senators. The former consists of 99 members representing the 19 departments, elected for a five-year term based on proportional representation, while the latter comprises 31 members\u201430 elected for five-year terms by proportional representation\u2014and the Vice President, who presides over the chamber and has the right to vote. Parliamentary elections are held jointly with the presidential election in a general vote.\nThe Judicial branch is headed by the Supreme Court, whose members\u2014known as \u201cMinisters\u201d\u2014are appointed by the General Assembly with a two-thirds majority and serve ten-year terms or until reaching the age of 70. The Court functions as the highest appellate body and the court of last resort, while also reviewing the constitutionality of laws. Below it are the Courts of Appeals\u2014each composed of three members\u2014and the Lawyer Judges and the Justices of the Peace, the latter two being single-member courts, with all appointed by the Supreme Court.\nUruguay adopted its current constitution in 1967, with the most recent reform occurring in 1997. Drawing on Switzerland and its use of the initiative, the Uruguayan Constitution allows citizens to propose bills, call for referendums to repeal laws, and submit constitutional reform proposals, which are ultimately decided in a nationwide referendum.\nFor most of Uruguay's history, the country was characterized by a two-party system between the Colorado and National parties, although the former held power for longer periods. At certain times, Uruguay has had periods of collegial executive governance. The earlier period, under the National Council of Administration (1919\u20131933), was a diarchic system in which the Council shared executive power with the President and Cabinet. The later period, under the National Council of Government (1952\u20131967), authority was largely concentrated in the Council itself, which acted as the sole executive body.\nIn 2024, Uruguay was classified as a \"full democracy\" by The Economist\u2019s Democracy Index, ranking 15th globally and first in Latin America. Latinobar\u00f3metro surveys consistently place the country among the highest in terms of public support for democracy and satisfaction with it. Moreover, according to the 2023 V-Dem Democracy Indices, Uruguay ranked 31st in the world for electoral democracy and 2nd globally\u2014behind Switzerland\u2014for citizen-initiated direct democracy.\nAdministrative divisions.\nUruguay is divided into 19 departments whose local administrations replicate the division of the executive and legislative powers. Each department elects its own authorities through a universal suffrage system. The departmental executive authority resides in a superintendent and the legislative authority in a departmental board.\nForeign relations.\nThe country's foreign policy is directed by the Ministry of Foreign Relations. Uruguay has traditionally had strong political and cultural ties with its neighboring countries and with Europe, and its international relations have been guided by the principles of non-intervention and multilateralism. The country is a founding member of international organizations such as the United Nations, the Organization of American States, the Southern Common Market, and the Latin American Integration Association. The headquarters of the latter two are located in its capital Montevideo, for which the role of the city has been compared to that of Brussels in Europe.\nUruguay has two uncontested boundary disputes with Brazil, over Isla Brasilera and the Invernada River region near Masoller. The two countries disagree on which tributary represents the legitimate source of the Quara\u00ed/Cuareim River, which would define the border in the latter disputed section, according to the 1851 border treaty between the two countries. The disputed areas remain \"de facto\" under Brazilian control, with little to no actual effort by Uruguay to assert its claims. Both countries have friendly diplomatic relations and strong economic ties.\nUruguay is also a founding member of The Forum of Small States (FOSS), a voluntary and informal grouping at the UN. The country has friendly relations with the United States since its transition back to democracy. Commercial ties between both countries have expanded with the signing of a bilateral investment treaty in 2004 and a Trade and Investment Framework Agreement in January 2007. The United States and Uruguay have also cooperated on military matters, with both countries playing significant roles in the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti. In 2017, Uruguay signed the UN treaty on the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons. It also rejoined the Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance (TIAR or \"Rio Pact\") in 2020.\nMilitary.\nThe Uruguayan Armed Forces are constitutionally subordinate to the president of the Republic, through the minister of defense. Armed forces personnel number about 18,000 for the Army, 6,000 for the Navy, and 3,000 for the Air Force. Enlistment is voluntary in peacetime, but the government has the authority to conscript in emergencies.\nUruguay ranks first in the world on a per capita basis for its contributions to the United Nations peacekeeping forces, with 2,513 soldiers and officers in 10 UN peacekeeping missions. As of February 2010, Uruguay had 1,136 military personnel deployed to Haiti in support of MINUSTAH and 1,360 deployed in support of MONUC in the Congo. In December 2010, Uruguayan Major General Gloodtdofsky, was appointed Chief Military Observer and head of the United Nations Military Observer Group in India and Pakistan.\nSince May 2009, homosexuals have been allowed to serve in the military after the defense minister signed a decree stating that military recruitment policy would no longer discriminate on the basis of sexual orientation. In the fiscal year 2010, the United States provided Uruguay with $1.7\u00a0million in military assistance, including $1\u00a0million in Foreign Military Financing and $480,000 in International Military Education and Training.\nEconomy.\nIn 1991, the country experienced an increase in strikes to obtain wage compensation to offset inflation and to oppose the privatizations desired by the government of Luis Alberto Lacalle. A general strike was called in 1992, and the privatization policy was widely rejected by the referendum. In 1994 and 1995, Uruguay faced economic difficulties caused by the liberalization of foreign trade, which increased the trade deficit. The Montevideo Gas Company and the Pluna airline were turned over to the private sector, but the pace of privatization slowed down in 1996. Uruguay experienced a major economic and financial crisis between 1999 and 2002, principally a spillover effect from the economic problems of Argentina. The economy contracted by 11%, and unemployment climbed to 14\u201321%.\nIn 2004, the Batlle government signed a three-year $1.1\u00a0billion stand-by arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), committing the country to a substantial primary fiscal surplus, low inflation, considerable reductions in external debt, and several structural reforms designed to improve competitiveness and attract foreign investment. Uruguay terminated the agreement in 2006 following the early repayment of its debt but maintained a number of the policy commitments. V\u00e1zquez, who assumed the government in March 2005, created the Ministry of Social Development and sought to reduce the country's poverty rate with a $240\u00a0million National Plan to Address the Social Emergency (PANES), which provided a monthly conditional cash transfer of approximately $75 to over 100,000 households in extreme poverty. In exchange, those receiving the benefits were required to participate in community work, ensure that their children attended school daily, and have regular health check-ups.\nFollowing the 2001 Argentine credit default, prices in the Uruguayan economy made a variety of services, including information technology and architectural expertise, once too expensive in many foreign markets, exportable. The Frente Amplio government, while continuing payments on Uruguay's external debt, also undertook an emergency plan to attack the widespread problems of poverty and unemployment. The economy grew at an annual rate of 6.7% during the 2004\u20132008 period. Uruguay's export markets have been diversified to reduce dependency on Argentina and Brazil. Poverty was reduced from 33% in 2002 to 21.7% in July 2008, while extreme poverty dropped from 3.3% to 1.7%.\nBetween 2007 and 2009, Uruguay was the only country in the Americas that did not technically experience a recession (two consecutive downward quarters). Unemployment reached a record low of 5.4% in December 2010 before rising to 6.1% in January 2011. While unemployment is still at a low level, the IMF observed a rise in inflationary pressures, and Uruguay's GDP expanded by 10.4% for the first half of 2010. According to IMF estimates, Uruguay was probably to achieve growth in real GDP of between 8% and 8.5% in 2010, followed by 5% growth in 2011 and 4% in subsequent years. Gross public sector debt contracted in the second quarter of 2010, after five consecutive periods of sustained increase, reaching $21.885 billion US dollars, equivalent to 59.5% of the GDP.\nUruguay was ranked 68th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.The number of union members has quadrupled since 2003, rising from 110,000 to more than 400,000 in 2015 for a working population of 1.5 million. According to the International Trade Union Confederation, Uruguay has \"ratified all eight core ILO labour Conventions\". The growth, use, and sale of cannabis were legalized on 11 December 2013, by former president Jos\u00e9 \"Pepe\" Mujica, making Uruguay the first country in the world to fully legalize marijuana. The law was voted on at the Uruguayan Senate on the same date with 16 votes to approve it and 13 against.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2010, Uruguay's export-oriented agricultural sector contributed to 9.3% of the GDP and employed 13% of the workforce. Official statistics from Uruguay's Agriculture and Livestock Ministry indicate that meat and sheep farming in Uruguay occupies 59.6% of the land. The percentage further increases to 82.4% when cattle breeding is linked to other farm activities such as dairy, forage, and rotation with crops such as rice.\nAccording to FAOSTAT, Uruguay is one of the world's largest producers of soybeans (9th), wool (12th), horse meat (14th), beeswax (14th), and quinces (17th). Most farms (25,500 out of 39,120) are family-managed; beef and wool represent the main activities and main source of income for 65% of them, followed by vegetable farming at 12%, dairy farming at 11%, hogs at 2%, and poultry also at 2%. Beef is the main export commodity of the country, totaling over US$1\u00a0billion in 2006.\nIn 2007, Uruguay had cattle herds totalling 12\u00a0million head, making it the country with the highest number of cattle per capita at 3.8. However, 54% is in the hands of 11% of farmers, who have a minimum of 500 head. At the other extreme, 38% of farmers exploit small lots and have herds averaging below one hundred head.\nTourism.\nThe tourism industry in Uruguay is an important part of its economy. In 2012, the sector was estimated to account for 97,000 jobs and (directly and indirectly) 9% of GDP. Uruguay is the Latin American country that receives the most tourists in relation to its population. In 2023, 3.8\u00a0million tourists entered Uruguay, of which the majority were Argentines and Brazilians, followed by Chileans, Paraguayans, Americans and Europeans of various nationalities.\nCultural experiences in Uruguay include exploring the country's colonial heritage, as found in Colonia del Sacramento. Historical monuments include Torres Garc\u00eda Museum and Estadio Centenario. One of the main natural attractions in Uruguay is Punta del Esteis situated on a small peninsula off the southeast coast of Uruguay. Its beaches are divided into Mansa, or tame (river) side and Brava, or rugged (ocean) side. Punta del Este adjoins the city of Maldonado, while to its northeast along the coast are found the smaller resorts of La Barra and Jos\u00e9 Ignacio\nAnother beautiful place to visit in Uruguay is Cabo Polonio, a seaside resort located in the municipality of Castillos, in the Rocha Department of Uruguay. This seaside resort is part of Cabo Polonio National Park, a protected natural area. It lies a short distance from the resort town of Valizas and features three small islands off its coast, known as the Torres Islands: Isla Rasa, Isla Encantada, and El Islote.\nTransportation.\nThe Port of Montevideo is one of the major container terminal port; it handles over 1.1\u00a0million containers annually. Its quay can handle vessels. Nine straddle cranes allow for 80 to 100 movements per hour. The port of Nueva Palmira is a major regional merchandise transfer point and houses both private and government-run terminals.\nAir.\nCarrasco International Airport was initially inaugurated in 1947, and in 2009, Puerta del Sur, the airport owner and operator, commissioned Rafael Vi\u00f1oly Architects to expand and modernize the existing facilities with a spacious new passenger terminal with an investment of $165\u00a0million. The airport can handle up to 4.5\u00a0million users per year. PLUNA was the flag carrier of Uruguay and was headquartered in Carrasco.\nThe Punta del Este International Airport, located from Punta del Este in the Maldonado Department, is the second busiest air terminal in Uruguay, built by the Uruguayan architect Carlos Ott. It was inaugurated in 1997.\nLand.\nThe Administraci\u00f3n de Ferrocarriles del Estado is the autonomous agency in charge of rail transport and the maintenance of the railroad network. Uruguay has about of operational railroad track. Until 1947, about 90% of the railroad system was British-owned. In 1949, the government nationalized the railways, along with the electric trams and the Montevideo Waterworks Company. However, in 1985, the \"National Transport Plan\" suggested passenger trains were too costly to repair and maintain. Cargo trains would continue, but bus transportation became the \"economic\" alternative for travellers. Passenger service was then discontinued in 1988. However, rail passenger commuter service into Montevideo was restarted in 1993, and now comprises three suburban lines.\nSurfaced roads connect Montevideo to the other urban centers in the country, the main highways leading to the border and neighboring cities. Numerous unpaved roads connect farms and small towns. Overland trade has increased markedly since Mercosur (Southern Common Market) was formed in the 1990s and again in the later 2000s. Most of the country's domestic freight and passenger service is by road rather than rail. The country has several international bus services connecting the capital and frontier localities to neighboring countries. These include 17 destinations in Argentina, 12 destinations in Brazil, and the capital cities of Chile and Paraguay.\nTelecommunications.\nThe telecommunications industry is more developed than in most other Latin American countries, being the first country in the Americas to achieve complete digital telephone coverage in 1997. The system is government-owned, and there have been controversial proposals to partially privatize it since the 1990s.\nThe mobile phone market is shared by the state-owned ANTEL and two private companies, Movistar and Claro. The ANTEL has the largest market share at 49% of Uruguay's mobile lines. ANTEL has launched a commercial 5G network in April 2019 with still continual development. While Movistar and Claro have only 30% and 21% of the market share, respectively. The Google Search engine accounted for 95% of total search engine market share in 2023\u20132024.\nEnergy.\nIn 2010, the Ministry of Energy, Mining and Industry of Uruguay approved Decree 354 on the Promotion of Renewable Energies. In 2021, Uruguay had, in terms of installed renewable electricity, 1,538 MW in hydropower, 1,514 MW in wind power (35th largest in the world), 258 MW in solar power (66th largest in the world), and 423 MW in biomass. In 2023, 98% of Uruguay's electricity comes from renewable energy. The dramatic shift, taking less than ten years and without government funding, lowered electricity costs and slashed the country's carbon footprint. Most of the electricity comes from hydroelectric facilities and wind parks. Uruguay no longer imports electricity. In 2022, 49% of the country's total carbon dioxide emissions came from the burning of diesel fuel, followed by gasoline, with a 25% share.\nDemographics.\nUruguayans are of predominantly European origin, with 86.0% of the population claiming \"white\" as their dominant ancestry self-identified in the 2023 census, a decrease from 87.7% over the 2011 census.\nMost Uruguayans of European ancestry are descendants of 19th and 20th century immigrants from Spain, and to a lesser degree Germany, Italy, France, and Britain. Earlier settlers had migrated from Argentina. People of African descent make up around five percent of the total. There are also important communities of Japanese. Overall, the ethnic composition is similar to neighboring Argentine provinces as well as Southern Brazil.\nFrom 1963 to 1985, an estimated 320,000 Uruguayans emigrated. The most popular destinations for Uruguayan emigrants are Argentina, followed by the United States, Australia, Canada, Spain, Brazil, Italy, France and Portugal. In 2009, for the first time in 44 years, the country saw an overall positive influx when comparing immigration to emigration. 3,825 residence permits were awarded in 2009, compared with 1,216 in 2005. 50% of new legal residents come from Argentina and Brazil. A migration law passed in 2008 gives immigrants the same rights and opportunities that nationals have, with the requisite of proving a monthly income of $650.\nMetropolitan Montevideo is the only large city, with around 1.9\u00a0million inhabitants, or more than half the country's total population. The rest of the urban population lives in about 30 towns. Uruguay's rate of population growth is much lower than in other Latin American countries. Its median age is 35.3 years, higher than the global average due to its low birth rate, high life expectancy, and relatively high rate of emigration among younger people. A quarter of the population is less than 15 years old, and about a sixth are aged 60 and older. In 2017, the average total fertility rate (TFR) across Uruguay was 1.70 children born per woman, below the replacement rate of 2.1. It remains considerably below the high of 5.76 children born per woman in 1882. A 2017 IADB report on labor conditions for Latin American nations ranked Uruguay as the region's leader overall in all but one subindexes, including gender, age, income, formality, and labor participation.\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLanguage.\nSpanish is the de facto national language. Uruguayan Spanish, as a variant of \"Rioplatense\", employs both and (with or ) and has a great influence of the Italian language and its different dialects since it incorporates \"lunfardo\". In the border areas with Brazil in the northeast of the country, Uruguayan Portuguese is spoken, which consists of a mixture of Spanish with Brazilian Portuguese. It is a dialect without formally defined orthography and without any official recognition. English is the most widely known foreign language among the Uruguayan people.\nAs few indigenous people exist in the population, no indigenous languages are thought to remain in active use in the country. Another spoken dialect was the Patois, which is an Occitan dialect. The dialect was spoken mainly in the Colonia Department, where the first pilgrims settled, in the city called La Paz. There are still written tracts of the language in the Waldensians Library (Biblioteca Valdense) in the town of Colonia Valdense, Colonia Department. Patois speakers arrived to Uruguay from the Piedmont. Originally, they were Vaudois who become Waldensians, giving their name to the city Colonia Valdense, which translated from the Spanish to mean \"Waldensian Colony\".\nIn 2001, Uruguayan Sign Language (LSU) was recognized as an official language of Uruguay under Law 17.378.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the largest religion in Uruguay. The country has no official religion; church and state are officially separated, and religious freedom is guaranteed. A 2008 survey by the INE of Uruguay showed Catholic Christianity as the main religion, with 45.7\u201381.4% of the population; 9.0% are non-Catholic Christians, 0.6% are Animists or Umbandists (an Afro-Brazilian religion), and 0.4% are Jewish. 30.1% reported believing in a god, but not belonging to any religion, while 14% were atheists or agnostics. Among the sizeable Armenian community in Montevideo, the dominant religion is Christianity, specifically Armenian Apostolic.\nPolitical observers consider Uruguay the most secular country in the Americas. Uruguay's secularization began with the relatively minor role of the church in the colonial era, compared with other parts of the Spanish Empire. The small numbers of Uruguay's indigenous peoples and their resistance to proselytism reduced the influence of the ecclesiastical authorities.\nAfter independence, anti-clerical ideas spread to Uruguay, particularly from France, further eroding the influence of the church. In 1837, civil marriage was recognized, and in 1861, the state took over the running of public cemeteries. In 1907, divorce was legalized, and in 1909, all religious instruction was banned from state schools. Under the influence of the Colorado politician Jos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez (1903\u20131911), complete separation of church and state was introduced with the new constitution of 1917. Uruguay's capital has 12 synagogues and a community of 20,000 Jews as of 2011. With a peak of 50,000 during the mid-1960s, Uruguay has the world's highest rate of aliyah as a percentage of the Jewish population.\nEducation.\nEducation in Uruguay is secular, free, and compulsory for 14 years, starting at the age of 4. The system is divided into six levels of education: early childhood (3\u20135 years), primary (6\u201311 years), basic secondary (12\u201314 years), upper secondary (15\u201317 years), higher education (18 and up), and postgraduate education. Public education is managed by three main institutions: the Ministry of Education and Culture, which coordinates national policies; the National Administration of Public Education, responsible for early childhood through secondary education; and the University of the Republic, which oversees higher education as the nation\u2019s leading institution. \nThe country maintains an adult literacy rate approaching 100% and ranks high at the regional level in standardized assessments, including PISA. In 2023, the government invested 4.9% of GDP in education.\nUruguay is part of the One Laptop per Child project, and in 2009 it became the first country in the world to provide a laptop for every primary school student as part of the Plan Ceibal. Over the 2007\u20132009 period, 362,000 pupils and 18,000 teachers were involved in the scheme; around 70% of the laptops were given to children who did not have computers at home. The OLPC project represents less than 5% of the country's education budget.\nCulture.\nUruguayan culture is predominantly European. The tradition of the gaucho has been an important element in the art and folklore of both Uruguay and Argentina.\nVisual arts.\nAbstract painter and sculptor Carlos P\u00e1ez Vilar\u00f3 was a prominent Uruguayan artist. He drew from both Timbuktu and Mykonos to create his best-known work: his home, hotel and atelier Casapueblo near Punta del Este. The 19th-century painter Juan Manuel Blanes, whose works depict historical events, was the first Uruguayan artist to gain widespread recognition. The Post-Impressionist painter Pedro Figari did pastel studies in Montevideo and the countryside. Most of the paintings were part of the abstract trend, not muralism.\nUruguay has many art museums, most of which are in Montevideo, such as the Torres Garc\u00eda Museum and the Gurvich Museum. The Torres Garc\u00eda Museum was dedicated in honor of the Uruguayan artist Joaqu\u00edn Torres-Garc\u00eda.\nMusic.\nThe folk and popular music of Uruguay shares its gaucho roots with Argentina and the tango. One of the most famous tangos, \"La cumparsita\" (1917), was written by the Uruguayan composer Gerardo Matos Rodr\u00edguez. The candombe is a folk dance performed at Carnival, especially Uruguayan Carnival, mainly by Uruguayans of African ancestry. The guitar is the preferred musical instrument, and in a popular traditional contest called the \"payada\", two singers, each with a guitar, take turns improvising verses to the same tune. Folk music is called \"canto popular\" and includes some guitar players and singers such as Los Olimare\u00f1os, and Numa Moraes.\nThere are numerous radio stations and musical events of rock music and the Caribbean genres. Early classical music in Uruguay showed Spanish and Italian influence, but since the 20th century, a number of composers of classical music, including Eduardo Fabini, H\u00e9ctor Tosar, and Eduardo Gilardoni, have made use of Latin American musical idioms more. There are two symphony orchestras in Montevideo, OSSODRE and Filarmonica de Montevideo. Some of the well-known classical musicians are pianists Albert Enrique Graf; guitarists Eduardo Fernandez and Marco Sartor; and singers Erwin Schrott.\nTango has especially affected Uruguayan culture during the 20th century, particularly the 1930s and 1940s with Uruguayan singers such as Julio Sosa from Las Piedras. When tango singer Carlos Gardel was 29 years old, he changed his nationality to be Uruguayan, saying he was born in Tacuaremb\u00f3. Nevertheless, a Carlos Gardel museum was established in 1999 in Valle Ed\u00e9n, near Tacuaremb\u00f3.\nRock and roll was first introduced into Uruguay with the arrival of the Beatles and other British bands in the early 1960s. A wave of bands appeared in Montevideo, including Los Shakers, Los Iracundos, Los Moonlights, and Los Malditos, of which all became major figures in the so-called Uruguayan Invasion of Argentina. Popular Uruguayan rock bands include La Vela Puerca, El Cuarteto de Nos, and Cursi. In 2004, the Uruguayan musician and actor Jorge Drexler won an Academy Award for composing the song \"Al otro lado del r\u00edo\" from the movie \"The Motorcycle Diaries\", which narrated the life of Che Guevara.\nLiterature.\nJos\u00e9 Enrique Rod\u00f3 (1871\u20131917), a modernist, is considered Uruguay's most significant literary figure. His book, \"Ariel\" (1900), deals with the need to maintain spiritual values while pursuing material and technical progress. It also stresses resisting cultural dominance by Europe and the United States. Notable amongst Latin American playwrights is Florencio S\u00e1nchez (1875\u20131910), who wrote plays about contemporary social problems that are still performed today.\nFrom about the same period came the romantic poetry of Juan Zorrilla de San Mart\u00edn (1855\u20131931), who wrote epic poems about Uruguayan history. Also notable are Juana de Ibarbourou (1895\u20131979), Delmira Agustini (1866\u20131914), Idea Vilari\u00f1o (1920\u20132009), and the short stories of Horacio Quiroga and Juan Jos\u00e9 Morosoli (1899\u20131959). The psychological stories of Juan Carlos Onetti (such as \"No Man's Land\" and \"The Shipyard\") have earned widespread critical praise, as have the writings of Mario Benedetti.\nUruguay's best-known contemporary writer is Eduardo Galeano, author of \"Las venas abiertas de Am\u00e9rica Latina\" (1971; \"Open Veins of Latin America\") and the trilogy \"Memoria del fuego\" (1982\u201387; \"Memory of Fire\"). Other modern Uruguayan writers include Sylvia Lago, Jorge Majfud, and Jes\u00fas Moraes.\nMedia.\nThe Reporters Without Borders worldwide press freedom index has ranked Uruguay as 19th of 180 reported countries in 2019. Freedom of speech and media are guaranteed by the constitution, with qualifications for inciting violence or \"insulting the nation\". Uruguay's freedom of the press was severely curtailed during the years of military dictatorship. On his first day in office in March 1985, Sanguinetti reestablished complete freedom of the press. Consequently, Montevideo's newspapers expanded their circulations. Uruguayans have access to more than 100 private daily and weekly newspapers, more than 100 radio stations, and some 20 terrestrial television channels, and cable TV is widely available.\nState-run radio and TV are operated by the official broadcasting service SODRE. Some newspapers are owned by, or linked to, the main political parties. \"El D\u00eda\" was the nation's most prestigious paper until its demise in the early 1990s, founded in 1886 by the Colorado party leader and (later) president Jos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez. , the paper of the rival Blanco Party, has the largest circulation. \"B\u00fasqueda\" serves as a forum for political and economic analysis. Although it sells only about 16,000 copies a week, its estimated readership exceeds 50,000.\nCuisine.\nUruguayan cuisine culture comes mostly from the European cuisine culture. Most of the Uruguayan dishes are from Spain, France, Italy, and Brazil, the result of immigration caused by past wars in Europe. Daily meals vary between meats, pasta of all types, rice, sweet desserts and others, with meat being the principal dish due to Uruguay being one of the world's largest producers of meat in quality.\nTypical dishes include: \"asado uruguayo\" (big grill or barbecue of all types of meat), roasted lamb, chivito (sandwich containing thin grilled beef, lettuce, tomatoes, fried egg, ham, olives and others, and served with French fries), milanesa (a kind of fried breaded beef), tortellini, spaghetti, gnocchi, ravioli, rice and vegetables.\nOne of the most consumed spreads in Uruguay is dulce de leche (a caramel confection from Latin America prepared by slowly heating sugar and milk). The most typical sweet is afajor, which is a small cake, filled with dulce de leche and covered with chocolate or meringue. Other typical desserts include the pastafrola (a type of cake filled with quince jelly) and chaj\u00e1 (meringue, sponge cake, whipped cream and fruits, typically peaches and strawberries are added). Mate, an herbal drink, is the most typical beverage in Uruguay.\nSports.\nSoccer is the most popular sport in Uruguay. The first international match outside the British Isles was played between Uruguay and Argentina in Montevideo in July 1902. Soccer was introduced to Uruguay by English sailors and workers in the 19th century alongside rugby and cricket. Uruguay won gold at the 1924 Paris Olympic Games and again in 1928 in Amsterdam. Its national football team has won the FIFA World Cup on two occasions. Uruguay won the inaugural tournament on home soil in 1930 and again in 1950, famously defeating home favorites Brazil in the final match. Uruguay has won the Copa Am\u00e9rica (an international tournament for South American nations and guests) 15 times, one less than Argentina, the last one in 2011. Uruguay has by far the smallest population of any country that has won a World Cup. Despite their early success, they missed three World Cups in four attempts from 1994 to 2006. Uruguay reached the semifinal for the first time in 40 years in the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Diego Forl\u00e1n was presented with the Golden Ball award as the best player of the 2010 tournament. Uruguay exported 1,414 soccer players during the 2000s, almost as many players as Brazil and Argentina. In 2010, the Uruguayan government enacted measures intended to retain players in the country. There are two Montevideo-based soccer clubs, Nacional and Pe\u00f1arol; they have won three Intercontinental Cups each. When the two clubs play each other, it is known as Uruguayan Cl\u00e1sico. In the rankings for June 2012, Uruguay was ranked the second best team in the world, according to the FIFA world rankings, their highest ever point in soccer history, falling short of the first spot to the Spain national soccer team.\nAnother popular sport is basketball. Its national team qualified for the Basketball World Cup seven times, more often than other countries in South America, except Brazil and Argentina. Uruguay hosted the official Basketball World Cup for the 1967 FIBA World Championship and the official Americas Basketball Championship in 1988 and 1997, and is a host of the 2017 FIBA AmeriCup.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31844", "revid": "5042921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31844", "title": "History of Uruguay", "text": "The history of Uruguay comprises different periods: the pre-Columbian time or early history (up to the 16th century), the Colonial Period (1516\u20131811), the Period of Nation-Building (1811\u20131830), and the history of Uruguay as an independent country (1830\u2013present).\nWritten history began with the arrival of Spanish chroniclers in the expedition of Juan D\u00edaz de Sol\u00eds in 1516 to the R\u00edo de la Plata, which marks the beginning of Spanish occupation of the region.\nIn 1527 the first European settlement was established in the territory of present-day Uruguay. It was called S\u00e1n L\u00e1zaro and founded by Sebastian Cabot who was in command of a Spanish expedition. In 1777 the Spanish Crown established the Viceroyalty of the R\u00edo de la Plata, which began to disintegrate with the Revolution of May 1810.\nThe territory of present-day Uruguay was invaded by the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarve, initially becoming part of the Portuguese kingdom as Cisplatina Province. In 1824 it was annexed to the Empire of Brazil, and a year later it declared its independence, which began the Cisplatine War. In 1828, with British mediation, a peace agreement was signed and the independence of Uruguay was recognized. In 1830 the country's first constitution was promulgated.\nNative.\nThe earliest traces of human presence are about 10,000 years old and belong to the hunter-gatherer cultures of Catalanense and Cuareim cultures, which are extensions of cultures originating in Brazil. The earliest discovered bolas is about 7,000 years old. Examples of ancient rock art have been found at Chamang\u00e1. About 4,000 years ago, Charr\u00faa and Guarani people arrived here. During precolonial times, Uruguayan territory was inhabited by small tribes of nomadic Charr\u00faa, Chan\u00e1, Arach\u00e1n, and Guarani peoples who survived by hunting and fishing and probably never reached more than 10,000 to 20,000 people. It is estimated that there were about 9,000 Charr\u00faa and 6,000 Chan\u00e1 and Guaran\u00ed at the time of first contact with Europeans in the 1500s. The native peoples had almost disappeared by the time of Uruguay's independence as a result of European diseases and constant warfare.\nEuropean genocide culminated on 11 April 1831 with the Massacre of Salsipuedes, when most of the Charr\u00faa men were killed by the Uruguayan army on the orders of President Fructuoso Rivera. The remaining 300 Charr\u00faa women and children were divided as household slaves and servants among Europeans.\nColonization.\nDuring the colonial era, the present-day territory of Uruguay was known as Banda Oriental (east bank of River Uruguay) and was a buffer territory between the competing colonial pretensions of Portuguese Brazil and the Spanish Empire. The Portuguese first explored the region of present-day Uruguay in 1512\u20131513.\nThe first European explorer to land there was Juan D\u00edaz de Sol\u00eds in 1516, but he was killed by natives. Ferdinand Magellan anchored at the future site of Montevideo in 1520. Sebastian Cabot in 1526 explored R\u00edo de la Plata, but no permanent settlements were established at that time. The absence of gold and silver limited the settlement of the region during the 16th and 17th centuries. In 1603, cattle and horses were introduced by the order of Hernando Arias de Saavedra, and, by the mid-17th century, their number had greatly multiplied. The first permanent settlement on the territory of present-day Uruguay was founded by Spanish Jesuits in 1624 at Villa Soriano on the R\u00edo Negro, where they tried to establish a Misiones Orientales system for the Charr\u00faas.\nIn 1680, Portuguese colonists established Col\u00f4nia do Sacramento on the northern bank of La Plata river, on the opposite coast from Buenos Aires. Spanish colonial activity increased as Spain sought to limit Portugal's expansion of Brazil's frontiers. In 1726, the Spanish established San Felipe de Montevideo on the northern bank and its natural harbor soon developed into a commercial center competing with Buenos Aires. They also moved to capture C\u00f4lonia del Sacramento. The 1750 Treaty of Madrid secured Spanish control over Banda Oriental, settlers were given land here and a local cabildo was created.\nIn 1776, the new Viceroyalty of Rio de la Plata was established with its capital at Buenos Aires, and it included the territory of Banda Oriental. By this time, the land had been divided among cattle ranchers, and beef was becoming a major product. By 1800, more than 10,000 people lived in Montevideo and another 20,000 in the rest of the province. Out of these, about 30 percent were African slaves.\nUruguay's early 19th-century history was shaped by an ongoing conflict between the British, Spanish, Portuguese, and local colonial forces for dominance of the La Plata Basin. In 1806 and 1807, during the Anglo-Spanish War (1796\u20131808), the British launched invasions. Buenos Aires was taken in 1806 and then liberated by forces from Montevideo led by Santiago de Liniers. In a new and stronger British attack in 1807, Montevideo was occupied by a 10,000-strong British force. The British forces were unable to invade Buenos Aires for the second time, however, and Liniers demanded the liberation of Montevideo in the terms of capitulation. The British gave up their attacks when the Peninsular War turned Great Britain and Spain into allies against Napoleon.\nStruggle for independence, 1811\u20131828.\nProvincial freedom under Artigas.\nThe May Revolution of 1810 in Buenos Aires marked the end of Spanish rule in the Vice-royalty and the establishment of the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata. The Revolution divided the inhabitants of Montevideo between royalists, who remained loyal to the Spanish crown (many of which remained so), and revolutionaries, who supported the independence of the provinces from Spain. This soon led to the First Banda Oriental campaign between Buenos Aires and the Spanish viceroy.\nLocal patriots under Jos\u00e9 Gervasio Artigas issued the Proclamation of 26 February 1811, which called for a war against the Spanish rule. With the help from Buenos Aires, Artigas defeated Spaniards on 18 May 1811 at the Battle of Las Piedras and began Siege of Montevideo. At this point, Spanish viceroy invited Portuguese from Brazil to launch a military invasion of Banda Oriental. Afraid to lose this province to the Portuguese, Buenos Aires made peace with the Spanish viceroy. British pressure persuaded the Portuguese to withdraw in late 1811, leaving the royalists in control of Montevideo. Angered by this betrayal by Buenos Aires, Artigas, with some 4,000 supporters, retreated to Entre R\u00edos Province. During the Second Banda Oriental campaign in 1813, Artigas joined Jos\u00e9 Rondeau's army from Buenos Aires and started the second siege of Montevideo, resulting in its surrender to R\u00edo de la Plata.\nArtigas participated in the formation of the League of the Free People, which united several provinces that wanted to be free from the dominance of Buenos Aires and create a centralized state as envisaged by the Congress of Tucum\u00e1n. Artigas was proclaimed Protector of this League. Guided by his political ideas (\"Artiguism\"), he launched a land reform, dividing land to small farmers.\nBrazilian province.\nThe steady growth of the influence and prestige of the \"Liga Federal\" frightened the Portuguese government, which did not want the League's republicanism to spread to the adjoining Portuguese colony of Brazil. In August 1816, forces from Brazil invaded and began the Portuguese conquest of the Banda Oriental with the intention of destroying Artigas and his revolution. The Portuguese forces included a fully armed force of disciplined Portuguese European veterans of the Napoleonic Wars with local Brazilian troops. This army, with more military experience and material superiority, occupied Montevideo on 20 January 1817. In 1820, Artigas's forces were finally defeated in the Battle of Tacuaremb\u00f3, after which Banda Oriental was incorporated into Brazil as its Cisplatina province. During the Brazilian War of Independence in 1822\u20131825, another siege of Montevideo occurred.\nThe Thirty-Three.\nOn 19 April 1825, with the support of Buenos Aires, the Thirty-Three Orientals, led by Juan Antonio Lavalleja, landed in Cisplatina. They reached Montevideo on 20 May. On 14 June, in La Florida, a provisional government was formed. On 25 August, the newly elected provincial assembly declared the secession of Cisplatina province from the Empire of Brazil and allegiance to the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata. In response, Brazil launched the Cisplatine War.\nThis war ended on 27 August 1828 when Treaty of Montevideo was signed. After mediation by Viscount Ponsonby, a British diplomat, Brazil and Argentina agreed to recognize an independent Uruguay as a buffer state between them. As with Paraguay, however, Uruguayan independence was not completely guaranteed, and only the Paraguayan War secured Uruguayan independence from the territorial ambitions of its larger neighbors. The Constitution of 1830 was approved in September 1829 and adopted on 18 July 1830.\nThe \"Guerra Grande\", 1839\u20131852.\nSoon after achieving independence, the political scene in Uruguay became split between two new parties, both splinters of the former Thirty-Three: the conservative Blancos (\"Whites\") and the liberal Colorados (\"Reds\"). The Colorados were led by the first President Fructuoso Rivera and represented the business interests of Montevideo; the Blancos were headed by the second President Manuel Oribe, who looked after the agricultural interests of the countryside and promoted protectionism.\nBoth parties took their informal names from the color of the armbands that their supporters wore. Initially, the Colorados wore blue, but, when it faded in the sun, they replaced it with red. The parties became associated with warring political factions in neighboring Argentina. The Colorados favored the exiled Argentinian liberal Unitarios, many of whom had taken refuge in Montevideo, while the Blanco president Manuel Oribe was a close friend of the Argentine ruler Juan Manuel de Rosas.\nOribe took Rosas's side when the French navy blockaded Buenos Aires in 1838. This led the Colorados and the exiled Unitarios to seek French backing against Oribe, and, on 15 June 1838, an army, led by the Colorado leader Rivera, overthrew Oribe who fled to Argentina. The Argentinian Unitarios then formed a government-in-exile in Montevideo, and, with secret French encouragement, Rivera declared war on Rosas in 1839. The conflict would last 13 years and become known as the \"Guerra Grande\" (the Great War).\nIn 1840, an army of exiled Unitarios attempted to invade northern Argentina from Uruguay but had little success. In 1842, the Argentinian army overran Uruguay on Oribe's behalf. They seized most of the country but failed to take the capital. The Great Siege of Montevideo, which began in February 1843, lasted nine years. The besieged Uruguayans called on resident foreigners for help. French and Italian legions were formed. The latter was led by the exiled Giuseppe Garibaldi, who was working as a mathematics teacher in Montevideo when the war broke out. Garibaldi was also made head of the Uruguayan navy.\nDuring this siege, Uruguay had two parallel governments:\nThe Argentinian blockade of Montevideo was ineffective as Rosas generally tried not to interfere with international shipping on the River Plate, but, in 1845, when access to Paraguay was blocked, Great Britain and France allied against Rosas, seized his fleet, and began a blockade of Buenos Aires, while Brazil joined in the war against Argentina. Rosas reached peace deals with Great Britain and France in 1849 and 1850, respectively. The French agreed to withdraw their legion if Rosas evacuated Argentinian troops from Uruguay. Oribe still maintained a loose siege of the capital. In 1851, the Argentinian provincial strongman Justo Jos\u00e9 de Urquiza turned against Rosas and signed a pact with the exiled Unitarios, the Uruguayan Colorados, and Brazil against him. Urquiza crossed into Uruguay, defeated Oribe, and lifted the siege of Montevideo. He then overthrew Rosas at the Battle of Caseros on 3 February 1852. With Rosas's defeat and exile, the \"Guerra Grande\" finally came to an end. Slavery was officially abolished in 1852. A ruling triumvirate consisting of Rivera, Lavalleja, and Venancio Flores was established, but Lavalleja died in 1853, Rivera in 1854, and Flores was overthrown in 1855.\nForeign relations.\nThe government of Montevideo rewarded Brazil's financial and military support by signing five treaties in 1851 that provided for a perpetual alliance between the two countries. Montevideo confirmed Brazil's right to intervene in Uruguay's internal affairs. Uruguay also renounced its territorial claims north of the R\u00edo Cuareim, thereby reducing its area to about and recognized Brazil's exclusive right of navigation in the Laguna Merin and the Rio Yaguaron, the natural border between the countries.\nIn accordance with the 1851 treaties, Brazil intervened militarily in Uruguay as often as it deemed necessary. In 1865, the Treaty of the Triple Alliance was signed by the Emperor of Brazil, the President of Argentina, and the Colorado general Venancio Flores, the Uruguayan head of government whom they had both helped to gain power. The Triple Alliance was created to wage a war against the Paraguayan leader Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez. The resulting Paraguayan War ended with the invasion of Paraguay and its defeat by the armies of the three countries. Montevideo, which was used as a supply station by the Brazilian navy, experienced a period of prosperity and relative calm during this war.\nThe Uruguayan War, 1864\u201365.\nThe Uruguayan War was fought between the governing Blancos and an alliance of the Empire of Brazil with the Colorados who were supported by Argentina. In 1863, the Colorado leader Venancio Flores launched the Liberating Crusade aimed at toppling President Bernardo Berro and his Colorado\u2013Blanco coalition (\"Fusionist\") government. Flores was aided by Argentina's President Bartolom\u00e9 Mitre. The \"Fusionist\" coalition collapsed as Colorados joined Flores's ranks.\nThe Uruguayan civil war developed into a crisis of international scope that destabilized the entire region. Even before the Colorado rebellion, the Blancos had sought an alliance with Paraguayan dictator Francisco Solano L\u00f3pez. Berro's now purely Blanco government also received support from Argentine Federalists, who opposed Mitre and his Unitarians. The situation deteriorated as the Empire of Brazil was drawn into the conflict. Brazil decided to intervene to reestablish the security of its southern frontiers and its influence over regional affairs. In a combined offensive against Blanco strongholds, the Brazilian\u2013Colorado troops advanced through Uruguayan territory, eventually surrounding Montevideo. Faced with certain defeat, the Blanco government capitulated on 20 February 1865.\nThe short-lived war would have been regarded as an outstanding success for Brazilian and Argentine interests, had Paraguayan intervention in support of the Blancos (with attacks upon Brazilian and Argentine provinces) not led to the long and costly Paraguayan War. In February 1868, former Presidents Bernardo Berro and Venancio Flores were assassinated.\nReturn to factions, 1865\u201375.\nWith the inauguration of Venancio Flores as president of Uruguay, the fusionist policy ended, once again strengthening and separating the Blanco and Colorado factions. The Colorados ruled without interruption from 1865 until 1958 despite internal conflicts, conflicts with neighboring states, political and economic fluctuations, and a wave of mass immigration from Europe.\nIn the 1860s Uruguay was going through a period of prosperity. Montevideo became a major economic center of the region. Thanks to its natural harbor, it became an entrep\u00f4t, or distribution hub, for goods from Argentina, Brazil, and Paraguay. The towns of Paysand\u00fa and Salto, both on the Uruguay River, also experienced similar development. In addition, new neighborhoods emerged in the city and numerous buildings began to be built. In addition, the European immigration that had begun after the Civil War continued, and Villa Cosm\u00f3polis \u2014current Villa del Cerro\u2014 expanded.\nThe economy saw a steep upswing after the Civil War, above all in livestock raising and export. Between 1860 and 1868, the number of sheep rose from 3 to 17 million. The reason for this increase lay above all in the improved methods of husbandry introduced by European immigrants.\nIn 1866 the country's first railway network was built. The Italians set up the \"Camera di Commercio Italiana di Montevideo\" (lit.\u2009'Italian Chamber of Commerce of Montevideo') which played a strategic role in trade with Italy and building up the Italian middle class in the city.\nThe government of General Lorenzo Batlle y Grau suppressed the Revolution of the Lances, which started in September 1870 under the leadership of Blanco Timoteo Aparicio. After two years of struggle, a peace agreement was signed on 6 April 1872 when a power-sharing agreement was signed giving the Blancos control over four out of the thirteen departments of Uruguay\u2014Canelones, San Jose, Florida, and Cerro Largo\u2014and a guaranteed, if limited representation in Parliament. This establishment of the policy of coparticipation represented the search for a new formula of compromise, based on the coexistence of the party in power and the party in opposition.\nMilitarism and modernization, 1875\u20131890.\nThe power-sharing agreement of 1872 split the Colorados into two factions\u2014the \"principistas\", who were open to cooperation with the Blancos, and the \"netos\", who were against it. In the 1873 Presidential election, the \"netos\" supported election of Jos\u00e9 Eugenio Ellauri, who was a surprise candidate with no political powerbase. Five days of rioting in Montevideo between the two Colorado factions led to a military coup on 15 January 1875. Ellauri was exiled and \"neto\" representative Pedro Varela assumed the Presidency.\nIn May 1875, the \"principistas\" began the Tricolor Revolution, which was defeated later in the year by an unexpected coalition of Blanco leader Aparicio Saravia and the Army under the command of Lorenzo Latorre. Between 1875 and 1890, the military became the center of political power. The country was going through an unstable situation, so representatives of the two major pressure groups, the Asociaci\u00f3n Rural del Uruguay \u2014which brought together the \"hacendados\"\u2014 and the Alto Comercio Montevideano \u2014which brought together businessmen dedicated to foreign trade\u2014, offered Latorre to take power.\nOn 10 March 1876, Lorenzo Latorre overthrew the Pedro Varela Olivera government and established a strong executive Presidency, which began the period known as . The main objectives of the Latorre's regime were the achievement of internal peace, order (especially in the countryside) and the affirmation of the right to private property. To achieve them, reforms were implemented that led to the modernization of the country and the establishment of a modern state apparatus.\nTo ensure peace and order, the security forces were professionalized and modernized. The National Army obtained a monopoly on Mauser and Remington rifles, which allowed it to have supremacy against any uprising, while also serving as a deterrent method for seditionists.In addition, the Rural Police was created to prevent livestock theft and rustling. To guarantee private property, the Rural Code was also drafted, which provided for the mandatory fencing of fields, and the was created to keep track of livestock and their owner.\nIn 1877 the \"Common Education Law\" was passed, which was based on a bill by Jos\u00e9 Pedro Varela and which laid the foundations of the Uruguayan educational system. Also known as the , it established universal, compulsory and free education. At first it was intended that it would also be secular, but it was decided not to so as not to deteriorate relations between the government and the Catholic Church. On the other hand, it was established that parents had to clarify if they wanted catechism classes to be taught to their children. The establishment of public education contributed to the strengthening of the Spanish language in areas close to the borders of Portuguese-speaking Brazil as well as to the integration of immigrants.\nWith the passing of the \"General Law of Railway Routes\", the railway network was regulated and expanded, with the formation of the first companies with British capital. The railways converged in Montevideo, which made it possible to transport raw materials and manufactured products to the country's main port, as well as enabling the faster movement of troops to any part of the territory in the event of an armed uprising. In addition, the telegraph line was expanded throughout the country.\nIn 1879, the Civil Status Registry was created for the registration of births, marriages and deaths, which until then was in charge of the Catholic Church. That year, the existing vicariate in the country was promoted to the Diocese of Montevideo on 13 July 1878 by Pope Leo XIII and Jacinto Vera was appointed as the first bishop of Montevideo.\nDuring the militarism the arrival of a large number of European immigrants that had begun after the Civil War continued. It led to the creation of large Italian Uruguayan and Spanish Uruguayan communities that heavily influenced the culture and demographics of the country. Within a few decades, the population of Uruguay doubled and Montevideo's tripled as most of the recent immigrants settled there. The number of immigrants rose from 48 percent of the population in 1860 to 68 percent in 1868. In the 1870s, a further 100,000 Europeans arrived, so that, by 1879, about 438,000 people were living in Uruguay, a quarter of them in Montevideo. Due to immigration, Uruguay's population reached one million in the early 20th century.In addition, the economy was stabilized and exports, mainly of Hereford beef and Merino wool, increased. In Fray Bentos corned beef production started. In 1880, Lorenzo Latorre resigned from the presidency, being succeeded by Francisco Antonino Vidal, who finished his term. In 1882 he was succeeded by M\u00e1ximo Santos. In 1886 the Quebracho Revolution took place, in which revolutionary forces that brought together Blanco and Colorado supporters faced off against the forces of the militarist government. In August 1886, President Santos survived an assassination attempt that led him to leave office.\nM\u00e1ximo Santos was succeeded by General M\u00e1ximo Tajes, who had led the government forces during the Quebracho Revolution. He carried out an opening policy, which allowed the reorganization of the then existing political parties. Furthermore, during the Tajes administration there was economic prosperity in which the construction of European-style buildings increased in Montevideo, and the gas lighting service was replaced by electric lighting in a large part of the city.\nReturn to civil rule and collectivism, 1890\u20131903.\nBy 1890 the country continued to undergo transformations, with increasing urbanization, mass European immigration, an increase in the educational level due to compulsory education and the development of the middle class. In the political sphere, the period that would last until 1903 was characterized by the political predominance of the upper bourgeoisie, to the detriment of the \"caudillismo\" that had prevailed for decades.\nIn 1890, Colorado Julio Herrera y Obes took office as president which marked the end of militarism and the return to civil rule. He proposed the , a political thesis that postulates that the president in office must choose candidates for high elective positions. Thus, collectivism emerged, in which the members of \"La Colectividad\", a sector of the Colorado Party, ensured successive control of the presidency.\nIn the months after Herrera and Obes took office, the Baring Crisis broke out, greatly affecting the Uruguayan economy. In 1894 Juan Idiarte Borda \u2014a member of \"La Colectividad\"\u2014 succeeded Herrera y Obes as president. During his administration, the state bank, Banco de la Republica, was established. Due to collectivism, which left state politics in the president's inner circle and ensured the supremacy of the Colorado Party, the National Party was excluded and without representation due to electoral legislation, in addition to denouncing fraud in the 1896 elections.In March 1897 there was an uprising led by the Blanco caudillo Aparicio Saravia, known as the Revolution of 1897. The confrontation ended with the signing of the \"Pacto de la Cruz\", in which greater political representation and coparticipation was agreed upon. Thus, the governors of the departments of Cerro Largo, Treinta y Tres, Rivera, Maldonado, Flores and San Jos\u00e9 would be appointed by the Honorable Board, the National Party's central body.\nOn 25 August 1897, President Juan Idiarte Borda was assassinated while attending Independence Day celebrations. He was succeeded by Juan Lindolfo Cuestas who held the position until 1903.\nDue to the high educational and cultural level of Uruguayan society at the end of the 19th century, the \"Generation of 900\" emerged, an influential group of writers, poets and intellectuals. It was made up of Florencio S\u00e1nchez, Mar\u00eda Eugenia Vaz Ferreira, Julio Herrera y Reissig, Delmira Agustini and Horacio Quiroga, among others.\nBatlle era, 1903\u201333.\nJos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez, President from 1903 to 1907 and again from 1911 to 1915, set the pattern for Uruguay's modern political development and dominated the political scene until his death in 1929. Batlle was opposed to the coparticipation agreement because he considered division of departments among the parties to be undemocratic. The Blancos feared loss of their power if a proportional election system was introduced and started their last revolution in 1904 \u2014led by Aparicio Saravia\u2014 which ended with the Colorado victory at the Battle of Masoller.\nThe Batlle era saw the introduction of various reforms such as new rights for working people, the encouragement of colonization, universal male suffrage, the nationalization of foreign-owned companies, the creation of a modern social welfare system. Under Batlle, the electorate was increased from 46,000 to 188,000. Income tax for lower incomes was abolished in 1905, secondary schools were established in every city (1906), the right of divorce was given to women (1907), and the telephone network was nationalized (1915).\nSeverance pay for commercial employees was introduced in 1914, and an eight-hour working day in 1915. In 1918, with the passing of a new constitution, Uruguay proclaimed a secular republic, with the separation of church and state. Loans and seeds were provided to poor farmers, and agricultural colonies were established, while Montevideo also underwent a great deal and social and economic development during these years. Hospitals, maternity homes and research institutes, as well as secondary schools, were built in all the capitals of the departments. Secondary education was integrated into the \"Secondary and Preparatory Education Section of the University\". In addition, a secondary night school was established in 1919 \"so that adults who had not finished secondary school could continue their formal education\".\nThe economic policy of Batllism was based on the nationalization of companies, under the idea that certain services should be provided by the State, in search of the common good. With a legal limit of the money destined to acquire the companies, among the nationalizations were the supply of electricity\u2014the National Administration of Power Plants and Electrical Transmissions was created\u2014the insurers and the mortgage loans\u2014the State Insurance Bank and the Banco Hipotecario del Uruguay were established in 1911 and nationalized in 1912, respectively. Furthermore, to compete with the English-administered railways, the construction of roads parallel to the train tracks began, and tram networks were installed in Montevideo, administered by the State.\nThe Constitution of 1918, as a result of political negotiation, established an Executive Branch made up of the President of the Republic and the National Council of Administration, a collegiate body. The president\u2014whose term lasted four years\u2014appointed the holders of the ministerial portfolios of the Interior, Defense and Foreign Relations. The National Council of Administration, on the other hand, appointed those of Finance, Instruction, Labor, Health and Public Works. This collegiate body was elected directly, and was renewed every two years by 1/3 of its members.Around 1900, infant mortality rates (IMR) in Uruguay were among the world's lowest, indicating a very healthy population. By 1910, however, the IMR leveled off, while it continued to drop in other countries. The leading causes of death\u2014diarrheal and respiratory diseases\u2014did not decline, indicating a growing public health problem.\nFurther social and economic reforms were carried out in the years following Batlle's passing. In 1930, Uruguay hosted and won the first FIFA World Cup. By the end of the 19th century and the first decades of the 20th century, the country managed to consolidate its democracy and welfare state, as well as reach high educational and cultural levels, which is why it began to be known as \"The Switzerland of the Americas\".\nGabriel Terra dictatorship, 1933\u201338.\nIn the 1920s, Uruguayan society and economy were prosperous and modern. However, the Wall Street crash of 1929 greatly affected the country, which depended heavily on foreign trade. The United Kingdom decided at the British Empire Economic Conference to freeze import volumes from Uruguay, and international meat prices decreased drastically. By 1930, the economic recession already affected the country, with an increase in unemployment, the devaluation of the Uruguayan peso and a reduction of more than 60% of meatpacking production. The welfare state was hit hard by the economic crisis, which also caused a growing political crisis.\nIn the general election of 1930, Colorado Gabriel Terra was elected president. He took office on 1 March 1931, and from the beginning he was critical of the 1918 Constitution that created the National Council of Administration, which he considered generated ungovernability. The council's measures to alleviate the economic crisis included adjustments for all sectors of society, which increased general discontent and led to the political isolation of the body. The Colorado Batllist majority and the Independent National Party minority of the Council reached an agreement to implement state intervention, for which the creation of the state-owned petroleum company, National Administration of Fuels, Alcohols and Portland (ANCAP), was ordered to prevent foreign currency evasion by foreign companies.\nIn rejection of the agreement in the council, the leader of the opposition National Party, Luis Alberto de Herrera joined President Terra in the campaign to carry out a constitutional reform. On 30 March, a manifesto by Colorado Batllista politicians opposed to the constitutional reform bill was published in the \"El D\u00eda\" newspaper, and in response, Terra decreed some extraordinary measures that were annulled by the General Assembly hours later. On 31 March 1933, with the support of the National Police \u2014led by his brother-in-law Alfredo Baldomir Ferrari\u2014 and the Fire Department, Gabriel Terra carried out a coup d'\u00e9tat, by dissolving Parliament and the National Council of Administration. The event was called the and began the \"terrista\" dictatorship.\nTerra established a traditionalist, protectionist and cooperative regime. It was characterized by strong nationalism, with the exaltation of national symbols and military parades. In June 1933, elections were held to elect the members of the Constitutional Assembly in charge of drafting a new Constitution. In March 1934, this body appointed him president until 1938. In April a referendum was held in which a new constitution was approved. It abolished the National Council of Administration and transferred its powers to the President, reinstating the single-person executive. In addition, homosexuality was decriminalized, a large number of rights were constitutionalized, and equality between both sexes and women's suffrage were established.\nIn foreign policy, Terra's regime broke diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union in 1935 and recognized the National Defense Junta of Spain led by Francisco Franco in 1936. It also had close ties with Fascist Italy and Nazi Germany. During his administration, the construction of the Rinc\u00f3n del Bonete hydroelectric dam was ordered to a consortium of German companies, which transferred its own technicians to the country, who settled in a town in the rural area.\nTerra was succeeded by his close political follower and brother-in-law General Alfredo Baldomir Ferrari. During this time, state retained large control over nation's economy and commerce, while pursuing free-market policies.\n\"Dictablanda\" and new constitution, 1938\u201347.\nIn the 1938 election, Colorado Alfredo Baldomir Ferrari was elected president. With the end of Terra's dictatorship, numerous social and political sectors were in favor of a new constitutional reform, to which President Baldomir joined.\nWith the outbreak of World War II, President Baldomir declared the country's neutrality. However, as the months passed, the Uruguayan government began to take a position in favor of the Allies and US directives, which meant a radical change in foreign policy with respect to that of Gabriel Terra. On 13 December 1939, the Battle of the River Plate was fought a day's sailing northeast of Uruguay between three British cruisers and the German \"pocket battleship\" . After a three-day layover in the port of Montevideo, the captain of \"Admiral Graf Spee\", believing he was hopelessly outnumbered, ordered the ship scuttled on 17 December.\nWith the escalation of the war, a parliamentary commission was established to investigate German and Italian cultural and sports organizations, which were presumed to be used to cover up Nazi-fascist activities infiltrated in the country. In addition, a law was passed classifying as an illicit association any organization that disseminated \"ideas contrary to the democratic-republican form of government\" and the Armed Forces were organized, establishing mandatory military service due to fears of an invasion.In June 1940, Germany threatened to break off diplomatic relations with Uruguay. In December, Germany protested that Uruguay gave safe harbor to after she fought the German raider \"Thor\". The ship was repaired with steel plate reportedly salvaged from \"Admiral Graf Spee\".\nOn 25 January 1942, Uruguay terminated its diplomatic relations with Nazi Germany, as did 21 other Latin American nations. In February 1945, Uruguay signed the Declaration by United Nations and subsequently declared war on the Axis powers but did not participate in any actual fighting.\nSimultaneously with the war in Europe, in Uruguay there was a lack of agreement between the factions of the different parties regarding the constitutional reform. The Herrerism sector led by Luis Alberto de Herrera, which had agreed to the 1934 Constitution, was opposed to the reform bill, and after not supporting the president's candidate for speaker of the Chamber of Representatives, Baldomir replaced three Herrerista ministers.\nDue to the lack of political agreement, in the early morning of 21 February 1942, President Baldomir carried out a self-coup by dissolving the General Assembly and the Electoral Court. In addition, he announced the call for elections for the last Sunday of November of that year. During the coup there were no arrests, no police repression, no censorship, and no violations of human rights, which is why these events are known as the and the regime, as \"dictablanda\".\nThe General Assembly was replaced by a Council of State of 16 members\u2014Colorado Batllistas and Independent Blancos\u2014which was in charge of drafting a new constitutional reform bill. On 29 November 1942, a general election were held in which Colorado Juan Jos\u00e9 de Am\u00e9zaga was elected president of the Republic. The Council of State would be dissolved shortly after and replaced by the newly elected parliament. Along with the general election, a constitutional referendum was held, which won by around 77% of the vote, and gave effect to the Constitution of 1942.\nNew Batllism era, 1947\u201358.\nIn the 1946 general election, Tom\u00e1s Berreta succeeded Juan Jos\u00e9 de Am\u00e9zaga as president. However, in August 1947, he died suffering from prostate cancer and was succeeded by then vice president Luis Batlle Berres\u2014nephew of Jos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez\u2014who became the third member of the Batlle family to occupy the presidency of the country.\nUruguay reached the peak of its economic prosperity thanks to the World War II and the Korean War. During these conflicts, the country supplied beef, wool, and leather to the Allied armies. In 1949, to cover the British debt for the beef deliveries during WWII, British-owned railroads and water companies were nationalized. Luis Batlle Berres implemented an interventionist and protectionist policy, which in several aspects continued the import substitution policy developed in the 1930s, and the principles of the Batllism welfare state implemented by Jos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez at the beginning of the century, for which it was called .\nIn the 1950 general election Colorado Andr\u00e9s Mart\u00ednez Trueba \u2014who was part of List 15, Batlle Berres' faction\u2014 was elected president of the Republic. After taking office he proposed a constitutional reform to reinstate a collegiate executive, which was supported by the leader of the National Party, Luis Alberto de Herrera, who had previously opposed the collegiate system. In 1951, a constitutional referendum was held that approved the 1952 Constitution, which established the National Council of Government. It was made up of six members from the winning party and three from the second party. Its first integration was a majority of the Colorado Party. Mart\u00ednez Trueba completed his presidential term until 1955 as president of the body.\nIn 1953, the Uruguayan Air Force was established as a separate branch of the National Army. In the 1954 election, the Colorado Party again obtained a majority in the National Council of Government. In the period 1955\u20131959, the effects of an economic crisis \u2014caused by the decrease in demand in the world market for agricultural products\u2014 worsened and there was an increase in the number of retirees and pensioners, in addition to an increase in the number of public employees, which led to popular discontent with the New Batllism model.\nBlanco collegiate executives era, 1958\u201366.\nThe National Party won the 1958 election and became the ruling political group in the National Council of Government. The period of government was characterized by constant instability and weakness due to internal conflicts in the National Party between the Herrerism, Ruralism and the White Democratic Union factions\u2014which was aggravated by the death of the party's leader, Luis Alberto de Herrera. \nDuring the first Blanco collegiate term, a liberal and anti-protectionist economic policy was implemented. In 1959 the country was hit by severe floods, which affected agricultural production and therefore the country's economy. In 1960, a letter of intent was signed with the International Monetary Fund, which sought a loan of 300 million dollars to finance agriculture.\nThe economic crisis led to student militancy and labor unrest. The collective ruling council was unable to agree on harsh measures that were required to stabilize the economy. As the demand for Uruguay's export products plummeted, the collective leadership tried to avoid budget cuts by spending Uruguay's currency reserves and then began taking foreign loans. The Uruguayan peso was devalued, and inflation increased greatly.\nIn the 1962 election, the National Party once again had the most votes, thus obtaining again a majority in the National Council of Government.\nGrowing instability, 1966\u201373.\nIn the early 1960s, social discontent due to the economic crisis that had worsened and union agitation increased, which led to the implementation of , which are powers established by the Uruguayan Constitution that enable the Government to temporarily suspend certain constitutional guarantees in the event of serious and unforeseen cases of external attack or internal commotion. Additionally, the far-left guerrilla group National Liberation Movement \u2013 Tupamaros (MLN-T), emerged and commenced operations involving weapons theft, bombings targeting government officials and military officers, and kidnappings.\nIn the 1966 election, \u00d3scar Diego Gestido was elected president, which meant the return of the Colorado Party to the Est\u00e9vez Palace. A constitutional referendum removed the National Council of Government and replaced it with a one-man executive under the new Constitution of 1967. In December 1967, President Gestido died without completing the first year of his term. He was succeeded by then vice president Jorge Pacheco Areco, who ordered the suspension of the Socialist Party, the Oriental Revolutionary Movement, the Uruguayan Anarchist Federation and the Revolutionary Left Movement, and the closure of the newspapers \"El Sol\" and \"\u00c9poca\", arguing that these groups and media outlets were members of the Latin American Solidarity Organization, which defended the revolution to rise to power.\nDuring the presidency of Pacheco Areco, student mobilization became widespread, in August 1968 during a demonstration against raids on university centers, the student L\u00edber Arce was killed by police forces. In June President Pacheco Areco had implemented . Additionally, the activity of the far-left guerrilla group \"Tupamaros\" (MLN-T) intensified, led by Ra\u00fal Sendic Antonaccio, who, years earlier, had organized the sugarcane workers' marches from Bella Uni\u00f3n to Montevideo. In the early 1970s, the group began carrying out more assassinations and kidnappings, including that of the British ambassador to Uruguay, Geoffrey Jackson, and Dan Mitrione, a CIA agent who collaborated with the National Police.\nIn September 1971, two months before the general election, 106 prisoners belonging to \"Tupamaros\" (MLN-T) escaped from the penitentiary of the Punta Carretas neighborhood of Montevideo. The government entrusted the Armed Forces with the anti-subversive fight, which involved the intervention of commanders in political affairs. In November, a general election was held, in which Colorado Juan Mar\u00eda Bordaberry was elected president.\nMilitary dictatorship, 1973\u20131985.\nAmid the ongoing armed struggle and political violence of the MLN-T, on April 15, 1972, the General Assembly declared a 'state of internal war,' marking the beginning of the Uruguayan intrastate war. This led to a widespread crackdown by the armed forces against guerrilla groups. At the same time, the economic situation deteriorated due to high inflation, which sparked a resurgence of labor mobilization. The MLN-T continued its attacks on military and police personnel, killing four young soldiers on guard duty in May.\nAfter a series of military operations, a large number of MLN-T members were arrested. In early September, the last remaining Tupamaro leader at large, Ra\u00fal Sendic Atonaccio, was captured. However, the influence of the top military commanders in national politics continued to grow. On February 9, 1973, the commanders of the Army and the Air Force announced that they refused to follow the orders of the newly appointed Minister of Defense, Antonio Francese.\nAfter defeating the Tupamaros, the military seized power in 1973. Torture was effectively used to gather information needed to break up the MLN and also against trade union officers, members of the Communist Party and even regular citizens. Torture practices extended until the end of Uruguayan dictatorship in 1985. Uruguay soon had the highest per capita percentage of political prisoners in the world. The MLN heads were isolated in improvised prisons and subjected to repeated acts of torture. Emigration from Uruguay rose drastically as large numbers of Uruguayans looked for political asylum throughout the world.\nBordaberry was finally removed from his \"president charge\" in 1976. He was first succeeded by Alberto Demicheli. Subsequently, a national council chosen by the military government elected Aparicio M\u00e9ndez. In 1980, in order to legitimize their position, the armed forces proposed a change in the constitution, to be subjected to a popular vote by a referendum. The \"No\" votes against the constitutional changes totaled 57.2 percent of the turnout, showing the unpopularity of the \"de facto\" government that was later accelerated by an economic crisis.\nIn 1981, General Gregorio \u00c1lvarez assumed the presidency. In 1982 primary elections in the political parties were held and in 1983 there began to be greater dialogue between the military junta and the political authorities. In November, after the negotiations were canceled due to lack of agreement, a massive demonstration was held at the Obelisk of the Constituents in Montevideo, to demand a democratic transition. From July to August 1984, talks were held that led to the Naval Club Pact, in which the path to the return to civil rule was outlined.\nA general election was held later in 1984. Colorado Party leader Julio Mar\u00eda Sanguinetti won the presidency and, following the brief interim Presidency of Rafael Addiego Bruno, served from 1985 to 1990. The first Sanguinetti administration implemented economic reforms and consolidated democratization following the country's years under military rule. Nonetheless, Sanguinetti never supported the human rights violations accusations, and his government did not prosecute the military officials who engaged in repression and torture against either the Tupamaros or the MLN. Instead, he opted for signing an amnesty treaty called in Spanish \"Ley de Amnistia\".\nAround 180 Uruguayans are known to have been killed during the 12-year military rule from 1973 to 1985. Most were killed in Argentina and other neighboring countries, with only 36 of them having been killed in Uruguay. A large number of those killed were never found, and the missing people have been referred to as the \"disappeared\", or \"desaparecidos\" in Spanish.\nRecent history.\nSanguinetti's economic reforms, focusing on the attraction of foreign trade and capital, achieved some success and stabilized the economy. In order to promote national reconciliation and facilitate the return of democratic civilian rule, Sanguinetti secured public approval by plebiscite of a controversial general amnesty for military leaders accused of committing human rights violations under the military regime and sped the release of former guerrillas.\nThe National Party's Luis Alberto Lacalle won the 1989 presidential election and served from 1990 to 1995. President Lacalle executed major economic structural reforms and pursued further liberalization of trade regimes, including Uruguay's inclusion in the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) in 1991. Despite economic growth during Lacalle's term, adjustment and privatization efforts provoked political opposition, and some reforms were overturned by referendum.\nIn the 1994 elections, former President Sanguinetti won a new term, which ran from 1995 until March 2000. As no single party had a majority in the General Assembly, the National Party joined with Sanguinetti's Colorado Party in a coalition government. The Sanguinetti government continued Uruguay's economic reforms and integration into MERCOSUR. Other important reforms were aimed at improving the electoral system, social security, education, and public safety. The economy grew steadily for most of Sanguinetti's term until low commodity prices and economic difficulties in its main export markets caused a recession in 1999, which continued into 2002.\nThe 1999 national elections were held under a new electoral system established by a 1996 constitutional amendment. Primaries in April decided single presidential candidates for each party, and national elections on 31 October determined representation in the legislature. As no presidential candidate received a majority in the October election, a runoff was held in November. In the runoff, Colorado Party candidate Jorge Batlle, aided by the support of the National Party, defeated Broad Front candidate Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez.\nThe Colorado and National Parties continued their legislative coalition, as neither party by itself won as many seats as the 40 percent of each house won by the Broad Front coalition. The formal coalition ended in November 2002, when the Blancos withdrew their ministers from the cabinet, although the Blancos continued to support the Colorados on most issues.\nBatlle's five-year term was marked by economic recession and uncertainty, first with the 1999 devaluation of the Brazilian real, then with the outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease (aftosa) in Uruguay's key beef sector in 2001, and finally with the political and economic collapse of Argentina. Unemployment rose to close to 20 percent, real wages fell, the peso was devalued, and the percentage of Uruguayans in poverty reached almost 40 percent.\nThese worsening economic conditions played a part in turning public opinion against the free market economic policies adopted by the Batlle administration and its predecessors, leading to popular rejection through plebiscites of proposals for privatization of the state petroleum company in 2003 and of the state water company in 2004.\nIn 1989, elections were held in Montevideo which saw the candidate of the Broad Front, Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez, elected mayor of Montevideo. Vasquez would go on to hold the post of mayor from 1990 to 1994. The victory of the Broad Front was arguably the result of long-standing social problems, with one observer noting \"The combination of economic crisis, military dictatorship and neoliberal policies had led to a drop in living standards and social equality as well as a decrease in social spending and urban services. The social safety net that had once made Uruguay a model welfare state was badly frayed, and government, from garbage collection to mass transport, no longer worked well. Added to these traumas was the trial of dealing with a municipal bureaucracy notorious for its arrogance and inefficiency. Paying one's taxes or filling out a forin could take hours; securing services from the centralized municipal government could take years.\" The Frente Amplio promised to tackle these problems, creating a municipal government that was efficient, efficacious and responsive, services that were modern and affordable, and a city whose financial burdens and economic benefits were more equitably distributed. The political subtext was clear. If the Frente Amplio could turn Montevideo around in so dramatic a fashion, it would be in a position to mount a serious challenge for national power, and V\u00e1zquez would become a credible presidential candidate. During the time the Broad Front governed Montevideo, a range of social initiatives were carried out. New street lights were installed, while housing construction was promoted by giving municipal lands to communities \"for cooperative self-built residential housing, and by funding the rental of construction machinery and contributing materials at low prices which are repaid through long-term loans from the public Banco Hipotecario or foreign non-governmental organizations (NGOs)\". More land titles were given to squatters than any previous administration, and a construction-materials \"bank\" was established to help people improve their housing. Public-vaccination plans were also expanded and an eye-care and clinic plan was initiated, though not fully implemented, while distribution of subsidized milk was tripled and free milk provided for institutional daytime snacks. In addition, the burden of subsidizing students and the elderly from other bus riders through higher fares was shifted to the municipality through direct subsidies to the bus companies.\nIn 2004, Uruguayans elected Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez as president, while giving the Broad Front coalition a majority in both houses of parliament. The newly elected government, while pledging to continue payments on Uruguay's external debt, also promised to undertake a crash jobs programs to attack the widespread problems of poverty and unemployment.\nIn 2009, former Tupamaro and agriculture minister, Jos\u00e9 Mujica, was elected president, subsequently succeeding V\u00e1zquez on 1 March 2010. Abortion was legalized in 2012, followed by same-sex marriage and cannabis in the following year. A number of other reforms were carried out during the Broad Front's time in office in areas like social security, taxation, education, housing, tobacco control, and worker's rights.\nThe number of trade union activists has quadrupled since 2003, from 110,000 to over 400,000 in 2015 for a working population of 1.5 million people. According to the International Trade Union Confederation, Uruguay has become the most advanced country in the Americas in terms of respect for \"fundamental labour rights, in particular freedom of association, the right to collective bargaining and the right to strike\".\nIn November 2014, former president Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez defeated center-right opposition candidate Luis Lacalle Pou in the presidential election. On 1 March 2015, Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez was sworn in as the new President of Uruguay to succeed president Jos\u00e9 Mujica.\nIn November 2019, conservative Luis Lacalle Pou won the election, bringing the end to 15 years of leftist rule of Broad Front. On 1 March 2020, Luis Lacalle Pou, the son of former president Luis Alberto Lacalle, was sworn in as the new President of Uruguay.\nOn 1 March 2025, Yamandu Orsi took office as Uruguay's new president, meaning the left-wing coalition, the Broad Front, returned to power after a five-year interruption.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31845", "revid": "5042921", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31845", "title": "Geography of Uruguay", "text": " \nUruguay is a country in the southeastern region of South America, bordering the Atlantic Ocean, between Argentina and Brazil. It is located in the Southern Hemisphere on the Atlantic seaboard of South America between 53 and 58 west longitude and 30 and 35 south latitude. It is bordered to the west by Argentina, on the north and northeast by Brazil, and on the southeast by the Atlantic Ocean, which makes up Uruguay's coast.\nTo the south, it fronts the R\u00edo de la Plata, a broad estuary that opens out into the South Atlantic. Montevideo, the capital and major port, sits on the banks of the R\u00edo de la Plata and is on approximately the same latitude as Cape Town and Sydney. Uruguay is the smallest Spanish-speaking nation in South America with a land area of and a water area of . It has an Exclusive Economic Zone of . It is the only country in South America situated completely south of the Tropic of Capricorn, as well as one of only four such in the world.\nTopography and hydrography.\nMost of Uruguay is a rolling plain that represents a transition from the almost featureless Argentine pampas to the hilly uplands of southern Brazil. The country itself has flat plains on its eastern, southern, and western edges. The narrow Atlantic coastal plain is sandy and marshy, occasionally broken by shallow lagoons. The littorals of the R\u00edo de la Plata and the R\u00edo Uruguay are somewhat broader and merge more gradually into the hilly interior.\nThe remaining three-quarters of the country is a rolling plateau marked by ranges of low hills that become more prominent in the north as they merge into the highlands of southern Brazil. Even these hilly areas are remarkably featureless, however, and elevations seldom exceed 200 meters. The highest point, the Cerro Catedral (513 m), is located in the southeast of the country in the Cuchilla Grande mountain range. Other noteworthy hills are Cerro Pan de Az\u00facar, Cerro de las \u00c1nimas, Cerro Arequita and Cerro Batov\u00ed.\nUruguay is a water-rich land. Prominent bodies of water mark its limits on the east, south, and west, and even most of the boundary with Brazil follows small rivers. Lakes and lagoons are numerous, and a high water table makes digging wells easy.\nThree systems of rivers drain the land: rivers flow westward to the R\u00edo Uruguay, eastward to the Atlantic or tidal lagoons bordering the ocean, and south to the R\u00edo de la Plata. The R\u00edo Uruguay, which forms the border with Argentina, is flanked by low banks, and disastrous floods sometimes inundate large areas. The longest and most important of the rivers draining westward is the R\u00edo Negro, which crosses the entire country from northeast to west before emptying into the R\u00edo Uruguay. A dam on the R\u00edo Negro at Paso de los Toros has created a reservoir\u2014the Embalse del R\u00edo Negro\u2014that is the largest artificial lake in South America. The R\u00edo Negro's principal tributary and the country's second most important river is the Y\u00ed River.\nThe rivers flowing east to the Atlantic are generally shallower and have more variable flow than the other rivers. Many empty into lagoons in the coastal plain. The largest coastal lagoon, Laguna Mer\u00edn, forms part of the border with Brazil. Six smaller lagoons, some freshwater and some brackish, line the coast farther south.\nClimate.\nLocated entirely within the temperate zone, Uruguay has a humid subtropical climate (Cfa according to the K\u00f6ppen climate classification) that is fairly uniform nationwide. Seasonal variations are pronounced, but extremes in temperature are rare. As would be expected by its abundance of water, high humidity and fog are common. The absence of mountains, which act as weather barriers, makes all locations vulnerable to high winds and rapid changes in weather as fronts or storms sweep across the country. Weather is sometimes humid.\nSeasons are fairly well defined, and in most of Uruguay spring is usually damp, cool, and windy; summers are warm; autumns are mild; and winters are chilly and somewhat uncomfortably damp. Northwestern Uruguay, however, is farther from large bodies of water and therefore has warmer summers and milder and drier winters than the rest of the country. Average highs and lows in summer (January) in Montevideo are , respectively, with an absolute maximum of ; comparable numbers for Artigas in the northwest are , with the highest temperature ever recorded . Winter (July) average highs and lows in Montevideo are , respectively, although the high humidity makes the temperatures feel colder; the lowest temperature registered in Montevideo is . Averages in July of a high of and a low of in Artigas confirm the milder winters in northwestern Uruguay, but even here temperatures have dropped to a subfreezing .\nRainfall is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, and annual amounts increase from southeast to northwest. Montevideo averages annually, and Artigas receives in an average year. As in most temperate climates, rainfall results from the passage of cold fronts in winter, falling in overcast drizzly spells, and summer thunderstorms are frequent.\nHigh winds are a disagreeable characteristic of the weather, particularly during the winter and spring, and wind shifts are sudden and pronounced. A winter warm spell can be abruptly broken by a strong pampero, a chilly and occasionally violent wind blowing north from the Argentine pampas. Summer winds off the ocean, however, have the salutary effect of tempering warm daytime temperatures.\nLand use and settlement patterns.\nUruguay may be divided into four regions, based on social, economic, and geographical factors. The regions include the interior, the littoral, Greater Montevideo, and the coast.\nThe interior.\nThis largest region includes the departments of Artigas, Cerro Largo, Durazno, Flores, Florida, Lavalleja, Rivera, Salto, Tacuaremb\u00f3, and Treinta y Tres and the eastern halves of Paysand\u00fa, R\u00edo Negro, and Soriano. The topsoil is thin and less suited to intensive agriculture, but it nourishes abundant natural pasture.\nOnly 2 to 3% of Uruguay's land is forested. An estimated 30,000 to (17 to 23% of the total land) are arable, but only one-third of this (about 7% of the total productive land) was cultivated in 1990. Almost all of the interior consisted of cattle and sheep ranches; pasture accounted for 89% of the country's productive land.\nSheep rearing was typically undertaken on medium-sized farms concentrated in the west and south. It began to boom as an export industry in the last quarter of the 19th century, particularly following the invention of barbed wire, which allowed the easy enclosure of properties. Uruguayan wool is of moderate quality, not quite up to Australian standards.\nCattle ranches, or estancias, for beef and hides were typically quite large (over 10\u00a0km\u00b2) and were concentrated in the north and east. Dairying was concentrated in the department of Colonia. Because ranching required little labor, merely a few gauchos, the interior lacked a peasantry and large towns. Despite being sparsely populated, however, the interior was relatively urbanized in that the capital of each department usually contained about half the inhabitants. Social and economic development indicators were lowest for the departments along the Brazilian border to the northeast. Government attempts to encourage agricultural colonization by means of land reform in the interior had largely failed in economic terms, as had the promotion of wheat production. One exception, rice, most of which was produced in the east, had become a major nontraditional export in recent years.\nThe Littoral.\nStretching west along the R\u00edo de la Plata from Montevideo, are the agricultural and dairying departments of San Jos\u00e9 and Colonia. To the north along the R\u00edo Uruguay lie the departments of Soriano, R\u00edo Negro, Paysand\u00fa and Salto. Their western halves form part of the litoral, a region that is somewhat more developed than the interior. Here soils are alluvial and more fertile, favoring crop production and farms of more modest size than in the interior. Citrus cultivation for export has increased in the departments along the R\u00edo Uruguay. The department of Colonia, some of which was settled by the Swiss, was famous for the production of milk, butter, cheese, and dulce de leche (a dessert made from concentrated milk and sugar). Most wheat (in which Uruguay was self-sufficient) also was produced in this region.\nConstruction with Argentina of the Salto Grande Dam across the R\u00edo Uruguay north of Salto was a major boost to the development of the northern litoral in the 1970s. By contrast, the closure of the famous meat-packing plant at Fray Bentos in the department of R\u00edo Negro transformed it into a virtual ghost town. Farther south, the litoral economy had benefited from completion of the General Artigas Bridge across the R\u00edo Uruguay from Paysand\u00fa to the Argentine province of Entre R\u00edos. However, the advent of a convenient (if circuitous) land route from Montevideo to Buenos Aires via the new bridge reduced freight and passenger traffic through the small port of Colonia on the R\u00edo de la Plata just opposite the Argentine capital. To compensate, the Uruguayan government encouraged the architectural restoration of Colonia, which was originally built by the Portuguese in colonial times. By 1990 Colonia had become one of Uruguay's most historic tourist attractions, and many of its houses had been bought by vacationers from Buenos Aires.\nGreater Montevideo.\nAccording to the 2004 census, the population of the department of Montevideo was 1,325,968, and that of the neighboring department of Canelones was 485,240, out of a total population of 3,241,003. Thus, these departments and the eastern portion of San Jos\u00e9, which together constituted the Greater Montevideo region, held over one-half of Uruguay's population.\nThis monocephalic pattern of settlement was more pronounced in Uruguay than in any other nation of the world, barring city-states. The 1985 census indicated a population density of about 2,475 inhabitants per square kilometer in the department of Montevideo and about 80 inhabitants per square kilometer in the department of Canelones. Densities elsewhere in the country were dramatically lower.\nMontevideo was founded on a promontory beside a large bay that forms a perfect natural harbor. In the 19th century, the British promoted it as a rival port to Buenos Aires. The city has expanded to such an extent that by 1990 it covered most of the department. The original area of settlement, known as the Old City, lies adjacent to the port, but the central business district and the middle-class residential areas have moved eastward. The only exception to this pattern of eastward expansion is that banking and finance continued to cluster in the Old City around the Stock Exchange, the Bank of Uruguay (Banco de la Rep\u00fablica Oriental del Uruguay\u2014BROU), and the Central Bank of Uruguay.\nSince the 1950s, Montevideo's prosperous middle classes have tended to abandon the formerly fashionable downtown areas for the more modern high-rise apartment buildings of Pocitos, a beachfront neighborhood east of the center. Still farther east lies the expensive area of Carrasco, a zone of modern luxury villas that has come to replace the old neighborhood of El Prado in the north of the city as home to the country's wealthy elite. Its beaches were less polluted than those closer to the center. Montevideo's Carrasco International Airport is located nearby, crossing the border to Canelones Department. The capital's principal artery, 18 July Avenue, was long the principal shopping street of Montevideo, but it has been hurt since the mid-1980s by the construction of a modern shopping mall strategically located between Pocitos and Carrasco.\nMontevideo's poorer neighborhoods tended to be located in the north of the city and around the bay in the areas of industrial activity. However, the degree of spatial separation of social classes was moderate by the standards of other cities in South America. Starting in the 1970s, the city began to acquire a belt of shantytowns around its outskirts, but in 1990 these remained small compared with Rio de Janeiro or Guayaquil, for example. About 60,000 families lived in such shantytowns, known in Uruguay as \"cantegriles\". An intensive program of public housing construction was undertaken in the 1970s and 1980s, but it had not solved the problem by 1990.\nIn 1990 Greater Montevideo was by far the most developed region of Uruguay and dominated the nation economically and culturally. It was home to the country's two universities, its principal hospitals, and most of its communications media (television stations, radio stations, newspapers, and magazines). Attempts by the military governments from 1973 to 1985 to promote the development of the north of the country (partly for strategic reasons) failed to change this pattern of extreme centralization. In one way, however, they achieved a major success: the introduction of direct dialing revolutionized the country's long distance telephone system. By contrast, the local telephone network in Montevideo remained so hopelessly antiquated and unreliable that many firms relied on courier services to get messages to other downtown businesses.\nUntil the construction boom of the late 1970s, relatively few modern buildings had been constructed. In many parts of the center, elegant nineteenth-century houses built around a central patio were still to be seen in 1990. In some cases, the patio was open to the air, but in most cases it was covered by a skylight, some of which were made of elaborate stained glass. Few of these houses were used for single-family occupancy, however, and many had been converted into low-cost apartments.\nThe middle classes preferred to live in more modern apartments near the city center or the University of the Republic. Alternatively, they might purchase a single-family villa with a small yard at the back. Many of these were close to the beaches running east from the downtown along the avenue known as the Rambla. In Pocitos, however, high-rise apartments had replaced the single-family homes on those streets closest to the beach.\nThe coast.\nStretching east from Montevideo along the R\u00edo de la Plata are the departments of Canelones, Maldonado, and Rocha. The inland portion of Canelones is an area of small farms and truck gardens, which produce vegetables for the capital. It was relatively poor in 1990. Many inhabitants of the department's small towns also commuted to jobs in Montevideo by express bus. Along the coast lie a string of small seaside towns (balnearios), from which more prosperous employees had also begun to commute. Farther east in the highly developed department of Maldonado lies the major resort of Punta del Este. This has been developed as a fashionable playground more for Argentines than for average Uruguayans, who found it too expensive. With its hotels, restaurants, casino, and nightclubs, Punta del Este was a major export earner, and it dominated Uruguay's tourism industry.\nVacationing Uruguayans of more modest means were concentrated in smaller resorts such as Piri\u00e1polis and Atl\u00e1ntida, which are closer to Montevideo. Beyond Punta del Este in the still mostly undeveloped department of Rocha, a number of communities had sprouted along the unspoiled Atlantic coast with its kilometres of sandy beaches and huge breakers. These small vacation communities\u2014such as Aguas Dulces and Cabo Polonio, both in Rocha Department\u2014were entirely unplanned and lacked essential services. In many cases, simple holiday chalets had been built on public property adjoining the seashore without any legal title to the land. In 1990 the authorities in Rocha Department announced plans to regulate and improve this development in hopes of encouraging visits by higher-spending tourists.\nRegional development.\nUruguay's regions differed markedly not only in population size and density but also in their indexes of social and economic development, including education, health care, communications, energy consumption, and industrialization. Least developed were the northern ranching departments along the Brazilian border\u2014Artigas, Rivera, and Cerro Largo\u2014and also Tacuaremb\u00f3. Somewhat more developed was a band of six departments stretching across the center of the country, from west to east: R\u00edo Negro, Flores, Florida, Durazno, Treinta y Tres, and Rocha. More industrialized and urbanized, but still quite poor, were the departments of Soriano and Salto, which, as noted previously, benefited from the construction of a bridge and a dam, respectively, across the R\u00edo Uruguay in the late 1970s and early 1980s. The two remaining western departments\u2014Colonia and Paysand\u00fa\u2014were the most developed of the littoral.\nThree departments close to Montevideo\u2014San Jos\u00e9, Canelones, and Lavalleja\u2014presented a contradictory picture of relatively advanced economic development combined with low indexes of social modernization. Finally, Montevideo and the department of Maldonado (which is strongly affected by the tourism industry in Punta del Este) had the highest indexes of social and economic development in the country.\nMaritime claims:\n&lt;br&gt;\"continental shelf:\"\n200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation\n&lt;br&gt;\"Exclusive Economic Zone:\"\n, . Overflight and navigation is guaranteed beyond \nNatural resources:\narable land, hydropower, minor minerals, fisheries\nIrrigated land:\n1,180\u00a0km2 (2003)\nTotal renewable water resources:\n139\u00a0km3 (2011)\nEnvironment - current issues:\nwater pollution from meat packing/tannery industry; inadequate solid/hazardous waste disposal\nEnvironment - international agreements:\n&lt;br&gt;\"party to:\"\nAntarctic Treaty, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Kyoto Protocol, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands\n&lt;br&gt;\"signed, but not ratified:\"\nMarine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31846", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31846", "title": "Demographics of Uruguay", "text": " \nThis is a demography of the population of Uruguay including population density, ethnicity, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.\nPopulation size and structure.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAccording to the total population was in , compared to only 2,239,000 in 1950. The proportion of children below the age of 15 in 2015 was 21.4%, 64.2% was between 15 and 65 years of age, while 14.4% was 65 years or older.\nDemographic distribution.\nMetropolitan Montevideo, with about one and a half million inhabitants, is the capital and largest city. The rest of the urban population lives in about 20 towns. Montevideo is about away from Buenos Aires in neighboring Argentina.\nUruguay is distinguished by its high literacy rate (97.3%) and a large urban middle class.\nAs a result of the low birth rate, high life expectancy, and relatively high rate of emigration of younger people, Uruguay's population is quite mature. In 2006, the country had a birth rate of 13.91 births per thousand population, lower than neighboring countries Argentina (16.73 births/1000 population)[3] and Brazil (16.56 births/1,000 population).\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nStructure of the population.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population by Sex and Age Group (Census 04.X.2011) (Excluding 437 homeless persons.): \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Hidden begin/styles.css\"/&gt;Population Estimates by Sex and Age Group (01.VII.2021) (Data refer to national projections.): \nVital statistics.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nOfficial vital statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nTotal fertility rate (1880\u20131899).\nThe total fertility rate is the number of children born per woman. It is based on fairly good data for the entire period. Sources: Our World In Data and Gapminder Foundation.\nUN estimates.\nThe Population Department of the United Nations prepared the following estimates for Uruguay.\nEthnic groups.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMost Uruguayans are descended from colonial-era settlers and immigrants from Europe with almost 88% of the population being of either sole or partial European descent, with a majority of these being Spaniards, followed closely by Italians, and smaller numbers of French, Germans, Portuguese, British (English or Scots), Irish, Swiss, Russians, Poles, Bulgarians, Hungarians, Ukrainians, Lithuanians, Estonians, Latvians, Swedes, Danes, Dutch, Belgians, Austrians, Croats, Serbs, Greeks and others.\nThere are also smaller numbers of Western Asian (Turks, Israelis, and Lebanese) and South Caucasus ethnic groups (Armenians, Georgians, and Azeris).\nMany Swiss settlements (\"colonias\" or \"colonies\"), such as Colonia Suiza, Colonia Valdense and Nueva Helvecia, were founded in the department of Colonia. Also, there are towns founded by early British settlers, such as Conchillas and Barker. A Russian colony called San Javier was founded in the 1910s in the department of R\u00edo Negro. There are also Mennonite colonies in the department of R\u00edo Negro and in the department of Canelones.\nMany of the European immigrants arrived in the late 19th century and have heavily influenced the architecture and culture of Montevideo and other major cities. For this reason, Montevideo and life within the city are very reminiscent of Western Europe.\nThe rest of the Uruguayan population is Black/Afro-Uruguayan of African descent and about 1 or 2% are of Asian descent, mostly are Lebanese/Syrian Arab, and Chinese or Japanese ancestry.\nAmerindians descendants make up a small population in the Rural North region, with Mestizos making up 6% of the population.\nUruguay has the highest percentage of self-identified White Latin Americans of any country in Latin America, however genetic studies have found that over a third of Uruguayans in the samples studied had Amerindian admixture.\nEmigration.\nDuring the past four decades, an estimated 500,000 Uruguayans had emigrated, principally to Brazil, Argentina and Europe. (Argentina is the main destination for Uruguayans, but they are also drawn to Spain, the United Kingdom, Italy, France and Germany.) Other Uruguayans went to various countries in Europe, Australia and the USA.\nNeighboring ties and short distances between Uruguayan cities and Argentine capital Buenos Aires, have drawn a path of success for very talented Uruguayans who settled in the neighbor country and became famous and locally accepted. Some famous Uruguayans who excelled in Argentina are entrepreneur and financier Juan Navarro, sports journalist Victor Hugo Morales, singer and actress Natalia Oreiro, soccer players Antonio Alzamendi, Enzo Francescoli and Carlos Goyen, actor Daniel Hendler, actress China Zorrilla, entertainer Carlos Perciavalle and former playboy and journalist Luis C\u00e9sar Avil\u00e9s.\nEmigration to the United States also rose at the beginning of the century, but remains a small part of the US population. The majority of Uruguayans in the US live in New York City, New Jersey, Washington, D.C., Florida, and urban areas of California.\nReligion.\nUruguay has no official religion, church and state are officially separated, and religious freedom is guaranteed. A 2008 survey by the National Statistics Institute gave Catholicism as the main religion, with 45.7% of the population, 9.0% are non-Catholic Christians, 0.6% are Animists or Umbandists (an Afro-Brazilian religion) and 0.4% Jewish. 30.1% reported believing in a god, but not belonging to any religion, while 14% were Atheist or Agnostic. Among the sizeable Armenian community in Montevideo the dominant religion is Christianity, specifically Armenian Apostolic.\nPolitical observers consider Uruguay the most secular country in the Americas. Uruguay's secularization began with the relatively minor role of the church in the colonial era, compared with other parts of the Spanish Empire. The small numbers of Uruguay's Indians and their fierce resistance to proselytism reduced the influence of the ecclesiastical authorities.\nAfter independence, anticlerical ideas spread to Uruguay, particularly from France, further eroding the influence of the church. In 1837, civil marriage was recognized and in 1861 the state took over the running of public cemeteries. In 1907, divorce was legalized and in 1909, all religious instruction was banned from state schools. Under the influence of the Colorado reformer Jos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez (1903\u20131911) complete separation of church and state was introduced with the new constitution of 1917.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31847", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31847", "title": "Politics of Uruguay", "text": "The politics of Uruguay abide by a presidential representative democratic republic, under which the president of Uruguay is both the head of state and the head of government, as well as a multiform party system. The president exercises executive power, while legislative power is vested in the two chambers of the General Assembly of Uruguay. The Judiciary is independent from the executive and legislature.\nThe Colorado and National parties have been locked in a power struggle, with the predominance of the Colorado party throughout most of Uruguay's history. The 2004 election, however, brought the Encuentro Progresista-Frente Amplio-Nueva Mayor\u00eda, a coalition of socialists, former Tupamaros, communists, social democrats, and Christian Democrats among others to power with majorities in both houses of parliament. A majority vote elected President Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez.\nIn 2009, the Broad Front once again won the elections with a plurality of the votes. A presidential runoff was triggered because their candidate, Jos\u00e9 Mujica, received only 47.96 percent of the vote. The Broad Front's candidate beat former president Luis Alberto Lacalle Herrera of the Nacional Party in the second round of voting. In addition to the presidency, the Broad Front won a simple majority in the Uruguayan Senate and Chamber of Representatives. In 2014, former president Tabar\u00e9 V\u00e1zquez retook power after defeating, in a second round, the candidate of the National Party, Luis Lacalle Pou, who would be the winner of the 2019 election, surpassing the socialist Daniel Mart\u00ednez with 50.79 to 49.2 percent of the vote. The 2024 election was won by Yamand\u00fa Orsi, a former Intendant of Canelones Department. He was inaugurated on 1 March 2025, meaning the left-wing coalition, the Broad Front, returned to power after a five-year interruption.\nAccording to the V-Dem Democracy indices Uruguay is 2023 the 4th most electoral democratic country in Latin America.\nHistory.\nUntil 1919, and from 1934 to 1952, Uruguay's political system, based on the 1830 Constitution, was presidential with strong executive power, similar to that of the United States (but centralized rather than federal). It was also characterized by the rivalry between the two traditional parties, the liberal Colorado Party and the conservative Blanco Party (or National Party). Historically, the Blancos represented the interests of rural property, the Church and the military hierarchy, while the Colorados were supported by urban movable property and reformist intellectuals.\nIn the 19th century, Uruguay had similar characteristics to other Latin American countries, including caudillism, civil wars and permanent instability (40 revolts between 1830 and 1903), control of important economic sectors in the hands of foreign capital, a high rate of illiteracy (more than half the population in 1900), and a landed oligarchy. Yet Montevideo became a refuge for Argentine exiles fleeing the dictatorship of Juan Manuel de Rosas and maintained a reputation as a welcoming place for \"advanced\" ideas of political and social protest. In 1842, the newspaper \"Le Messager fran\u00e7ais\" devoted a special issue to the memory of Charles Fourier. During the Great Siege of Montevideo (1843-1851), Garibaldi's redshirts fought against Rosas' attacking forces. In 1875, workers founded a section of the International.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, Uruguay became the most politically and socially advanced state on the continent. The liberal Jos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez (in power between 1903 and 1907, then between 1911 and 1915) was the main architect of this transformation; freedom of expression and the press was affirmed, as was that of suffrage. A system of proportional representation was adopted to allow for the representation of minorities. This period also saw the abolition of the death penalty, a fight against administrative corruption, and the introduction of secularism and women's suffrage.\nOn the economic level, Batlle stated that \"industry must not be allowed to destroy human beings...on the contrary the State must regulate it in order to make the lives of the masses happier.\" An economic policy of dirigisme was thus undertaken, nationalizing many sectors of the economy (railways, telephone, electricity, among others). \"Batllism\" also took the form of social measures, including the introduction of free and compulsory primary education, maternity leave and the eight-hour day, as well as support for trade unions and the recognition of the right to strike. All this legislation, which was very advanced for its time, made Uruguay a progressive social democracy.\nConstitution.\nUruguay adopted its first constitution in 1830, following the conclusion of a three-year war in which Argentina and Uruguay fought as a regional federation: the United Provinces of the R\u00edo de la Plata. Sponsored by the United Kingdom, the 1828 Treaty of Montevideo built the foundations for a Uruguayan state and constitution. A constitution proposed under the military dictatorship government was rejected by a referendum in 1980.\nExecutive branch.\nUruguay's Constitution of 1967 created a strong presidency, subject to legislative and judicial balance. Many of these provisions were suspended in 1973 but reestablished in 1985. The president, who is both the head of state and the head of government, is elected by popular vote for a five-year term, with the vice president elected on the same ticket. The president must act together with the Council of Ministers, which comprises cabinet ministers, appointed by the president. Thirteen ministers head various executive departments. The ministers can be removed by the General Assembly by a majority vote.\nThe Constitution amendment establishes the requirements for becoming president. Article 151 establishes that the president must be a natural-born citizen of the country, or have been born to a Uruguayan citizen if born abroad. The president must also be at least 35 years old and be registered in the National Civic Registry. The current president since 1 March 2025 is Yamand\u00fa Orsi. \nLegislative branch.\nThe General Assembly (\"Asamblea General\") has two chambers. The Chamber of Representatives (\"C\u00e1mara de Representantes\") has 99 members, elected for a five-year term by proportional representation with at least two members per department. The Chamber of Senators (\"C\u00e1mara de Senadores\") has 31 members; 30 members are elected for a five-year term by proportional representation and the Vice-president who presides over it.\nJudicial branch.\nThe judiciary of Uruguay is headed by the Supreme Court of Justice, whose members are appointed by the General Assembly through a two-thirds majority and whose terms last ten years. The Supreme Court of Justice is the last instance of appeal and is also in charge of judging the constitutionality of the laws. The judiciary is also made up of Courts of Appeals, District Courts and Peace Courts, as well as Conciliation Courts, Mediation Centers, and Misdemeanour Courts. Other dependencies of the Uruguayan judiciary are the Public Defender Office, the Forensic Technical Institute, and the Center for Judiciary Studies.\nDirect democracy.\nThe Uruguayan political system allows citizens to use direct democracy mechanisms to directly take political decisions on the current legal system without intermediaries. These mechanisms are the referendums to repeal recently approved laws, plebiscites to propose changes to the Constitution and the power of citizens to drive \"popular initiatives\" such as to propose referendums, to propose law drafts to the Parliament, to reform the Constitution and to deal with departmental matters.\nInternational organization participation.\nUruguay or Uruguayan organizations participate in the following international organizations: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31848", "revid": "40153758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31848", "title": "Economy of Uruguay", "text": "The economy of Uruguay features an export-oriented agricultural sector and a well-educated workforce, along with high levels of social spending. Tourism and banking are also prominent sectors; Uruguay acts as a regional hub for international finance and tourism. The country also has a history and representation of advanced workers-rights protection, with unions and the eight-hour work-day protected at the beginning of the 20th century.\n90% of the country's population is urbanized, while most of the industry and over half of the population is concentrated in the capital Montevideo.\nAfter averaging growth of 5% annually during 1996\u201398, Uruguay's economy suffered a major downturn in 1999\u20132002, stemming largely from the spillover effects of the economic problems of its large neighbors; Argentina and Brazil. In 2001\u201302, Argentine citizens made massive withdrawals of dollars deposited in Uruguayan banks after bank deposits in Argentina were frozen, which led to a plunge in the Uruguayan peso, causing the 2002 Uruguay banking crisis.\nHistory.\n19th century.\nIn the 19th century, the country had similar characteristics to other Latin American countries: caudillismo, civil wars and permanent instability (40 revolts between 1830 and 1903), foreign capitalism's control of important sectors of the economy, a high percentage of illiterate people (more than half the population in 1900). Among foreign investments, investors from Great Britain controlled 22% of the land and many majors parts of the industrial infrastructure, including meatpacking and leather industry, infrastructure for water and gas, and transport systems like trolley and 1100 miles of rail.\nIn 1857, the first nationally owned bank, Banco Comercial, was founded.\nReforms after Batlle.\nJos\u00e9 Batlle y Ord\u00f3\u00f1ez, President from 1903 to 1907 and again from 1911 to 1915, set the pattern for Uruguay's modern political development and dominated the political scene until he died in 1929. Batlle introduced widespread political, social, and economic reforms such as a welfare program, government participation in many facets of the economy, and a new constitution.\nBatlle nationalized foreign-owned companies and created a modern social welfare system. Income tax for lower incomes was abolished in 1905, secondary schools established in every city (1906), telephone network nationalized, unemployment benefits were introduced (1914), eight-hour working day introduced (1915), etc. By 1929, 84% of manufacturing was concentrated in a handful of industries: meatpacking, leather and wool. Industrial policies further encouraging migration from rural to urban communities, as well as waves of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe. Investment in urban infrastructure in Montevideo and a growing economy, was capped by hosting the first 1930 FIFA World Cup.\nClaudio Williman who served between Batlle's two terms was his supporter and continued all his reforms, as did the next President Baltasar Brum (1919\u20131923). Around 1900 infant mortality rates (IMR) in Uruguay were among the world's lowest, indicating a very healthy population.\nThe Great Depression ended an era of export-led economic growth in Uruguay.\nMid-20th century.\nThe Uruguay economy shifted from an agriculture-dominated economy to an industrial economy from the period 1930 to 1955. This shift led to a sluggish economy, as Uruguay neglected its comparative advantage, diverting resources away from a productive agricultural sector to an inefficient, unproductive manufacturing sector. The government sought to bolster its manufacturing sector with import substitution industrialization, disincentivizing imports. From the 1950s onwards, the Uruguayan economy was in decline.\nAnthropology professor Daniel Renfrew describes the 50s, 60s and dictatorship period (70s and 80s) as economic downturn periods, followed by further economic degradation caused by neoliberalism. Economist Jamie Mezzera disagrees with this interpretation, arguing that between 1968 and 1972, Uruguay was one of the most regulated capitalist economies in the world. In this period, the government massively increased import tariffs and had near-total wage and price controls. The government instituted these policies to avoid the political pressure that would come if they were to devalue their currency. Between 1955 and 1972, economic output in Uruguay stagnated. After the price and wage controls were largely removed in 1973, growth increased by 4.3% per year until 1979.\nThe policies of the Colorado Party under Julio Mar\u00eda Sanguinetti and Jorge Batlle during the 90s and early 2000s, following global trends of neo-liberalization, facilitated a shift from manufacturing and small-scale agriculture, towards increasing monoculture agriculture and services like finance and tourism. However, these policies faded as the regional economic problems in Argentina and Brazil caused a downturn and unemployment from 1998 to 2003. The economic and social crises that followed allowed for the election of the Broad Front a leftist coalition against the neoliberal policies.\nCurrency.\nUruguay has a partially dollarized economy. As of \u00a02008[ [update]] almost 60% of bank loans use United States dollars, but most transactions use the Uruguayan peso. Today, the Uruguayan peso is minted in coins of 1, 2, 5, 10, and 50 pesos and in banknotes of 20, 50, 100, 200, 500, 1000, and 2000 pesos.\nSectors.\nAgriculture, textiles and leather.\nThroughout Uruguay's history, their strongest exporting industries have been beef and wool. In the case of beef exports, they have been boosted since Uruguay joined the Mercosur agreement in 1991 and the country has been able trade with more distant markets, such as Japan. In 2018, it produced 589 thousand tons of beef. In the case of wool exports, they have not been doing so well in recent years suffering from other competitors in the market like New Zealand and the fluctuations of its demand during the 2008 recession in the developed world.\nAs timber refining is being kept within the country, forestry has become a growth industry in recent years. In 2018, the country produced 1.36 million tons of rice, 1.33 million tons of soy, 816 thousand tons of maize, 637 thousand tons of barley, 440 thousand tons of wheat, 350 thousand tons of sugar cane, 106 thousand tons of orange, 104 thousand tons of grape, 90 thousand tons of rapeseed, 87 thousand tons of potato, 76 thousand tons of sorghum, 71 thousand tons of tangerine, 52 thousand tons of oats, 48 thousand tons of apple, in addition to smaller yields of other agricultural products.\nLiebig Extract of Meat Company ran a very large and influential beef extract factory in Fray Bentos for 100 years.\nSoftware.\nDuring the last decades the software industry has developed considerably. Many start-ups have been very successful, such is the case of PedidosYa and DLocal. Uruguay also exports software; the similar geographic longitude to that of the United States makes it attractive for companies to outsource software development to Uruguayan companies. Other notable Uruguayan software enterprises are: Genexus, C\u00f3digos del Sur, Overactive.\nMining.\nAlthough this is a sector that does not make substantial contributions to the country's economy, in recent years there has been some activity in gold and cement production, and also in the extraction of granite.\nArtigas Department is well known for its amethyst and agate quartz varieties mining. During 2010s 20 thousand tons of minerals were extracted with a value of 9 million US dollars, exported to Germany, United States, Brazil and China.\nPlastics.\nIn 2011, plastics were the second-largest non-agricultural industrial export of the country.\nTelecommunications.\nDespite having poor levels of investment in the fixed-line sector, the small size of Uruguay's population has enabled them to attain one of the highest telecommunication density levels in South America. The teledensity was already the second highest in the continent in the 1990s (after French Guiana) and the highest in 2001. Reaching a peak of 162.077 in 2014, the density declined in subsequent years, yet it was still 136.921 as of 2021. Mobile penetration was the second highest in Latin America (after Panama) as of 2022. Furthermore, the country already achieved a 100% digitalization of main lines by 1999.\nThe telecommunications sector is partially under a state monopoly through the public company ANTEL, including a monopoly on landline telephony. While this sector was privatized in many Latin American countries during the 1990s, Uruguay managed to keep telecommunications in public hands, partially under pressure from popular opinion through referendums. However, steps have been made to introduce liberalization and to allow for the entry of more private firms into the cellular sector. In 2022, under Luis Lacalle Pou, Uruguay authorized five cable companies into the fixed broadband internet sector.\nTravel and tourism.\nIn 2013, travel and tourism accounted for 9.4% of the country's GDP. Their tourist industry is mainly characterized for attracting visitors from neighboring countries. Currently Uruguay's major attraction is the interior, particularly located in the region around Punta del Este.\nSpecialties.\n\"With a population of only three million, Uruguay has rapidly become Latin America's outsourcing hub. In partnership with one of India's largest technology consulting firms, engineers in Montevideo work while their counterparts in Mumbai sleep.\" - The New York Times, Sep 22, 2006.\nData.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1980\u20132021 (with IMF staff estimates in 2022\u20132027). Inflation below 10% is in green.\nUruguay in the world.\nThe following table shows the economic rankings of Uruguay compared to the world:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n12. "}
{"id": "31849", "revid": "40153758", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31849", "title": "Telecommunications in Uruguay", "text": "Telecommunications in Uruguay include radio, television, telephones, and the Internet in Uruguay.\nGeneral outline.\nDespite having poor levels of investment in the fixed-line sector, the small size of Uruguay's population has enabled the country to attain one of the highest telecommunication density levels in South America. The teledensity was already the second highest in the continent in the 1990s (after French Guiana) and the highest in 2001. Reaching a peak of 162.077 in 2014, the density declined in subsequent years, yet it was still 136.921 as of 2021. Mobile penetration was the second highest in Latin America (after Panama) as of 2022. Furthermore, the country already achieved a 100% digitalization of main lines by 1999.\nThe telecommunications sector is partially under a state monopoly through the public company ANTEL, including a monopoly on landline telephony. While this sector was privatized in many Latin American countries during the 1990s, Uruguay managed to keep telecommunications in public hands, partially under pressure from popular opinion through referendums. However, steps have been made to introduce liberalization and to allow for the entry of more private firms into the cellular sector. In 2022, under Luis Lacalle Pou, Uruguay authorized five cable companies into the fixed broadband internet sector.\nRadio and television.\nUruguay has a mixture of privately owned and state-run broadcast media; more than 100 commercial radio stations and about 20 TV channels. Cable TV is readily available. Uruguay adopted the hybrid Japanese/Brazilian HDTV standard (ISDB-T) in December 2010.\nInternet.\nIn Uruguay, one can access the Internet mainly by using:\nFiber to the home.\nIn November 2010, ANTEL announced that it would start rolling out Fiber to the home (FTTH) in the second half of 2011. As of September 2017, 49% of the homes with Internet access do so via FTTH.\nAs of January 2019 Antel offers the following fiber to the home plans:\nAll home consumer plans provide a dynamic IP address only.\nThere are also business plans available with no monthly data consumption limit that provide fixed IP addresses.\nADSL.\nANTEL is the only ISP to provide ADSL service since it enjoys a monopoly in the basic telephony area. Other ISP use other technologies, such as radio, to get to customers.\nThe following are the plans marketed to home users by Antel as of May 2018. All plans require having a corresponding voice phone service with Antel. All prices include VAT.\nConsumer data plans\nAll consumer plans provide a dynamic IP address.\nFixed wireless.\nMost of Uruguay's landmass is too far away from cities to have wired Internet access. For customers in these rural and low density suburban areas, fixed wireless ISPs provide a service. Wireless Internet service has also provided city Internet users with some degree of choice in a country where private companies have not been allowed to offer wired alternatives (e.g. cable TV Internet, fiber to the home) to the state-operated ADSL service.\nDedicado is a local wireless ISP. It appeared before or about at the same time as Anteldata (about in 1999), but since ADSL was not available at the same time on every neighborhood, Dedicado had the majority of the permanent Internet connections.\nAs of November 2007, ADSL is available in every neighborhood in Montevideo, and in most other cities, and Dedicado lost a big market share, both because being more expensive and giving bad service to their users. They started a big advertising campaign, but didn't pay attention to the technical details related to their number of users, so their quality of service decreased. As of 2012, their quality of service issues appear to be on the mend, but their pricing issues continue especially in the rural market where they have no credible competition and have steadily increased prices. Dedicado originally operated Ericsson fixed wireless equipment and later transitioned to Motorola Canopy and Cambium technology. In 2005, they started deploying WiMAX services. However, as of May 2010, the service is not offered nor advertised yet. There are other wireless ISPs, but Dedicado is the main one.\nTelmex is another entrant in the Uruguayan fixed wireless space. As of early 2012, they were still a tentative player however, with limited coverage of the country and some technical shortcomings (e.g. no Skype connectivity). \nIn February 2012, Antel announced a push to provide fixed wireless Internet service to rural customers using their 3G cellular network. As of November 2012, the service was being actively offered to customers of the company's Ruralcel fixed wireless telephone service. Customers who sign up get the equipment (a ZTE MF612/MF32 or Huawei B660 3G router) and monthly Internet service for free. While the network and router are capable of supporting multi-Mbit/s service, the free offering is throttled back to 256\u00a0kb down/64\u00a0kb upload speeds and capped at 1\u00a0Gbyte of monthly data transfer (except for a small number of customers grandfathered from a previous service). Once that data limit is reached, the customer has to recharge the service using a prepaid card at a rate of approximately US$10/Gbyte. There is an alternative monthly billing plan that offers 2\u00a0Mbit/s down and 512\u00a0Mbit/s up with a 5\u00a0Gbyte data cap for US$15, plus US$10 for each additional Gbyte (up to 5\u00a0Gbyte). There is no unlimited data plan, which limits this technology's ability to compete in the non-residential fixed wireless space against vendors like Dedicado.\nMobile wireless.\nInternet access via cell phone networks is probably the most vibrant and competitive Internet marketplace in Uruguay. All the Uruguayan cell phone companies (Antel, Claro, Movistar) offer data plans for their smartphone users as well as USB modems for personal computers. Ancel/Antel even offers a bundle of cellular Internet access and ADSL, an unusual but potentially attractive combination for home ADSL users who also want to have Internet access on the go. The speeds delivered by all companies within their areas of coverage keep getting faster, and the areas of coverage keep expanding (as of 2012 Ancel probably still has the edge in % of the country's land covered). Vendors are shifting from 3G to 4G, starting in the area around Montevideo. From a consumer's standpoint, the only discouraging trend in this market is the adoption of data volume caps by all vendors. As of August 2012, no vendor web-site offered an unlimited mobile Internet data plan (the closest was an \"unlimited during nights and weekends\" from Claro). This means these offerings are unlikely to cross sell into the fixed wireless Internet market where unlimited data plans tend to be the rule.\nInternet Service Providers.\nThe main Internet Service Providers (ISPs) in Uruguay are:\nCable Internet.\nDespite a fully developed cable network in all mid- and large-size cities, Uruguayan government regulators historically precluded cable companies from providing Internet access through their systems. This made Uruguay and Cuba the only countries in the Americas missing this component of the Internet access ecosystem. In June 2022 however the Uruguayan government reversed this long standing situation opening the market to selected cable providers and effectively ending Antel's monopoly on wired Internet services. \nInternet censorship and surveillance.\nThere are no government restrictions on access to or usage of the Internet or credible reports that the government monitors e-mail or Internet chat rooms without judicial oversight.\nUruguayan law provides for freedom of speech and press, and the government generally respects these rights in practice. An independent press, an effective judiciary, and a functioning democratic political system combine to ensure these rights. The law also prohibits arbitrary interference with privacy, family, home, or correspondence, and the government generally respects these prohibitions in practice.\nIn August 2016 the President of URSEC (the Uruguayan government agency equivalent to the FCC in the US) stated that his agency was at the government's beck and call to block the IP address of the servers of Uber to keep its app from operating in Uruguay. If carried out this would constitute the first and only known instance of Great Firewall style blocked-IP censorship in Uruguay. In the same interview he stated that WhatsApp \"transgresses the limits of communications\". In July 2017 the Uruguayan subsecretary of economy stated that the government was considering \"blocking the signals\" of online gaming sites, which in Internet terms would seem to refer to some kind of IP-based censorship.\nIn April 2018 a Uruguayan court ordered all Uruguayan ISPs to block their users from accessing the content of specific sites broadcasting sports events copyrighted by Fox Sports Latin America. This is a key precedent that differs dramatically from the piracy enforcement in first world countries like the US, which focuses on the takedown of the sites themselves and does not engage in IP-based censorship. A Fox spokesman declared the network would try to use the precedent to get similar rulings in other Latin American countries.\nIn November 2016 the Uruguayan Ministry of the Interior initiated legal action against a Facebook and Twitter site (\"chorros_uy\") that reports criminal activity across Uruguay, alleging that it \"raises public alarm\". The Interamerican Press Society swiftly criticized the Ministry's attempt to censor the site as \"contrary to democracy's norms\".\nAs of 2017 a surveillance software suite, called \"Guardi\u00e1n\", capable of spying internet traffic, email accounts, social networks and telephone calls is being used without proper authorization from the Judiciary.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31850", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31850", "title": "Transport in Uruguay", "text": " \nThe transport network in Uruguay consists of 1,673\u00a0km of rail network, 7,743\u00a0km of paved roads, 1,600\u00a0km of navigable waterways, and 11 airports with paved roads.\nRailways.\nUruguayan railways have a total operational length of . All of them are standard gauge as of 2005.\nPassenger services.\nRegular passenger services have been operated between Montevideo and 25 de Agosto (63km) since August 26, 1993 (previously all regular passenger services were withdrawn on January 2, 1988). One daily train was extended to San Jos\u00e9 (96km from Montevideo) on January 15, 2007 and another was extended from 25 de Agosto to Florida (109km from Montevideo) on January 2, 2008. Another line, which operates between Montevideo and Ingeniero Victor Sudriers, was reopened on December 15, 2005 (44km).\nFuture.\nThe state railway administration AFE has announced that starting in January 2010, 419km of track will be renewed on the Pintado-Rivera section of the central main line and part of the international branch from Rivera to Santana do Livramento, north of Chamberlain, using Russian rail. The programme will cost $30m.\nRoadways.\nMotorways.\nUruguay has a small network of motorways, owing to the low demand due to sparse population outside the capital. The few highways with 4 lanes are:\nFuel stations.\nThe traditional fuel stations were Ancap, Esso, Shell and Texaco. In 2005\u20132006, Petrobras bought the 90 Shell stations. In 2006\u20132007, Ancap bought the 90 Texaco stations. In 2011, Bridas bought the Esso stations but kept the brand.\nWaterways.\nUruguay has 1,600 km of waterways.\nPorts and harbors.\nUruguay has a number of ports and harbors including: Montevideo (its major port), Fray Bentos, Nueva Palmira, Paysand\u00fa, La Paloma, Juan Lacaze, Carmelo, Conchillas, Salto, Punta del Este, Colonia del Sacramento, Piri\u00e1polis, Mercedes.\nAirports.\nUruguay had a total of 94 airfields as of 2012, 11 of which have paved runways. The country is primarily served by the Carrasco International Airport in Canelones Department, near the border with Montevideo Department. Handing just over 1.5 million passengers a year, its operating traffic is significantly lighter than others in the region such as Buenos Aires-Ezeiza and S\u00e3o Paulo-Guarulhos.\nAirports - with paved runways:\n\"total:\"\n11\n\"over 3,047 m:\"\n1\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n4\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n4\n\"under 914 m:\"\n2 (2013)\nAirports - with unpaved runways:\n\"total:\"\n122\n\"1,524 to 2,437 m:\"\n3\n\"914 to 1,523 m:\"\n40\n\"under 914 m:\"\n79 (2013)\nPipelines.\nAs of 2010, Uruguay has 257\u00a0km of natural gas pipeline and 160\u00a0km of oil line.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31851", "revid": "5666248", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31851", "title": "Armed Forces of Uruguay", "text": "Combined military forces of Uruguay\nThe Armed Forces of Uruguay ( or \"FF.AA. del Uruguay\") consist of the National Army of Uruguay, the National Navy of Uruguay, and the Uruguayan Air Force. These three independent branches are constitutionally subordinate to the President of the Republic through the Minister of Defense. The government has trimmed the armed forces to about 16,800 for the Army; 6,000 for the Navy; and 3,000 for the Air Force. As of February 2003, Uruguay has more than 2,500 soldiers deployed on 12 UN Peacekeeping missions. The largest groups are in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Haiti. There is also a 58-man contingent in the MFO in the Sinai. \nArmy (Ej\u00e9rcito Nacional).\nThe Army consists of some 15,000 personnel organized into four divisions.\nIt is equipped with 15 Israeli Ti-67 (T-55) Main Battle Tanks (MBTs), 17 American M24 Chaffee light tanks, 46 M41A1 Walker Bulldog light tanks, 24 American M113A1 Armored Personnel Carriers (APCs), 15 Czech BMP-1 Infantry Fighting Vehicles (IFVs), 130 OT-64 SKOT APCs, 64 German Condor APCs, 15 Brazilian EE-9 Cascavel, 18 EE-3 Jararaca armored cars, and 48 Russian lightly armored GAZ-3937 amphibious vehicles. In 2008, Uruguay also purchased 44 6x6 Canadian-made AVGP APCs rehabilitated by FAMAE in Chile after retirement from the Canadian Army, receiving a second batch of 100 of Grizzlys and 5 Huskys, the recovery version. It has 4 sets of RM-70 multiple rocket launchers. The army operates 40 Land Rover Defender 110SW vehicles, and is looking to buy between 30 and 40 more.\nThe current assault rifle used by the Army is the Argentinian-built version of the Belgian FN FAL; it is being replaced by the Austrian Steyr AUG following a bidding contest in 2007 and 2008. In addition, about 300 Russian AK-101s are already used, and the elite airborne, commando, and antiterrorist Battalion 14 (\"Batall\u00f3n de Infanter\u00eda Paracaidista N.\u00ba 14\") exclusively employ German Heckler &amp; Koch G36s.\nThe Army will receive locally produced Glock 17 pistols as replacements for its legacy Browning Hi-Power and M1911 pistols.\nUruguay Special Forces are now fielding an indigenous .50 BMG sniper rifle called the FS50 Peregrino. It is a single-shot bolt-action rifle that was developed in Uruguay for about two years.\nThe Uruguayan Army was considering buying either the Panzerfaust 3 or RPG-7 as short-range anti-tank weapons. Acquisition of the rockets was cancelled due to lack of funds.\nNavy (Armada Nacional).\nThe Navy consists of about 5,700 personnel under command of Admiral Jorge Wilson and is organized into four commands: the Fleet Command (\"Comando de la Flota\" or \"COMFLO\"), the Coast Guard (\"Prefectura Nacional Naval\" or \"PRENA\"), the Chief Directorate of Naval Materiel (\"Direcci\u00f3n General de Material Naval\" or \"DIMAT\"), and the Chief Directorate of Naval Personnel (\"Direcci\u00f3n General de Personal Naval\" or \"DIPER\"). The Navy General Staff (\"Estado Mayor General de la Armada\" or \"ESMAY\") acts as an advisory body to the admiral.\nThe current fleet consists of one ex-German L\u00fcneburg-class replenishment ship, refitted with helipad and used for helicopter patrol and transport and named ROU 04 \"General Artigas\", one former United States Coast Guard (USCG) Cape-class cutter, named ROU 11 \"R\u00edo Negro\", three former USCG Marine Protector-class patrol boat, named as ROU 14 \"R\u00edo Arapey\", ROU 15 \"R\u00edo de la Plata\" and ROU 16 \"R\u00edo Yaguaron\", three ex-East German \"Kondor II\" class minesweepers, a three-masted staysail schooner named \"Capit\u00e1n Miranda\" (ROU 20) and other smaller craft.\nThe Navy also includes Marine Corps and a small Naval Air Station at Laguna del Sauce, equipped with two Beechcraft T-34C-1 Turbo Mentors, two Beechcraft Super King Air and three Cessna O-2A Skymasters fixed-wing aircraft, and two Bell 412 and one Bell OH-58A Kiowa helicopters.\nThe Uruguayan Naval Academy (\"Escuela Naval\" or \"ESNAL\") is located in Carrasco, a suburb of Montevideo. Instruction consists of a 4-year course of study culminating in a cruise on the instructional tall ship \"Capit\u00e1n Miranda\", which lasts several weeks and takes graduates to various ports around the world.\nAir Force (Fuerza A\u00e9rea Uruguaya).\nThe Air Force consists of about 3,000 personnel and organized into three Air Brigades (I, II, &amp; III) and several Squadrons.\nCombat aircraft consist of a few Cessna A-37B Dragonflies and transport aircraft of two Lockheed C-130s, two Embraer C-95 Bandeirantes, one Embraer C-120ER Brasilia, five Spanish CASA C-212-200/300 Aviocars and ten Cessna U-206H Stationairs. The helicopter fleet consist of a few Bell UH-1H Iroquois, five Bell 212 and two Eurocopter AS-365N2 Dauphin.\nThe Air Force Academy (\"Escuela Militar de Aeron\u00e1utica\") is located at General Artigas Air Base in Pando, Canelones; the Air Force Technical School of Aeronautics (\"Escuela T\u00e9cnica de Aeron\u00e1utica\") in Toledo Sur, Canelones; and the Air Force Command Academy (\"Escuela de Comando y Estado Mayor A\u00e9reo\") at Captain Boiso Lanza Air Base in Montevideo. Training aircraft consists of twelve Italian Aermacchi SF-260EU, three Beechcraft UB-55 and UB-58 Barons, and five Swiss Pilatus PC-7U Turbo Trainers.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31852", "revid": "7447121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31852", "title": "Foreign relations of Uruguay", "text": " \nThis article deals with the diplomatic affairs, foreign policy and international relations of Uruguay. At the political level, these matters are officially handled by the Ministry of Foreign Relations, also known as \"Canciller\u00eda\", which answers to the President.\nOverview.\nUruguay traditionally has had strong political and cultural links with its neighbours and Europe. British diplomat Alfred Mitchell-Innes was Minister to Uruguay throughout the crucial years of World War I (1913\u20131919).\nWith globalization and regional economic problems, its links to North America have strengthened. Uruguay is a strong advocate of constitutional democracy, political pluralism, and individual liberties. Its international relations historically have been guided by the principles of nonintervention, multilateralism, respect for national sovereignty, and reliance on the rule of law to settle disputes. Uruguay's international relations also reflect its drive to seek export markets and foreign investment. It is a founding member of MERCOSUR. In June 1991, MERCOSUR and the United States signed the \"Rose Garden Agreement\" (also known as the \"Four Plus One\" Agreement). The agreement was non-operational until June 2001 when MERCOSUR invited the U.S. to discuss the feasibility of market access negotiations. The first U.S.-MERCOSUR meeting was held on September 24, 2001, and resulted in the creation of four working groups on industrial trade, e-commerce, agriculture, and investment.\nUruguay was a member of the Rio Group, an association of Latin American states that deals with multilateral security issues (under the \"Inter-American Treaty of Reciprocal Assistance\"), prior to the group's dissolution in 2011. Uruguay's location between Argentina and Brazil makes close relations with these two larger neighbors and MERCOSUR associate members Chile and Bolivia particularly important. An early proponent of the Enterprise for the Americas Initiative, Uruguay has actively participated in the follow-up process to the periodic Summits of the Americas, especially the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA). Often considered a neutral country and blessed with a professional diplomatic corps, Uruguay is often called on to preside international bodies. Most recently, Uruguay was selected to chair the FTAA and WTO agricultural committees and a Uruguayan presides over the WTO General Assembly. Uruguay also is a member of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI), a trade association based in Montevideo that includes 10 South American countries plus Mexico and Cuba.\nIn 2020, the new right-wing president of Uruguay, Luis Lacalle Pou, announced that he will implement radical changes in Uruguay's foreign policy, taking a harder attitude against disputed President Nicolas Maduro's regime in Venezuela and improving relations with the U.S. The previous left-wing government of Uruguay had recognized Maduro as Venezuela's president. President Luis Lacalle Pou also declared the presidents of Venezuela and Cuba to be \"dictators.\"\nDisputes - international: Uncontested disputes with Brazil over tiny Isla Brasilera at the mouth of the Quarai/Cuareim River near the Argentina tripoint, and, 225 kilometers upriver, over the 235\u00a0km2. Invernada River region, as to which tributary is the legitimate source of the Quarai/Cuareim River.\nIn the 1960s, the US Office of Public Safety helped in training Uruguayan police officers. Dan Mitrione taught torture methods used against the civilian population and the Tupamaros.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Uruguay maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31853", "revid": "17101593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31853", "title": "Uzbekistan", "text": "Country in Central Asia\nUzbekistan, officially the Republic of Uzbekistan, is a doubly landlocked country located in Central Asia. It is surrounded by five countries: Kazakhstan to the north, Kyrgyzstan to the northeast, Tajikistan to the southeast, Afghanistan to the south, and Turkmenistan to the southwest, making it one of only two doubly landlocked countries on Earth, the other being Liechtenstein. The country has a population of more than 37.6 million, making it the most populous country in Central Asia. Uzbekistan is a member of the Organization of Turkic States. Uzbek, spoken by the Uzbek people, is the official language and spoken by the majority of its inhabitants, while Russian and Tajik are significant minority languages. Islam is the predominant religion, and most Uzbeks are Sunni Muslims.\nThe first recorded settlers in the land of what is contemporary Uzbekistan were Eastern Iranian nomads, known as Scythians, who founded kingdoms in Khwarazm, Sogdiana, and Bactria in the 8th\u20136th centuries BC, as well as Fergana and Margiana in the 3rd century BC \u2013 6th century AD. The area was incorporated into the Achaemenid Empire and, after a period of Greco-Bactrian rule and later by the Sasanian Empire, until the Muslim conquest of Persia in the seventh century. The early Muslim conquests and the subsequent Samanid Empire converted most of the people into adherents of Islam. During this period, cities began to grow rich from the Silk Road, and became a center of the Islamic Golden Age. The local Khwarazmian dynasty was destroyed by the Mongol invasion in the 13th century, leading to a dominance by Mongol peoples. Timur in the 14th century established the Timurid Empire. Its capital was Samarkand, which became a center of science under the rule of Ulugh Beg, giving birth to the Timurid Renaissance. The territories of the Timurid dynasty were conquered by Kipchak Shaybanids in the 16th century. Conquests by Emperor Babur towards the east led to the foundation of the Mughal Empire in India. Most of Central Asia was gradually incorporated into the Russian Empire during the 19th century, with Tashkent becoming the political center of Russian Turkestan. In 1924, national delimitation created the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic as a republic of the Soviet Union. It declared independence as the Republic of Uzbekistan in 1991.\nUzbekistan is a secular state, with a semi-presidential constitutional government. Uzbekistan comprises 12 regions (vilayats), Tashkent City, and one autonomous republic, Karakalpakstan. While non-governmental organisations have defined Uzbekistan as \"an authoritarian state with limited civil rights\", significant reforms under Uzbekistan's second president, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, have been made following the death of the first president, Islam Karimov. Owing to these reforms, relations with the neighbouring countries of Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Afghanistan have drastically improved. A United Nations report of 2020 found much progress toward achieving the UN's Sustainable Development Goals.\nThe Uzbek economy is in a gradual transition to the market economy, with foreign trade policy being based on import substitution. In September 2017, the country's currency became fully convertible at market rates. Uzbekistan is a major producer and exporter of cotton. With the gigantic power-generation facilities from the Soviet era and an ample supply of natural gas, Uzbekistan has become the largest electricity producer in Central Asia. From 2018 to 2021, the republic received a BB\u2212 sovereign credit rating by both Standard and Poor (S&amp;P) and Fitch Ratings. In June 2025, Fitch Ratings upgraded Uzbekistan\u2019s long-term foreign-currency issuer default rating from BB\u2212 to BB, with a Stable Outlook, citing sustained economic reforms, robust growth, and improvements in external buffers. The Brookings Institution described Uzbekistan as having large liquid assets, high economic growth, low public debt, and a low GDP per capita. Uzbekistan is a member of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), United Nations (UN) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO).\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Uzbeg'ist\u00e1n\" appears in the 16th century Tarikh-i Rashidi.\nThe origin of the word Uzbek remains disputed. \nAll three have the middle syllable/phoneme being cognate with the Turkic title \"Beg\".\nThe name of the country was often spelled as \" in Uzbek Cyrillic or \" in Russian during Soviet rule.\nHistory.\nThe region currently known as the country of Uzbekistan has been referred to by many names over the millennia. The name Uzbekistan first appears in 16th century literature. Other names for the region include: Transoxiana, Turkestan, and Bukhara. In the 14th century the region served as the birthplace, home, and capital of Tamerlane. Under Tamerlane, the region was a part of the Timurid Empire which extended from the Black Sea to the Arabian Sea, and to just outside of Delhi, India.\nPrehistory and ancient history.\nCentral Asia was frequented by multiple Indo-European migrations. During early antiquity the region was inhabited by nomadic Scythian tribes who came from the Eurasian Steppe which includes modern Uzbekistan, sometime in during first millennium BC. When these nomadic tribes settled in the region they built an extensive irrigation system along the rivers. At this time, cities such as Bukhoro (Bukhara) and Samarqand (Samarkand) emerged as centres of government and high culture. By the fifth century BC, the Bactrian, Sogdian, and Tokharian states dominated the region.\nAs East Asia began to develop its silk trade with the West, using an extensive network of cities and rural settlements in the province of Transoxiana, and further east in what is today Xinjiang, the Sogdian intermediaries became the wealthiest of these merchants. As a result of this trade on what became known as the Silk Road, Bukhara and Samarkand eventually became extremely wealthy cities, and at times Transoxiana (Mawarannahr) was one of the most influential and powerful provinces of antiquity.\nThe Achaemenid emperors Cyrus the Great, and later Darius the Great exerted control of the Amu Darya, incorporating Bactria and Chorasmia as satrapies. Historical Iranian texts later record the region as Turan. In 327 BC, Macedonian ruler Alexander the Great conquered the Persian Empire provinces of Sogdiana and Bactria, which contained the territories of modern Uzbekistan. Popular resistance to the conquest was fierce, causing Alexander's army to be bogged down in the region that became the northern part of the Macedonian Greco-Bactrian Kingdom. The kingdom was replaced with the Yuezhi-dominated Kushan Empire in the first century BC. For many centuries thereafter the region of Uzbekistan was ruled by the Hephthalites and Sassanid Empires, as well as by other empires, for example, those formed by the Turkic Gokturk peoples.\nMedieval history.\nThe Muslim conquests from the seventh century onward saw the Arabs bring Islam to Uzbekistan. In the same period, Islam began to take root among the nomadic Turkic peoples.\nIn the eighth century, Transoxiana, the territory between the Amudarya and Syrdarya rivers, was conquered by the Arabs (Qutayba ibn Muslim), becoming a focal point soon after the Islamic Golden Age.\nIn the ninth and tenth centuries, Transoxiana was brought into the Samanid State. In the tenth century it was gradually dominated by the Turkic-ruled Karakhanids, as well as their Seljuk (Sultan Sanjar) overseer's.\nThe Mongol conquest under Genghis Khan during the 13th century brought change to the region. The invasions of Bukhara, Samarkand, Urgench and others resulted in mass murders and unprecedented destruction, which saw parts of Khwarezmia being completely razed.\nFollowing the death of Genghis Khan in 1227, his empire was divided among his four sons and family members. Despite the potential for serious fragmentation, an orderly succession continued for several generations. Control of most of Transoxiana stayed in the hands of the direct descendants of Chagatai Khan, the second son of Genghis Khan. Orderly succession, prosperity, and internal peace prevailed in the Chaghatai lands, and the Mongol Empire as a whole remained a strong and united kingdom, known as the Golden Horde.\nTimurid period.\nOne tribal chieftain, Timur (Tamerlane), emerged from these struggles in the 1380s as the dominant force in Transoxiana. Although he was not a descendant of Genghis Khan, Timur became the \"de facto\" ruler of Transoxiana and proceeded to conquer all of western Central Asia, Iran, the Caucasus, Mesopotamia, Asia Minor, and the southern steppe region north of the Aral Sea. He also invaded Russia before dying during an invasion of China in 1405. Timur was also known for his extreme brutality and his conquests were accompanied by genocidal massacres in the cities he occupied.\nTimur initiated the last flowering of Transoxiana by gathering together numerous artisans and scholars from the vast lands he had conquered into his capital, Samarkand, thus imbuing his empire with a rich Perso-Islamic culture. During his reign and the reigns of his immediate descendants, a wide range of religious and palatial construction masterpieces were undertaken in Samarkand and other population centres.\nTamerlane also established an exchange of medical discoveries and patronised physicians, scientists and artists from the neighbouring regions such as India; his grandson Ulugh Beg was one of the world's first great astronomers. It was during the Timurid dynasty that Turkic, in the form of the Chaghatai dialect, became a literary language in its own right in Transoxiana, although the Timurids were Persianate in culture. The greatest Chaghataid writer, Ali-Shir Nava'i, was active in the city of Herat (now in northwestern Afghanistan) in the second half of the 15th century.\nUzbek period.\nThe Timurid state quickly split in half after the death of Timur. The chronic internal fighting of the Timurids attracted the attention of the Uzbek nomadic tribes living to the north of the Aral Sea. In 1501, the Uzbek forces began a wholesale invasion of Transoxiana. The slave trade in the Emirate of Bukhara became prominent and was firmly established at this time. The Khanate of Bukhara was eventually invaded by the foreign government of Persia in 1510, and then became a part of the Persian empire of the day.\nBefore the arrival of the Russians, present-day Uzbekistan was divided between the Emirate of Bukhara and the khanates of Khiva and Kokand. \nRussian conquest.\nIn the 19th century, the Russian Empire began to expand and spread into Central Asia. There were 210,306 Russians living in Uzbekistan in 1912. The \"Great Game\" period is generally regarded as running from approximately 1813 to the Anglo-Russian Convention of 1907. A second, less intensive phase followed the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917. At the start of the 19th century, there were some separating British India and the outlying regions of Tsarist Russia. Much of the land between was unmapped. In the early 1890s, Sven Hedin passed through Uzbekistan, during his first expedition.\nSoviet period.\nBy the beginning of 1920, Central Asia was firmly in the hands of Russia and, despite some early resistance to the Bolsheviks, Uzbekistan and the rest of Central Asia became a part of the Soviet Union. On 27 October 1924, the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic was created. From 1941 to 1945, during World War II, 1,433,230 people from Uzbekistan fought in the Red Army against Nazi Germany. As many as 263,005 Uzbek soldiers died in the battlefields of the Eastern Front, and 32,670 went missing in action.\nDuring the Soviet\u2013Afghan War, a number of Uzbek troops fought in neighbouring Afghanistan. At least 1,500 lost their lives and thousands more paralysed.\nIndependence.\nOn 20 June 1990, Uzbekistan declared its state sovereignty. On 31 August 1991, Uzbekistan declared independence after the failed coup attempt in Moscow. 1 September was proclaimed National Independence Day. The Soviet Union was dissolved on 26 December of that year. Islam Karimov, previously first secretary of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan since 1989, was elected president of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic in 1990. After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, he was elected president of independent Uzbekistan. An authoritarian ruler, Karimov died in September 2016. He was replaced by his long-time Prime Minister, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, on 14 December of the same year. On 6 November 2021, Mirziyoyev was sworn into his second term in office, after gaining a landslide victory in presidential election.\nGeography.\nUzbekistan has an area of . It is the 56th largest country in the world by area and the 40th by population. Among the CIS countries, it is the fourth largest by area and the second largest by population.\nUzbekistan lies between latitudes 37\u00b0 and 46\u00b0 N, and longitudes 56\u00b0 and 74\u00b0 E. It stretches from west to east and from north to south. Bordering Kazakhstan and the Aralkum Desert (former Aral Sea) to the north and northwest, Turkmenistan and Afghanistan to the southwest, Tajikistan to the southeast, and Kyrgyzstan to the northeast, Uzbekistan is one of the largest Central Asian states and the only Central Asian state to border all the other four. Uzbekistan also shares a short border (less than ) with Afghanistan to the south.\nUzbekistan is a hot, dry, landlocked country. It is one of two doubly landlocked countries in the world \u2013 that is, a landlocked country completely surrounded by other landlocked countries. The second doubly landlocked country is Liechtenstein. In addition, due to its location within a series of endorheic basins, none of its rivers lead to the sea. Less than 10% of its territory is intensively cultivated irrigated land in river valleys and oases. The Aral Sea, which has been largely desiccated by cotton production established in the Soviet era, is considered one of the world's worst environmental disasters. The rest is the vast Kyzylkum Desert and mountains.\nAccording to a 1981 Soviet study, the highest point in Uzbekistan is Khazret Sultan at above sea level, in the southern part of the Gissar Range in the Surxondaryo Region on the border with Tajikistan, just northwest of Dushanbe (formerly called Peak of the 22nd Congress of the Communist Party). \nThe climate in Uzbekistan is continental, with little precipitation expected annually (100\u2013200 millimetres, or 3.9\u20137.9\u00a0inches). The average summer high temperature tends to be 40\u00a0\u00b0C (104 \u00b0F), while the average winter low temperature is around \u221223\u00a0\u00b0C (\u22129 \u00b0F).\nUzbekistan is home to six terrestrial ecoregions: Alai-Western Tian Shan steppe, Gissaro-Alai open woodlands, Badghyz and Karabil semi-desert, Central Asian northern desert, Central Asian riparian woodlands, and Central Asian southern desert.\nEnvironment.\nUzbekistan has a rich and diverse natural environment. However, decades of Soviet policies in pursuit of greater cotton production have resulted in a catastrophic scenario with the agricultural industry being the main contributor to the pollution and devastation of both air and water in the country.\nThe Aral Sea was once the fourth-largest inland sea on Earth, humidifying the surrounding air and irrigating the arid land. Since the 1960s, when the overuse of the Aral Sea water began, it has shrunk to about 10% of its former area and divided into parts, with only the southern part of the narrow western lobe of the South Aral Sea remaining permanently in Uzbekistan. Much of the water was and continues to be used for the irrigation of cotton fields, a crop requiring a large amount of water to grow.\nDue to the Aral Sea loss, high salinity and contamination of the soil with heavy elements are especially widespread in Karakalpakstan, the region of Uzbekistan adjacent to the Aral Sea. The bulk of the nation's water resources is used for farming, which accounts for nearly 84% of the water use and contributes to high soil salinity. Heavy use of pesticides and fertilisers for cotton growing further aggravates soil contamination.\nAccording to the UNDP (United Nations Development Programme), climate risk management in Uzbekistan should consider its ecological safety.\nNumerous oil and gas deposits have been discovered in the south of the country.\nUzbekistan has also been home to seismic activity, as evidenced by the 1902 Andijan earthquake, 2011 Fergana Valley earthquake, and 1966 Tashkent earthquake.\nA dam collapse at Sardoba Reservoir in May 2020 flooded 35,000 hectares of land. Six people died and 111,000 evacuated with recovery estimates over 1.5 trillion som. The devastation extended into areas inside neighbouring Kazakhstan.\nAir pollution.\nThe air pollution situation in Uzbekistan throughout the 21st century has been characterised by steady deterioration, reflecting a long history of environmental problems. The increase in pollution began with local domestic emissions in the early 20th century, but Soviet industrialisation made a significant contribution, especially the evacuation of enterprises in the 1940s and the subsequent development of heavy industry, oil refining and chemical production in the 1950s\u20131980s. The decline in the level of the Aral Sea has created an additional source of salt and dust storms. In the post-Soviet period, the structure of pollution shifted: in the 2000s, the dominant factor was the growth of motor transport and the use of low-quality fuel, and in the 2010s, it was the increase in PM2.5 concentrations due to the construction boom and climatic conditions. \nBy 2020\u20132025, the combination of transport emissions, domestic heating, dust and meteorological inversions had led to a systemic environmental crisis, with Tashkent regularly ranking among the most polluted cities in the world. According to the World Bank, the average annual pollution level in the capital is more than six times higher than the WHO recommended level (5 \u03bcg/m\u00b3).\nPolitics.\nAfter Uzbekistan declared independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, an election was held, and Islam Karimov was elected as the first President of Uzbekistan on 29 December 1991. The elections of the Oliy Majlis (Parliament or Supreme Assembly) were held under a resolution adopted by the 16th Supreme Soviet in 1994. In that year, the Supreme Soviet was replaced by the Oliy Majlis. The third elections for the bicameral 150-member Oliy Majlis, the Legislative Chamber, and the 100-member Senate for five-year terms, were held on 27 December 2009. The second elections were held from December 2004 to January 2005. The Oliy Majlis was unicameral up to 2004. Its size increased from 69 deputies (members) in 1994 to 120 in 2004\u201305 and currently stands at 150.\nIslam Karimov\u2019s first presidential term was extended to 2000 through a referendum. He was subsequently re-elected in 2000, 2007, and 2015, each time winning over 90% of the vote. However, most international observers refused to participate in the electoral process and dismissed the results as failing to meet democratic standards.\nA 2002 referendum introduced a bicameral parliament, consisting of a lower house (the Oliy Majlis) and an upper house (the Senate), with members of the lower house serving as full-time legislators. Elections for the new parliament were held on 26 December 2002.\nFollowing Karimov\u2019s death on 2 September 2016, the Oliy Majlis appointed Prime Minister Shavkat Mirziyoyev as interim president. While the constitution designated Senate Chairman Nigmatilla Yuldashev as the rightful successor, he declined the position, citing Mirziyoyev\u2019s extensive experience. In the December 2016 presidential election, Mirziyoyev was officially elected with 88.6% of the vote and was sworn in on 14 December. Deputy Prime Minister Abdulla Aripov then succeeded him as prime minister.\nAs president, Mirziyoyev replaced most of Karimov\u2019s officials and called for the inclusion of younger, patriotic individuals in government. Over time, he distanced himself from Karimov\u2019s policies, visiting various regions and cities to oversee reforms. Analysts and Western media have compared his leadership style to that of Deng Xiaoping and Mikhail Gorbachev, describing his tenure as a potential \"Uzbek Spring\".\nAccording to International IDEA\u2019s Global State of Democracy (GSoD) Indices and Democracy Tracker, Uzbekistan performs in the low range on overall democratic measures, with particular weaknesses in local democracy, judicial independence and free political parties. The V-Dem Democracy Indices described Uzbekistan as a closed autocracy in 2024. \nForeign relations.\nUzbekistan joined the Commonwealth of Independent States in December 1991. However, it is opposed to reintegration and withdrew from the CIS collective security arrangement in 1999. Since that time, Uzbekistan has participated in the CIS peacekeeping force in Tajikistan and in UN-organised groups to help resolve the Tajikistan and Afghanistan conflicts, both of which it sees as posing threats to its own stability.\nPreviously close to Washington (which gave Uzbekistan half a billion dollars in aid in 2004, about a quarter of its military budget), the government of Uzbekistan has recently restricted American military use of the airbase at Karshi-Khanabad for air operations in neighbouring Afghanistan. Uzbekistan was an active supporter of U.S. efforts against worldwide terrorism.\nThe relationship between Uzbekistan and the United States began to deteriorate after the so-called \"colour revolutions\" in Georgia and Ukraine (and to a lesser extent Kyrgyzstan). When the U.S. joined in a call for an independent international investigation of the bloody events at Andijan, the relationship further declined, and President Islam Karimov changed the political alignment of the country to bring it closer to Russia and China.\nIn late July 2005, the government of Uzbekistan ordered the United States to vacate an airbase in Karshi-Kanabad (near Uzbekistan's border with Afghanistan) within 180 days. Karimov had offered use of the base to the U.S. shortly after 9/11. It is also believed by some Uzbeks that the protests in Andijan were brought about by the UK and U.S. influences in the area of Andijan. This is another reason for the hostility between Uzbekistan and the West.\nUzbekistan is a member of the United Nations (UN) (since 2 March 1992), the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council (EAPC), Partnership for Peace (PfP), and the Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). It belongs to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the Economic Cooperation Organization (ECO) (comprising the five Central Asian countries, Azerbaijan, Iran, Turkey, Afghanistan, and Pakistan). In 1999, Uzbekistan joined the GUAM alliance (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova), which was formed in 1997 (making it GUUAM), but pulled out of the organisation in 2005.\nUzbekistan is also a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) and hosts the SCO's Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure (RATS) in Tashkent. Uzbekistan joined the new Central Asian Cooperation Organisation (CACO) in 2002. The CACO consists of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. It is a founding member of, and remains involved in, the Central Asian Union, formed with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, and joined in March 1998 by Tajikistan.\nIn December 1994 Uzbekistan applied for the World Trade Organization membership and received an observer status to start the accession process. The Working Party on the Accession of Uzbekistan to the WTO held its fourth meeting on 7 July 2020 \u2014 almost 15 years after its last formal meeting.\nIn September 2006, UNESCO presented Islam Karimov an award for Uzbekistan's preservation of its rich culture and traditions. Despite criticism, this seems to be a sign of improving relationships between Uzbekistan and the West.\nThe month of October 2006 also saw a decrease in the isolation of Uzbekistan from the West. The EU announced that it was planning to send a delegation to Uzbekistan to talk about human rights and liberties, after a long period of hostile relations between the two. Although it is equivocal about whether the official or unofficial version of the Andijan Massacre is true, the EU is evidently willing to ease its economic sanctions against Uzbekistan. Nevertheless, it is generally assumed among Uzbekistan's population that the government will stand firm in maintaining its close ties with the Russian Federation and in its theory that the 2004\u20132005 protests in Uzbekistan were promoted by the US and UK.\nIn January 2008, Lola Karimova-Tillyaeva was appointed to her current role as Uzbekistan's ambassador to UNESCO. Karimova-Tillyaeva and her team have been instrumental in promoting inter-cultural dialogue by increasing European society's awareness of Uzbekistan's cultural and historical heritage.\nHuman rights.\nNon-governmental human rights organisations, such as IHF, Human Rights Watch, Amnesty International, as well as the United States Department of State and the Council of the European Union, characterise Uzbekistan as \"an authoritarian state with limited civil rights\" and express profound concern about \"wide-scale violation of virtually all basic human rights\".\nAccording to the reports, the most widespread violations include torture, arbitrary arrests, and various restrictions on freedoms, such as those of religion, speech, press, association, and assembly. It has also been reported that forced sterilisation of rural Uzbek women has been sanctioned by the government.\nThe reports maintain that the violations are most often committed against members of religious organisations, independent journalists, human rights activists and political activists, including members of the banned opposition parties. As of 2015, reports on violations on human rights in Uzbekistan indicated that violations were still going on without any improvement. The Freedom House has consistently ranked Uzbekistan near the bottom of its Freedom in the World ranking since the country's founding in 1991. In the 2018 report, Uzbekistan was one of the 11 worst countries for Political Rights and Civil Liberties.\nThe 2005 civil unrest in Uzbekistan, which resulted in several hundred people being killed, is viewed by many as a landmark event in the history of human rights abuse in Uzbekistan.\nConcern has been expressed and requests for an independent investigation of the events has been made by the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, the OSCE Chairman-in-Office and the OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights.\nThe government of Uzbekistan is accused of unlawful termination of human life and of denying its citizens freedom of assembly and freedom of expression. The government vehemently rebuffs the accusations, maintaining that it merely conducted an anti-terrorist operation, exercising only necessary force. In addition, some officials claim that \"an information war on Uzbekistan has been declared\" and the human rights violations in Andijan are invented by the enemies of Uzbekistan as a convenient pretext for intervention in the country's internal affairs. Male and female homosexuality is illegal in Uzbekistan. Punishment ranges from a fine to 3 years in prison.\nThere are an estimated 1.2 million modern slaves in Uzbekistan, most work in the cotton industry. The government allegedly forces state employees to pick cotton in the autumn months. World Bank loans have been connected to projects that use child labour and forced labour practices in the cotton industry.\nRecent developments.\nKarimov died in 2016 and his successor Shavkat Mirziyoyev is considered by most to be pursuing a less autocratic path by increasing co-operation with human rights NGOs, scheduling Soviet-style exit visas to be abolished in 2019, and reducing sentences for certain misdemeanor offences.\nThe Amnesty International report on the country for 2017\u20132018 found some remnant repressive measures and lack of rule of law in eradicating modern slavery. In February 2020, the United Nations announced that Uzbekistan had made \"major progress\" on stamping out forced labour in its cotton harvest as 94% of pickers worked voluntarily.\nAdministrative divisions.\nUzbekistan is divided into twelve regions (, singular , compound noun e.g., , , etc.), one autonomous republic (, compound noun e.g. , \"Karakalpakstan Autonomous Republic\", etc.), and one independent city (, compound noun , e.g., , \"Tashkent City\"). Names are given below in Uzbek, and Karakalpak languages when applicable, although numerous variations of the transliterations of each name exist.\nKarakalpakstan\nNavoiy\nKhorezm\nBukhara\nQashqadaryo\nSurxondaryo\nSamarkand\nJizzakh\nFergana\nAndijan\nNamangan\nSirdaryo\nTashkent\nTashkent City\nThe regions are further divided into districts ().\nLargest cities.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEconomy.\nUzbekistan mines 80 tons of gold annually, seventh in the world. In 2015, Uzbekistan's gold production was 102 metric tons. Uzbekistan's copper deposits rank tenth in the world and its uranium deposits twelfth. The country's uranium production ranks seventh globally. The Uzbek national gas company, Uzbekneftegaz, ranks 11th in the world in natural gas production with an annual output of . The country has significant untapped reserves of oil and gas: there are 194 deposits of hydrocarbons in Uzbekistan, including 98 condensate and natural gas deposits and 96 gas condensate deposits.\nUzbekistan improved marginally in the \"2020 Ease of Doing Business\" ranking by the World Bank.\nThe largest corporations involved in Uzbekistan's energy sector are the China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC), Petronas, the Korea National Oil Corporation, Gazprom, Lukoil, and Uzbekneftegaz.\nAlong with many Commonwealth of Independent States or CIS economies, Uzbekistan's economy declined during the first years of transition and then recovered after 1995, as the cumulative effect of policy reforms began to be felt. It has shown robust growth, rising by 4% per year between 1998 and 2003 and accelerating thereafter to 7%\u20138% per year. According to IMF estimates, the GDP in 2008 will be almost double its value in 1995 (in constant prices). Since 2003, annual inflation rates varied, reaching almost 40% in 2010 and less than 20% in 2019.\nUzbekistan has a GNI per capita of US$2,020 in 2018 dollars, resulting in a PPP equivalent of US$7,230. Economic production is concentrated in commodities. In 2011, Uzbekistan was the world's seventh-largest producer and fifth-largest exporter of cotton as well as the seventh-largest world producer of gold. It is also a regionally significant producer of natural gas, coal, copper, oil, silver and uranium.\nAgriculture employs 27% of Uzbekistan's labour force and contributes 17.4% of its GDP (2012 data). Cultivable land is 4.4 million hectares, or about 10% of Uzbekistan's total area. While official unemployment is very low, underemployment \u2013 especially in rural areas \u2013 is estimated to be at least 20%. Cotton production in Uzbekistan is important to the national economy of the country. Uzbek cotton is even used to make banknotes in South Korea. Uzbek cotton exports have become the cause of a scandal related to the Russian-Ukrainian war and sanctions imposed on the Russian military industry. According to the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP), Vlast, and iStories, after 24 February 2022, Uzbekistan significantly increased its exports of cotton pulp and nitrocellulose to Russia, key components for the manufacture of explosives and gunpowder. According to Ekonomichna Pravda, at least two large Uzbek exporters have been working with Russian military-industrial complex enterprises. Documents from the Federal Tax Service of the Russian Federation confirm that at least three Russian companies - Bina Group, Khimtrade, and Lenakhim - sold imported cotton pulp in Russia to military plants under US sanctions.\nThe country has a considerable production of carrots as well. The use of child labour in Uzbekistan has led several companies, including Tesco, C&amp;A, Marks &amp; Spencer, Gap, and H&amp;M, to boycott Uzbek cotton.\nFacing a multitude of economic challenges upon acquiring independence, the government adopted an evolutionary reform strategy, with an emphasis on state control, reduction of imports and self-sufficiency in energy. Since 1994, the state-controlled media have repeatedly proclaimed the success of this \"Uzbekistan Economic Model\" and suggested that it is a unique example of a smooth transition to the market economy while avoiding shock, pauperism and stagnation. As of 2019, Uzbekistan's economy is one of the most diversified in Central Asia which makes the country an attractive economic partner for China.\nThe gradualist reform strategy has involved postponing significant macroeconomic and structural reforms. The state in the hands of the bureaucracy has remained a dominant influence in the economy. Corruption permeates the society and grows more rampant over time. A February 2006 report by the International Crisis Group suggests that revenues earned from key exports, especially cotton, gold, maize and increasingly gas, are distributed among a very small circle of the ruling elite, with little or no benefit for the populace at large. The early-2010s high-profile corruption scandals involving government contracts and large international companies, notably TeliaSonera, have shown that businesses are particularly vulnerable to corruption when operating in Uzbekistan.\nAccording to the Economist Intelligence Unit, \"the government is hostile to allowing the development of an independent private sector, over which it would have no control\".\nThe economic policies have repelled foreign investment, which is the lowest per capita in the CIS. For years, the largest barrier to foreign companies entering the Uzbekistan market has been the difficulty of converting currency. In 2003 the government accepted the obligations of Article VIII under the International Monetary Fund (IMF) providing for full currency convertibility. However, strict currency controls and the tightening of borders have lessened the effect of this measure.\nUzbekistan experienced rampant inflation of around 1000% per year immediately after independence (1992\u20131994). Stabilisation efforts implemented with guidance from the IMF paid off. The inflation rates were brought down to 50% in 1997 and then to 22% in 2002. Since 2003 annual inflation rates averaged less than 10%. Tight economic policies in 2004 resulted in a drastic reduction of inflation to 3.8% (although alternative estimates based on the price of a true market basket put it at 15%). The inflation rates moved up to 6.9% in 2006 and 7.6% in 2007 but have remained in the single-digit range.\nThe government of Uzbekistan restricts foreign imports in many ways, including high import duties. Excise taxes are applied in a highly discriminatory manner to protect locally produced goods, although the excises taxes were removed for foreign cars in 2020. Official tariffs are combined with unofficial, discriminatory charges resulting in total charges amounting to as much as 100 to 150% of the actual value of the product, making imported products virtually unaffordable. Import substitution is an officially declared policy and the government proudly reports a reduction by a factor of two in the volume of consumer goods imported. A number of CIS countries are officially exempt from Uzbekistan import duties. Uzbekistan has a Bilateral Investment Treaty with fifty other countries.\nThe Republican Stock Exchange (RSE) opened in 1994. The stocks of all Uzbek joint stock companies (around 1,250) are traded on RSE. The number of listed companies as of January 2013 exceeds 110. Securities market volume reached 2 trillion in 2012, and the number is rapidly growing due to the rising interest by companies of attracting necessary resources through the capital market. According to Central Depository as of January 2013 par value of outstanding shares of Uzbek emitters exceeded 9 trillion.\nThanks in part to the recovery of world market prices of gold and cotton (the country's key export commodities), expanded natural gas and some manufacturing exports, and increasing labour migrant transfers, the current account turned into a large surplus (between 9% and 11% of GDP from 2003 to 2005). In 2018, foreign exchange reserves, including gold, totalled around US$25 billion.\nForeign exchange reserves amounted in 2010 to US$13 billion.\nUzbekistan is predicted to be one of the fastest-growing economies in the world (top 26) in future decades, according to a survey by global bank HSBC.\nUzbekistan was ranked 79th in the Global Innovation Index in 2025.\nDemographics.\nAs of 2022, Uzbekistan has the largest population of countries in Central Asia. Its 36 million citizens comprise nearly half the region's total population. The population of Uzbekistan is very young though it is slowly aging. 23.1% of its people are younger than 16 (2020 estimate). According to official sources, Uzbeks comprise a majority (84.5%) of the total population. Other ethnic groups include Tajiks 4.8%, Kazakhs 2.4%, Karakalpaks 2.2%, Russians 2.1% and Tatars 0.5% as of 2021.\nEthnic composition of the population of Uzbekistan in 2021:\nThere is some controversy about the percentage of the Tajik population. While official state numbers from Uzbekistan put the number around 5%, the number is said to be an understatement and some Western scholars put the number up to 10%\u201320%. Uzbekistan has an ethnic Korean population that was forcibly relocated to the region by Stalin from the Soviet Far East in 1937\u20131938. There are also small groups of Armenians in Uzbekistan, mostly in Tashkent and Samarkand.\nThe nation is 96% Muslim (mostly Sunni, with a Shi'a minority), 2.3% Eastern Orthodox and 1.7% other faiths. The U.S. State Department's International Religious Freedom Report 2004 reports that 0.2% of the population are Buddhist (these being ethnic Koreans). Bukharan Jews have lived in Central Asia, mostly in Uzbekistan, for thousands of years. There were 94,900 Jews in Uzbekistan in 1989 (about 0.5% of the population according to the 1989 census), but since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, most Central Asian Jews left the region for the United States, Germany, or Israel. Fewer than 5,000 Jews remained in Uzbekistan in 2007 and they live primarily in Tashkent, Samarkand, and Bukhara.\nRussians in Uzbekistan represented 5.5% of the total population in 1989. During the Soviet period, Russians and Ukrainians constituted more than half the population of Tashkent. The country counted nearly 1.5 million Russians, 12.5% of the population, in the 1970 census. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union, significant emigration of ethnic Russians has taken place, mostly for economic reasons.\nIn the 1940s, the Crimean Tatars, along with the Volga Germans, Chechens, Pontic Greeks, Kumaks and many other nationalities were deported to Central Asia. Approximately 100,000 Crimean Tatars continue to live in Uzbekistan. The number of Greeks in Tashkent has decreased from 35,000 in 1974 to about 12,000 in 2004. The majority of Meskhetian Turks left the country after the pogrom in the Fergana valley in June 1989.\nAlmost 10% of Uzbekistan's labour force works abroad, mostly in Russia and Kazakhstan.\nUzbekistan has a 100% literacy rate among adults older than 15 (2019 estimate).\nLife expectancy in Uzbekistan is 75 years average. 72 years among men and 78 years among women.\nPresident Shavkat Mirziyoyev signed a law in March 2020 that demands a national census take place at least every 10 years. The population has not been officially counted in over 30 years. In November 2020, the first census was cancelled due to concerns about coronavirus and the sheer size of the task. It now has been scheduled for 2025\u22122026, with the results expected to be published in 2027.\nReligion.\nUzbekistan is a secular country and Article 61 of its constitution states that religious organisations and associations shall be separated from the state and equal before law. The state shall not interfere in the activity of religious associations. Islam is the dominant religion in Uzbekistan, although Soviet power (1924\u20131991) discouraged the expression of religious belief, and it was repressed during its existence as a Soviet Republic. The CIA Factbook (2004) estimates that Muslims constitute 88% of the population, while 9% of the population follow Russian Orthodox Christianity, 3% other religions and non-religious, while a 2020 Pew Research projection stated that Uzbekistan's population is 96.7% Muslim and Christians (mostly Russian Orthodox Christians) comprised 2.3% of the population (630,000). An estimated 93,000 Jews lived in the country in the early 1990s.\nIn addition, there are about 7,400 Zoroastrians left in Uzbekistan, mostly in Tajik areas like Khojand.\nDespite the predominance of Islam and its rich history in the country, the practice of the faith is far from monolithic. Uzbeks have practiced many versions of Islam. The conflict of Islamic tradition with various agendas of reform or secularisation throughout the 20th century has left a wide variety of Islamic practices in Central Asia.\nThe end of Soviet control in Uzbekistan in 1991 did not bring an immediate upsurge of religion-associated fundamentalism, as many had predicted, but rather a gradual re-acquaintance with the precepts of the Islamic faith and a gradual resurgence of Islam in the country. However, since 2015 there has been a slight increase in Islamist activity, with small organisations such as the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan declaring allegiance to Daesh and contributing fighters abroad, although the terror threat in Uzbekistan itself remains low. (See Terrorism in Uzbekistan).\nJewish community.\nThe Jewish community in the Uzbek lands lived for centuries, with occasional hardships during the reigns of certain rulers. During the rule of Tamerlane in the 14th century, Jews contributed greatly to his efforts to rebuild Samarkand, and a great Jewish centre was established there.\nAfter the area came under Russian rule in 1868, Jews were granted equal rights with the local Muslim population. In that period some 50,000 Jews lived in Samarkand and 20,000 in Bukhara.\nAfter the Russian revolutions in 1917 and the establishment of the Soviet regime, Jewish religious life (as with all religions) became restricted. By 1935 only one synagogue out of 30 remained in Samarkand. Similarly only one synagogue was operational in Bukhara and in Tashkent. Young children were not allowed to enter synagogues. In spite of this underground Jewish community life continued during the Soviet era.\nBy 1970 there were 103,000 Jews registered in the Uzbek SSR. Since the 1980s most of the Jews of Uzbekistan emigrated to Israel or to the United States of America. A small community of several thousand remained in the country as of 2013[ [update]]: some 7,000 lived in Tashkent, 3,000 in Bukhara and 700 in Samarkand.\nLanguages.\nThe Uzbek language is one of the Turkic languages. It belongs to the Karluk branch of the Turkic language family, which also includes the Uyghur language. It is the only official national language and since 1992 is officially written in the Latin alphabet.\nBefore the 1920s, the written language of Uzbeks was called Turki (known to Western scholars as Chagatai) and used the Nasta\u02bfl\u012bq script. In 1926 the Latin alphabet was introduced and went through several revisions throughout the 1930s. Finally, in 1940, the Cyrillic alphabet was introduced by Soviet authorities and was used until the fall of Soviet Union. In 1993 Uzbekistan shifted back to the Latin script (Uzbek alphabet), which was modified in 1996 and is being taught in schools since 2000. Educational establishments teach only the Latin notation. At the same time, the Cyrillic notation is common among the older generation. Even though the Cyrillic notation of Uzbek has now been abolished for official documents, it is still used by a number of some newspapers and websites.\nKarakalpak, belonging to the Kipchak branch of the Turkic language family and thus closer to Kazakh, is spoken by half a million people, primarily in the Republic of Karakalpakstan, and has an official status in that territory.\nAlthough the Russian language is not an official language in the country, it is widely used in many fields as a second official de-facto language. Digital information from the government is bilingual. The country is also home to approximately one million native Russian speakers. Signs throughout the country are both in Uzbek and Russian.\nThe Tajik language (a variety of Persian) is widespread in the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand because of their relatively large population of ethnic Tajiks. It is also found in large pockets in the Tashkent region, and Kasansay, Chust, Rishtan and Sokh in Ferghana Valley, as well as in Burchmulla, Ahangaran, Baghistan in the middle Syr Darya district, and finally in, Shahrisabz, Qarshi, Kitab and the river valleys of Kafiringan and Chaganian, forming altogether, approximately 25\u201330% of the population of Uzbekistan.\nIn April 2020, a draft bill was introduced in Uzbekistan to regulate the exclusive use of the Uzbek language in government affairs. Under this legislation, government workers could incur fines for doing work in languages other than Uzbek. Though unsuccessful, it was met with criticism by the Russian Ministry of Foreign Affairs spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova. In response, a group of Uzbek intellectuals signed an open letter arguing for the instatement of Russian as an official language alongside Uzbek, citing historical ties, the large Russian-speaking population in Uzbekistan, and the usefulness of Russian in higher education, together with the argument that only Russian language opened the communication with the other peoples of the region and the literature of the outside world. The Cyrillic Uzbek alphabet is still widely used, and 862 Russian-language schools are functioning in the country, compared to 1,100 in 1991, despite the fact that the Russian minority there has decreased from 1,7 million in 1990 to nearly 700,000 in 2022. In business, the Russian language outpaces Uzbek. Many Uzbeks in urban areas, as of 2019, are feeling more comfortable to speak in Russian, while Uzbek is more present in the agricultural regions. Uzbek did not manage to become a state language, and many blame the intelligentsia.\nOn September 15, 2020, citizenship amendments came into force that required foreigners to have proficiency in the Uzbek language before becoming citizens.\nCommunications.\nAccording to the official source report, as of 10 March 2008, the number of cellular phone users in Uzbekistan reached 7 million, up from 3.7 million on 1 July 2007. Mobile users in 2017 were more than 24 million. The largest mobile operator in terms of number of subscribers is MTS-Uzbekistan (former Uzdunrobita and part of Russian Mobile TeleSystems) and it is followed by Beeline (part of Russia's Beeline) and UCell (ex Coscom) (originally part of the U.S. MCT Corp., now a subsidiary of the Nordic/Baltic telecommunication company TeliaSonera AB).\nAs of 2019, the estimated number of internet users was more than 22 million or about 52% of the population.\nCensorship.\nCensorship in Uzbekistan exists and in October 2012 the government toughened internet censorship by blocking access to proxy servers. Reporters Without Borders has named Uzbekistan's government an \"Enemy of the Internet\" and government control over the internet has increased dramatically since the start of the Arab Spring.\nThe press in Uzbekistan practices self-censorship and foreign journalists have been gradually expelled from the country since the Andijan massacre of 2005 when government troops fired into crowds of protesters killing 187 according to official reports and estimates of several hundred by unofficial and witness accounts.\nTransportation.\nTashkent, the nation's capital and largest city, has a four-line metro built in 1977, and expanded in 2001 after ten years' independence from the Soviet Union. Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan are currently the only two countries in Central Asia with a subway system. It is promoted as one of the cleanest systems in the former Soviet Union. The stations are exceedingly ornate. For example, the station \"Kosmonavtlar\" built in 1984 is decorated using a space travel theme to recognise the achievements of humankind in space exploration and to commemorate the role of Vladimir Dzhanibekov, the Soviet cosmonaut of Uzbek origin. A statue of Vladimir Dzhanibekov stands near a station entrance.\nThere are government-operated trams and buses running across the city. There are also many taxis, registered and unregistered. Uzbekistan has plants that produce modern cars. The car production is supported by the government and the Korean auto company Daewoo. In May 2007 UzDaewooAuto, the car maker, signed a strategic agreement with General Motors-Daewoo Auto and Technology (GMDAT, see GM Uzbekistan also). The government bought a stake in Turkey's Koc in SamKochAvto, a producer of small buses and lorries. Afterward, it signed an agreement with Isuzu Motors of Japan to produce Isuzu buses and lorries.\nTrain links connect many towns in Uzbekistan, as well as neighbouring former republics of the Soviet Union. Moreover, after independence two fast-running train systems were established. Uzbekistan launched the first high-speed railway in Central Asia in September 2011 between Tashkent and Samarqand. The new high-speed electric train Talgo 250, called \"Afrosiyob\", was manufactured by Patentes Talgo S.L. (Spain) and took its first trip from Tashkent to Samarkand on 26 August 2011.\nA large aircraft manufacturing plant was built during the Soviet era\u00a0\u2013 Tashkent Chkalov Aviation Manufacturing Plant or \u0422\u0410\u041f\u041e\u0438\u0427 in Russian. The plant originated during World War II, when production facilities were evacuated south and east to avoid capture by advancing Nazi forces. Until the late 1980s, the plant was one of the leading aeroplane production centres in the USSR. With dissolution of the Soviet Union, its manufacturing equipment became outdated; most of the workers were laid off. Now it produces only a few planes a year, but with interest from Russian companies growing, there are rumours of production-enhancement plans.\nCivil Aviation.\nAfter the declaration of independence of the Republic of Uzbekistan, in accordance with the Decree of the President of the Republic of Uzbekistan dated January 28, 1992, the National Airline Uzbekistan Airways was created on the basis of the Civil Aviation Department of Uzbekistan, which was under the jurisdiction of the former Ministry of Civil aviation of the Union. Air transport is one of the leading sectors of the economy of Uzbekistan, serves the development of international, economic, diplomatic, cultural ties of the country with the outside world. In Tashkent, Nukus, Samarkand, Bukhara, Urgench, Termez, Karshi, Namangan, Fergana, Navoi there are airports equipped with modern equipment. Tashkent International Airport is the largest international airport in the Central Asian region. The airports of Bukhara, Samarkand, Urgenchalso have international status. The National Airline Uzbekistan Airways regularly performs 20 international flights. 44 representative offices have been opened in the cities of Europe, America, Southeast Asia and the CIS countries. Over the years of independence, the Government of the Republic of Uzbekistan has allocated 1 billion 200 million dollars to the aviation industry. Investments in the amount of US dollars were made and a developed modern infrastructure was built. All international flights are carried out on Boeing 767/757, A-310, U-85 aircraft. The national airline Uzbekistan Airways cooperates with large European companies Airbus Industry, American companies Boeing, Russian design bureau Ilyushin, German and French firms in various fields.\nMilitary.\nWith close to 65,000 servicemen, Uzbekistan possesses the largest armed forces in Central Asia. The military structure is largely inherited from the Turkestan Military District of the Soviet Army. The Uzbek Armed Forces' equipment is standard, mostly consisting of post-Soviet inheritance and newly crafted Russian and some American equipment.\nThe government has accepted the arms control obligations of the former Soviet Union, acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (as a non-nuclear state), and supported an active programme by the U.S. Defence Threat Reduction Agency (DTRA) in western Uzbekistan (Nukus and Vozrozhdeniye Island). The Government of Uzbekistan spends about 3.7% of GDP on the military but has received a growing infusion of Foreign Military Financing (FMF) and other security assistance funds since 1998.\nFollowing 11 September 2001 terrorist attacks in the U.S., Uzbekistan approved the U.S. Central Command's request for access to an air base, the Karshi-Khanabad airfield, in southern Uzbekistan. However, Uzbekistan demanded that the U.S. withdraw from the airbases after the Andijan massacre and the U.S. reaction to this massacre. The last US troops left Uzbekistan in November 2005. In 2020, it was revealed that the former US base was contaminated with radioactive materials which may have resulted in unusually high cancer rates in US personnel stationed there. Yet the government of Uzbekistan has denied this statement claiming that there has never been such a case.\nOn 23 June 2006, Uzbekistan became a full participant in the Collective Security Treaty Organization (CSTO), but informed the CSTO to suspend its membership in June 2012.\nCulture.\nUzbekistan has a wide mix of ethnic groups and cultures, with the Uzbek being the majority group. In 1995 about 71% of Uzbekistan's population was Uzbek. The chief minority groups were Russians (8%), Tajiks (3\u20134.7%), Kazakhs (4%), Tatars (2.5%) and Karakalpaks (2%). It is said, however, that non-Uzbeks decline as Russians and other minority groups slowly leave and Uzbeks return from other parts of the former Soviet Union.\nWhen Uzbekistan gained independence in 1991, there was concern that Muslim fundamentalism would spread across the region. The expectation was that a country long denied freedom of religious practice would undergo a very rapid increase in the expression of its dominant faith.\nAccording to a 2009 Pew Research report, Uzbekistan's population is 96.3% Muslim; around 54% identifies as non-denominational Muslim, 18% as Sunni and 1% as Shia. Furthermore, 11% say they belong to a Sufi order.\nMedia.\nMass media in Uzbekistan have undergone significant transformations since the country's independence in 1991. The government initially maintained strict control over all forms of media, with the state owning almost all print media and broadcasting outlets. However, since the early 2000s, there has been a gradual shift toward a more open media environment, although state influence remains strong.\nThe government controls major television channels, radio stations, and print publications, while the internet, though growing, faces censorship. Despite these constraints, the rise of independent media outlets and online platforms has slowly contributed to a diversification of information sources in the country. Nevertheless, journalists continue to face harassment, and self-censorship remains a significant issue in Uzbekistan's media landscape.\nMusic.\nCentral Asian classical music is called Shashmaqam, which arose in Bukhara in the late 16th century when that city was a regional capital. Shashmaqam is closely related to Azerbaijani Mugam and Uyghur muqam. The name, which translates as \"six maqams\", refers to the structure of the music, which contains six sections in six different Musical modes, similar to classical Persian traditional music. Interludes of spoken Sufi poetry interrupt the music, typically beginning at a lower register and gradually ascending to a climax before calming back down to the beginning tone.\nEducation.\nUzbekistan has a high literacy rate, with 99.9% of adults above the age of 15 being able to read and write. However, with only 76% of the under-15 population currently enrolled in education (and only 20% of the 3\u20136 year olds attending pre-school), this figure may drop in the future. Students attend school Monday through Saturday during the school year, and education officially concludes at the end of the 11th grade.\nUzbekistan has encountered severe budget shortfalls in its education programme. The education law of 1992 began the process of theoretical reform, but the physical base has deteriorated and curriculum revision has been slow. Corruption within the education system is rampant, with students from wealthier families routinely bribing teachers and school executives to achieve high grades without attending school, or undertaking official examinations.\nPublic spending on education in Uzbekistan in 2019 amounted to 5.6% of GDP and 6.2% of GDP in 2021. In 2019, of the total expenditure on education, the government spent the largest share on secondary education (about 65%), preschool education (21%), higher education (10%) and secondary special education (4%).\nIn 2023, UNICEF supported the Government of Uzbekistan in developing a Roadmap for Education Reform, which aims to bring together the efforts of the government, development partners, teachers, parents, students and school communities to achieve the outlined strategic goals of transformative quality education.\nSeveral universities, including Westminster University, Turin University, Management University Institute of Singapore, Bucheon University in Tashkent, TEAM University and Inha University Tashkent maintain a campus in Tashkent offering English language courses across several disciplines. The Russian-language high education is provided by most national universities, including foreign Moscow State University and Gubkin Russian State University of Oil and Gas, maintaining campuses in Tashkent. As of 2019, Webster University, in partnership with the Ministry of Education (now Ministry of Higher Education, Science and Innovation), has opened a graduate school offering an MBA in Project Management and a MA in Teaching English as a Second Language (TESL).\nThere are three Islamic institutes and an academy in Uzbekistan. They are Tashkent islamic institute, Mir Arab high school, School of hadith knowledge, International islamic academy of Uzbekistan.\nHolidays.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n\"Variable date\"\nCuisine.\nUzbek cuisine is influenced by local agriculture; since there is a great deal of grain farming in Uzbekistan, bread and noodles are of importance and Uzbek cuisine has been characterised as \"noodle-rich\". Mutton is a popular variety of meat due to the abundance of sheep in the country and it is part of various Uzbek dishes.\nUzbekistan's signature dish is \"palov\" (or \"plov\"), a main course typically made with rice, meat, carrots, and onions, though it was not available to ordinary people until the 1930s. There are many regional variations of the dish. Often the fat found near the sheep tail, \"qurdiuq\", is used. In the past, the cooking of \"palov\" was reserved for men, but the Soviets allowed women to cook it as well. Since then, it seems, the old gender roles have been restored.\nOther notable national dishes include shurpa, a soup made of large pieces of fatty meat (usually mutton), and fresh vegetables; norin and \"laghman\", noodle-based dishes that may be served as a soup or a main course; manti, chuchvara, and \"somsa\", stuffed pockets of dough served as an appetiser or a main course; dimlama, a meat and vegetable stew; and various kebabs, usually served as a main course.\nGreen tea is the national hot beverage consumed throughout the day; teahouses (\"chaikhanas\") are of cultural importance. Black tea is preferred in Tashkent, but both green and black teas are consumed daily, without milk or sugar. Tea always accompanies a meal, but it is also a drink of hospitality that is automatically offered: green or black to every guest. Ayran, a chilled yogurt drink, is popular in summer.\nThe use of alcohol is less widespread than in the West, but wine is comparatively popular for a Muslim nation as Uzbekistan is largely secular. Uzbekistan has 14 wineries, the oldest and most famous being the Khovrenko Winery in Samarkand (established in 1927). A number of vineyards in and around Tashkent are also growing in popularity, including Chateau Hamkor.\nSport.\nBefore Uzbekistan's independence in 1991, the country was part of the Soviet Union football, rugby union, basketball, ice hockey, and handball national teams. After independence, Uzbekistan created its own football, rugby union, basketball and futsal national teams.\nFootball.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan's premier football league is the Uzbek Super League, which has consisted of 16 teams since 2015. The current champions (2022) are FC Pakhtakor. Pakhtakor holds the record for the most Uzbekistan champion titles, having won the league ten times. Uzbekistan's football clubs regularly participate in the AFC Champions League and the AFC Cup. FC Nasaf Qarashi won the AFC Cup in 2011, the first international club cup for Uzbek football.\nIn 2025, Uzbek international footballer Abdukodir Khusanov, a center-back, transferred from Lens to Manchester City on a four-and-a-half-year deal, becoming the first Uzbek player to compete in the Premier League.\nCycling.\nUzbekistan is home to former racing cyclist Djamolidine Abdoujaparov. Abdoujaparov won the green jersey points contest in the Tour de France three times. Abdoujaparov was a specialist at winning stages in tours or one-day races when the bunch or peloton would finish together. He would often 'sprint' in the final kilometer and had a reputation as being dangerous in these bunch sprints as he would weave from side to side. This reputation earned him the nickname 'The Terror of Tashkent'.\nWrestling.\nArtur Taymazov won Uzbekistan's inaugural wrestling medal at the 2000 Summer Olympics, followed by three Olympic gold medals in Men's 120\u00a0kg in 2004, 2008 and 2012. His 2008 gold was taken away in 2017 after a re-testing of samples from the Beijing Games and Taymazov was later stripped of his London 2012 Olympic gold medal after re-analysis of stored samples in 2019. His London gold had made him the most successful freestyle competitor in Olympic history. He is the 60th athlete to be disqualified from the London Olympics after the event.\nUzbekistan is the home of the International Kurash Association. Kurash is an internationalised and modernised form of traditional Uzbek wrestling.\nBoxing.\nBoxing is also one of the most popular sports in Uzbekistan. Uzbekistan has four Olympic champions, winners of two silver and eight bronze medals at the Olympic Games in this sport. The country also has more medal winners in boxing at the Asian Games, the Asian Championships and the World. At the 2016 Summer Olympics, Uzbekistan boxing team took first place in the medal standings in boxing, winning 3 gold, 2 silver and 2 bronze medals. At the 2024 Summer Olympics, the Uzbekistan boxing team performed even better: five uzbek boxers were awarded gold medals.\nRuslan Chagaev is a former professional boxer representing Uzbekistan in the WBA. He won the WBA champion title in 2007 after defeating Nikolai Valuev. Chagaev defended his title twice before losing it to Vladimir Klitschko in 2009. Another young talented boxer Hasanboy Dusmatov, light flyweight champion at the 2016 Summer Olympics, won the Val Barker Trophy for the outstanding male boxer of Rio 2016 on 21 August 2016. On 21 December 2016 Dusmatov was honoured with the AIBA Boxer of the Year award at a 70-year anniversary event of AIBA.\nIce Hockey.\nHumo Tashkent, a professional ice hockey team was established in 2019 with the aim of joining Kontinental Hockey League (KHL), a top level Eurasian league in the future. Humo will join the second-tier Supreme Hockey League (VHL) for the 2019\u201320 season. Humo play their games at the Humo Ice Dome which cost over \u20ac175 million in construction; both the team and arena derive their name from the mythical Huma bird, a symbol of happiness and freedom. Uzbekistan Hockey Federation (UHF) began preparation for forming national ice hockey team in joining IIHF competitions.\nTennis.\nTennis is a very popular sport in Uzbekistan, especially after Uzbekistan's sovereignty in 1991. Uzbekistan has its own Tennis Federation called the \"UTF\" (Uzbekistan Tennis Federation), created in 2002. Uzbekistan also hosts an International WTA tennis tournament, the \"Tashkent Open\", held in Uzbekistan's capital city. This tournament has been held since 1999, and is played on outdoor hard courts. The most notable active players from Uzbekistan are Denis Istomin and Akgul Amanmuradova.\nChess.\nChess is quite popular in Uzbekistan. The country boasts Rustam Kasimdzhanov, who was the FIDE World Chess Champion in 2004, and many junior players like the 2021 World Rapid Chess Champion Nodirbek Abdusattorov and the Chess World Cup 2025 winner Javokhir Sindarov. The Uzbek team consisting of GM Nodirbek Abdusattorov, GM Nodirbek Yakubboev, GM Javokhir Sindarov, GM Shamsiddin Vokhidov and GM Jahongir Vakhidov won gold at the 44th Chess Olympiad in Chennai.\nOther Sports.\nMichael Kolganov, an Uzbek\u2013born sprint canoer, was world champion and won an Olympic bronze in Sydney in the K1 500-meter in 2000 on behalf of Israel. In 2009 and 2011, another Uzbek \u00e9migr\u00e9, gymnast Alexander Shatilov, won a world bronze medal as an artistic gymnast in floor exercise, though he lives in and represents Israel in international competitions. Oksana Chusovitina has attended eight Olympic games, and won five world medals in artistic gymnastics including an Olympic gold. Some of those medals were won while representing Germany and the Soviet Union, though she currently competes for Uzbekistan.\nOther popular sports in Uzbekistan include basketball, judo, team handball, baseball, taekwondo, and futsal.\nUlugbek Rashitov, won the country's first Olympic gold medal in taekwondo, at the Summer Olympic Games in Tokyo 2021.\nIn 2022, the World Judo Championships were held in Tashkent.\nIn 2024, the FIFA Futsal World Cup was held in Uzbekistan.\nUNESCO World Heritage sites.\nUzbekistan has five cultural and two natural sites on the UNESCO World Heritage list. The cultural sites are:\nThe natural sites are:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nGeneral information\nMedia"}
{"id": "31854", "revid": "41718658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31854", "title": "History of Uzbekistan", "text": "Uzbekistan is a landlocked country in Central Asia. It is itself surrounded by five landlocked countries: Kazakhstan to the north; Kyrgyzstan to the northeast; Tajikistan to the southeast; Afghanistan to the south, Turkmenistan to the south-west. Its capital and largest city is Tashkent. Uzbekistan is part of the Turkic languages world, as well as a member of the Organization of Turkic States. While the Uzbek language is the majority spoken language in Uzbekistan, Russian is widely used as an inter-ethnic tongue and in government. Islam is the majority religion in Uzbekistan, most Uzbeks being non-denominational Muslims. In ancient times it largely overlapped with the region known as Sogdia, and also with Bactria.\nThe first people recorded in Central Asia were Scythians who came from the northern grasslands of what is now Uzbekistan, sometime in the first millennium BC; when these nomads settled in the region they built an extensive irrigation system along the rivers. At this time, cities such as Bukhoro (Bukhara) and Samarqand (Samarkand) emerged as centres of government and high culture. By the fifth century BC, the Bactrian, Soghdian, and Tokharian states dominated the region. As China began to develop its silk trade with the West, Persian cities took advantage of this commerce by becoming centres of trade. Using an extensive network of cities and rural settlements the Sogdian intermediaries became the wealthiest of these Iranian merchants. As a result of this trade on what became known as the Silk Route, Bukhara, Samarkand and Khiva eventually became extremely wealthy cities, and at times Transoxiana (Mawarannahr) was one of the most influential and powerful Persian provinces of antiquity. A remote part of the Persian Empire, the area was briefly conquered by Alexander the Great, and was known as Sogdia at this time. It, or parts of it, then passed through the Seleucid Empire, Greco-Bactrian Kingdom, Kushan Empire, Hephthalite Empire, and Sasanian Empire. As Turkic peoples arrived in the area, largely replacing Iranic peoples, the Sogdian city-states formed part of the First Turkic Khaganate and Western Turkic Khaganate.\nLong before Islamic invasion, the region was ruled by Hindu kings for several centuries. Among all the dynasties, Kushan dynasty was the most remarkable and influential one. This period is well known the for expansion of science, art and culture from both Hinduism and Buddhism while both religions flourished in harmony. The region was at its peak glory during the period. \nThe Early Muslim conquests and the subsequent Samanid Empire converted most of the people, including the local ruling classes, into adherents of Islam. This period saw leading figures of the Islamic Golden Age, including Muhammad al-Bukhari, Al-Tirmidhi, al Khwarizmi, al-Biruni, Avicenna and Omar Khayyam. Innovations in science, such as the development of chemical processes by Jabir ibn Hayyan and astronomical studies by Ibn Al-Haytham, were also prominent during this period. The local Khwarazmian dynasty and Central Asia as a whole were decimated by the Mongol invasion in the 13th century, after which the region became dominated by Turkic peoples. The city of Shahrisabz was the birthplace of the Turco-Mongol conqueror Timur (Tamerlane), who in the 14th century established the Timurid Empire and was proclaimed the Supreme Emir of Turan with his capital in Samarkand, which became a centre of science under the rule of Ulugh Beg, giving birth to the Timurid Renaissance. The territories of the Timurid dynasty were conquered by Uzbek Shaybanids in the 16th century, moving the centre of power to Bukhara. The region was split into three states: the Khanate of Khiva, Khanate of Kokand and Emirate of Bukhara. Conquests by the Mughal emperor Babur towards the east led to the foundation of India's newest invasions as the Mughal Empire.\nAll of Central Asia was gradually incorporated into the Russian Empire during the 19th century, with Tashkent becoming the political center of Russian Turkestan. In 1924, national delimitation created the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic as an independent republic within the Soviet Union. Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union, it declared independence as the Republic of Uzbekistan on 31 August 1991.\nPrehistory.\nIn 1938 A. Okladnikov discovered the 70,000-year-old skull of an 8- to 11-year-old Neanderthal child in Teshik-Tash in Uzbekistan. After this Central Asia was occupied by the Scythians, Iranian nomads who arrived from the northern grasslands of what is now Kazakhstan sometime in the first millennium BC. These nomads, who spoke Iranian dialects, settled in Central Asia and began to build an extensive irrigation systems along the rivers of Central Asia and built cities such as Bukhara (Bukhara) and Samarqand (Samarkand), these places became extremely wealthy points of transit of the Silk Road between China and Europe, and became centers of government and culture.\nEarly history.\nBy the fifth century BC, the Bactrian, Soghdian, and Tokharian states dominated the region. As China began to develop its silk trade with the West, Iranian cities took advantage of this commerce by becoming centers of trade. Using an extensive network of cities and settlements in the province of Transoxiana (Mawarannahr was a name given the region after the Arab conquest) in Uzbekistan and farther east in what is today China's Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, the Soghdian intermediaries became the wealthiest of these Iranian merchants. Because of this trade on what became known as the Silk Route, Bukhara and Samarqand eventually became extremely wealthy cities, and at times Transoxiana was one of the most influential and powerful Persian provinces of antiquity..Alexander the Great conquered the region in 328 BC, bringing it briefly under the control of his Macedonian Empire.\nThe wealth of Transoxiana was a constant magnet for invasions from the northern steppes and from China. Numerous intraregional wars were fought between Soghdian states and the other states in Transoxiana, and the Persians and the Chinese were in perpetual conflict over the region. The Chinese in particular sought the Heavenly Horses from the region, going so far as to wage a siege war against Dayuan, an urbanized civilization in the Fergana Valley in 104 BC to obtain the horses.In the same centuries, however, the region also was an important center of intellectual life and religion. Until the first centuries after Christ, the dominant religion in the region was Zoroastrianism, but Buddhism, Manichaeism and Christianity also attracted large numbers of followers.\nIn the seventh century AD, the Soghdian Iranians, who profited most visibly from this trade, saw their province of Transoxiana (Mawarannahr) overwhelmed by Arabs, who spread Islam throughout the region. Under the Arab Abbasid Caliphate and (starting from the mid-9th century), the Persian Samanid Empire, the eighth to tenth centuries were a golden age of learning and culture in Transoxiana.\nBuddhism.\nTraces of Buddhism have been found in all five former Soviet Central Asian republics. But Michael Barry Lane who is UNESCO's representative in Uzbekistan explains why so many Buddhist sites are concentrated around Termez, the former northern capital of ancient Bactria, a historic region that included southern Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and northern Afghanistan: \"The main inspiration for the Buddhist culture transmitted to China and Japan was the Greco-Buddhist culture -- or Hellenistic culture -- which flourished in Gandahara, in today's northern Pakistan and Afghanistan, from about the first century B.C. to the fourth century A.D. The trade route from Gandahara to the northwest also left a lot of influences and a lot of vestiges along the Amu Darya River in Central Asia. And the center of this region was Termez\". Founded 2,500 years ago in the foothills of Nepal, Buddhism spread to Gandahara. From there, the religion traveled along trade routes to reach Parthia in modern Turkmenistan and northeastern Iran, and Bactria. Mostly from Bactria, Buddhism arrived to Sogdia in central Uzbekistan and northwestern Tajikistan. Later, in the seventh century, Buddhism continued its route to southern Kazakhstan and northern Kyrgyzstan.\nTurkic Khaganate.\nIn 563\u2013567, the territory of modern Uzbekistan became part of the Turkic Khaganate. In 630 and 658, the Eastern and Western Turkic Khaganate were conquered by the Tang Dynasty of China.\nDuring the era of the Western Turkic Khaganate (603-658), the political influence of the Turks in Sogd increased. The process of settling the Turks in the oases of Central Asia led to the development of the ancient Turkic writing and monetary relations. Some Turkic rulers of Bukhara, Chach and Fergana issued their own coins. Part of the Bukhara Turks adopted Christianity. The Turks from other regions adopted Buddhism and Zoroastrianism. The first steps for the official introduction of Buddhism into the religious practice of the Turks were made by Mukan Ka\u011fan (553-572). However, only Taspar Ka\u011fan (572-580) gave the Buddhist mission a scope that could provide the followers of this religion with cultural and political priority in the Kagan headquarters. Most of the Turkic population retained their religion. The sources mention the following Turkic deities: Tengri (God, root or origin point), Umay (Mother Goddess), Yer-sub (Earth-Water) and Erklig (Lord of Hell), among which Tengri, the ruler of the Upper World, held a dominant position.\nEarly Islamic period.\nThe conquest of Central Asia by Muslim Arabs, which was completed in the eighth century AD, brought to the region a new religion that continues to be dominant. The Arabs first invaded Transoxiana in the middle of the seventh century through sporadic raids during their conquest of Persia. Available sources on the Arab conquest suggest that the Soghdians and other Iranian peoples of Central Asia were unable to defend their land against the Arabs because of internal divisions and the lack of strong indigenous leadership. The Arabs, on the other hand, were led by a brilliant general, Qutaybah ibn Muslim, and were also highly motivated by the desire to spread their new faith (the official beginning of which was in AD 622). Because of these factors, the population of Transoxiana was easily subdued. The new religion brought by the Arabs spread gradually into the region. The native religious identities, which in some respects were already being displaced by Persian influences before the Arabs arrived, were further displaced in the ensuing centuries. Nevertheless, the destiny of Central Asia as an Islamic region was firmly established by the Arab victory over the Chinese armies in 750 in a battle at the Talas River.\nDespite brief Arab rule, Central Asia successfully retained much of its Iranian characteristic, remaining an important center of culture and trade for centuries after the adoption of the new religion. Transoxiana continued to be an important political player in regional affairs, as it had been under various Persian dynasties. In fact, the Abbasid Caliphate, which ruled the Arab world for five centuries beginning in 750, was established thanks in great part to assistance from Central Asian supporters in their struggle against the then-ruling Umayyad Caliphate.\nDuring the height of the Abbasid Caliphate in the eighth and the ninth centuries, Central Asia and Transoxiana experienced a truly golden age. Bukhara became one of the leading centers of learning, culture, and art in the Muslim world, its magnificence rivaling contemporaneous cultural centers such as Baghdad, Cairo, and Cordoba. Some of the greatest historians, scientists, and geographers in the history of Islamic culture were natives of the region including al-Bukhari, Al-Tirmidhi, al Khwarizmi, al-Biruni, Avicenna and Omar Khayyam.\nAs the Abbasid Caliphate began to weaken and local Islamic Iranian states emerged as the rulers of Iran and Central Asia, the Persian language continued its preeminent role in the region as the language of literature and government. The rulers of the eastern section of Iran and of Transoxiana were Persians. Under the Samanids and the Buyids, the rich Perso-Islamic culture of Transoxiana continued to flourish.\nGhaznavids, Karakhanids and Anushteginids.\nIn the sixth century, the continued influx of Turkic nomads from the northern steppes brought a new group of people into Central Asia. These people were the Turks who lived in the great grasslands stretching from Mongolia to the Caspian Sea.\nLater, introduced mainly as slave soldiers to the Samanid Dynasty, these Turks served in the armies of all the states of the region, including the Abbasid army. In the late tenth century, as the Samanids began to lose control of Transoxiana (Mawarannahr) and northeastern Iran, some of these soldiers came to positions of power in the government of the region, and eventually established their own states, albeit highly Persianized. With the emergence of a Turkic ruling group in the region, other Turkic tribes began to migrate to Transoxiana.\nThe first of the Turkic states in the region was the Persianate Ghaznavid Empire, established in the last years of the tenth century. The Ghaznavid state, which captured the Samanid domains south of the Amu Darya, was able to conquer large areas of eastern Iran, Central Asia, Afghanistan, and Pakistan during the reign of Sultan Mahmud. The Ghaznavids were closely followed by the Turkic Qarakhanids, who took the Samanid capital Bukhara in 999 AD, and ruled Transoxiana for the next two centuries. Samarkand was made the capital of the Western Qarakhanid state.\nThe dominance of Ghazna was curtailed, however, when the Seljuks led themselves into the western part of the region, conquering the Ghaznavid territory of Khorazm (also spelled Khorezm and Khwarazm). The Seljuks also defeated the Karakhanids, but did not annex their territories outright. Instead, they made the Karakhanids a vassal state. The Seljuks dominated a wide area from Asia Minor, Iran, Iraq, and parts of the Caucasus, to the western sections of Transoxiana, in Afghanistan, in the eleventh century. The Seljuk Empire then split into states ruled by various local Turkic and Iranian rulers. The culture and intellectual life of the region continued unaffected by such political changes, however. Turkic tribes from the north continued to migrate into the region during this period. The power of the Seljuks however became diminished when the Seljuk Sultan Ahmed Sanjar was defeated by the Kara-Khitans at the Battle of Qatwan in 1141.\nIn the late twelfth century, a Turkic leader of Khorazm, which is the region south of the Aral Sea, united Khorazm, Transoxiana, and Iran under his rule. Under the rule of the Khorazm shah Kutbeddin Muhammad and his son, Muhammad II, Transoxiana continued to be prosperous and rich while maintaining the region's Perso-Islamic identity. However, a new incursion of nomads from the north soon changed this situation. This time the invader was Genghis Khan with his Mongol armies.\nAs Turks began entering the region from the north, they established new states starting from the 11th century and began to change the demographics of the region. After a succession of states dominated the region, in the twelfth century, Transoxiana was united in a single state with Iran and the region of Khwarezm, south of the Aral Sea. In the early thirteenth century, that state was invaded by Mongols, led by Genghis Khan. Under his successors, Iranian-speaking communities were displaced from some parts of Central Asia. Under Timur (Tamerlane), Transoxiana began its last cultural flowering, centered in Samarqand through the Timurid Renaissance. After Timur the state began to split, and by 1510 Uzbek tribes had conquered all of Central Asia.\nMongol period.\nThe Mongol invasion of Central Asia is one of the turning points in the history of the region. The Mongols had such a lasting effect because they established the tradition that the legitimate ruler of any Central Asian state could only be a blood descendant of Genghis Khan.\nThe Mongol conquest of Central Asia, which took place from 1219 to 1225, led to a wholesale change in the population of Mawarannahr. The conquest quickened the process of Turkification in some parts of the region because, although the armies of Genghis Khan were led by Mongols, they were made up mostly of Turkic tribes that had been incorporated into the Mongol armies as the tribes were encountered in the Mongols' southward sweep. As these armies settled in Mawarannahr, they intermixed with the local populations which did not flee. Another effect of the Mongol conquest was the large-scale damage the soldiers inflicted on cities such as Bukhara and on regions such as Khorazm. As the leading province of a wealthy state, Khorazm was treated especially severely. The irrigation networks in the region suffered extensive damage that was not repaired for several generations. Many Iranian-speaking populations were forced to flee southwards in order to avoid persecution.\nFollowing the death of Genghis Khan in 1227, his empire was divided among his four sons and his family members. Despite the potential for serious fragmentation, Mongol law of the Mongol Empire maintained orderly succession for several more generations, and control of most of Mawarannahr stayed in the hands of direct descendants of Chaghatai, the second son of Genghis. Orderly succession, prosperity, and internal peace prevailed in the Chaghatai lands, and the Mongol Empire as a whole remained strong and united. But, Khwarezm was part of Golden Horde.\nTimur and Timurids.\nIn the early fourteenth century, however, as the empire began to break up into its constituent parts, the Chaghtai territory also was disrupted as the princes of various tribal groups competed for influence. One tribal chieftain, Timur (Tamerlane), emerged from these struggles in the 1380s as the dominant force in Mawarannahr. Although he was not a descendant of Genghis, Timur became the de facto ruler of Mawarannahr and proceeded to conquer all of western Central Asia, Iran, Asia Minor, and the southern steppe region north of the Aral Sea. He also invaded Russia before dying during an invasion of China in 1405.\nTimur initiated the last flowering of Mawarannahr by gathering in his capital, Samarqand, numerous artisans and scholars from the lands he had conquered. By supporting such people, Timur imbued his empire with a very rich Perso-Islamic culture. During Timur's reign and the reigns of his immediate descendants, a wide range of religious and palatial construction projects were undertaken in Samarqand and other population centers. Timur also patronized scientists and artists; his grandson Ulugh Beg was one of the world's first great astronomers. It was during the Timurid dynasty that Turkic, in the form of the Chaghatai dialect, became a literary language in its own right in Mawarannahr, although the Timurids were Persianate in nature. The greatest Chaghataid writer, Ali Shir Nava'i, was active in the city of Herat, now in northwestern Afghanistan, in the second half of the fifteenth century.\nThe Timurid state quickly broke into two halves after the death of Timur. The chronic internal fighting of the Timurids attracted the attention of the Uzbek nomadic tribes living to the north of the Aral Sea. In 1501 the Uzbeks began a wholesale invasion of Mawarannahr.\nUzbek period.\nBy 1510 the Uzbeks had completed their conquest of Central Asia, including the territory of the present-day Uzbekistan. Of the states they established, the most powerful, the Khanate of Bukhara, centered on the city of Bukhara. The khanate controlled Mawarannahr, especially the region of Tashkent, the Fergana Valley in the east, and northern Afghanistan. \nA second Uzbek state, the Khanate of Khiva was established in the oasis of Khorazm at the mouth of the Amu Darya in 1512. \nThe Khanate of Bukhara was initially led by the energetic Shaybanid Dynasty. The Shaybanids competed against Iran, which was led by the Safavid dynasty, for the rich far-eastern territory of present-day Iran. The struggle with Iran also had a religious aspect because the Uzbeks were Sunni Muslims, and Iran was Shia..\nNear the end of the sixteenth century, the Uzbek states of Bukhara and Khorazm began to weaken because of their endless wars against each other and the Persians and because of strong competition for the throne among the khans in power and their heirs. At the beginning of the seventeenth century, the Shaybanid Dynasty was replaced by the Janid Dynasty.\nAnother factor contributing to the weakness of the Uzbek khanates in this period was the general decline of trade moving through the region. This change had begun in the previous century when ocean trade routes were established from Europe to India and China, circumventing the Silk Route. As European-dominated ocean transport expanded and some trading centers were destroyed, cities such as Bukhara, Merv, and Samarqand in the Khanate of Bukhara and Khiva and Urganch (Urgench) in Khorazm began to steadily decline.\nThe Uzbeks' struggle with Iran also led to the cultural isolation of Central Asia from the rest of the Islamic world. In addition to these problems, the struggle with the nomads from the northern steppe continued. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Kazakh nomads and Mongols continually raided the Uzbek khanates, causing widespread damage and disrupt. In the beginning of the eighteenth century, the Khanate of Bukhara lost the fertile Fergana region, and a new Uzbek khanate was formed in Quqon.\nIn the sixteenth century, the Uzbeks established two strong rival khanates, Bukhara and Khorazm. In this period, the Silk Road cities began to decline as ocean trade flourished. The khanates were isolated by wars with Iran and weakened by attacks from northern nomads. Between 1729 and 1741 all the Khanates were made into vassals by Nader Shah of Persia. In the early nineteenth century, three Uzbek khanates\u2014Bukhara, Khiva, and Quqon (Kokand)\u2014had a brief period of recovery. However, in the mid-nineteenth century Russia, attracted to the region's commercial potential and especially to its cotton, began the full military conquest of Central Asia. By 1876 Russia had incorporated all three khanates (hence all of present-day Uzbekistan) into its empire, granting the khanates limited autonomy. In the second half of the nineteenth century, the Russian population of Uzbekistan grew and some industrialization occurred.\nArrival of the Russians.\nThe following period was one of weakness and disruption, with continuous invasions from Iran and from the north. In this period, a new group, the Russians, began to appear on the Central Asian scene. As Russian merchants began to expand into the grasslands of present-day Kazakhstan, they built strong trade relations with their counterparts in Tashkent and, to some extent, in Khiva. For the Russians, this trade was not rich enough to replace the former transcontinental trade, but it made the Russians aware of the potential of Central Asia. Russian attention also was drawn by the sale of increasingly large numbers of Russian slaves to the Central Asians by Kazakh and Turkmen tribes. Russians kidnapped by nomads in the border regions and Russian sailors shipwrecked on the shores of the Caspian Sea usually ended up in the slave markets of Bukhara or Khiva. Beginning in the eighteenth century, this situation evoked increasing Russian hostility toward the Central Asian khanates.\nMeanwhile, in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries new dynasties led the khanates to a period of recovery. Those dynasties were the Qongrats in Khiva, the Manghits in Bukhara, and the Mins in Quqon. These new dynasties established centralized states with standing armies and new irrigation works. However, their rise coincided with the ascendance of Russian influence in the Kazakh steppes and the establishment of British rule in India. By the early nineteenth century, the region was the scene of the \"Great Game\", a series of political maneuverers between the two powers to prevent the other from gaining power in Central Asia. The Central Asian powers took little notice of this political bickering between the European powers, continuing to wage wars of conquest amongst themselves.\nRussian conquest.\nIn the nineteenth century, Russian interest in the area increased greatly, sparked by nominal concern over increasing British influence in Central Asia; by anger over the situation of Russian citizens held as slaves; and by the desire to control the trade in the region and to establish a secure source of cotton for Russia. When the United States Civil War prevented cotton delivery from Russia's primary supplier, the southern United States, Central Asian cotton assumed much greater importance for Russia.\nAs soon as the Russian conquest of the Caucasus was completed in the late 1850s, the Russian Ministry of War began to send military forces against the Central Asian khanates. Three major population centers of the khanates\u2014Tashkent, Kokand, and Samarqand \u2014 were captured in 1865, 1876, and 1868, respectively. In 1868 the Khanate of Bukhara signed a treaty with Russia making Bukhara a Russian protectorate. In 1868 the Khanate of Kokand was confined to the Ferghana Valley and in 1876 it was annexed. The Khanate of Khiva became a Russian protectorate in 1873.\nThus by 1876 the entire territory comprising present-day Uzbekistan either had fallen under direct Russian rule or had become a protectorate of Russia. The treaties establishing the protectorates over Bukhara and Khiva gave Russia control of the foreign relations of these states and gave Russian merchants important concessions in foreign trade; the khanates retained control of their own internal affairs. Tashkent and Quqon fell directly under a Russian governor general.\nDuring the first few decades of Russian rule, the daily life of the Central Asians did not change greatly. The Russians substantially increased cotton production, but otherwise they interfered little with the indigenous people. Some Russian settlements were built next to the established cities of Tashkent and Samarqand, but the Russians did not mix with the indigenous populations. The era of Russian rule did produce important social and economic changes for some Uzbeks as a new middle class developed and some peasants were affected by the increased emphasis on cotton cultivation.\nIn the last decade of the nineteenth century, conditions began to change as new Russian railroads brought greater numbers of Russians into the area. In the 1890s, several revolts, which were put down easily, led to increased Russian vigilance in the region. The Russians increasingly intruded in the internal affairs of the khanates. The policy of the Russian authorities (refusal to approve waqf documents) resulted in the fall of incomes and the level of living standards in Islamic \"sacred families\".\nThe only avenue for Uzbek resistance to Russian rule became the Pan-Turkish movement, also known as Jadidism, which had arisen in the 1860s among intellectuals who sought to preserve indigenous Islamic Central Asian culture from Russian encroachment. By 1900 Jadidism had developed into the region's first major movement of political resistance. Until the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, the modern, secular ideas of Jadidism faced resistance from both the Russians and the Uzbek khans, who had differing reasons to fear the movement.\nPrior to the events of 1917, Russian rule had brought some industrial development in sectors directly connected with cotton. Although railroads and cotton-ginning machinery advanced, the Central Asian textile industry was slow to develop because the cotton crop was shipped to Russia for processing. As the tsarist government expanded the cultivation of cotton dramatically, it changed the balance between cotton and food production, creating some problems in food supply\u2014although in the prerevolutionary period Central Asia remained largely self-sufficient in food. This situation was to change during the Soviet period when the Moscow government began a ruthless drive for national self-sufficiency in cotton. This policy converted almost the entire agricultural economy of Uzbekistan to cotton production, bringing a series of consequences whose harm still is felt today in Uzbekistan and other republics.\nEntering the twentieth century.\nBy the turn of the twentieth century, the Russian Empire was in complete control of Central Asia. The territory of Uzbekistan was divided into three political groupings: the khanates of Bukhara and Khiva and the Guberniya (Governorate General) of Turkestan, the last of which was under direct control of the Ministry of War of Russia. The final decade of the nineteenth century finds the three regions united under the independent and sovereign Republic of Uzbekistan. The intervening decades were a period of revolution, oppression, massive disruptions, and colonial rule.\nAfter 1900 the khanates continued to enjoy a certain degree of autonomy in their internal affairs. However, they ultimately were subservient to the Russian governor general in Tashkent, who ruled the region in the name of Tsar Nicholas II. The Russian Empire exercised direct control over large tracts of territory in Central Asia, allowing the khanates to rule a large portion of their ancient lands for themselves. In this period, large numbers of Russians, attracted by the climate and the available land, immigrated into Central Asia. After 1900, increased contact with Russian civilization began to affect the lives of Central Asians in the larger population centers where the Russians settled.\nThe Jadidists and Basmachis.\nRussian influence was especially strong among certain young intellectuals who were the sons of the rich merchant classes. Educated in the local Muslim schools, in Russian universities, or in Istanbul, these men, who came to be known as the Jadidists, tried to learn from Russia and from modernizing movements in Istanbul and among the Tatars, and to use this knowledge to regain their country's independence. The Jadidists believed that their society, and even their religion, must be reformed and modernized for this goal to be achieved. In 1905 the unexpected victory of a new Asiatic power in the Russo-Japanese War and the eruption of revolution in Russia raised the hopes of reform factions that Russian rule could be overturned, and a modernization program initiated, in Central Asia. The democratic reforms that Russia promised in the wake of the revolution gradually faded, however, as the tsarist government restored authoritarian rule in the decade that followed 1905. Renewed tsarist repression and the reactionary politics of the rulers of Bukhara and Khiva forced the reformers underground or into exile. Nevertheless, some of the future leaders of Soviet Uzbekistan, including Abdur Rauf Fitrat and others, gained valuable revolutionary experience and were able to expand their ideological influence in this period.\nIn the summer of 1916, a number of settlements in eastern Uzbekistan were the sites of violent demonstrations against a new Russian decree canceling the Central Asians' immunity to conscription for duty in World War I. Reprisals of increasing violence ensued, and the struggle spread from Uzbekistan into Kyrgyz and Kazak territory. There, Russian confiscation of grazing land already had created animosity not present in the Uzbek population, which was concerned mainly with preserving its rights.\nThe next opportunity for the Jadidists presented itself in 1917 with the outbreak of the February and October revolutions in Russia. In February the revolutionary events in Russia's capital, Petrograd (St. Petersburg), were quickly repeated in Tashkent, where the tsarist administration of the governor general was overthrown. In its place, a dual system was established, combining a provisional government with direct Soviet power and completely excluding the native Muslim population from power. Indigenous leaders, including some of the Jadidists, attempted to set up an autonomous government in the city of Quqon in the Fergana Valley, but this attempt was quickly crushed. Following the suppression of autonomy in Quqon, Jadidists and other loosely connected factions began what was called the Basmachi revolt against Soviet rule, which by 1922 had survived the civil war and was asserting greater power over most of Central Asia. For more than a decade, Basmachi guerrilla fighters (that name was a derogatory Slavic term that the fighters did not apply to themselves) fiercely resisted the establishment of Soviet rule in parts of Central Asia.\nHowever, the majority of Jadidists, including leaders such as Abdurauf Fitrat and Fayzulla Khodzhayev, cast their lot with the communists. In 1920 Khojayev, who became first secretary of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan, assisted communist forces in the capture of Bukhara and Khiva. After the Amir of Bukhara had joined the Basmachi movement, Khojayev became president of the newly established Bukharan People's Soviet Republic. A People's Republic of Khorezm also was set up in what had been Khiva.\nThe Basmachi revolt eventually was crushed as the civil war in Russia ended and the communists drew away large portions of the Central Asian population with promises of local political autonomy and the potential economic autonomy of Soviet leader Lenin's New Economic Policy. Under these circumstances, large numbers of Central Asians joined the communist party, many gaining high positions in the government of the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic (Uzbek SSR), the administrative unit established in 1924 to include present-day Uzbekistan and Tajikistan. The indigenous leaders cooperated closely with the communist government in enforcing policies designed to alter the traditional society of the region: the emancipation of women, the redistribution of land, and mass literacy campaigns.\nAt the beginning of the twentieth century, the Jadidist movement of educated Central Asians, centered in present-day Uzbekistan, began to advocate overthrowing Russian rule. In 1916 violent opposition broke out in Uzbekistan and elsewhere, in response to the conscription of Central Asians into the Russian army fighting World War I. When the tsar was overthrown in 1917, Jadidists established a short-lived autonomous state at Quqon. After the Bolshevik Party gained power in Moscow, the Jadidists split between supporters of Russian communism and supporters of a widespread uprising that became known as the Basmachi Rebellion. As that revolt was being crushed in the early 1920s, local communist leaders such as Faizulla Khojayev gained power in Uzbekistan. In 1924 the Soviet Union established the Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic, which included present-day Tajikistan and Uzbekistan. Tajikistan became the separate Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic in 1929. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, large-scale agricultural collectivization resulted in widespread famine in Central Asia. In the late 1930s, Khojayev and the entire leadership of the Uzbek Republic were purged and executed by Soviet leader Joseph V. Stalin (in power 1927\u201353) and replaced by Russian officials. The Russification of political and economic life in Uzbekistan that began in the 1930s continued through the 1970s. During World War II, Stalin exiled entire national groups from the Caucasus and the Crimea to Uzbekistan to prevent \"subversive\" activity against the war effort.\nThe Stalinist period.\nIn 1929 the Tajik and Uzbek Soviet socialist republics were separated. As Uzbek communist party chief, Khojayev enforced the policies of the Soviet government during the collectivization of agriculture in the late 1920s and early 1930s and, at the same time, tried to increase the participation of Uzbeks in the government and the party. Soviet leader Joseph V. Stalin suspected the motives of all reformist national leaders in the non-Russian republics of the Soviet Union. By the late 1930s, Khojayev and the entire group that came into high positions in the Uzbek Republic had been arrested and executed during the Stalinist purges.\nFollowing the purge of the nationalists, the government and party ranks in Uzbekistan were filled with people loyal to the Moscow government. Economic policy emphasized the supply of cotton to the rest of the Soviet Union, to the exclusion of diversified agriculture. During World War II, many industrial plants from European Russia were evacuated to Uzbekistan and other parts of Central Asia. With the factories came a new wave of Russian and other European workers. Because native Uzbeks were mostly occupied in the country's agricultural regions, the urban concentration of immigrants increasingly Russified Tashkent and other large cities. During the war years, in addition to the Russians who moved to Uzbekistan, other nationalities such as Crimean Tatars, Chechens, and Koreans were exiled to the republic because Moscow saw them as subversive elements in European Russia.\nKhrushchev and Brezhnev rule.\nFollowing the death of Joseph Stalin in 1953, the relative relaxation of totalitarian control initiated by First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev (in office 1953\u201364) brought the rehabilitation of some of the Uzbek nationalists who had been purged. More Uzbeks began to join the Communist Party of Uzbekistan and to assume positions in the government. However, those Uzbeks who participated in the regime did so on Russian terms. Russian was the language of state, and Russification was the prerequisite for obtaining a position in the government or the party. Those who did not or could not abandon their Uzbek lifestyles and identities were excluded from leading roles in official Uzbek society. Because of these conditions, Uzbekistan gained a reputation as one of the most politically conservative republics in the Soviet Union.\nAs Uzbeks were beginning to gain leading positions in society, they also were establishing or reviving unofficial networks based on regional and clan loyalties. These networks provided their members support and often profitable connections between them and the state and the party. An extreme example of this phenomenon occurred under the leadership of Sharaf Rashidov, who was first secretary of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan from 1959 to 1982. During his tenure, Rashidov brought numerous relatives and associates from his native region into government and party leadership positions. The individuals who thus became \"connected\" treated their positions as personal fiefdoms to enrich themselves.\nIn this way, Rashidov was able to initiate efforts to make Uzbekistan less subservient to Moscow. As became apparent after his death, Rashidov's strategy had been to remain a loyal ally of Leonid Brezhnev, leader of the Soviet Union from 1964 to 1982, by bribing high officials of the central government. With this advantage, the Uzbek government was allowed to merely feign compliance with Moscow's demands for increasingly higher cotton quotas.\nThe 1980s.\nMoscow's control over Uzbekistan weakened in the 1970s as Uzbek party leader Sharaf Rashidov brought many cronies and relatives into positions of power. In the mid-1980s, Moscow attempted to regain control by again purging the entire Uzbek party leadership. However, this move increased Uzbek nationalism, which had long resented Soviet policies such as the imposition of cotton monoculture and the suppression of Islamic traditions.\nPerestroika and Glasnost.\nIn the late 1980s, the liberalized atmosphere of the Soviet Union under Mikhail Gorbachev (in power 1985\u201391) fostered political opposition groups and open (albeit limited) opposition to Soviet policy in Uzbekistan. In 1989 a series of violent ethnic clashes involving Uzbeks brought the appointment of ethnic Uzbek outsider Islam Karimov as Communist Party Chief. When the Supreme Soviet of Uzbekistan reluctantly approved independence from the Soviet Union in 1991, Karimov became president of the Republic of Uzbekistan.\nDuring the decade following the death of Rashidov, Moscow attempted to regain the central control over Uzbekistan that had weakened in the previous decade. In 1986 it was announced that almost the entire party and government leadership of the republic had conspired in falsifying cotton production figures. Eventually, Rashidov himself was also implicated (posthumously) together with Yuri Churbanov, Brezhnev's son-in-law. A massive purge of the Uzbek leadership was carried out, and corruption trials were conducted by prosecutors brought in from Moscow. In the Soviet Union, Uzbekistan became synonymous with corruption. The Uzbeks themselves felt that the central government had singled them out unfairly; in the 1980s, this resentment led to a strengthening of Uzbek nationalism. Moscow's policies in Uzbekistan, such as the strong emphasis on cotton and attempts to uproot Islamic tradition, then came under increasing criticism in Tashkent.\nIn 1989 ethnic animosities came to a head in the Fergana Valley, where local Meskhetian Turks were assaulted by Uzbeks, and in 1990 in the Kyrgyz city of Osh Uzbek and Kyrgyz youth clashed.\nPriority over Soviet Union laws and negotiations on a new Treaty.\nMoscow's response to this violence was a reduction of the purges and the appointment of Islam Karimov as first secretary of the Communist Party of Uzbekistan. The appointment of Karimov, who was not a member of the local party elite, signified that Moscow wanted to lessen tensions by appointing an outsider who had not been involved in the purges.\nResentment among Uzbeks continued to smolder, however, in the liberalized atmosphere of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's policies of perestroika and glasnost. With the emergence of new opportunities to express dissent, Uzbeks expressed their grievances over the cotton scandal, the purges, and other long-unspoken resentments. These included the environmental situation in the republic, recently exposed as a catastrophe as a result of the long emphasis on heavy industry and a relentless pursuit of cotton. Other grievances included discrimination and persecution experienced by Uzbek recruits in the Soviet army and the lack of investment in industrial development in the republic to provide jobs for the ever-increasing population.\nBy the late 1980s, some dissenting intellectuals had formed political organizations to express their grievances. The most important of these, Birlik (Unity), initially advocated the diversification of agriculture, a program to salvage the desiccated Aral Sea, and the declaration of the Uzbek language as the state language of the republic. Those issues were chosen partly because they were real concerns and partly because they were a safe way of expressing broader disaffection with the Uzbek government. In their public debate with Birlik, the government and party never lost the upper hand. As became especially clear after the accession of Karimov as party chief, most Uzbeks, especially those outside the cities, still supported the communist party and the government. Birlik's intellectual leaders never were able to make their appeal to a broad segment of the population.\n1991 to present.\nSoviet coup attempt, the Transition Period and the end of the Soviet Union.\nThe attempted coup against the Gorbachev government by disaffected hard-liners in Moscow, which occurred in August 1991, was a catalyst for independence movements throughout the Soviet Union. Despite Uzbekistan's initial hesitancy to oppose the coup, the Supreme Soviet of Uzbekistan declared the republic independent on August 31, 1991.\nIndependent country and the Commonwealth.\nPost-Soviet countries have signed a series of treaties and agreements to settle the legacy of the former Soviet Union multilaterally and bilaterally.\nIn December 1991, an independence referendum was passed with 98.2 percent of the popular vote. The same month, a parliament was elected and Karimov was chosen the new nation's first president.\nAlthough Uzbekistan had not sought independence, when events brought them to that point, Karimov and his government moved quickly to adapt themselves to the new realities. They realized that under the Commonwealth of Independent States, the loose federation proposed to replace the Soviet Union, no central government would provide the subsidies to which Uzbek governments had become accustomed for the previous 70 years. Old economic ties would have to be reexamined and new markets and economic mechanisms established. Although Uzbekistan as defined by the Soviets had never had independent foreign relations, diplomatic relations would have to be established with foreign countries quickly. Investment and foreign credits would have to be attracted, a formidable challenge in light of Western restrictions on financial aid to nations restricting expression of political dissent. For example, the suppression of internal dissent in 1992 and 1993 had an unexpectedly chilling effect on foreign investment. Uzbekistan's image in the West alternated in the ensuing years between an attractive, stable experimental zone for investment and a post-Soviet dictatorship whose human rights record made financial aid inadvisable. Such alternation exerted strong influence on the political and economic fortunes of the new republic in its first five years.\nIn 1992 Uzbekistan adopted a new constitution, but the main opposition party, Birlik, was banned, and a pattern of media suppression began. In 1995 a national referendum extended Karimov's term of office from 1997 to 2000. A series of violent incidents in eastern Uzbekistan in 1998 and 1999 intensified government activity against Islamic extremist groups, other forms of opposition, and minorities. In 2000 Karimov was reelected overwhelmingly in an election whose procedures received international criticism. Later that year, Uzbekistan began laying mines along the Tajikistan border, creating a serious new regional issue and intensifying Uzbekistan's image as a regional hegemon. In the early 2000s, tensions also developed with neighboring states Kyrgyzstan and Turkmenistan. In the mid-2000s, a mutual defense treaty substantially enhanced relations between Russia and Uzbekistan. Tension with Kyrgyzstan increased in 2006 when Uzbekistan demanded extradition of hundreds of refugees who had fled from Andijon into Kyrgyzstan after the riots. A series of border incidents also inflamed tensions with neighboring Tajikistan. In 2006 Karimov continued arbitrary dismissals and shifts of subordinates in the government, including one deputy prime minister.\nThe activities of missionaries from some Islamic countries, coupled with the absence of real opportunities to participate in public affairs, contributed to the popularization of a radical interpretation of Islam. In the February 1999 Tashkent bombings, car bombs hit Tashkent and President Karimov narrowly escaped an assassination attempt. The government blamed the Islamic Movement of Uzbekistan (IMU) for the attacks. Thousands of people suspected of complicity were arrested and imprisoned. In August 2000, militant groups tried to penetrate Uzbek territory from Kyrgyzstan; acts of armed violence were noted in the southern part of the country as well.\nIn March 2004, another wave of attacks shook the country. These were reportedly committed by an international terrorist network. An explosion in the central part of Bukhara killed ten people in a house allegedly used by terrorists on March 28, 2004. Later that day, policemen were attacked at a factory, and early the following morning a police traffic check point was attacked. The violence escalated on March 29, when two women separately set off bombs near the main bazaar in Tashkent, killing two people and injuring around 20. These were the first suicide bombers in Uzbekistan. On the same day, three police officers were shot dead. In Bukhara, another explosion at a suspected terrorist bomb factory caused ten fatalities. The following day police raided an alleged militant hideout south of the capital city.\nPresident Karimov claimed the attacks were probably the work of a banned radical group Hizb ut-Tahrir (\"The Party of Liberation\"), although the group denied responsibility. Other groups that might have been responsible include militant groups operating from camps in Tajikistan and Afghanistan and opposed to the government's support of the United States since September 11, 2001.\nIn 2004, British ambassador Craig Murray was removed from his post after speaking out against the regime's human rights abuses and British collusion therein.\nOn July 30, 2004, terrorists bombed the embassies of Israel and the United States in Tashkent, killing three people and wounding several. The Jihad Group in Uzbekistan posted a claim of responsibility for those attacks on a website linked to Al-Qaeda. Terrorism experts say the reason for the attacks is Uzbekistan's support of the United States and its War on terror.\nIn May 2005, several hundred demonstrators were killed when Uzbek troops fired into a crowd protesting against the imprisonment of 23 local businessmen. (For further details, see 2005 Andijan Unrest.)\nIn July 2005, the Uzbek government gave the US 180 days' notice to leave the airbase it had leased in Uzbekistan. A Russian airbase and a German airbase remain.\nIn December 2007 Islam A. Karimov was reelected to power in a fraudulent election. Western election observers noted that the election failed to meet many OSCE benchmarks for democratic elections, the elections were held in a strictly controlled environment, and there had been no real opposition since all the candidates publicly endorsed the incumbent. Human rights activists reported various cases of multiple voting throughout the country as well as official pressure on voters at polling stations to cast ballots for Karimov. The BBC reported that many people were afraid to vote for anyone other than the president. According to the constitution Karimov was ineligible to stand as a candidate, having already served two consecutive presidential terms and thus his candidature was illegal.\nThe lead up to the elections was characterized by the secret police arresting dozens of opposition activists and putting them in jail including Yusuf Djumayaev, an opposition poet. Several news organizations, including \"The New York Times\", the BBC and the Associated Press, were denied credentials to cover the election. Around 300 dissidents were in jail in 2007, including Jamshid Karimov, the president's 41-year-old nephew.\nIn 2016, Islam Karimov died after suffered with stroke for almost a week earlier, while still being a president and was replaced by Shavkat Mirziyoyev, who was Uzbekistan's interim leader since the death of Islam Karimov. In December 2016, Shavkat Mirziyoyev won the presidential election with signs of fraud.\nOn 6 November 2021, President Shavkat Mirziyoyev was sworn into his second term in office, after gaining a landslide victory in presidential election.\nOn 1 July 2022 protests broke out in the autonomous region of Karakalpakstan over proposed amendments to the Constitution of Uzbekistan which would have ended Karakalpakstan's status as an autonomous region of Uzbekistan and right to secede from Uzbekistan via referendum. They were brutally suppressed, at least 18 people were killed.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31855", "revid": "50700693", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31855", "title": "Geography of Uzbekistan", "text": " \nUzbekistan is a country in Central Asia, located north of Turkmenistan and Afghanistan. With an area of approximately 448,900 square kilometers, Uzbekistan stretches from west to east and from north to south. It borders Turkmenistan to the southwest, Kazakhstan to the north and Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan to the south and east. Uzbekistan also has four small exclaves in Kyrgyzstan.\nUzbekistan is the only Central Asian state to border all of the other four. Uzbekistan also shares a short border with Afghanistan to the south. As the Caspian Sea is an inland sea with no direct link to the oceans, Uzbekistan is one of only two \"doubly landlocked\" countries\u2014countries completely surrounded by other landlocked countries. The other is Liechtenstein.\nTopography and drainage.\nThe physical environment of Uzbekistan is diverse, ranging from the flat, desert topography that comprises almost 80% of the country's territory to mountain peaks in the east reaching about above sea level. The southeastern portion of Uzbekistan is characterized by the foothills of the Tian Shan mountains, which rise higher in neighboring Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan and form a natural border between Central Asia and China. The vast Qizilqum (Turkic for \"red sand\"\u2014Russian spelling Kyzyl Kum) Desert, shared with southern Kazakhstan, dominates the northern lowland portion of Uzbekistan. The most fertile part of Uzbekistan, the Fergana Valley, is an area of about directly east of the Qizilqum and surrounded by mountain ranges to the north, south, and east. The western end of the valley is defined by the course of the Syr Darya, which runs across the northeastern sector of Uzbekistan from southern Kazakhstan into the Qizilqum. Although the Fergana Valley receives just of rainfall per year, only small patches of desert remain in the center and along ridges on the periphery of the valley.\nWater resources, which are unevenly distributed, are in short supply in most of Uzbekistan. The vast plains that occupy two-thirds of Uzbekistan's territory have little water, and there are few lakes. The two largest rivers feeding Uzbekistan are the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya, which originate in the mountains of Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan, respectively. These rivers form the two main river basins of Central Asia; they are used primarily for irrigation, and several artificial canals have been built to expand the supply of arable land in the Fergana Valley and elsewhere. During the Soviet Era, a plan was devised in which Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan provided water from these two rivers to Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan in summer, and these three countries provided Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan with oil and gas during the winter in return. However, this system dissolved after the collapse of the USSR, and a new resource-sharing plan has yet to be put in place. According to the International Crisis Group, this situation could lead to irreparable regional destabilization if it is not resolved. A shallow lake, Sarygamysh Lake, sits on the border with Turkmenistan.\nAnother important feature of Uzbekistan's physical environment is the significant seismic activity that dominates much of the country. Indeed, much of Uzbekistan's capital city, Tashkent, was destroyed in a major earthquake in 1966, and other earthquakes have caused significant damage before and since the Tashkent disaster. The mountain areas are especially prone to earthquakes.\nClimate.\nUzbekistan's climate has sometimes been broadly described as Mediterranean and humid continental, meaning that it has both relatively hot summers and relatively cool winters. However, only a small area in eastern Uzbekistan is classified as Mediterranean and humid continental under the K\u00f6ppen climate classification. A vast majority of its total area \u2014 including all of the sparsely populated western and central regions \u2014 is classified as either cold desert (K\u00f6ppen \"BWk\") or cold steppe (\"BSk\").\nSummer temperatures often surpass ; winter temperatures average between and , but may fall as low as . Most of the country also is quite arid, with average annual rainfall amounting to between and occurring mostly in winter and spring. Between June and September, little precipitation falls, essentially stopping the growth of vegetation during that period of time.\nEnvironmental problems.\nDespite Uzbekistan's rich and varied natural environment, decades of environmental neglect in the Soviet Union have combined with skewed economic policies in the Soviet south to make Uzbekistan one of the gravest of the CIS's many environmental crises. The heavy use of agrochemicals, diversion of huge amounts of irrigation water from the two rivers that feed the region, and the chronic lack of water treatment plants are among the factors that have caused health and environmental problems on an enormous scale.\nEnvironmental devastation in Uzbekistan is best exemplified by the catastrophe of the Aral Sea. Because of diversion of the Amu Darya and Syr Darya for cotton cultivation and other purposes, what once was the world's fourth largest inland sea has shrunk in the past thirty years to only about one-third of its 1960 volume and less than half its 1960 geographical size. The desiccation and salinization of the lake have caused extensive storms of salt and dust from the sea's dried bottom, wreaking havoc on the region's agriculture and ecosystems and on the population's health. Desertification has led to the large-scale loss of plant and animal life, loss of arable land, changed climatic conditions, depleted yields on the cultivated land that remains, and destruction of historical and cultural monuments. Every year, many tons of salts reportedly are carried as far as 800 kilometers away. Regional experts assert that salt and dust storms from the Aral Sea have raised the level of particulate matter in the Earth's atmosphere by more than 5%, seriously affecting global climate change.\nThe Aral Sea disaster is only the most visible indicator of environmental decay, however. The Soviet approach to environmental management brought decades of poor water management and lack of water or sewage treatment facilities; inordinately heavy use of pesticides, herbicides, defoliants, and fertilizers in the fields; and construction of industrial enterprises without regard to human or environmental impact. Those policies present enormous environmental challenges throughout Uzbekistan.\n*shrinkage of the Aral Sea is resulting in growing concentrations of chemical pesticides and natural salts; these substances are then blown from the increasingly exposed lake bed and contribute to desertification; water pollution from industrial wastes and the heavy use of fertilizers and pesticides is the cause of many human health disorders; increasing soil salination; soil contamination from agricultural chemicals, including DDT\n*party to:\n**Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands\n*signed, but not ratified:\n**none of the selected agreements\nWater pollution.\nLarge-scale use of chemicals for cotton cultivation, inefficient irrigation systems, and poor drainage systems are examples of the conditions that led to a high filtration of salinized and contaminated water back into the soil. Post-Soviet policies have become even more dangerous; in the early 1990s, the average application of chemical fertilizers and insecticides throughout the Central Asian republics was 20 to 25 kilograms per hectare, compared with the former average of three kilograms per hectare for the entire Soviet Union. As a result, the supply of fresh water has received further contaminants. Industrial pollutants also have damaged Uzbekistan's water. In the Amu Darya, concentrations of phenol and oil products have been measured at far above acceptable health standards. In 1989 the Minister of Health of the Turkmen SSR described the Amu Darya as a sewage ditch for industrial and agricultural waste substances. Experts who monitored the river in 1995 reported even further deterioration.\nIn the early 1990s, about 60% of pollution control funding went to water-related projects, but only about half of cities and about one-quarter of villages have sewers. Communal water systems do not meet health standards; much of the population lacks drinking water systems and must drink water straight from contaminated irrigation ditches, canals, or the Amu Darya itself.\nAccording to one report, virtually all the large underground fresh-water supplies in Uzbekistan are polluted by industrial and chemical wastes. An official in Uzbekistan's Ministry of Environment estimated that about half of the country's population lives in regions where the water is severely polluted. The government estimated in 1995 that only 230 of the country's 8,000 industrial enterprises were following pollution control standards.\nAir pollution.\nPoor water management and heavy use of agricultural chemicals also have polluted the air. Salt and dust storms and the spraying of pesticides and defoliants for the cotton crop have led to severe degradation of air quality in rural areas.\nIn urban areas, factories and auto emissions are a growing threat to air quality. Fewer than half of factory smokestacks in Uzbekistan are equipped with filtration devices, and none has the capacity to filter gaseous emissions. In addition, a high percentage of existing filters are defective or out of operation. Air pollution data for Tashkent, Farghona, and Olmaliq show all three cities exceeding recommended levels of nitrous dioxide and particulates. High levels of heavy metals such as lead, nickel, zinc, copper, mercury, and manganese have been found in Uzbekistan's atmosphere, mainly from the burning of fossil fuels, waste materials, and ferrous and nonferrous metallurgy. Especially high concentrations of heavy metals have been reported in Toshkent Province and in the southern part of Uzbekistan near the Olmaliq Metallurgy Combine. In the mid-1990s, Uzbekistan's industrial production, about 60% of the total for the Central Asian nations excluding Kazakhstan, also yielded about 60% of the total volume of Central Asia's emissions of harmful substances into the atmosphere. Because automobiles are relatively scarce, automotive exhaust is a problem only in Tashkent and Farghona.\nLand and Soil Pollution.\nThe reduction of water in Uzbekistan has resulted in soil degradation, and the spread of the salt from the evaporated Aral Sea has contaminated the surrounding soil. The soil has lost much of its water due to the increased surface irrigation. The irrigation of farmlands with water from the Aral Sea has resulted in increased salinization of the soil, causing the farmland to be less productive and the destruction of a large portion of farmable land.\nThe amount of grasslands in Uzbekistan has gradually decreased mainly due to over-grazing and climate change. About 62.6% of the land in Uzbekistan is used for agriculture with 51.7% of that land used for permanent pasture.\nThe soil has been polluted by mining and smelting activities due to the spread of metals and other pollutants by wind. Smelter ash contaminated soil causes environmental risks such as reduction of soil respiration, contamination of microbial biomass, and negatively effecting trophic interactions. Many species of animals are sensitive to metal pollution and are directly exposed to it by living off of the land that has been polluted by the mining and smelting activities. The metals polluting the land and soil include copper, gold, lead, silver, metallic zinc, and others. An example is the metallurgical complex at Almalik in Uzbekistan that manufactures metals and has waste storage sites in surrounding areas, which pollute the soil, groundwater, and air with high amounts of copper, zinc, arsenic, lead, and cadmium. The mining complexes in Uzbekistan have created toxic waste that has spread through the land, groundwater, air, waterways, and soil.\nThe soil in Uzbekistan is also polluted by industrial waste. The improper handling and disposal of industrial waste has polluted the land in Uzbekistan and other countries in Central Asia. The evaporation of the Aral Sea exposed Vozrozhdeniya Island, also known as Resurrection Island, to the land and environment in Uzbekistan when the island transformed into a large peninsula. At Resurrection Island, the land and soil was polluted with weaponized and genetically modified pathogens due to a secret biological weapons program carried out by the Soviet military. The island was decontaminated by the Russian military, Government of Uzbekistan, and U.S. experts because of the health and environmental dangers it could have caused with its new connection to the land.\nGovernment environmental policy.\nThe government of Uzbekistan has acknowledged the extent of the country's environmental problems, and it has made a commitment to address them in its Biodiversity Action Plan. But the governmental structures to deal with these problems remain confused and ill-defined. Old agencies and organizations have been expanded to address these questions, and new ones have been created, resulting in a bureaucratic web of agencies with no generally understood commitment to attack environmental problems directly. Various nongovernmental and grassroots environmental organizations also have begun to form, some closely tied to the current government and others assuming an opposition stance. For example, environmental issues were prominent points in the original platform of Birlik, the first major opposition movement to emerge in Uzbekistan. By the mid-1990s, such issues had become a key concern of all opposition groups and a cause of growing concern among the population as a whole.\nIn the first half of the 1990s, many plans were proposed to limit or discourage economic practices that damage the environment. Despite discussion of programs to require payments for resources (especially water) and to collect fines from heavy polluters, however, little has been accomplished. The obstacles are a lack of law enforcement in these areas, inconsistent government economic and environmental planning, corruption, and the overwhelming concentration of power in the hands of a president who shows little tolerance of grassroots activity.\nInternational donors and Western assistance agencies have devised programs to transfer technology and know-how to address these problems. But the country's environmental problems are predominantly the result of abuse and mismanagement of natural resources promoted by political and economic priorities. Until the political will emerges to regard environmental and health problems as a threat not only to the government in power but also to the very survival of Uzbekistan, the increasingly grave environmental threat will not be addressed effectively.\nThe Government of Uzbekistan joined forces with Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, and Kyrgyzstan in 1992 to form the International Fund for Saving the Aral Sea (IFAS) and in 1993 to form the Interstate Council on the Problems of the Aral Sea Basin (ICAS). The ICAS was formed to work with the World Bank in order to improve the conditions of the Aral Sea, but was disbanded in 1997 to form IFAS.\nThe Uzbekistan government along with NGOs and U.S. international donors has been working to help improve the health conditions in Uzbekistan since the 1990s. This has led to improvements in drinking water. The World Bank and United Nations have also been involved in preparing possible solutions for the environmental problems in Uzbekistan. The World Bank worked with the countries in the Aral Sea Basin to form the Aral Sea Basin Assistance Program (ASBP) in the early 1990s. The main roles of the ASBP were the rehabilitation of the Aral Sea area that was destroyed through evaporation, the planning and management of the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers, and the construction of institutions to plan and implement the rehabilitation and management of the water resources surrounding the Aral Sea. The World Bank also formed the Water and Environmental Management Project in 1998 that was funded by both the World Bank and the Global Environmental Facility (GEF). The program was funded by the World Bank, the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the Asian Development Bank, as well as the governments of a few countries. Other groups that contributed to the rehabilitation and management of the Aral Sea include the European Union, the United Nations, UNESCO, United Nations Development Program (UNDP), the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and the Science for Peace program.\n*total: 447,400\u00a0km\u00b2\n**\"country rank in the world:\" 56th\n*land: 425,400\u00a0km\u00b2\n*water: 22,000\u00a0km\u00b2\n* same size as Morocco\n* slightly smaller than Sweden\n* Australia comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Victoria\n* Canada comparative: slightly smaller than the Yukon\n* United Kingdom comparative: approximately larger than the United Kingdom\n* United States comparative: slightly larger than California\n* EU comparative: slightly less than times the size of Italy\n*Total: 6,221\u00a0km\n*Border countries: Afghanistan (137\u00a0km), Kazakhstan (2,203\u00a0km), Kyrgyzstan (1,099\u00a0km), Tajikistan (1,161\u00a0km), Turkmenistan (1,621\u00a0km)\n*0\u00a0km (landlocked)\n*None. \n**Note: Uzbekistan is one of only two countries (Liechtenstein) in the world that are \"doubly landlocked\".\n*Lowest point: Sariqarnish Kuli \u2212 below sea level.\n*Highest point: Alpomish Peak, \n*arable land: 9.61%\n*permanent crops: 0.8%\n*other: 89.58% (2011)\n*41,980\u00a0km\u00b2 (2005)\n*48.87\u00a0km2 (2011)\n*total: 56\u00a0km2/yr (7%/3%/90%)\n**per capita: 2,113 m3/yr (2005)\nDeserts.\nAlmost 80% of Uzbekistan (360,000 km\u00b2 of 450,000 km\u00b2) are the deserts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31856", "revid": "49380818", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31856", "title": "Demographics of Uzbekistan", "text": "Demographic features of the population of Uzbekistan include population growth, population density, ethnicity, education level, health, economic status, religious affiliations, and other aspects of the population. The nationality of a person from Uzbekistan is Uzbekistani, while the ethnic Uzbek majority call themselves Uzbeks. Much of the data is estimated because the last census was carried out in Soviet times in 1989.\nOverview.\nUzbekistan is Central Asia's most populous country. Its 36.8 million people (as of January 2024) comprise nearly half the region's total population.\nThe population of Uzbekistan is very young: 30.1% of its people are younger than 14. According to official sources, Uzbeks comprise a majority (84.4%) of the total population. Other ethnic groups, as of 1996 estimates, include Russians (2.1% of the population), Tajiks (4,8%), Kazakhs (3%), Karakalpaks (2.5%), and Tatars (1.5%).\nUzbekistan has an ethnic Korean population that was forcibly relocated to the region from the Soviet Far East in 1937\u20131938. There are also small groups of Armenians in Uzbekistan, mostly in Tashkent and Samarkand. The nation is 94% Muslim (mostly Sunni), 3% Eastern Orthodox and 3% other faiths (which include small communities of Korean Christians, other Christian denominations, Buddhists, Baha'is, and more). The Bukharan Jews have lived in Central Asia, mostly in Uzbekistan, for thousands of years. There were 94,900 Jews in Uzbekistan in 1989 (about 0.5% of the population according to the 1989 census), but now, since the collapse of the USSR, most Central Asian Jews left the region for the United States or Israel. More than 5,000 Jews remain in Uzbekistan.\nMuch of Uzbekistan's population was engaged in cotton farming in large-scale collective farms when the country was part of the Soviet Union. The population continues to be heavily rural and dependent on farming for its livelihood, although the farm structure in Uzbekistan has largely shifted from collective to individual since 1990.\nVital statistics.\nUN estimates.\nSource: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs website &gt; World Population Prospects: The 2019 revision.\nRegistered birth and deaths.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nSources:\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nDemographic and Health Surveys.\nTotal fertility rate (TFR) and crude birth rate (CBR):\nIn 2002, the estimated TFR was 2.92; Uzbeks 2.99, Russians 1.35, Karakalpak 2.69, Tajik 3.19, Kazakh 2.95, Tatar 2.05, others 2.53; Tashkent City 1.96, Karakalpakstan 2.90, Fergana 2.73; Eastern region 2.71, East Central 2.96, Central 3.43, Western 3.05.\nThe high fertility rate during the Soviet Union and during its period of disintegration is partly due to the historical cultural preferences for large families, economic reliance upon agriculture, and the greater relative worth of Soviet child benefits in Uzbekistan. Abortion was the preferred method of birth control. Legalized in 1955, the number of abortions increased by 231% from 1956 to 1973. By 1991, the abortion ratio was 39 abortions per 1,000 women of reproductive age per year.\nHowever, in the past few decades, fertility control methods have shifted considerably from abortion to modern contraceptive methods, especially IUDs. By the mid-1980s IUDS became the main method of contraception through government and organizational policies that aimed to introduce women to modern contraceptives. According to a UHES report from 2002, 73% of married Uzbek woman had used the IUD, 14% male condom, and 13% the pill.\nThe government supported the use of modern contraceptives to control fertility rates because of national economic difficulties that followed the disintegration of the Soviet Union. Thus the government has been influential in determining the popularity of the IUD. Despite family planning programs that educate women on different methods of contraception, the IUD has remained women's first choice of contraception. Word of mouth and social relations also account for the strong preference for the IUD. Nevertheless, factors such as class and level of education have been shown to give women more freedom in their choice of contraception methods.\nThe late President Islam Karimov had repressive birth control measures as part of state policy, including allegations of forced sterilization, which were loosened after his death in 2016 and which accounts for a baby boom that had started in 2018.\nRegional differences.\nAs of 2024, the regions of Surxondaryo and Qashqadaryo have the highest birth rate in Uzbekistan. On the other hand, the Republic of Karakalpakstan and Toshkent have the lowest birth rate in the country. The highest death rate is in the city of Toshkent, while the lowest in the region of Jizzax.\nInfant mortality rate.\n2020 estimate:\n \"Total\": 17 deaths per 1,000 live births\n \"Male\": 19 deaths per 1,000 live births\n \"Female\": 15 deaths per 1,000 live births\nLife expectancy.\nSource: \"UN World Population Prospects 2017\"\nEthnic groups.\nEthnic composition according to the 1989 population census (latest available):\nUzbek 71%, Russian 6%, Tajik 5% (believed to be much higher), Kazakh 4%, Tatar 3%, Karakalpak 2%, other 7%.\nEstimates of ethnic composition in 1996 from \"CIA World Factbook\":\nUzbek 80%, Russian 5.5%, Tajik 5%, Kazakh 3%, Karakalpak 2.5%, Tatar 1.5%, other 2.5% (1996 est.)\nThe table shows the ethnic composition of Uzbekistan's population (in percent) according to four population censuses between 1926 and 1989 (no population census was carried out in 1999, and the next census is now being planned for 2010). The increase in the percentage of Tajik from 3.9% of the population in 1979 to 4.7% in 1989 may be attributed, at least in part, to the change in census instructions: in the 1989 census for the first the nationality could be reported not according to the passport, but freely self-declared on the basis of the respondent's ethnic self-identification.\nLanguages.\nAccording to the CIA factbook, the current language distribution is: Uzbek 82%, Russian 9%, Tajik 5% and Other 4%. The Latin script replaced Cyrillic in the mid-1990s.\nFollowing independence, Uzbek was made the official state language. President Islam Karimov, the radical nationalist group Birlik (Unity), and the Uzbek Popular Front promoted this change. These parties believed that Uzbek would stimulate nationalism and the change itself was part of the process of derussification, which was meant to deprive Russian language and culture of any recognition. Birlik held campaigns in the late 1980s to achieve this goal, with one event in 1989 culminating in 12,000 people in Tashkent calling for official recognition of Uzbek as the state language. In 1995, the government adopted the Law of the Republic of Uzbekistan on State Language, which mandates that Uzbek be used in all public spheres and official jobs. Scholars studying migration and ethnic minorities have since criticized the law as a source of discrimination toward minorities who do not speak Uzbek. Nevertheless, Russian remains the \"de facto\" language when it comes to science, inter-ethnic communication, business, and advertising.\nMultiple sources suggest that the Persian-speaking Tajik population of Uzbekistan may be as large as 10%-15% of the total population. The Tajik language is the dominant language spoken in the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand. The delineation of territory in 1924 and the process of \"Uzbekisation\" caused many Tajiks to identify as Uzbek. Thus there are many Tajiks who speak Tajik but are officially documented as Uzbek.\nReligion.\nMuslims constitute 94% of the population according to a 2013 US State Department release. Approximately 3% of the population are Russian Orthodox Christians.\nThere were 94,900 Jews in Uzbekistan in 1989 (about 0.5% of the population according to the 1989 census), but fewer than 5,000 remained in 2007.\nA study showed that 35% of those surveyed consider religion as \"very important\".\nMigration.\nAs of 2011, Uzbekistan has a net migration rate of -2.74 migrant(s)/ 1,000 population.\nThe process of migration changed after the fall of the Soviet Union. During the Soviet Union, passports facilitated movement throughout the fifteen republics and movement throughout the republics was relatively less expensive than it is today. An application for a labor abroad permit from a special department of the Uzbek Agency of External Labor Migration in Uzbekistan is required since 2003. The permit was originally not affordable to many Uzbeks and the process was criticized for the bureaucratic red tape it required. The same departments and agencies involved in creating this permit are consequently working to substantially reduce the costs as well as simplifying the procedure. On July 4, 2007, the Russian First Deputy Prime Minister Sergey Ivanov signed three agreements that would address labor activity and protection of the rights of the working migrants (this includes Russian citizens in Uzbekistan and Uzbek citizens in Russia) as well as cooperation in fighting undocumented immigration and the deportation of undocumented workers.\nUzbek migration.\nEconomic difficulties have increased labor migration to Russia,the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Turkey, South Korea, and Europe over the past decade. At least 10% of Uzbekistan's labor force works abroad. Approximately 58% of the labor force that migrates, migrates to Russia. High unemployment rates and low wages are responsible for labor migration.\nMigrants typically are people from the village, farmers, blue-collar workers, and students who are seeking work abroad. However, many migrants are not aware of the legal procedures required to leave the country, causing many to end up unregistered in Uzbekistan or the host country. Without proper registration, undocumented migrants are susceptible to underpayment, no social guarantees and bad treatment by employers. According to data from the Russian Federal Immigration Service, there were 102,658 officially registered labor migrants versus 1.5 million unregistered immigrants from Uzbekistan in Russia in 2006. The total remittances for both groups combined was approximately US$1.3 billion that same year, eight percent of Uzbekistan's GDP.\nMinorities.\nA significant number of ethnic and national minorities left Uzbekistan after the country became independent, but actual numbers are unknown. The primary reasons for migration by minorities include: few economic opportunities, a low standard of living, and a poor prospect for educational opportunities for future generations. Although Uzbekistan's language law has been cited as a source of discrimination toward those who do not speak Uzbek, this law has intertwined with social, economic, and political factors that have led to migration as a solution to a lack of opportunities in Uzbekistan.\nRussians, who constituted a primarily urban population made up half of the population of Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan, until the 1980s. Since then, the population has been gradually diminishing as many Russians have migrated to Russia. Nevertheless, Russian registration permits (propiska) constrain migration. The decision to migrate is complicated by the fact that many Russians or other minority groups who have a \"homeland\" may view Uzbekistan as the \"motherland\". It is also complicated by the fact that these groups might not speak the national language of their \"homeland\" or may be registered under another nationality on their passports. Nonetheless, \"native\" embassies facilitate this migration. Approximately 200 visas are given out to Jews from the Israel embassy weekly.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31857", "revid": "24827452", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31857", "title": "Politics of Uzbekistan", "text": " \nThe Republic of Uzbekistan is a semi-presidential constitutional republic, whereby the President of Uzbekistan is head of state. Executive power is exercised by the government and by the Prime Minister of Uzbekistan.\nLegislative power is vested in the two chambers of the Oliy Majlis, the Senate and the Legislative Chamber. The judicial branch (or judiciary), is composed of the Supreme Court, Constitutional Court that exercises judicial power.\nThe movement toward economic reform in Uzbekistan has not been matched by a movement toward political reform. The government of Uzbekistan has instead tightened its grip since independence (September 1, 1991), cracking down increasingly on opposition groups. Although the names have changed, the institutions of government remain similar to those that existed before the breakup of the Soviet Union.\nThe government has justified its restraint of public assembly, opposition parties, and the media by emphasizing the need for stability and a gradual approach to change during the transitional period, citing the conflict and chaos in the other former republics (most convincingly, neighbouring Tajikistan). This approach has found credence among a large share of Uzbekistan's population, although such a position may not be sustainable in the long run.\nDespite the trappings of institutional change, the first years of independence saw more resistance than acceptance of the institutional changes required for democratic reform to take hold. Whatever initial movement toward democracy existed in Uzbekistan in the early days of independence seems to have been overcome by the inertia of the remaining Soviet-style strong centralized leadership.\nIndependence.\nIn the Soviet era, Uzbekistan organized its government and its local communist party in conformity with the structure prescribed for all the republics. The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) occupied the central position in ruling the country. The party provided both the guidance and the personnel for the government structure. The system was strictly bureaucratic: every level of government and every governmental body found its mirror image in the party. The instrument used by the CPSU to control the bureaucracy was the system of \"nomenklatura\", a list of sensitive jobs in the government and other important organizations that could be filled only with party approval. The \"nomenklatura\" defined the Soviet political leadership, and the people on the list invariably were members of the CPSU.\nFollowing the failure of the coup against the government of Mikhail Gorbachev in Moscow in August 1991, Uzbekistan's Supreme Soviet declared the independence of the republic, henceforth to be known as the Republic of Uzbekistan. At the same time, the Communist Party of Uzbekistan voted to cut its ties with the CPSU; three months later, it changed its name to the People's Democratic Party of Uzbekistan (PDPU), but the party leadership, under President Islam Karimov, remained in place. Independence brought a series of institutional changes, but the substance of governance in Uzbekistan changed much less dramatically.\nOn December 21, 1991, together with the leaders of ten other Soviet republics, Karimov agreed to dissolve the Soviet Union and form the Commonwealth of Independent States, of which Uzbekistan became a charter member according to the Alma-Ata Declaration. Shortly thereafter, Karimov was elected president of independent Uzbekistan in the new country's first contested election. Karimov drew 86% of the vote against opposition candidate Muhammad Salih (or Salikh), whose showing experts praised in view of charges that the election had been rigged. The major opposition party, Birlik, had been refused registration in time for the election.\nIn 1992 the PDPU retained the dominant position in the executive and legislative branches of government that the Communist Party of Uzbekistan had enjoyed. All true opposition groups were repressed and physically discouraged. Birlik, the original opposition party formed by intellectuals in 1989, was banned for allegedly subversive activities, establishing the Karimov regime's dominant rationalization for increased authoritarianism: Islamic fundamentalism threatened to overthrow the secular state and establish an Islamic regime similar to that in Iran.\nThe constitution ratified in December 1992 reaffirmed that Uzbekistan was a secular state. Although the constitution prescribed a new form of legislature, the PDPU-dominated Supreme Soviet remained in office for nearly two years until the first election to the new parliament, the Oliy Majlis, which took place in December 1994 and January 1995.\nIn 1993 Karimov's concern about the spread of Islamic fundamentalism spurred Uzbekistan's participation in the multinational CIS peacekeeping force sent to quell the civil war in nearby Tajikistan - a force that remained in place three years later because of continuing hostilities. Meanwhile, in 1993 and 1994 continued repression by the Karimov regime brought strong criticism from international human rights organizations.\nIn March 1995, Karimov took another step in the same direction by securing a 99% majority in a referendum on extending his term as president from the prescribed next election in 1997 to 2000.\nIn early 1995, Karimov announced a new policy of toleration for opposition parties and coalitions, apparently in response to the need to improve Uzbekistan's international commercial position. A few new parties were registered in 1995, although the degree of their opposition to the government was doubtful, and some imprisonments of opposition political figures continued.\nThe parliamentary election, the first held under the new constitution's guarantee of universal suffrage to all citizens 18 years of age or older, excluded all parties except the PDPU and the pro-government Progress of the Fatherland Party, despite earlier promises that all parties would be free to participate. The new, 250-seat \"Oliy Majlis\" included only 69 members elected as PDPU candidates, but an estimated 120 more deputies were PDPU members technically nominated to represent local councils rather than the PDPU. The result was that Karimov's solid majority continued after the new parliament went into the office.\n1992 constitution.\nFrom the beginning of his presidency, Karimov remained nominally committed to instituting democratic reforms. A new constitution was adopted by the legislature in December 1992. Officially it created a separation of powers among a strong presidency, the \"Oliy Majlis\", and the judiciary. In practice, however, these changes have been largely cosmetic. Although the language of the new constitution includes many democratic features, it can be superseded by executive decrees and legislation, and often constitutional law simply is ignored.\nThe president, who is directly elected to a five-year term that can be repeated once, is the head of state and is granted supreme executive power by the constitution. As commander in chief of the armed forces, the president also may declare a state of emergency or of war. The president is empowered to appoint the prime minister and full cabinet of ministers and the judges of the three national courts, subject to the approval of the \"Oliy Majlis\", and to appoint all members of lower courts. The president also has the power to dissolve the parliament, in effect negating the Oliy Majlis's veto power over presidential nominations in a power struggle situation.\nDeputies to the \"Oliy Majlis\", the highest legislative body, are elected to five-year terms. The body may be dismissed by the president with the concurrence of the Constitutional Court; because that court is subject to presidential appointment, the dismissal clause weights the balance of power heavily toward the executive branch.\nThe \"Oliy Majlis\" enacts legislation, which may be initiated by the president, within the parliament, by the high courts, by the procurator general (highest law enforcement official in the country), or by the government of the Autonomous Province of Karakalpakstan. Besides legislation, international treaties, presidential decrees, and states of emergency also must be ratified by the Senate of \"Oliy Majlis\".\nThe national judiciary includes the Supreme Court, the Constitutional Court, and the High Economic Court. Lower court systems exist at the regional, district, and town levels. Judges at all levels are appointed by the president and approved by the \"Oliy Majlis\".\nNominally independent of the other branches of government, the courts remain under complete control of the executive branch. As in the system of the Soviet era, the procurator general and his regional and local equivalents are both the state's chief prosecuting officials and the chief investigators of criminal cases, a configuration that limits the pretrial rights of defendants.\nOpposition parties and the media.\nAlso passed in the 2002 referendum was a plan to create a bicameral parliament. Several political parties have been formed with government approval but have yet to show interest in advocating alternatives to government policy. Similarly, although multiple media outlets (radio, TV, newspapers) have been established, these either remain under government control or rarely broach political topics. Independent political parties have been denied registration under restrictive registration procedures.\nDespite extensive constitutional protections, the Karimov government has actively suppressed the activities of political movements, continues to ban unsanctioned public meetings and demonstrations, and continues to suppress opposition figures. The repression reduces constructive opposition even when institutional changes have been made. In the mid-1990s, legislation established significant rights for independent trade unions, separate from the government, and enhanced individual rights; but enforcement is uneven, and the role of the state security agencies, principally the State Security Service (SGB), remains central.\nWith the exception of sporadic liberalization, all opposition movements and independent media are essentially banned in Uzbekistan. The early 1990s were characterized by arrests and beatings of opposition figures on fabricated charges. For example, one prominent Uzbek, Ibrahim Bureyev, was arrested in 1994 after announcing plans to form a new opposition party.\nAfter reportedly being freed just before the March referendum, Bureyev shortly thereafter was arrested again on charges of possessing illegal firearms and drugs. In April 1995, fewer than two weeks after the referendum extending President Karimov's term, six dissidents were sentenced to prison for distributing the party newspaper of Erk/Liberty and inciting the overthrow of Karimov. Members of opposition groups have been harassed by Uzbekistan's SNB as far away as Moscow.\nCrackdown on Islamic fundamentalism.\nThe government severely represses those it suspects of Islamic extremism. Some 6,000 suspected members of Hizb ut-Tahrir are among those incarcerated, and some are believed to have died over the past several years from prison disease, torture, and abuse. With few options for religious instruction, some young Muslims have turned to underground Islamic movements. The police force and the SNB use torture as a routine investigation technique. The government has begun to bring to trial some officers accused of torture. Four police officers and three SNB officers have been convicted.\nThe government has granted amnesties to political and non-political prisoners, but this was believed to have benefited only a small proportion of those detained. In 2002 and the beginning of 2003 the government arrested fewer suspected Islamic fundamentalists than in the past. However, in May 2005, hundreds were killed by police in a massacre of protesters in the city of Andijan. This sparked the interest in online debate over the subject in different countries\u00a0as it was not allowed to be discussed in the country. This led to the departure of other critics in fear of jail time or censorship.\nIn a move welcomed by the international community, the government of Uzbekistan has ended prior censorship, though the media remain tightly controlled.\nIn the modern era the government still detains and punishes the believers of Islam. According to the report of the U.S Department of State along with sources from Radio Free Europe written in 2023, Uzbekistan continues its offensive against people who teach or read certain books. This also counts for women who wear clothes that cover their eyes called burkas and also forced to shave their beard if its longer than a certain amount. During the month of Ramadan the country was found to punish fasting prisoners by threatening them to be put in worse conditions while at the same time not providing the morning meal for fasting.\nExecutive branch.\nThe president is elected by popular vote for a five-year term in elections that cannot be described as free. Freedom House rates Uzbekistan as absolutely unfree in both political institutions and civil society.\nThe prime minister and deputy ministers are appointed by the president. In effect, the executive branch holds almost all power. The judiciary lacks independence and the legislature, which meets only a few days each year, has little power to shape laws.\nThe president selects and replaces provincial governors. Under the terms of a December 1995 referendum, Islam Karimov's first term was extended. Another national referendum was held January 27, 2002, to again extend Karimov's term. The referendum passed and Karimov's term was extended by act of the parliament to December 2007. Most international observers refused to participate in the process and did not recognize the results, dismissing them as not meeting basic standards. Karimov had himself re-elected for a technically unconstitutional third term in the 2007 election.\nLegislative branch.\nThe Oliy Majlis has 150 members in the Legislative Chamber, elected for a five-year term, and 100 members in the Senate, 84 of whom are elected at the sessions of the district, regional and city deputies, and 16 appointed by the president.\nAdministrative divisions.\nUzbekistan is divided in 12 \"viloyatlar\" (singular - \"viloyat\"), 1 autonomous republic* (\"respublikasi\"), and 1 city** (\"shahri\"):\n\"note:\" administrative divisions have the same names as their administrative centers (exceptions and alternate spellings have the administrative center name following in parentheses)\nCabinet of Ministers.\nAripov Government \nInternational organization participation.\nUzbekistan is a member of a number of international organizations, including AsDB, CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, SCO, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCO, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, UNWTO, and the WTO (observer).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31858", "revid": "323264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31858", "title": "Economy of Uzbekistan", "text": "The economy of Uzbekistan, formerly a Soviet-style command economy, has undergone changes that align more with a market economy. Under the administration of Islam Karimov, currency conversion capacity was restricted, imports were controlled and Uzbekistan's borders with neighboring Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan were sporadically closed. Since the election of President Shavkat Mirziyoyev, Uzbekistan economic and social reforms have been implemented to boost growth and modernize the country. International Financial Institutions, including EBRD, Asian Development Bank and the World Bank, are supportive of the reform process and increased their presence in the country.\nUzbekistan is a major producer and exporter of cotton. In 2022, the Cotton Campaign and other agencies, including the US Government, lifted all bans on the import of cotton imposed due to international human rights concerns.\nUzbekistan is also a big producer of gold, with the largest open-pit gold mine in the world. The country has substantial deposits of silver, strategic minerals, gas, and oil.\nSince 2016, there have been significant economic reforms in Uzbekistan. The country liberalised the currency in 2017, allowing freer flows of foreign currency and allowing the import and export of goods, and the path to foreign investment. 2019 tax reforms also allowed company consolidation, tax simplification and the professionalisation of the Private sector. The Government is also committed to privatisation of State Owned Enterprises (SOEs), with the domestic IPO of UzAuto predicted in 2022.\nThe Uzbekistan Economic Forum run by the Ministry of Finance brings together IFIs, businesses, government officials and other stakeholders on an annual basis. The first iteration was in Tashkent, and the Uzbekistan Economic Forum II took place in Samarkand. In December 2022, the Uzbek Government received a loan from the World Bank of almost US$1bn to \"implement strategic reforms\". Today, the volume of GDP of Uzbekistan has reached 146 billion dollars.\nGDP and employment.\nThis is a chart depicting the trend of the gross domestic product in Uzbekistan in constant prices of 1995, estimated by the International Monetary Fund with figures in millions of soum. The chart also shows the consumer price index(CPI) as a measure of inflation from the same source and the end-of-year U.S. dollar exchange rate from the Central Bank of the Uzbekistan database. For purchasing power parity comparisons in 2006, the U.S. dollar is exchanged at 340 som.\nUzbekistan's GDP, like that of all CIS countries, declined during the first years of transition and then recovered after 1995, as the cumulative effect of policy reforms began to be felt. It showed robust growth, rising by 4% per year between 1998 and 2003, and accelerating thereafter to 7\u20138% per year. In 2011 the growth rate rose to 9%.\nGiven the growing economy, the total number of people employed rose from 8.5 million in 1995 to 13.5 million in 2011. This increase of nearly 25% in the labor force lagged behind the increase in GDP during the same period (64%, see chart), which implied a significant increase in labor productivity. Official unemployment is low: less than 30,000 job seekers were registered in government labor exchanges in 2005\u20132006 (0.3% of the labor force). Underemployment, on the other hand, is quite high, especially in agriculture, which accounts for fully 28% of all employed, many working part-time on small household plots.\nThe minimum wage, public-sector wages, and old-age pensions are raised twice a year to ensure that base income is not eroded by inflation. Although no statistics are published on average wages in Uzbekistan, pensions as a proxy for the average wage increased significantly between 1995 and 2006, both in real terms and in U.S. dollars. The monthly old-age pension increased in real (CPI-adjusted) soums by almost a factor of 5 between 1995 and 2006. The monthly pension in U.S. dollars was around $20\u2013$25 until 2000, then dropped to $15\u2013$20 between 2001 and 2004, and now is $64. The minimum wage was raised to $34.31 in November 2011. Assuming that the average wages in the country are at a level of 3\u20134 times the monthly pension, we estimate the wages in 2006 at $100\u2013$250 per month, or $3\u2013$8 per day.\nAccording to the forecast by the Asian Development Bank, the GDP in Uzbekistan in 2009 was expected to grow by 7%. Meanwhile, in 2010 the Uzbekistan GDP growth is predicted at 6,5%.\nWork force and vocational training.\nLiteracy in Uzbekistan is almost universal, but in order to meet labor force needs, hundreds of students are sent to the United States, Europe, and Japan for university degrees, after which they commit to working for the government for 5 years. About 60% of students who study abroad find employment with foreign companies upon completing their degrees despite their commitment to work for the government.\nIn addition, Uzbekistan subsidizes studies for students at Westminster International University in Tashkent\u2014one of the few Western-style institutions in Uzbekistan. In 2002, the government \"Istedod\" Foundation (formerly as \"Umid\" Foundation) paid for 98 out of 155 students studying at Westminster. For the following academic year, Westminster admitted 360 students, with Istedod paying for 160 students. Tuition is $5,200 per academic year.\nIn 2008 Management Development Institute of Singapore at Tashkent opened to provide high quality education with international degrees. Tuition fee was $5000 in 2012.\nIn 2009 Turin Polytechnik University was opened. It is the only university in Central Asia that prepares high quality employees for industries.\nWith the closing or downsizing of many foreign firms, it is relatively easy to find qualified employees, though salaries are very low by Western standards. Salary caps, which the government implements in an apparent attempt to prevent firms from circumventing restrictions on withdrawal of cash from banks, prevent many foreign firms from paying their workers as much as they would like. Labor market regulations in Uzbekistan are similar to those of the Soviet Union, with all rights guaranteed but some rights unobserved. Unemployment is a growing problem, and the number of people looking for jobs in Russia, Kazakhstan, and Southeast Asia is increasing each year. Uzbekistan's Ministry of Labor does not publish information on Uzbek citizens working abroad, but Russia's Federal Migration Service reports 2.5 million Uzbek migrant workers in Russia. There are also indications of up to 1 million Uzbek migrants working illegally in Kazakhstan. Uzbekistan's migrant workers may thus be around 3.5\u20134 million people, or a staggering 25% of its labor force of 14.8 million. The U.S. Department of State also estimates that between three and five million Uzbek citizens of working age live outside Uzbekistan.\nAfter acknowledging the need for more higher education to support labor market needs, new programs were opened and cooperation commenced with foreign universities. Moreover, private higher education providers started to emerge on the market to provide students with necessary skills, knowledge and competencies required on the labor market. One of the private universities in Tashkent TEAM University aims at development of skills necessary for starting entrepreneurial activities, thus contributing to development of businesses and private enterprises.\nPrices and monetary policy.\nUzbekistan experienced galloping inflation of around 1000% per year immediately after independence (1992\u20131994). Stabilization efforts implemented with active guidance from the International Monetary Fund rapidly paid off, as inflation rates were brought down to 50% in 1997 and then to 22% in 2002. Since 2003 annual inflation rates averaged less than 10%.\nThe severe inflationary pressures that characterized the early years of independence inevitably led to a dramatic depreciation of the national currency. The exchange rate of Uzbekistan's first currency, the \"notional\" rouble inherited from the Soviet period and its successor, the transient \"coupon soum\" introduced in November 1993 in a ratio of 1:1 to the rouble, went up from 100 roubles/US$ in the early 1992 to 3,627 roubles (or coupon soum) in mid-April 1994. On July 1, 1994, the \"coupon soum\" was replaced with the permanent new Uzbek soum (UZS) in a ratio of 1000:1, and the starting exchange rate for the new national currency was set at 7 soum/US$, implying an almost two-fold depreciation since mid-April. Within the first six months, between July and December 1994, the national currency depreciated further to 25 soum/US$ and continued depreciating at a fast clip until December 2002, when the exchange rate had reached 969 soum/US$, i.e., 138 times the starting exchange rate eight and a half years earlier or nearly 10,000 times the exchange rate in early 1992, soon after the declaration of independence. Then the depreciation of the soum virtually stopped in response to the government's stabilization program, which at the same time dramatically reduced the inflation rates. During the four years that followed (2003\u20132007) the exchange rate of the soum to the US dollar increased only by a factor of 1.33, from 969 soum to around 1,865 soum in May 2012.\nFrom 1996 until the spring of 2003, the official and so-called \"commercial\" exchange rate \u2013 both set administratively by the Central Bank \u2013 were highly overvalued. Many businesses and individuals were unable to buy dollars legally at these \"low\" rates, so a widespread black market developed to meet hard currency demand. The spread between the official exchange rate and the curb rate widened especially after the 1998 Russian financial crisis: at the end of 1999 the curb rate stood at 550\u00a0soum/US$ compared with the official rate of 140\u00a0soum/US$, a gap by nearly a factor of 4 (up from a factor of \"only\" 2 in 1997 and the first half of 1998). By mid-2003, the government's stabilization and liberalization efforts had reduced the gap between the black market, official, and commercial rates to approximately 8% and it quickly disappeared as the soum was made convertible after October 2003. Today, four foreign currencies\u2014the U.S. dollar, the euro, the pound sterling, and the yen\u2014are freely exchanged in commercial booths all around the cities, while other currencies, including the Russian rouble and the Kazakh tenge, are bought and sold by individual (\"black market\") money changers, who are allowed to operate openly without harassment. The foreign exchange regime since October 2003 is characterized as \"controlled floating rate\". Liberalization of the trade regime remains a prerequisite for Uzbekistan to proceed to an IMF-financed program. In 2012, \"black market\" rate is again significantly higher than official rate, 2,850\u00a0soum/US$ vs. 1,865\u00a0soum/US$ (as of mid-June 2011). This curb rate is often referred to as 'bazar rate', because money changers operate at or near 'bazars' \u2013 large farmer markets.\nTax collection rates remained high, due to the use of the banking system by the government as a collection agency. Technical assistance from the World Bank, Office of Technical Assistance at the U.S. Treasury Department, and UNDP is being provided in reforming the Central Bank and Ministry of Finance into institutions capable of conducting market-oriented fiscal and monetary policy.\nAgriculture.\nIn 2018, Uzbekistan produced:\nIn addition to smaller productions of other agricultural products.\nAt the end of 2013, the government announced through the Central Bank of the Republic of Uzbekistan that it predicted agriculture as playing a major component of the country's economic development in the future.\nAgriculture in Uzbekistan employs 28% of labor force and contributes 24% of GDP (2006 data). Another 8% of GDP is from processing of domestic agricultural output. Cotton, once Uzbekistan's star cash earner, has lost much its luster since independence as wheat began to gain prominence from considerations of food security for the rapidly growing population. Areas cropped to cotton were reduced by more than 25% from 2 million hectares in 1990 to less than 1.5 million hectares in 2006, while wheat cultivation jumped 60% from around 1 million hectares in 1990 to 1.6 million hectares in 2006. Cotton production dropped from 3 million tons annually in the pre-independence decade to around 1.2 million tons since 1995, but even at these reduced levels Uzbekistan produces 3 times as much cotton as all the other Central Asian countries and Azerbaijan combined. Cotton exports tumbled from highs of around 45% of Uzbekistan's total exports in the early 1990s to 17% in 2006. Uzbekistan is the largest producer of jute in West Asia and it also produces significant quantities of silk (Uzbek ikat), fruit, and vegetables, with food products contributing nearly 8% of total exports in 2006. Virtually all agriculture requires irrigation, but because of budgetary constraints there has been practically no expansion of irrigated area since independence: it remains static at 4.2 million hectares, the level reached by 1990 after rapid growth during the Soviet period.\nGovernment intervention in agriculture is reflected in the persistence of state orders for the two main cash crops, cotton and wheat. Farmers receive binding directives on the area to be cropped to these commodities and are obliged to surrender their harvest to designated marketers at state-fixed prices. The incomes of farmers and agricultural workers are substantially lower than the national average because the government pays them less than the world prices for their cotton and wheat, using the difference to subsidize capital intensive industrial concerns, such as factories producing automobiles, airplanes, and tractors. Consequently, many farmers focus on production of fruits and vegetables on their small household plots, because the prices of these commodities are determined by supply and demand, not by government decrees. Farmers also resort to smuggling cotton and especially wheat across the border with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan in order to obtain higher prices.\nThe government's pricing for the main cash crops, cotton and wheat, is apparently responsible for the exceptionally rapid growth of the cattle herd in recent years, as the prices of milk and meat, like those of fruits and vegetables, are also determined by market forces. The number of cattle increased from 4 million head in 1990 to 7 million head in 2006, and virtually all these animals are maintained by rural families with just 2\u20133 head per household. Sales of own-produced milk, meat, and vegetables in town markets are an important source for augmenting rural family incomes.\nThe Soviet practice of using \"volunteer labor\" to help gathering the cotton harvest continues in Uzbekistan where schoolchildren, university students, medical professionals, and state employees are driven en masse out to the fields every year. A recent article posted by a domestic news agency (admittedly with strong anti-government leanings) describes Uzbekistan's cotton as \"riches gathered by the hands of hungry children\".\nNatural resources and energy.\nIn 2019, the country was the 5th largest world producer of uranium; 12th largest world producer of gold; 7th largest world producer of rhenium; 12th largest world producer of molybdenum; 21st largest world producer of phosphate, and the 19th largest world producer of graphite\nMinerals and mining are important economic sectors. Gold and cotton are major foreign exchange earners, unofficially estimated at 20% of total exports. Uzbekistan is the world's seventh-largest gold producer, mining about 80 tons per year, and holds the fourth-largest reserves in the world. Uzbekistan has an abundance of natural gas, used both for domestic consumption and export; oil used for domestic consumption; and significant reserves of copper, lead, zinc, tungsten, and uranium. Energy use is generally high since the controlled prices do not stimulate consumers to conserve energy. Uzbekistan was a partner country of the EU INOGATE energy programme, which focused on enhancing energy security, \nconvergence of member state energy markets on the basis of EU internal energy market principles, supporting sustainable energy development, and attracting investment for energy projects of common and regional interest.\nThe country's largest steel manufacturer is Uzmetkombinat. The company planned an IPO in 2023.\nExternal trade and investment.\nSince the 2017 liberalisation of the foreign exchange market, Uzbekistan has seen rapid growth in exports. Traditional export products such as gas and cotton are now kept domestically for processing. They have been replaced by a vast growth in exports in areas such as fruit, textiles and home appliances. In recent years textile export has doubled in revenue to almost US$3bn worth of goods exports. Home appliance manufacturer Artel has seen exports rise from $5.6m in 2017, to around $100m in 2021.\nBefore this, the system of multiple exchange rates combined with the highly regulated trade regime caused both imports and exports to drop each from about US$4.5 billion in 1996 to less than US$3 billion in 2002. The success of stabilization and currency liberalization in 2003 has led to significant increases in exports and imports in recent years, although imports have increased much less rapidly: while exports had more than doubled to US$15.5 by 2011, imports had risen to US$6.5 billion only, reflecting the impact of the government's import substitution policies designed to maintain hard currency reserves. Draconian tariffs, sporadic border closures, and border crossing \"fees\" have a negative effect on legal imports of both consumer products and capital equipment.\nUzbekistan is a member of the International Monetary Fund, World Bank, Asian Development Bank, and European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. It has observer status at the World Trade Organization, is a member of the World Intellectual Property Organization, and is a signatory to the \"Convention on Settlement of Investment Disputes Between States and Nationals of Other States\", the \"Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property\", the \"Madrid Agreement on Trademarks Protection\", and the \"Patent Cooperation Treaty\". In 2002, Uzbekistan was again placed on the special \"301\" Watch List for lack of intellectual copyright protection.\nUntil 2017, according to EBRD transition indicators, Uzbekistan's investment climate remains among the least favorable in the CIS, with only Belarus and Turkmenistan ranking lower. The unfavorable investment climate has caused foreign investment inflows to dwindle to a trickle. It is believed that Uzbekistan has the lowest level of foreign direct investment per capita in the CIS. Since Uzbekistan's independence, U.S. firms have invested roughly $500 million in the country, but due to declining investor confidence, harassment, and currency convertibility problems, numerous international investors have left the country or are considering leaving. In 2005, the Central Bank has revoked the license of the nascent Biznes Bank citing unspecified violations of local currency exchange rules. The revocation prompted immediate bankruptcy procedures, under which clients' deposits stay arrested for two month. No interest was accrued during that two-month period. In 2006, the Government of Uzbekistan forced out Newmont Mining Corporation (at the time the largest U.S. investor) from its gold mining joint venture in the Muruntau gold mine. Newmont and the government resolved their dispute, but the action adversely affected Uzbekistan's image among foreign investors. The government attempted the same with British-owned Oxus Mining. Coscom, a U.S.-owned telecommunications company, involuntarily sold its stake in a joint venture to another foreign company. GM-DAT, a Korean subsidiary of GM, is the only known U.S. business to have entered Uzbekistan in over two years. It recently signed a joint-venture agreement with UzDaewooAuto to assemble Korean-manufactured cars for export and domestic sale. Other large U.S. investors in Uzbekistan include Case IH, manufacturing and servicing cotton harvesters and tractors; Coca-Cola, with bottling plants in Tashkent, Namangan, and Samarkand; Texaco, producing lubricants for sale in the Uzbek market; and Baker Hughes, in oil and gas development.\nIn 2024, Uzbekistan\u2019s external debt reached $64.1 billion, or 55.7% of GDP, up from 51.9% in 2023. This included both public and private liabilities, though much of the private sector; particularly banks and industrial enterprises; remained state-owned. Government debt rose to $33.9 billion (29.5% of GDP), while corporate external debt reached $30.2 billion (26.2%). The government continued to control about 65% of the banking sector and held stakes in major firms like UzAuto Motors and Uzbekneftegaz. Public debt was projected to rise to $45.1 billion (36.7% of GDP) by the end of 2025.\nIn 2025, President Shavkat Mirziyoyev signed a law on Uzbekistan's accession to the Agreement Establishing the Eurasian Development Bank (EADB). Uzbekistan will become the seventh member of the Bank and the third largest shareholder with a 10% equity stake.\nBanking.\nUzbekistan's banks have demonstrated reasonably stable performance in a largely state-dominated local economy. Sector stability is currently supported by rapid economic growth, low exposure to external financial markets and the strong external and fiscal position of the sovereign. However, the sector remains vulnerable to possible economic shocks due to weak corporate governance and risk management, fast recent asset growth, significant directed lending and acquisitions of problem assets. Banks\u2019 foreign currency obligations, specifically those arising from trade finance, are particularly vulnerable due to existing foreign exchange constraints.\nAccording to Fitch Ratings, there are notable risks of asset quality deterioration in case of a reversal in economic trends. The funding base is mainly short-term, largely sourced from corporate current accounts, while retail funds account for only a small 25% of total deposits. Longer-term funding is provided by the Ministry of Finance and other state agencies, which comprise a notable proportion of sector liabilities. Foreign funding is small, estimated at 10% of the total liabilities, and plans for further borrowings are moderate. Liquidity management is constrained be the lack of deep capital markets, and banks generally tend to hold substantial cash reserves on their balance sheets. The quality of capital is sometimes compromised by less conservative regulatory requirements for recognition of credit impairment and by investments in non-core assets.\nRetail.\nUzbekistan's retail sector remains dominated by traditional markets, known as \"bozorlar\", where individual vendors sell food, housewares, clothing, and other consumer goods. But the country's retail sector is rapidly modernizing. The construction of modern supermarkets and malls has accelerated in recent years. The country's retail market was estimated at $17 billion in 2017 and rising incomes, population growth, and a move from informal to formal retail are expected to drive continued expansion of the sector. Major supermarket chains include local players Korzinka.uz and Makro (Uzbekistan) and the French multinational chain Carrefour, which will open its first store in Uzbekistan in 2021. The country's first modern shopping malls are located in Tashkent, and include the Samarkand Darvoza and Compass developments. The sector has also seen growth in online retail. In 2021, Korzinka acquired a US$40m stake in Anglesey Food, the Singapore mother entity of Korzinka. In 2021, the company also signed a signed $12 million in debt financing to promote food security and sustain the livelihoods of more than 5,000 employees and 1,200 farm workers in Uzbekistan.\nTourism.\nSilk road route's three important cities are located in Uzbekistan, namely Khiva, Bukhara and Samarkand. There are numerous well connected tourist destinations in Uzbekistan. There are five UNESCO World Heritage Sites in Uzbekistan and 30 are on tentative list.\nControversy.\nAccording to the Organized Crime and Corruption Reporting Project (OCCRP), Vlast, and iStories, after February 24, 2022, Uzbekistan significantly increased its exports of cotton pulp and nitrocellulose, key components for making explosives and gunpowder, to Russia. According to Ekonomichna Pravda, at least two large Uzbek exporters have been working with Russian military-industrial complex enterprises. Documents from the Russian Federal Tax Service confirm that at least three Russian companies \u2013 Bina Group, Khimtrade, and Lenakhim - sold imported cotton pulp to military plants in Russia. Among them: Kazan Powder Plant (a strategic defense-industrial enterprise that produces gunpowder and charges for various types of weapons, subject to US sanctions), Tambov Powder Plant (a defense-industrial enterprise that produces ammunition and special chemicals, It is subject to US and Ukrainian sanctions), Perm Powder Plant (an enterprise involved in the production of Topol-M and Bulava intercontinental ballistic missiles, as well as Kornet ATGMs and Grad and Smerch multiple rocket launchers. It is under Ukrainian sanctions).\nMiscellaneous data.\nThe following table shows the main economic indicators in 1993\u20132024.\nHousehold income or consumption by percentage share:\nDistribution of family income \u2013 Gini index:\n36.8 (2003)\nAgriculture \u2013 products:\ncotton, vegetables, fruits, grain; livestock\nIndustrial production growth rate:\n6.2% (2003 est.)\nElectricity:\nElectricity \u2013 production by source:\nOil:\nNatural gas:\nCurrent account balance:\n$3.045 billion (2007 est.)\nExports \u2013 commodities:\ncotton 17.2%, energy products 13.1%, metals 12.9%, machinery and equipment 10.1%, food products 7.9%, chemical products 5.6%, services 12.1%( 2006)\nImports \u2013 commodities:\nmachinery and equipment 40.3%, chemical products 15.0%, metals 10.4%, food products 8.1%, energy products 4.3%, services 9.1% (2006)\nReserves of foreign exchange &amp; gold:\n$5.6 billion (Dec. 2007 est.)\nExchange rates:\nCurrent economy growth (6 months of 2009):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31859", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31859", "title": "Telecommunications in Uzbekistan", "text": " \nTelecommunications networks in Uzbekistan are largely based on Soviet-built infrastructure but with many modern additions, making the country one of the leading influences in the region in informational development.\nIn 2012, the telecommunications services volume grew by 22.5% year-on-year in Uzbekistan. The number of broadband ports installed totalled 378,000 across the country at the end of 2012, up by 55.5% year-on-year. The number of ports in active use was 202,700 up by 37.2%. A total of 1,576 km of fibre optic backbone lines were deployed across the country in the same year.\nTelephone.\nThere are digital exchanges in large cities and rural areas.\nDomestic system.\nThe main line telecommunications system is dilapidated and telephone density is low. The state-owned telecommunications company, Uztelecom, has used loans from the Japanese government and the China Development Bank to improve mainline services. The completion of conversion to digital exchanges was in 2010. Mobile services are growing rapidly, with the subscriber base reaching 25 million in 2011.\nInternational system.\nUzbekistan is linked by fiber-optic cable or microwave radio relay with CIS member states and to other countries by leased connection via the Moscow international gateway switch. After the completion of the Uzbek link to the Trans-Asia-Europe (TAE) fiber-optic cable, Uzbekistan plans to establish a fiber-optic connection to Afghanistan.\nRadio.\nCurrently, Uzbekistan has four AM stations, 12 FM stations, and three shortwave stations. Additionally, as of 1997, there are an estimated 10.2 million radios in use in Uzbekistan.\nTelevision.\nUzbekistan has 28 television broadcast stations. This includes one cable rebroadcaster in Tashkent and approximately 20 stations in regional capitals. National Television and Radio Company of Uzbekistan is the State Television Channel of Uzbekistan. Other country-wide television stations are Aqlvoy, MY5 and Sevimli.\nInternet.\nDuring the presidency of Islam Karimov, local websites peaked in the late 2000s and the early 2010s; Olam.uz collaborated with the government in 2012; there was still a significant amount of self-censorship practiced by the Uzbek portals of the time.\nInternet access in Uzbekistan has significantly developed after its new president, Shavkat Mirziyoyev, came to power. Compared to the past, you can now access Instagram, Facebook, Twitter and many other social networks without any restrictions. The new president has opened up the country to FDIs and has signed a tax incentive for business opportunities to improve the private business sector. He has also addressed and put a lot of effort into improving internet connections and mobility within the country.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31860", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31860", "title": "Transport in Uzbekistan", "text": " \nAs of 2007, Uzbekistan's overland transportation infrastructure declined significantly in the post-Soviet era due to low investment and poor maintenance. Air transport was the only branch that received substantial government investment in the early 2000s, as airport modernization projects were undertaken. In the following years, improvements have been made to the surface transport network including the construction of the Tashkent\u2013Samarkand high-speed rail line.\nRailways.\nAs of March 2017, the total length of Uzbekistan's main railway network is , of which is electrified.\nTrams.\nUzbekistan has one town tramway system, which is located in Samarkand. The modern, electrified system opened its first line in 2017, and is the first system to operate in Samarkand since the Soviet-era system was disestablished in 1973. \nMetro lines.\nThe Tashkent Metro was the only such line in Central Asia, until the opening of the Almaty Metro.\nHighways.\nAs of 2005, Uzbekistan had of roads, about of which were paved. The road infrastructure is deteriorating, particularly outside of Tashkent. No significant highway projects were underway in 2006. In the early 2000s, U.S. engineers improved some roads around the port of Termez to facilitate movement of humanitarian supplies to Afghanistan. Uzbekistan is a member country of the United Nations\u2019 Asian Highway Network, and several national roads are designated as part of the network.\nThere are some parts of the roads considered as freeways, although mostly in a state of complete neglect and disrepair since the collapse of the Soviet Union. The ring road around Tashkent is about long, and completely multilaned, although it lacks a carriageway separation in most sections. \nThe M39 Highway, connecting Tashkent and Samarkand is a 4-laned road in some of its length, although poorly maintained and without carriageway separation in most of its length. In January, 2017, the Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan governments made an agreement to reopen the section of this highway which passed through Kazakhstan that had been closed for ten years, avoiding the detour via Guliston. The M37 Highway starts from Samarkand, reaching west to the Turkmen border, via Navoiy and Bukhara. The A373 Highway starts from Tashkent, going east through Kokand of Fergana Region, and ends at the Kyrgyz border.\nIn September 2019, The Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank proposed the Bukhara Road Network Improvement Project to improve the multiple assets of cross-border roads in Bukhara and the road networks in Karakalpakstan and Khorezm regions. The project finances were approved in June of 2020 and has been estimated to take 214.7 million USD. \nHighway classification.\nThe highways in Uzbekistan are divided into three groups based on the level of their significance whose names differ by a prefix on their code. On July 2024, in a cabinet ruling, the Soviet-era highway numbers were retained for \"roads of international significance\", but the road numbering was overhauled for \"roads of state significance\" and \"roads of local significance\".\nThis superceded and annulled an earlier cabinet ruling from August 2010, which affirmed and documented the same 3 levels of roadway, but retaining the codes from the Soviet era.\nBelow are the \"highways of international significance\", with a prefix \"M\" or \"A\", inheritted from the Soviet road network.\nThe total length of these roads is 3,833 km.\nThe next level of roadways in Uzbekistan are \"roads of state significance\" (), their codes consisting of 3 digints, and being designated with a prefix \"D\" (for \"davlat\", meaning \"state\"). These roads are designated from \"D001\" to \"D240\", with branches and variants being labelled using miniscule latin letters, e.g. \"D025e\" (862nd km of M39 \u2014 Chinoz). The total length of these roads is 14,316 km.\nThe next level of roadways are \"roads of local significance\", numbered at a region (viloyat) level. For these types of roads, their codes consist of 3 digits, and they're designated with a prefix \"##V\" (a two digit number desingating the region, same codes as those for Uzbek license plates, followed by \"V\" for \"viloyat\"). For example \"70V001\" is located in Qashqadaryo Region, and designates Qashqadaryo Ring Road. (license plates of Qashqadaryo Region have codes 70 to 74). Branches and variants are also labelled using miniscule latin letters, e.g. \"70V078a\" (3rd km of D148 \u2014 Shahrisabz). The total length of these roads is 24,222 km.\nPorts and waterways.\nDouble landlocked Uzbekistan has no seaports. Its main river port is Termez on the Amu Darya river. Although Termez lacks modern facilities and has a shortage of spare parts, activity there has increased as conditions in neighboring Afghanistan have stabilized. Termez has been an important transfer point for humanitarian supplies entering Afghanistan.\nUzbekistan has of inland waterways. Since the mid-1990s, commercial travel on Uzbekistan's portion of the Amu Darya has been reduced because of low water levels.\nPipelines.\nAs of 2010, Uzbekistan had of natural gas pipelines, of oil pipelines, and of pipelines for refined products.\nAirports.\nAs of 2012, Uzbekistan has 53 airports. 33 of them have paved runways, six of which had runways longer than . The largest of them, Tashkent International Airport, is linked with European and Middle Eastern cities by direct flights of Aeroflot, Lufthansa, and Turkish Airlines. The national airline, Uzbek Havo Yollari (Uzbekistan Airlines), flies mainly within the former Soviet Union.\nIn August 2010, Hanjin Group, the parent of Korean Airlines, opened a new cargo terminal at Navoi, which will become a cargo hub with regular Incheon-Navoi-Milan flights.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31861", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31861", "title": "Armed Forces of the Republic of Uzbekistan", "text": "Combined military forces of the Uzbekistan\nThe Armed Forces of the Republic of Uzbekistan (), is the name of the unified armed forces of Uzbekistan, consisting of the Ground Force and the Air and Air Defence forces under the defence ministry. Paramilitary units include the National Guard, a Frontier Service and a River Force. It is reported to be the largest and the strongest in Central Asia.\n'The country has also began professionalizing its military, an effort that has only limited success and erratic government support. But even in Uzbekistan, these changes represent merely a modest beginning and most of the benefits are concentrated in a few elite, higher readiness formations rather than uniformly applied to the entire force. The Uzbek military is woefully inadequate, but it is far superior to its neighbours.'\nHistory.\nPre-history.\nTashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan, used to be the headquarters of the Soviet Turkestan Military District and on 20 February 1992, the new Ministry of Defence took over the offices which had been formerly occupied by the district headquarters staff. The Uzbek SSR had the strongest Soviet military presence of the other Central Asian Republics, controlling its own and operating its own domestic Ministry of Internal Affairs (MVD) independent of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Soviet Union.\nEstablishment of armed forces and military institutions.\nOn 2 July 1992 a Presidential Decree established a Ministry of Defence to supersede the Ministry of Defence Affairs. Over the succeeding years, Uzbekistan replaced Russian officers with ethnic Uzbeks and restructured the military to focus on targets like civil unrest, drug trafficking, and Hizb-ut-Tahrir. The three major Soviet military academies, the Tashkent Higher All-Arms Command School, the Chirchiq Higher Tank Command and Engineering School, and the Samarkand Higher Military Automobile Command School, were located in Uzbekistan. This caused the government to not send Uzbek officers to Russia for training. In 1994, they established the joint Armed Forces Academy, to train officers of all branches. Though the Uzbek language was becoming more in use by the army, Russian remained the main language used in training officers, due to the fact that most manuals were in Russian. But today Uzbek language is used in all spheres of defense system as it is an only state language in Uzbekistan\nDevelopment.\nIn October 1993, by the decree, the 2nd Mobile Army Corps was formed on the basis of the 105th Guards Vienna Airborne Division, and the 1st Army Corps was established on the basis of the former 59th Army Corps. In January 1994, the 108th Motorized Rifle Division was disbanded, and its military units were incorporated into the 1st Army Corps. Disbanded regiments were replaced by motorized infantry, mountain artillery, tank, and anti-aircraft artillery brigades. In April 1994, departments of defense were introduced in the regions of the republic, the Republic of Karakalpakstan and the city of Tashkent, and departments of defense in cities and districts.\nMilitary reforms were implemented after the appointment of civilian Kadyr Gulyamov to the defence ministry. Soviet-style regimental structures, were replaced, with the basic fighting unit consisting of 14 soldiers. \"Ranger\" detachments based on the American model were also formed.\nSince Shavkat Mirziyoyev came to power, the military has been involved in re-arming its military with modern equipment.\nActivities and foreign relations.\nFrom August to September 1997, Uzbekistan took part in the exercises of the Central Asian Battalion (CENTRASBAT) in Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan. as part of an eight nation joint exercise which include the United States, Russia and Ukraine. After the September 11, 2001 attacks, the United States leased the Karshi-Khanabad airbase in southern Uzbekistan, which borders Afghanistan. The American base there was called \"Camp Stronghold Freedom,\" yet was more often referred to as \"K2 Airbase\" by the personnel in theater.\nIn May 2005, the military was involved in suppressing unrest in the Ferghana Valley city of Andijan, which became known as the Andijan massacre. Consequently, the EU banned arms sales and imposed a one-year visa ban on 12 senior officials, including the security chief and interior and defence ministers, accusing them of bearing responsibility for the killings.\nIn the aftermath of the incident, President Karimov dismissed several senior military figures: Defense Minister Gulyamov, Head of the Joint Headquarters of the Armed Forces Ismail Ergashev, and Commander of the Eastern Military District Kosimali Akhmedov. Burnashev and Chernykh said that '..although these dismissals did not change the formal system of administration in the security and military structures, they reflected serious shifts in power relations among regional elites representing their clans.'\nA joint statement of the member countries of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation issued in early July 2005 on a conference in the Kazakh capital of Astana called for a withdrawal of US troops from military bases in Central Asia. On 29 July 2005, Uzbekistan invoked a provision asking the U.S. to leave within 180 days. On 21 November 2005, the withdrawal of US troops from Karshi-Khanabad and any other bases was completed.\nThe European Union lifted the arms sales ban in 2009. Uzbekistan and Russia signed a mutual defence pact in 2005 for closer military cooperation. This marked a stark contrast to a few years earlier, when the US appeared to be Uzbekistan's favoured foreign friend, and relations with Russia were cooler.\nArms control and non-proliferation.\nThe government has accepted the arms control obligations of the former Soviet Union, and acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a non-nuclear state. It has also supported an active program by the U.S. Department of Defense Defense Threat Reduction Agency in western Uzbekistan (Nukus and the biological warfare test laboratory on Vozrozhdeniye Island).\nLand Forces.\nThe army includes five military districts. In 2001, the Tashkent garrison was transformed into the Tashkent Military District. The headquarters of the military districts and their areas of responsibility are as follows:\nAir Forces.\nThe Uzbek air forces consist of units formerly part of the 49th Air Army of the Turkestan Military District headquartered at Tashkent. There are two remaining combat units, brigades at Karshi-Khanabad and Dzhizak.\nThe 60th Separate Brigade is the former 735th Bomber Aviation Regiment combined with the former 87th Separate Reconnaissance Aviation Regiment. It has 31 Su-24s, 32 MiG-29s, and 6 Su-27s. Other recently disbanded units include the 61st Fighter Aviation Regiment at Kakaydy, which was itself a merger with the previous 115th Fighter Aviation Regiment, and the 62nd Fighter Aviation Regiment at Andijan. Regiments at both bases were disbanded in 1999. As many as 26 stored Su-17s, apparently in very bad condition, remain at Chirchiq (see Google Earth 41\u00b030'05.69\"N 69\u00b033'44.90\"E)\nOther elements.\nSpecial units.\nDifferent special units in the armed forces include the following:\nArmy Special Forces.\nUzbekistan formed Special Forces Battalions which are trained and formed by American and other NATO experts, located in provinces which border troubled republics like Afghanistan and Tajikistan. Units of the Special Operations Forces are based in the most important operational areas, including the mountainous areas of the Surkhandarya and Tashkent regions.\nParamilitary and militarized forces.\nThe following institutions are uniformed and have military affiliations but are not part of the Armed Forces:\nMilitary industry.\nIn November 2017, at the initiative of President Mirziyoyev, the State Committee for Defense Industry () was created, serving as an authorized body of state administration responsible for the implementation of state defense orders and defense production organization. Abbreviated by the Russian term of Goskomoboronprom, it has developed the country's industrial potential in the field of production of military and dual-use products. Under the committee, a joint Uzbek-Turkish enterprise for the production of military uniforms was created.\nThe following enterprises serve under the committee:\nIn 2020, the first Uzbek light armored personnel carrier began the process of development. The APCs, known as the Tarlon and Qalqon light armored vehicles, was designed and manufactured at the enterprises of the military-industrial complex. It designed for the protection and tracking of convoys, sanitary transportation, engineering, radiation, chemical and biological reconnaissance and fire support.\nMilitary education.\nNCO training.\nIn January 2001, Sergeant Training Schools were established in the Tashkent, Central, South-West and Eastern military districts. In 2007, a fifth sergeant training school was opened in the Northwest Military District. The curriculum of the Sergeant Training School provides servicemen with basic instruction in managing tactical units, professional command skills related to military specialization, accurate situational assessments and decision-making, and methods of organizing the use of weapons and military equipment. The training program is aimed at developing the leadership qualities of sergeants and maintaining healthy morale and military skills in military units.\nOfficers of the military, national police, special forces, and Ministry of Internal Affairs attend courses at the Joint Service Officer Training Academy in the capital.\nYouth training.\nIn addition to the schools mentioned, four military lyceums (high schools) operate in Tashkent, Samarkand, Fergana and Urgench, all of which were established in 1993, are run by the military for pre-military education.\nMilitary culture.\nMilitary oath.\nThe military oath is taken by conscripts as a legal basis of the beginning of their military service. The oath is administered by the commanding officer of the unit while a colour guard lowers the national flag for the soldier to kiss after he/she has taken the oath. The first military oath of the Armed Forces of Uzbekistan was adopted at the 10th session of the 12th convocation of the Supreme Soviet of Uzbekistan on 3 July 1992. The following is the text for the 1992 version of the oath:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"I, (last name, first name, fatherland), joining the ranks of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Uzbekistan, solemnly swear allegiance to its people and the President.\nI swear piously to abide by the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Uzbekistan, to unconditionally fulfill military regulations, orders of commanders and chiefs, to strictly observe military discipline, to be honest, brave and watchful warrior.\nI swear before the memory of my ancestors to be the true son of my homeland until the last breath, to withstand all the burdens and deprivations of military service, to keep state and military secrets.\nI swear in the name of the bright future of my native Uzbekistan to be a worthy advocate of its state interests and independence. If I break this solemn oath, then let me be overtaken by the harsh punishment of the laws and the contempt of the people!\"\nWith the entry of the Law \"On General Military Commitment and Military Service\" adopted by the Oliy Majlis in 2002, the oath was abolished and the original text was made unavailable. In April 2018, a long proposed new version of the oath was approved. The new version is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"When I am in the ranks of the Armed Forces of the Republic of Uzbekistan, I swear to honor the Republic of Uzbekistan, to be loyal to my people and to the President.\nI swear to honor and adhere to the Constitution and the laws of the Republic of Uzbekistan, to obey the orders of the military commanders and officers placed before me, to strictly adhere to military discipline and to be an honest, brave and vigilant serviceman.\nUntil the last breath, I swear in the spirit of my ancestors to be a faithful child of my Homeland, to steadfastly endure all the hardships and difficulties of the military service and to maintain the secrets of the state and the military secrets of the armed forces.\nFor the bright future of my dear Uzbekistan, I swear to be a worthy defender of state interests and independence.\nIf I ever break this solemn oath, I would be subject to the most severest punishments prescribed by law and the hatred of my people!\"\nHolidays.\nThese are the military holidays observed by all service personnel the Uzbek Armed Forces:\nCultural institutions.\nThe armed forces maintains a number of cultural institutions that operated under the Ministry of Defense. Those institutions include the following:\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31862", "revid": "51038220", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31862", "title": "Foreign relations of Uzbekistan", "text": " \nUzbekistan joined the Commonwealth of Independent States in December 1991. However, it is opposed to reintegration and withdrew from the CIS collective security arrangement in 1999. Since that time, Uzbekistan has participated in the CIS peacekeeping force in Tajikistan and in United Nations-organized groups to help solve the Tajik and Afghan conflicts, both of which it sees as posing threats to its own stability. Uzbekistan is an active supporter of U.S. efforts against worldwide terrorism and joined the coalitions which have dealt with both Afghanistan and Iraq (although, in 2005, relations with the U.S. were strained after the May 2005 unrest and Uzbekistan demanded that the U.S. leave Karshi-Khanabad). It is a member of the United Nations, the Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council, Partnership for Peace, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE). It belongs to the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and the Economic Cooperation Organization, which comprises 7 Central Asian countries: Pakistan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. It is a founding member of and remains involved in the Central Asian Union, formed with Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan, joined in March 1998 by Tajikistan.\nIn 1999, Uzbekistan joined the GUAM alliance (Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan and Moldova), which was formed in 1997 (temporarily making it GUUAM until Uzbekistan withdrew in 2005). Uzbekistan is also a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO) and hosts the SCO's Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure (RATS) in Tashkent. Uzbekistan is also candidate state of the new Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU).\nFinland.\nIn 2006, Antti Turunen, head of the Finnish Foreign Ministry's Eastern European and Central Asian department, led a European Union fact-finding mission to Tashkent, Uzbekistan. The Uzbek deputy foreign minister had indicated that the Uzbek government was interested in talks with the EU during a visit to Helsinki, Finland in June 2006, just before Finland assumed the EU presidency. \"Radio Free Europe\" journalists spoke to Turunen on September 1. Turunen's visit to Uzbekistan was the first EU visit since October, when sanctions were imposed after the Uzbek government refused to allow an international investigation into the Andijan massacre.\nTurunen said that the visit went smoothly and that Uzbek Foreign Minister Vladimir Norov offered a warm reception. The EU delegation met with officials from the Justice Ministry, the Attorney General's office, and Uzbek parliament members. He stressed that the real issue for the EU was the Uzbek government's response to the Andijan massacre and human rights abuses. He said Russia-Uzbek relations and possible EU development of Uzbek energy reserves were not directly discussed but that EU investment might be possible in this area.\nPersian Gulf states.\nOn 31 March 2009, Uzbekistan and the Sultanate of Oman agreed upon a legal framework to protect Omani investments in central Asia and guarantee trade from both nations was free from double taxation. The Sultanate's government had been pursuing economic diversification and privatisation policies for nearly a decade after signeding similar agreements with thirty other trading partners.\nNetherlands.\nIn July 2024, the ambassador of Uzbekistan met Director of the Europe Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, Erik Weststrate, to discuss bilateral and multilateral cooperation.\nDiplomatic relations.\nList of countries which Uzbekistan maintains diplomatic relations with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31863", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31863", "title": "Uterus", "text": "Female sex organ in mammals\nThe uterus (from Latin \"uterus\", pl.: uteri or uteruses) or womb () is the organ in the reproductive system of most female mammals, including humans, that accommodates the embryonic and fetal development of one or more fertilized eggs until birth. The uterus is a hormone-responsive sex organ that contains glands in its lining that secrete uterine milk for embryonic nourishment. (The term \"uterus\" is also applied to analogous structures in some non-mammalian animals.)\nIn humans, the lower end of the uterus is a narrow part known as the isthmus that connects to the cervix, the anterior gateway leading to the vagina. The upper end, the body of the uterus, is connected to the fallopian tubes at the uterine horns; the rounded part, the fundus, is above the openings to the fallopian tubes. The connection of the uterine cavity with a fallopian tube is called the uterotubal junction. The fertilized egg is carried to the uterus along the fallopian tube. It will have divided on its journey to form a blastocyst that will implant itself into the lining of the uterus \u2013 the endometrium, where it will receive nutrients and develop into the embryo proper, and later fetus, for the duration of the pregnancy.\nIn the human embryo, the uterus develops from the paramesonephric ducts, which fuse into the single organ known as a simplex uterus. The uterus has different forms in many other animals and in some it exists as two separate uteri known as a duplex uterus.\nIn medicine and related professions, the term \"uterus\" is consistently used, while the Germanic-derived term \"womb\" is commonly used in everyday contexts. Events occurring within the uterus are described with the term in utero.\nStructure.\nIn humans, the uterus is located within the pelvic region immediately behind and almost overlying the bladder, and in front of the sigmoid colon. The human uterus is pear-shaped and about long, broad (side to side), and thick. A typical adult uterus weighs about 60 grams. The uterus can be divided anatomically into four regions: the fundus \u2013 the uppermost rounded portion of the uterus above the openings of the fallopian tubes, the body, the cervix, and the cervical canal. The cervix protrudes into the vagina. The uterus is held in position within the pelvis by ligaments, which are part of the endopelvic fascia. These ligaments include the pubocervical ligaments, the cardinal ligaments, and the uterosacral ligaments. It is covered by a sheet-like fold of peritoneum, the broad ligament.\nLayers.\nThe uterus has three layers, which together form the uterine wall. From innermost to outermost, these layers are the endometrium, myometrium, and perimetrium.\nThe endometrium is the inner epithelial layer, along with its mucous membrane, of the mammalian uterus. It has a basal layer and a functional layer; the functional layer thickens and then is shed during the menstrual cycle or estrous cycle. During pregnancy, the uterine glands and blood vessels in the endometrium further increase in size and number and form the decidua. Vascular spaces fuse and become interconnected, forming the placenta, which supplies oxygen and nutrition to the embryo and fetus.\nThe myometrium of the uterus mostly consists of smooth muscle. The innermost layer of myometrium is known as the junctional zone, which becomes thickened in adenomyosis.\nThe perimetrium is a serous layer of visceral peritoneum. It covers the outer surface of the uterus.\nSurrounding the uterus is a layer or band of fibrous and fatty connective tissue called the parametrium that connects the uterus to other tissues of the pelvis.\nCommensal and mutualistic organisms are present in the uterus and form the uterine microbiome.\nSupport.\nThe uterus is primarily supported by the pelvic diaphragm, perineal body, and urogenital diaphragm. Secondarily, it is supported by ligaments, including the peritoneal ligament and the broad ligament of uterus.\nMajor ligaments.\nThe uterus is held in place by several peritoneal ligaments, of which the following are the most important (there are two of each):\nAxis.\nNormally, the human uterus lies in anteversion and anteflexion. In most women, the long axis of the uterus is bent forward on the long axis of the vagina, against the urinary bladder. This position is referred to as anteversion of the uterus. Furthermore, the long axis of the body of the uterus is bent forward at the level of the internal os with the long axis of the cervix. This position is termed anteflexion of the uterus. The uterus assumes an anteverted position in 50% of women, a retroverted position in 25% of women, and a midposed position in the remaining 25% of women.\nPosition.\nThe uterus is located in the middle of the pelvic cavity, in the frontal plane (due to the broad ligament of the uterus). The fundus does not extend above the \"linea terminalis\", while the vaginal part of the cervix does not extend below the interspinal line. The uterus is mobile and moves posteriorly under the pressure of a full bladder, or anteriorly under the pressure of a full rectum. If both are full, it moves upwards. Increased intra-abdominal pressure pushes it downwards. The mobility is conferred to it by a musculo-fibrous apparatus that consists of suspensory and sustentacular parts. Under normal circumstances, the suspensory part keeps the uterus in anteflexion and anteversion (in 90% of women) and keeps it \"floating\" in the pelvis. The meanings of these terms are described below:\nThe sustentacular part supports the pelvic organs and comprises the larger pelvic diaphragm in the back and the smaller urogenital diaphragm in the front.\nThe pathological changes of the position of the uterus are:\nIn cases where the uterus is \"tipped\", also known as retroverted uterus, the woman may have symptoms of pain during sexual intercourse, pelvic pain during menstruation, minor incontinence, urinary tract infections, fertility difficulties, and difficulty using tampons. A pelvic examination by a doctor can determine if a uterus is tipped.\nBlood, lymph, and nerve supply.\nThe human uterus is supplied by arterial blood both from the uterine artery and the ovarian artery. Another anastomotic branch may also supply the uterus from anastomosis of these two arteries.\nAfferent nerves supplying the uterus are T11 and T12. Sympathetic supply is from the hypogastric plexus and the ovarian plexus. Parasympathetic supply is from the S2, S3 and S4 nerves.\nDevelopment.\nBilateral M\u00fcllerian ducts form during early human fetal life. In males, anti-M\u00fcllerian hormone (AMH) secreted from the testes leads to the ducts' regression. In females, these ducts give rise to the fallopian tubes and the uterus. In humans, the lower segments of the two ducts fuse to form a single uterus; in cases of uterine malformations this fusion may be disturbed. The different uterine morphologies among the mammals are due to varying degrees of fusion of the M\u00fcllerian ducts.\nVarious congenital conditions of the uterus can develop \"in utero\". Though uncommon, some of these are didelphic uterus, bicornate uterus and others.\nSee also List of related male and female reproductive organs.\nFunction.\nThe primary reproductive function of the human uterus is to prepare for the implantation of a zygote, a fertilized ovum, and maintenance of pregnancy if implantation occurs. Traveling along the fallopian tube on its way to the uterine cavity, the zygote divides mitotically to become a blastocyst, which ultimately attaches to the uterine wall and implants into the endometrium. The placenta later develops to nourish the embryo, which grows through embryonic and fetal development until childbirth. During this process, the uterus grows to accommodate the growing fetus. When normal labor begins, the uterus forcefully contracts as the cervix dilates, which results in delivery of the infant.\nIn the absence of pregnancy, menstruation occurs. The withdrawal of female sex hormones, estrogen and progesterone, which occurs in the absence of fertilization, triggers the shedding of the functional layer of the endometrium. This layer is broken down, shed, and restored in anticipation of the next menstrual cycle. The average bleeding duration during menses is 5-7 days after which the menstrual cycle begins again.\nClinical significance.\nDuring pregnancy, the growth rate of the fetus can be assessed by measuring the fundal height.\nSome pathological states include:\nMalformations.\nUterine malformations are mainly congenital malformations, and include \"uterus didelphys\", bicornuate uterus and septate uterus. Congenital absence of the uterus is known as M\u00fcllerian agenesis.\nSurgery.\nA hysterectomy is the surgical removal of the uterus, which may be carried out for a number of reasons including the ridding of tumours both benign and malignant. A complete hysterectomy involves the removal of the body, fundus, and cervix of the uterus. A partial hysterectomy may just involve the removal of the uterine body while leaving the cervix intact. It is the most commonly performed gynecological surgical procedure.\nTransplants.\nUterus transplantations have been successfully carried out in a number of countries. The transplant is intended to be temporary \u2013 recipients will have to undergo a hysterectomy after one or two successful pregnancies. This is done to avoid the need to take immunosuppressive drugs for life with a consequent increased risk of infection.\nThe procedure remains the last resort: it is as of 2023, a relatively new and somewhat experimental procedure, performed only by certain specialist surgeons in select centres, it is expensive and unlikely to be covered by insurance, and it involves risk of infection and organ rejection. Some ethics specialists consider the risks to a live donor too great, and some find the entire procedure ethically questionable, especially since the transplant is not a life-saving procedure.\nOther animals.\nMost animals that lay eggs, such as birds and reptiles, including most ovoviviparous species, have an oviduct instead of a uterus. However, recent research into the biology of the viviparous (not merely ovoviviparous) skink \"Trachylepis ivensi\" has revealed development of a very close analogue to eutherian mammalian placental development.\nIn monotremes, mammals which lay eggs, namely the platypus and the echidnas, either the term \"uterus\" or \"oviduct\" is used to describe the same organ, but the egg does not develop a placenta within the mother and thus does not receive further nourishment after formation and fertilization.\nMarsupials have two uteri, each of which connect to a lateral vagina and both use a third, middle \"vagina\", which functions as the birth canal. Marsupial embryos form a choriovitelline placenta (which can be thought of as something between a monotreme egg and a \"true\" placenta), in which the egg's yolk sac supplies a large part of the embryo's nutrition but also attaches to the uterine wall and takes nutrients from the mother's bloodstream. However, bandicoots also have a rudimentary chorioallantoic placenta, similar to those of placentals.\nThe fetus usually develops fully in placentals and only partially in marsupials including kangaroos and opossums. In marsupials, the uterus forms as a duplex organ of two uteri. In monotremes such as the platypus, the uterus is duplex and rather than nurturing the embryo, secretes the shell around the egg. It is essentially identical with the shell gland of birds and reptiles, with which the uterus is homologous.\nIn mammals, the four main forms of the uterus are: duplex, bipartite, bicornuate and simplex.\nTwo uteri usually form initially in a female and usually male fetus, and in placental mammals, they may partially or completely fuse into a single uterus depending on the species. In many species with two uteri, only one is functional. Humans and other higher primates such as chimpanzees, usually have a single completely fused uterus, although in some individuals, the uteri may not have completely fused.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31865", "revid": "47722236", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31865", "title": "Unicon", "text": "Unicon may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31866", "revid": "50536615", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31866", "title": "UN", "text": ""}
{"id": "31867", "revid": "138667", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31867", "title": "Under Suspicion", "text": "Under Suspicion may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31868", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31868", "title": "Unamerican activities", "text": ""}
{"id": "31871", "revid": "44630394", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31871", "title": "Ubiquitous computing", "text": "Concept in software engineering and computer science\n Ubiquitous computing (or \"ubicomp\") is a concept in software engineering, hardware engineering and computer science where computing is made to appear seamlessly anytime and everywhere. In contrast to desktop computing, ubiquitous computing implies use on any device, in any location, and in any format. A user interacts with the computer, which can exist in many different forms, including laptop computers, tablets, smart phones and terminals in everyday objects such as a refrigerator or a pair of glasses. The underlying technologies to support ubiquitous computing include the Internet, advanced middleware, kernels, operating systems, mobile codes, sensors, microprocessors, new I/Os and user interfaces, computer networks, mobile protocols, global navigational systems, and new materials.\nThis paradigm is also described as pervasive computing, ambient intelligence, or \"everyware\". Each term emphasizes slightly different aspects. When primarily concerning the objects involved, it is also known as physical computing, the Internet of Things, haptic computing, and \"things that think\".\nRather than propose a single definition for ubiquitous computing and for these related terms, a taxonomy of properties for ubiquitous computing has been proposed, from which different kinds or flavors of ubiquitous systems and applications can be described.\nUbiquitous computing themes include: distributed computing, mobile computing, location computing, mobile networking, sensor networks, human\u2013computer interaction, context-aware smart home technologies, and artificial intelligence.\nCore concepts.\nUbiquitous computing is the concept of using small internet connected and inexpensive computers to help with everyday functions in an automated fashion.\nMark Weiser proposed three basic forms for ubiquitous computing devices:\nUbiquitous computing devices proposed by Mark Weiser are all based around flat devices of different sizes with a visual display. Expanding beyond those concepts there is a large array of other ubiquitous computing devices that could exist.\nHistory.\nMark Weiser coined the phrase \"ubiquitous computing\" around 1988, during his tenure as Chief Technologist of the Xerox Palo Alto Research Center (PARC). Both alone and with PARC Director and Chief Scientist John Seely Brown, Weiser wrote some of the earliest papers on the subject, largely defining it and sketching out its major concerns.\nRecognizing the effects of extending processing power.\nRecognizing that the extension of processing power into everyday scenarios would necessitate understandings of social, cultural and psychological phenomena beyond its proper ambit, Weiser was influenced by many fields outside computer science, including \"philosophy, phenomenology, anthropology, psychology, post-Modernism, sociology of science and feminist criticism\". He was explicit about \"the humanistic origins of the 'invisible ideal in post-modernist thought'\", referencing as well the ironically dystopian Philip K. Dick novel \"Ubik\".\nAndy Hopper from Cambridge University UK proposed and demonstrated the concept of \"Teleporting\" \u2013 where applications follow the user wherever he/she moves.\nRoy Want (now at Google), while at Olivetti Research Ltd, designed the first \"Active Badge System\", which is an advanced location computing system where personal mobility is merged with computing. Later at Xerox PARC, he designed and built the \"PARCTab\" or simply \"Tab\", widely recognized as the world's first Context-Aware computer, which has great similarity to the modern smartphone.\nBill Schilit (now at Google) also did some earlier work in this topic, and participated in the early Mobile Computing workshop held in Santa Cruz in 1996.\nKen Sakamura of the University of Tokyo, Japan leads the Ubiquitous Networking Laboratory (UNL), Tokyo as well as the T-Engine Forum. The joint goal of Sakamura's Ubiquitous Networking specification and the T-Engine forum, is to enable any everyday device to broadcast and receive information.\nMIT has also contributed significant research in this field, notably \"Things That Think\" consortium (directed by Hiroshi Ishii, Joseph A. Paradiso and Rosalind Picard) at the Media Lab and the CSAIL effort known as Project Oxygen. Other major contributors include University of Washington (Shwetak Patel, Anind Dey and James Landay), Dartmouth College's HealthX Lab (directed by Andrew Campbell), Georgia Tech's College of Computing (Gregory Abowd and Thad Starner), Cornell Tech's People Aware Computing Lab (directed by Tanzeem Choudhury), NYU's Interactive Telecommunications Program, UC Irvine's Department of Informatics, Microsoft Research, Intel Research and Equator, Ajou University UCRi &amp; CUS.\nExamples.\nOne of the earliest ubiquitous systems was artist Natalie Jeremijenko's \"Live Wire\", also known as \"Dangling String\", installed at Xerox PARC during Mark Weiser's time there. This was a piece of string attached to a stepper motor and controlled by a LAN connection; network activity caused the string to twitch, yielding a \"peripherally noticeable\" indication of traffic. Weiser called this an example of \"calm technology\".\nA present manifestation of this trend is the widespread diffusion of mobile phones. Many mobile phones support high speed data transmission, video services, and other services with powerful computational ability. Although these mobile devices are not necessarily manifestations of ubiquitous computing, there are examples, such as Japan's Yaoyorozu (\"Eight Million Gods\") Project in which mobile devices, coupled with radio frequency identification tags demonstrate that ubiquitous computing is already present in some form.\nAmbient Devices has produced an \"orb\", a \"dashboard\", and a \"weather beacon\": these decorative devices receive data from a wireless network and report current events, such as stock prices and the weather, like the Nabaztag, which was invented by Rafi Haladjian and Olivier M\u00e9vel, and manufactured by the company Violet.\nThe Australian futurist Mark Pesce has produced a highly configurable 52-LED LAMP enabled lamp which uses Wi-Fi named \"MooresCloud\" after Gordon Moore.\nThe Unified Computer Intelligence Corporation launched a device called \"Ubi \u2013 The Ubiquitous Computer\" designed to allow voice interaction with the home and provide constant access to information.\nUbiquitous computing research has focused on building an environment in which computers allow humans to focus attention on select aspects of the environment and operate in supervisory and policy-making roles. Ubiquitous computing emphasizes the creation of a human computer interface that can interpret and support a user's intentions. For example, MIT's Project Oxygen seeks to create a system in which computation is as pervasive as air:\nIn the future, computation will be human centered. It will be freely available everywhere, like batteries and power sockets, or oxygen in the air we breathe...We will not need to carry our own devices around with us. Instead, configurable generic devices, either handheld or embedded in the environment, will bring computation to us, whenever we need it and wherever we might be. As we interact with these \"anonymous\" devices, they will adopt our information personalities. They will respect our desires for privacy and security. We won't have to type, click, or learn new computer jargon. Instead, we'll communicate naturally, using speech and gestures that describe our intent...\nThis is a fundamental transition that does not seek to escape the physical world and \"enter some metallic, gigabyte-infested cyberspace\" but rather brings computers and communications to us, making them \"synonymous with the useful tasks they perform\".\nNetwork robots link ubiquitous networks with robots, contributing to the creation of new lifestyles and solutions to address a variety of social problems including the aging of population and nursing care.\nThe \"Continuity\" set of features, introduced by Apple in OS X Yosemite, can be seen as an example of ubiquitous computing.\nIssues.\nPrivacy is easily the most often-cited criticism of ubiquitous computing (ubicomp), and may be the greatest barrier to its long-term success.\nResearch centres.\nThis is a list of notable institutions who claim to have a focus on Ubiquitous computing sorted by country:\nTopological Media Lab, Concordia University, Canada\nCommunity Imaging Group, University of Oulu, Finland\nTelecooperation Office (TECO), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany\nUbiquitous Computing Research Resource Centre (UCRC), Centre for Development of Advanced Computing\nCentre for Research in Ubiquitous Computing (CRUC), Karachi, Pakistan\nMobile Life Centre, Stockholm University\nMixed Reality Lab, University of Nottingham\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31873", "revid": "40753954", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31873", "title": "USA", "text": ""}
{"id": "31874", "revid": "38455", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31874", "title": "United States Declaration of Independence", "text": "1776 American national founding document\nThe Declaration of Independence, formally The unanimous Declaration of the thirteen united States of America in the original printing, is the founding document of the United States. On July 4, 1776, it was adopted unanimously by the Second Continental Congress, who were convened at Pennsylvania State House, later renamed Independence Hall, in the colonial city of Philadelphia. These delegates became known as the nation's Founding Fathers. The Declaration explains why the Thirteen Colonies regarded themselves as independent sovereign states no longer subject to British colonial rule, and has become one of the most circulated, reprinted, and influential documents in history.\nThe American Revolutionary War commenced in April 1775 with the Battles of Lexington and Concord. Amid the growing tensions, the colonies reconvened the Congress on May 10. Their king, George III, proclaimed them to be in rebellion on August 23. On June 11, 1776, Congress appointed the Committee of Five (John Adams, Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson, Robert R. Livingston, and Roger Sherman) to draft and present the Declaration. Adams, a leading proponent of independence, persuaded the committee to charge Jefferson with writing the document's original draft, which the Congress then edited. Jefferson largely wrote the Declaration between June 11 and June 28, 1776. The Declaration was a formal explanation of why the Continental Congress voted to declare American independence from the Kingdom of Great Britain. Two days prior to the Declaration's adoption, Congress passed the Lee Resolution, which resolved that the British no longer had governing authority over the Thirteen Colonies. The Declaration justified the independence of the colonies, citing 27 colonial grievances against the king and asserting certain natural and legal rights, including a right of revolution.\nThe Declaration was unanimously ratified on July 4 by the Second Continental Congress, whose delegates represented each of the Thirteen Colonies. In ratifying and signing it, the delegates knew they were committing an act of high treason against The Crown, which was punishable by torture and death. Congress then issued the Declaration of Independence in several forms. Two days following its ratification, on July 6, it was published by \"The Pennsylvania Evening Post\". The first public readings of the Declaration occurred simultaneously on July 8, 1776, at noon, at three previously designated locations: in Trenton, New Jersey; Easton, Pennsylvania; and Philadelphia.\nThe Declaration was published in several forms. The printed Dunlap broadside was widely distributed following its signing. It is now preserved at the Library of Congress in Washington, D.C. The signed copy of the Declaration is now on display at the National Archives in Washington, D.C., and is generally considered the official document; this copy, engrossed by Timothy Matlack, was ordered by Congress on July 19, and signed primarily on August 2, 1776.\nThe Declaration has proven an influential and globally impactful statement on human rights. The Declaration was viewed by Abraham Lincoln as the moral standard to which the United States should strive, and he considered it a statement of principles through which the Constitution should be interpreted.126 In 1863, Lincoln made the Declaration the centerpiece of his Gettysburg Address, widely considered among the most famous speeches in American history. The Declaration's second sentence, \"We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness\", is considered one of the most significant and famed lines in world history. Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Joseph Ellis has written that the Declaration contains \"the most potent and consequential words in American history\".\nBackground.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Believe me, dear Sir: there is not in the British empire a man who more cordially loves a union with Great Britain than I do. But, by the God that made me, I will cease to exist before I yield to a connection on such terms as the British Parliament propose; and in this, I think I speak the sentiments of America.\u2014\u200a\nBy the time the Declaration of Independence was adopted in July 1776, the Thirteen Colonies and Kingdom of Great Britain had been at war for over a year. Relations had been deteriorating between the colonies and the mother country since 1763. In 1767, Parliament enacted a series of measures designed to increase revenue from the colonies, including the Stamp Act of 1765 and the Townshend Acts, which it believed were a legitimate means of having the colonies pay their fair share of the costs of remaining a part of the British Empire.\nIn the Thirteen Colonies, however, perspectives varied on the British Empire. The colonies were not directly represented in Parliament, and colonists argued that Parliament had no right to levy taxes upon them. This tax dispute was part of a larger divergence between British and American interpretations of the British Constitution and the extent of Parliament's authority in the colonies.162 The orthodox British view, dating from the Glorious Revolution of 1688, was that Parliament was the supreme authority throughout the empire, and anything that Parliament did was constitutional. In the colonies, however, the idea had developed that the British Constitution recognized certain fundamental rights that no government could violate, including Parliament. After the Townshend Acts, some essayists questioned whether Parliament had any legitimate jurisdiction in the colonies. As a result of this ideological shift in the colonies, many colonialists participated in tax protests against the Royal authority such as the Pine Tree Riot in 1772 and the Boston Tea Party in 1773.\nAnticipating the arrangement of the British Commonwealth, by 1774 American writers such as Samuel Adams, James Wilson, and Thomas Jefferson argued that Parliament was the legislature of Great Britain only, and that the colonies, which had their own legislatures, were connected to the rest of the empire only through their allegiance to the Crown.\nContinental Congress convenes.\nIn 1774, Parliament passed the Coercive Acts, known as the Intolerable Acts in the colonies. This was intended to punish the colonists for the Gaspee Affair of 1772 and the Boston Tea Party of 1773. Many colonists considered the Coercive Acts to be in violation of the British Constitution and a threat to the liberties of all of British America. In September 1774, the First Continental Congress convened in Philadelphia to coordinate a formal response. Congress organized a boycott of British goods and petitioned the king for repeal of the acts. These measures were unsuccessful, however, since King George and His Majesties' prime minister, Lord North, were determined to enforce parliamentary supremacy over the Thirteen Colonies. In November 1774, King George, in a letter to North, wrote, \"blows must decide whether they are to be subject to this country or independent\".\nMost colonists still hoped for reconciliation with Great Britain, even after fighting began in the American Revolutionary War at Lexington and Concord in April 1775. The Second Continental Congress convened at Pennsylvania State House, later renamed Independence Hall, in Philadelphia in May 1775. Some delegates supported eventual independence for the colonies, but none had yet declared it publicly, which was an act of treason punishable by death under the laws of the British monarchy at the time.\nMany colonists believed that Parliament no longer had sovereignty over them, but they were still loyal to King George, thinking he would intercede on their behalf. They were disabused of that notion in late 1775, when the king rejected Congress's second petition, issued a Proclamation of Rebellion, and announced before Parliament on October 26 that he was considering \"friendly offers of foreign assistance\" to suppress the rebellion.25 A pro-American minority in Parliament warned that the government was driving the colonists toward independence.25\nGrowing support for independence.\nDespite this growing popular support for independence, the Second Continental Congress initially lacked the clear authority to declare it. Delegates had been elected to Congress by 13 different governments, which included extralegal conventions, ad hoc committees, and elected assemblies, and they were bound by the instructions given to them. Regardless of their personal opinions, delegates could not vote to declare independence unless their instructions permitted such an action. Several colonies, in fact, expressly prohibited their delegates from taking any steps toward separation from Great Britain, while other delegations had instructions that were ambiguous on the issue;30 consequently, advocates of independence sought to have the Congressional instructions revised. For Congress to declare independence, a majority of delegations would need authorization to vote for it, and at least one colonial government would need to specifically instruct its delegation to propose a declaration of independence in Congress.\nBetween April and July 1776, a \"complex political war\"59 was waged to bring this about.671\nIn January 1776, Thomas Paine's pamphlet \"Common Sense\", which described the uphill battle against the British for independence as a challenging but achievable and necessary objective, was published in Philadelphia. \"Common Sense\" made a persuasive, impassioned case for independence, which had not been given serious consideration in the colonies. Paine linked independence with Protestant beliefs, as a means to present a distinctly American political identity, and he initiated open debate on a topic few had dared to discuss.33\nAs \"Common Sense\" was circulated throughout the Thirteen Colonies, public support for independence from Great Britain steadily increased. After reading it, Washington ordered that it be read by his Continental Army troops, who were demoralized following recent military defeats. A week later, Washington led the crossing of the Delaware in one of the Revolutionary War's most complex and daring military campaigns, resulting in a much-needed military victory in the Battle of Trenton against a Hessian military garrison at Trenton. \"Common Sense\" was sold and distributed widely and read aloud at taverns and meeting places. In proportion to the population of the colonies at that time (2.5 million), it had the largest sale and circulation of any book published in American history. As of 2006, it remains the all-time best-selling American title and is still in print today.\nIn December 1776, Paine followed up with \"The American Crisis,\" in which he wrote the famed phrase:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These are the times that try men's souls; the summer soldier and the sunshine patriot will, in this crisis, shrink from the service of his country; but he that stands it \"now\", deserves the love and thanks of man and woman. Tyranny, like hell, is not easily conquered; yet we have this consolation with us, that the harder the conflict, the more glorious the triumph.\u2014\u200a\nWhile some colonists still hoped for reconciliation, public support for independence strengthened considerably in early 1776. In February 1776, colonists learned of Parliament's passage of the Prohibitory Act, which established a blockade of American ports and declared American ships to be enemy vessels. John Adams, a strong supporter of independence, believed that Parliament had effectively declared American independence before Congress had been able to. Adams labeled the Prohibitory Act the \"Act of Independency\", calling it \"a compleat Dismemberment of the British Empire\". Support for declaring independence grew even more when it was confirmed that King George had hired German mercenaries to use against his American subjects.\nRevising instructions.\nIn the campaign to revise Congressional instructions, many Americans formally expressed their support for separation from Great Britain in what were effectively state and local declarations of independence. Historian Pauline Maier identifies more than ninety such declarations that were issued throughout the Thirteen Colonies from April to July 1776. These \"declarations\" took a variety of forms. Some were formal written instructions for Congressional delegations, such as the Halifax Resolves of April 12, with which North Carolina became the first colony to explicitly authorize its delegates to vote for independence. Others were legislative acts that officially ended British rule in individual colonies, such as the Rhode Island legislature renouncing its allegiance to Great Britain on May 4\u2014the first colony to do so.679 Many declarations were resolutions adopted at town or county meetings that offered support for independence. A few came in the form of jury instructions, such as the statement issued on April 23, 1776, by Chief Justice William Henry Drayton of South Carolina: \"the law of the land authorizes me to declare ... that \"George\" the Third, King of \"Great Britain\" ... has no authority over us, and we owe no obedience to him.\" Most of these declarations are now obscure, having been overshadowed by the resolution for independence, approved by Congress on July 2, and the declaration of independence, approved and printed on July 4 and signed in August.48 The modern scholarly consensus is that the best-known and earliest of the local declarations is most likely inauthentic, the Mecklenburg Declaration of Independence, allegedly adopted in May 1775 (a full year before other local declarations).174\nSome colonies held back from endorsing independence. Resistance was centered in the middle colonies of New York, New Jersey, Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Delaware. Advocates of independence saw Pennsylvania as the key; if that colony could be converted to the pro-independence cause, it was believed that the others would follow.682 On May 1, however, opponents of independence retained control of the Pennsylvania Assembly in a special election that had focused on the question of independence.683 In response, Congress passed a resolution on May 10 which had been promoted by John Adams and Richard Henry Lee, calling on colonies without a \"government sufficient to the exigencies of their affairs\" to adopt new governments.68437 The resolution passed unanimously, and was even supported by Pennsylvania's John Dickinson, the leader of the anti-independence faction in Congress, who believed that it did not apply to his colony.684\nMay 15 preamble.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis Day the Congress has passed the most important Resolution, that ever was taken in America.\n\u2014John Adams, May 15, 1776\nAs was the custom, Congress appointed a committee to draft a preamble to explain the purpose of the resolution. John Adams wrote the preamble, which stated that because King George had rejected reconciliation and was hiring foreign mercenaries to use against the colonies, \"it is necessary that the exercise of every kind of authority under the said crown should be totally suppressed\".37684 Adams' preamble was meant to encourage the overthrow of the governments of Pennsylvania and Maryland, which were still under proprietary governance.684 Congress passed the preamble on May 15 after several days of debate, but four of the middle colonies voted against it, and the Maryland delegation walked out in protest.685 Adams regarded his May 15 preamble effectively as an American declaration of independence, although a formal declaration would still have to be made.38\nLee Resolution.\nOn the same day that Congress passed Adams' preamble, the Virginia Convention set the stage for a formal Congressional declaration of independence. On May 15, the Convention instructed Virginia's congressional delegation \"to propose to that respectable body to declare the United Colonies free and independent States, absolved from all allegiance to, or dependence upon, the Crown or Parliament of Great Britain\".63 In accordance with those instructions, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia presented a three-part resolution to Congress on June 7. The motion was seconded by John Adams, calling on Congress to declare independence, form foreign alliances, and prepare a plan of colonial confederation. The part of the resolution relating to declaring independence read: \"Resolved, that these United Colonies are, and of right ought to be, free and independent States, that they are absolved from all allegiance to the British Crown, and that all political connection between them and the State of Great Britain is, and ought to be, totally dissolved.\"41\nLee's resolution met with resistance in the ensuing debate. Opponents of the resolution conceded that reconciliation was unlikely with Great Britain, while arguing that declaring independence was premature, and that securing foreign aid should take priority.42 Advocates of the resolution countered that foreign governments would not intervene in an internal British struggle, and so a formal declaration of independence was needed before foreign aid was possible. All Congress needed to do, they insisted, was to \"declare a fact which already exists\".689 Delegates from Pennsylvania, Delaware, New Jersey, Maryland, and New York were still not yet authorized to vote for independence, however, and some of them threatened to leave Congress if the resolution were adopted. Congress, therefore, voted on June 10 to postpone further discussion of Lee's resolution for three weeks. Until then, Congress decided that a committee should prepare a document announcing and explaining independence in case Lee's resolution was approved when it was brought up again in July.\nFinal push.\nSupport for a Congressional declaration of independence was consolidated in the final weeks of June 1776. On June 14, the Connecticut Assembly instructed its delegates to propose independence and, the following day, the legislatures of New Hampshire and Delaware authorized their delegates to declare independence. In Pennsylvania, political struggles ended with the dissolution of the colonial assembly, and a new Conference of Committees under Thomas McKean authorized Pennsylvania's delegates to declare independence on June 18.691 The Provincial Congress of New Jersey had been governing the province since January 1776; they resolved on June 15 that Royal Governor William Franklin was \"an enemy to the liberties of this country\" and had him arrested.692 On June 21, they chose new delegates to Congress and empowered them to join in a declaration of independence.693\nAs of the end of June, only two of the thirteen colonies had yet to authorize independence, Maryland and New York. Maryland's delegates previously walked out when the Continental Congress adopted Adams' May 15 preamble, and had sent to the Annapolis Convention for instructions.694 On May 20, the Annapolis Convention rejected Adams' preamble, instructing its delegates to remain against independence. But Samuel Chase went to Maryland and, thanks to local resolutions in favor of independence, was able to get the Annapolis Convention to change its mind on June 28.68 Only the New York delegates were unable to get revised instructions. When Congress had been considering the resolution of independence on June 8, the New York Provincial Congress told the delegates to wait.698 But on June 30, the Provincial Congress evacuated New York as British forces approached, and would not convene again until July 10. This meant that New York's delegates would not be authorized to declare independence until after Congress had made its decision.\nDraft and adoption.\nPolitical maneuvering was setting the stage for an official declaration of independence even while a document was being written to explain the decision. On June 11, 1776, Congress appointed the Committee of Five to draft a declaration, including John Adams of Massachusetts, Benjamin Franklin of Pennsylvania, Thomas Jefferson of Virginia, Robert R. Livingston of New York, and Roger Sherman of Connecticut.\nThe committee took no minutes, so there is some uncertainty about how the drafting process proceeded; contradictory accounts were written many years later by Jefferson and Adams, too many years to be regarded as entirely reliable, although their accounts are frequently cited. What is certain is that the committee discussed the general outline which the document should follow and decided that Jefferson would write the first draft. The committee in general, and Jefferson in particular, thought that Adams should write the document, but Adams persuaded them to choose Jefferson and promised to consult with him personally.\nJefferson largely wrote the Declaration of Independence in isolation between June 11, 1776, and June 28, 1776, from the second floor of a three-story home he was renting at 700 Market Street in Philadelphia, now called the Declaration House and within walking distance of Independence Hall. Considering Congress's busy schedule, Jefferson probably had limited time for writing over these 17 days, and he likely wrote his first draft quickly.104\nExamination of the text of the early Declaration drafts reflects the influence that John Locke and Thomas Paine, author of \"Common Sense\" had on Jefferson. He then consulted the other members of the Committee of Five who offered minor changes, and then produced another copy incorporating these alterations. The committee presented this copy to the Congress on June 28, 1776. The title of the document was \"A Declaration by the Representatives of the United States of America, in General Congress assembled.\"4\nCongress ordered that the draft \"lie on the table\"701 and then methodically edited Jefferson's primary document for the next two days, shortening it by a fourth, removing unnecessary wording, and improving sentence structure. They removed Jefferson's assertion that King George III had forced slavery onto the colonies, in order to moderate the document and appease those in South Carolina and Georgia, both states which had significant involvement in the slave trade.\nJefferson later wrote in his autobiography that Northern states were also supportive towards the clauses removal, \"for though their people had very few slaves themselves, yet they had been pretty considerable carriers of them to others.\" Jefferson wrote that Congress had \"mangled\" his draft version, but the Declaration that was finally produced was \"the majestic document that inspired both contemporaries and posterity\", in the words of his biographer John Ferling.\nCongress tabled the draft of the declaration on Monday, July 1 and resolved itself into a committee of the whole, with Benjamin Harrison of Virginia presiding, and they resumed debate on Lee's resolution of independence. John Dickinson made one last effort to delay the decision, arguing that Congress should not declare independence without first securing a foreign alliance and finalizing the Articles of Confederation.699 John Adams gave a speech in reply to Dickinson, restating the case for an immediate declaration.\nA vote was taken after a long day of speeches, each colony casting a single vote, as always. The delegation for each colony numbered from two to seven members, and each delegation voted among themselves to determine the colony's vote. Pennsylvania and South Carolina voted against declaring independence. The New York delegation abstained, lacking permission to vote for independence. Delaware cast no vote because the delegation was split between Thomas McKean, who voted yes, and George Read, who voted no. The remaining nine delegations voted in favor of independence, which meant that the resolution had been approved by the committee of the whole. The next step was for the resolution to be voted upon by Congress itself. Edward Rutledge of South Carolina was opposed to Lee's resolution but desirous of unanimity, and he moved that the vote be postponed until the following day.700\nOn July 2, South Carolina reversed its position and voted for independence. In the Pennsylvania delegation, Dickinson and Robert Morris abstained, allowing the delegation to vote three-to-two in favor of independence. The tie in the Delaware delegation was broken by the timely arrival of Caesar Rodney, who voted for independence. The New York delegation abstained once again since they were still not authorized to vote for independence, although they were allowed to do so a week later by the New York Provincial Congress.45 The resolution of independence was adopted with twelve affirmative votes and one abstention, and the colonies formally severed political ties with Great Britain. John Adams wrote to his wife on the following day and predicted that July 2 would become a great American holiday. He thought that the vote for independence would be commemorated; he did not foresee that Americans would instead celebrate Independence Day on the date when the announcement of that act was finalized.\nI am apt to believe that [Independence Day] will be celebrated, by succeeding Generations, as the great anniversary Festival. It ought to be commemorated, as the Day of Deliverance by solemn Acts of Devotion to God Almighty. It ought to be solemnized with Pomp and Parade, with shews, Games, Sports, Guns, Bells, Bonfires and Illuminations from one End of this Continent to the other from this Time forward forever more.\nCongress next turned its attention to the committee's draft of the declaration. They made significant changes in wording during several days of debate including the removal of nearly a fourth of the text. The final wording of the Declaration of Independence was approved on July 4, 1776, and sent to the printer for publication.\nThere is a distinct change in wording from this original broadside printing of the Declaration and the final official engrossed copy. The word \"unanimous\" was inserted as a result of a Congressional resolution passed on July 19, 1776: \"Resolved, That the Declaration passed on the 4th, be fairly engrossed on parchment, with the title and stile of 'The unanimous declaration of the thirteen United States of America,' and that the same, when engrossed, be signed by every member of Congress.\" Historian George Athan Billias says: \"Independence amounted to a new status of interdependence: the United States was now a sovereign nation entitled to the privileges and responsibilities that came with that status. America thus became a member of the international community, which meant becoming a maker of treaties and alliances, a military ally in diplomacy, and a partner in foreign trade on a more equal basis.\"\nAnnotated text of the engrossed declaration.\nThe declaration is not divided into formal sections; but it is often discussed as consisting of five parts: \"introduction\", \"preamble\", \"indictment\" of King George III, \"denunciation\" of the British people, and \"conclusion\".\nThe version of the signed document that people saw at the time was also signed by Mary Katherine Goddard. She was the postmaster of Baltimore and was tasked by the Continental Congress with printing the signed Declaration. Her normal signature, in her capacity as the owner of the Maryland Journal, was \"M.K. Goddard,\" but she signed the Declaration of Independence with her full name.\nInfluences and legal status.\nHistorians have often sought to identify the sources that most influenced the words and political philosophy of the Declaration of Independence. By Jefferson's own admission, the Declaration contained no original ideas, but was instead a statement of sentiments widely shared by supporters of the American Revolution. As he explained in 1825:\nNeither aiming at originality of principle or sentiment, nor yet copied from any particular and previous writing, it was intended to be an expression of the American mind, and to give to that expression the proper tone and spirit called for by the occasion.\nJefferson's most immediate sources were two documents written in June 1776: his own draft of the preamble of the Constitution of Virginia, and George Mason's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights. Ideas and phrases from both of these documents appear in the Declaration of Independence. Mason's opening was:\nSection 1. That all men are by nature equally free and independent, and have certain inherent rights, of which, when they enter into a state of society, they cannot, by any compact, deprive or divest their posterity; namely, the enjoyment of life and liberty, with the means of acquiring and possessing property, and pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.\nMason was, in turn, directly influenced by the 1689 English Declaration of Rights, which formally ended the reign of King James\u00a0II. During the American Revolution, Jefferson and other Americans looked to the English Declaration of Rights as a model of how to end the reign of an unjust king. The Scottish Declaration of Arbroath (1320) and the Dutch Act of Abjuration (1581) have also been offered as models for Jefferson's Declaration, but these models are now accepted by few scholars. Maier found no evidence that the Dutch Act of Abjuration served as a model for the Declaration, and considers the argument \"unpersuasive\".264 Armitage discounts the influence of the Scottish and Dutch acts, and writes that neither was called \"declarations of independence\" until fairly recently. Stephen E. Lucas argued in favor of the influence of the Dutch act.\nJefferson wrote that a number of authors exerted a general influence on the words of the Declaration. English political theorist John Locke is usually cited as one of the primary influences, a man whom Jefferson called one of \"the three greatest men that have ever lived\".\nIn 1922, historian Carl L. Becker wrote, \"Most Americans had absorbed Locke's works as a kind of political gospel; and the Declaration, in its form, in its phraseology, follows closely certain sentences in Locke's second treatise on government.\"27 The extent of Locke's influence on the American Revolution has been questioned by some subsequent scholars, however. Historian Ray Forrest Harvey argued in 1937 for the dominant influence of Swiss jurist Jean Jacques Burlamaqui, declaring that Jefferson and Locke were at \"two opposite poles\" in their political philosophy, as evidenced by Jefferson's use in the Declaration of Independence of the phrase \"pursuit of happiness\" instead of \"property\". Other scholars emphasized the influence of republicanism rather than Locke's classical liberalism.\nHistorian Garry Wills argued that Jefferson was influenced by the Scottish Enlightenment, particularly Francis Hutcheson, rather than Locke, an interpretation that has been strongly criticized.\nLegal historian John Phillip Reid has written that the emphasis on the political philosophy of the Declaration has been misplaced. The Declaration is not a philosophical tract about natural rights, argues Reid, but is instead a legal document\u2014an indictment against King George for violating the constitutional rights of the colonists. As such, it follows the process of the 1550 \"Magdeburg Confession\", which legitimized resistance against Holy Roman Emperor Charles V in a multi-step legal formula now known as the doctrine of the lesser magistrate.\nHistorian David Armitage has argued that the Declaration was strongly influenced by de Vattel's \"The Law of Nations\", the dominant international law treatise of the period, and a book that Benjamin Franklin said was \"continually in the hands of the members of our Congress\". Armitage writes, \"Vattel made independence fundamental to his definition of statehood\"; therefore, the primary purpose of the Declaration was \"to express the international legal sovereignty of the United States\". If the United States were to have any hope of being recognized by the European powers, the American revolutionaries first had to make it clear that they were no longer dependent on Great Britain. The Declaration of Independence does not have the force of law domestically, but nevertheless it may help to provide historical and legal clarity about the Constitution and other laws.\nSigning.\nThe Declaration became official when Congress recorded its vote adopting the document on July 4; it was transposed on paper and signed by John Hancock, President of the Congress, on that day. Signatures of the other delegates were not needed to further authenticate it. The signatures of fifty-six delegates are affixed to the Declaration, though the exact date when each person signed became debatable. Jefferson, Franklin, and Adams all wrote that the Declaration was signed by Congress on July 4. But in 1796, signer Thomas McKean disputed that, because some signers were not then present, including several who were not even elected to Congress until after that date. Historians have generally accepted McKean's version of events. History particularly shows most delegates signed on August 2, 1776, and those who were not then present added their names later.\nIn an 1811 letter to Adams, Benjamin Rush recounted the signing on August 2 in stark fashion, describing it as a scene of \"pensive and awful silence\". Rush said the delegates were called up, one after another, and then filed forward somberly to subscribe what each thought was their ensuing death warrant. He related that the \"gloom of the morning\" was briefly interrupted when the rotund Benjamin Harrison of Virginia said to a diminutive Elbridge Gerry of Massachusetts, at the signing table, \"I shall have a great advantage over you, Mr. Gerry, when we are all hung for what we are now doing. From the size and weight of my body I shall die in a few minutes and be with the Angels, but from the lightness of your body you will dance in the air an hour or two before you are dead.\" According to Rush, Harrison's remark \"procured a transient smile, but it was soon succeeded by the Solemnity with which the whole business was conducted.\"\nThe signatories include then future presidents John Adams and Thomas Jefferson, though the most legendary signature is John Hancock's. His large, flamboyant signature became iconic, and the term \"John Hancock\" emerged in the United States as a metaphor of \"signature\". A commonly circulated but apocryphal account claims that, after Hancock signed, the delegate from Massachusetts commented, \"The British ministry can read that name without spectacles.\" Another report indicates that Hancock proudly declared, \"There! I guess King George will be able to read that!\"\nA legend emerged years later about the signing of the Declaration, after the document had become an important national symbol. John Hancock is supposed to have said that Congress, having signed the Declaration, must now \"all hang together\", and Benjamin Franklin replied: \"Yes, we must indeed all hang together, or most assuredly we shall all hang separately.\" That quotation first appeared in print in an 1837 London humor magazine.\nThe Syng inkstand used at the signing was also used at the signing of the United States Constitution in 1787.\nPublication and reaction.\nAfter the Second Continental Congress unanimously approved the final wording of the Declaration on July 4, a handwritten copy was sent a few blocks away to the printing shop of John Dunlap. Throughout the night, Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides for distribution. The source copy used for this printing has been lost and may have been a copy in Thomas Jefferson's hand. The first formal public readings of the document took place simultaneously on July 8, at noon in three locations: Philadelphia, where it was read by John Nixon in the yard of present-day Independence Hall, Trenton, New Jersey, and Easton, Pennsylvania. The first newspaper to publish the Declaration was \"The Pennsylvania Evening Post\", which published it on July 6.156 A German translation of the Declaration was published in Philadelphia by July 9.72 It was subsequently widely read and published throughout the Thirteen Colonies.\nPresident of Congress John Hancock sent a broadside to General George Washington, instructing him to have it proclaimed \"at the Head of the Army in the way you shall think it most proper\".155 Washington had the Declaration read to his troops in New York City on July 9, with thousands of British troops on ships in the harbor. Washington and Congress hoped that the Declaration would inspire the soldiers, and encourage others to join the army.156 After hearing the Declaration, crowds in many cities tore down and destroyed signs or statues representing royal authority. An equestrian statue of King George in New York City was pulled down and the lead used to make musket balls.\nOne of the first readings of the Declaration by the British is believed to have taken place at the Rose and Crown Tavern on Staten Island, New York in the presence of General Howe. British officials in North America sent copies of the Declaration to Great Britain.73 It was published in British newspapers beginning in mid-August, it had reached Florence and Warsaw by mid-September, and a German translation appeared in Switzerland by October. The first copy of the Declaration sent to France got lost, and the second copy arrived only in November 1776. News of the Declaration managed to reach Russia on August 13 via a dispatch from the Russian \"charg\u00e9 d'affaires\" in London, Nikita Panin. It reached Portuguese America by Brazilian medical student \"Vendek\" Jos\u00e9 Joaquim Maia e Barbalho, who had met with Thomas Jefferson in N\u00eemes.\nThe Spanish-American authorities banned the circulation of the Declaration, but it was widely transmitted and translated: by Venezuelan Manuel Garc\u00eda de Sena, by Colombian Miguel de Pombo, by Ecuadorian Vicente Rocafuerte, and by New Englanders Richard Cleveland and William Shaler, who distributed the Declaration and the United States Constitution among Creoles in Chile and Indians in Mexico in 1821. The North Ministry did not give an official answer to the Declaration, but instead secretly commissioned pamphleteer John Lind to publish a response entitled \"Answer to the Declaration of the American Congress\".75 British Tories denounced the signers of the Declaration for not applying the same principles of \"life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness\" to African Americans. Thomas Hutchinson, the former royal governor of Massachusetts, also published a rebuttal.74 These pamphlets challenged various aspects of the Declaration. Hutchinson argued that the American Revolution was the work of a few conspirators who wanted independence from the outset, and who had finally achieved it by inducing otherwise loyal colonists to rebel. Lind's pamphlet had an anonymous attack on the concept of natural rights written by Jeremy Bentham, an argument that he repeated during the French Revolution. Both pamphlets questioned how the American slaveholders in Congress could proclaim that \"all men are created equal\" without freeing their own slaves.\nWilliam Whipple, a signer of the Declaration of Independence who had fought in the war, freed his slave Prince Whipple because of his revolutionary ideals. In the postwar decades, other slaveholders also freed their slaves; from 1790 to 1810, the percentage of free blacks in the Upper South increased to 8.3 percent from less than one percent of the black population. Northern states began abolishing slavery shortly after the war for Independence began, and all had abolished slavery by 1804.\nLater in late November 1776, a group of 547 Loyalists, largely from New York, signed a Declaration of Dependence in New York City at Fraunces Tavern in Manhattan pledging their loyalty to the Crown.\nHistory of the documents.\nThe official copy of the Declaration of Independence was the one printed on July 4, 1776, under Jefferson's supervision. It was sent to the states and to the Army and was widely reprinted in newspapers. The slightly different \"engrossed copy\" (shown at the top of this article) was made later for members to sign. The engrossed version is the one widely distributed in the 21st century. Note that the opening lines differ between the two versions.\nThe copy of the Declaration that was signed by Congress is known as the engrossed or parchment copy. It was probably engrossed (that is, carefully handwritten) by clerk Timothy Matlack. A facsimile made in 1823 has become the basis of most modern reproductions rather than the original because of poor conservation of the engrossed copy through the 19th century. In 1921, custody of the engrossed copy of the Declaration was transferred from the State Department to the Library of Congress, along with the United States Constitution.\nAfter the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, the documents were moved for safekeeping to the United States Bullion Depository at Fort Knox in Kentucky, where they were kept until 1944. In 1952, the engrossed Declaration was transferred to the National Archives and is now on permanent display at the National Archives in the \"Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom\".\nThe document signed by Congress and enshrined in the National Archives is usually regarded as \"the\" Declaration of Independence, but historian Julian P. Boyd argued that the Declaration, like Magna Carta, is not a single document. Boyd considered the printed broadsides ordered by Congress to be official texts, as well. The Declaration was first published as a broadside that was printed the night of July 4 by John Dunlap of Philadelphia. Dunlap printed about 200 broadsides, of which 26 are known to survive. The 26th copy was discovered in The National Archives in England in 2009.\nIn 1777, Congress commissioned Mary Katherine Goddard to print a new broadside that listed the signers of the Declaration, unlike the Dunlap broadside. Nine copies of the Goddard broadside are known to still exist. A variety of broadsides printed by the states are also extant, including seven copies of the Solomon Southwick broadside, one of which was acquired by Washington University in St. Louis in 2015.\nSeveral early handwritten copies and drafts of the Declaration have also been preserved. Jefferson kept a four-page draft that late in life he called the \"original Rough draught\". Historians now understand that Jefferson's Rough draft was one in a series of drafts used by the Committee of Five before being submitted to Congress for deliberation. According to Boyd, the first, \"original\" handwritten draft of the Declaration of Independence that predated Jefferson's Rough draft, was lost or destroyed during the drafting process. It is not known how many drafts Jefferson wrote prior to this one, and how much of the text was contributed by other committee members.\nIn 1947, Boyd discovered a fragment of an earlier draft in Jefferson's handwriting that predates Jefferson's Rough draft. In 2018, the Thomas Paine National Historical Association published findings on an additional early handwritten draft of the Declaration, referred to as the \"Sherman Copy\", that John Adams copied from the lost original draft for Committee of Five members Roger Sherman and Benjamin Franklin's initial review. An inscription on the document noting \"A beginning perhaps...\", the early state of the text, and the manner in which this document was hastily taken, appears to chronologically place this draft earlier than both the fair Adams copy held in the Massachusetts Historical Society collection and the Jefferson \"rough draft\". After the text was finalized by Congress as a whole, Jefferson and Adams sent copies of the rough draft to friends, with variations noted from the original drafts.\nDuring the writing process, Jefferson showed the rough draft to Adams and Franklin, and perhaps to other members of the drafting committee, who made a few more changes. Franklin, for example, may have been responsible for changing Jefferson's original phrase \"We hold these truths to be sacred and undeniable\" to \"We hold these truths to be self-evident\". Jefferson incorporated these changes into a copy that was submitted to Congress in the name of the committee. The copy that was submitted to Congress on June 28 has been lost and was perhaps destroyed in the printing process, or destroyed during the debates in accordance with .\nOn April 21, 2017, it was announced that a second engrossed copy had been discovered in the archives at West Sussex County Council in Chichester, England. Named by its finders the \"Sussex Declaration\", it differs from the National Archives copy (which the finders refer to as the \"Matlack Declaration\") in that the signatures on it are not grouped by States. How it came to be in England is not yet known, but the finders believe that the randomness of the signatures points to an origin with signatory James Wilson, who had argued strongly that the Declaration was made not by the States but by the whole people.\nYears of exposure to damaging lighting resulted in the original Declaration of Independence document having much of its ink fade by 1876.\nAt the request of President Donald Trump, a copy of the Declaration of Independence was hung in the Oval Office in March 2025.\nLegacy.\nThe Declaration was given little attention in the years immediately following the American Revolution, having served its original purpose in announcing the independence of the United States. Early celebrations of Independence Day largely ignored the Declaration, as did early histories of the Revolution. The \"act\" of declaring independence was considered important, whereas the \"text\" announcing that act attracted little attention.160 The Declaration was rarely mentioned during the debates about the United States Constitution, and its language was not incorporated into that document.92 George Mason's draft of the Virginia Declaration of Rights was more influential, and its language was echoed in state constitutions and state bills of rights more often than Jefferson's words.90 \"In none of these documents\", wrote Pauline Maier, \"is there any evidence whatsoever that the Declaration of Independence lived in men's minds as a classic statement of American political principles.\"167\nGlobal influence.\nMany leaders of the French Revolution admired the Declaration of Independence167 but were also interested in the new American state constitutions.82 The inspiration and content of the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen (1789) emerged largely from the ideals of the American Revolution. Lafayette prepared its key drafts, working closely in Paris with his friend Thomas Jefferson. It also borrowed language from George Mason's Virginia Declaration of Rights. The declaration also influenced the Russian Empire, and it had a particular impact on the Decembrist revolt and other Russian thinkers.\nAccording to historian David Armitage, the Declaration of Independence did prove to be internationally influential, but not as a statement of human rights. Armitage argues that the Declaration was the first in a new genre of declarations of independence which announced the creation of new states. Other French leaders were directly influenced by the text of the Declaration of Independence itself. The \"Manifesto of the Province of Flanders\" (1790) was the first foreign derivation of the Declaration;113 others include the Venezuelan Declaration of Independence (1811), the Liberian Declaration of Independence (1847), the declarations of secession by the Confederate States of America (1860\u201361), and the Vietnamese Proclamation of Independence (1945). These declarations echoed the United States Declaration of Independence in announcing the independence of a new state, without necessarily endorsing the political philosophy of the original.\nOther countries have used the Declaration as inspiration or have directly copied sections from it. These include the Haitian declaration of January 1, 1804, during the Haitian Revolution, the United Provinces of New Granada in 1811, the Argentine Declaration of Independence in 1816, the Chilean Declaration of Independence in 1818, Costa Rica in 1821, El Salvador in 1821, Guatemala in 1821, Honduras in 1821, Mexico in 1821, Nicaragua in 1821, Peru in 1821, Bolivian War of Independence in 1825, Uruguay in 1825, Ecuador in 1830, Colombia in 1831, Paraguay in 1842, Dominican Republic in 1844, Texas Declaration of Independence in March 1836, California Republic in November 1836, Hungarian Declaration of Independence in 1849, Declaration of the Independence of New Zealand in 1835, and the Czechoslovak declaration of independence from 1918 drafted in Washington, D.C., with Gutzon Borglum among the drafters. The Rhodesian declaration of independence is based on the American one, as well, ratified in November 1965, although it notably omits the phrases \"all men are created equal\" and \"the consent of the governed\". In a similar vein, the from December 1860 also mentions the U.S. Declaration of Independence, though it too omits references to \"all men are created equal\" and \"consent of the governed\".\nRevival of interest.\nInterest in the Declaration was revived in the 1790s with the emergence of the United States's first political parties. Throughout the 1780s, few Americans knew or cared who wrote the Declaration. But in the next decade, Jeffersonian Republicans sought political advantage over their rival Federalists by promoting both the importance of the Declaration and Jefferson as its author. Federalists responded by casting doubt on Jefferson's authorship or originality, and by emphasizing that independence was declared by the whole Congress, with Jefferson as just one member of the drafting committee. Federalists insisted that Congress's act of declaring independence, in which Federalist John Adams had played a major role, was more important than the document announcing it.171 But this view faded away, like the Federalist Party itself, and, before long, the act of declaring independence became synonymous with the document.\nA less partisan appreciation for the Declaration emerged in the years following the War of 1812, thanks to a growing American nationalism and a renewed interest in the history of the Revolution. In 1817, Congress commissioned John Trumbull's famous painting of the signers, which was exhibited to large crowds before being installed in the Capitol.572175 The earliest commemorative printings of the Declaration also appeared at this time, offering many Americans their first view of the signed document.572 Collective biographies of the signers were first published in the 1820s,176 giving birth to what Garry Wills called the \"cult of the signers\". In the years that followed, many stories about the writing and signing of the document were published for the first time.\nWhen interest in the Declaration was revived, the sections that were most important in 1776 were no longer relevant: the announcement of the independence of the United States and the grievances against King George. But the second paragraph was applicable long after the war had ended, with its talk of self-evident truths and unalienable rights.93 The identity of natural law since the 18th century has seen increasing ascendancy towards political and moral norms versus the law of nature, God, or human nature as seen in the past. The Constitution and the Bill of Rights lacked sweeping statements about rights and equality, and advocates of groups with grievances turned to the Declaration for support. Starting in the 1820s, variations of the Declaration were issued to proclaim the rights of workers, farmers, women, and others.197 In 1848, for example, the Seneca Falls Convention of women's rights advocates declared that \"all men and women are created equal\".19795\nJohn Trumbull's \"Declaration of Independence\" (1817\u20131826).\nJohn Trumbull's painting \"Declaration of Independence\" has played a significant role in popular conceptions of the Declaration of Independence. The painting is in size and was commissioned by the United States Congress in 1817; it has hung in the United States Capitol Rotunda since 1826. It is sometimes described as the signing of the Declaration of Independence, but it actually shows the Committee of Five presenting their draft of the Declaration to the Second Continental Congress on June 28, 1776, and not the signing of the document, which took place later.\nTrumbull painted the figures from life whenever possible, but some had died and images could not be located; hence, the painting does not include all the signers of the Declaration. One figure had participated in the drafting but did not sign the final document; another refused to sign. In fact, the membership of the Second Continental Congress changed as time passed, and the figures in the painting were never in the same room at the same time. It is, however, an accurate depiction of the room in Independence Hall, the centerpiece of the Independence National Historical Park in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.\nTrumbull's painting has been depicted multiple times on U.S. currency and postage stamps. Its first use was on the reverse side of the $100 National Bank Note issued in 1863. A few years later, the steel engraving used in printing the bank notes was used to produce a 24-cent stamp, issued as part of the 1869 Pictorial Issue. An engraving of the signing scene has been featured on the reverse side of the United States two-dollar bill since 1976.\nSlavery and the Declaration.\nThe apparent contradiction between the claim that \"all men are created equal\" and the existence of slavery in the United States attracted comment when the Declaration was first published. Many of the founders understood the incompatibility of the statement of natural equality with the institution of slavery, but continued to enjoy the \"Rights of Man\". Jefferson had included a paragraph in his initial rough vigorously condemning the evil of the slave trade, and condemning King George III for forcing it onto the colonies, but this was deleted from the final version.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;he has waged cruel war against human nature itself, violating it's most sacred rights of life &amp; liberty in the persons of a distant people who never offended him, captivating &amp; carrying them into slavery in another hemisphere, or to incur miserable death in their transportation thither. this piratical warfare, the opprobrium of infidel powers, is the warfare of the CHRISTIAN king of Great Britain. determined to keep open a market where MEN should be bought &amp; sold, he has prostituted his negative for suppressing every legislative attempt to prohibit or to restrain this execrable commerce: and that this assemblage of horrors might want no fact of distinguished die, he is now exciting those very people to rise in arms among us, and to purchase that liberty of which he had deprived them, &amp; murdering the people upon whom he also obtruded them; thus paying off former crimes committed against the liberties of one people, with crimes which he urges them to commit against the lives of another. \nJefferson himself was a prominent Virginia slaveowner, owning six hundred enslaved Africans on his Monticello plantation. Referring to this contradiction, English abolitionist Thomas Day wrote in a 1776 letter, \"If there be an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an American patriot, signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves.\" The African-American writer Lemuel Haynes expressed similar viewpoints in his essay \"Liberty Further Extended\", where he wrote that \"Liberty is Equally as pre[c]ious to a Black man, as it is to a white one\".\nIn the 19th century, the Declaration took on a special significance for the abolitionist movement. Historian Bertram Wyatt-Brown wrote that \"abolitionists tended to interpret the Declaration of Independence as a theological as well as a political document\". Abolitionist leaders Benjamin Lundy and William Lloyd Garrison adopted the \"twin rocks\" of \"the Bible and the Declaration of Independence\" as the basis for their philosophies. He wrote, \"As long as there remains a single copy of the Declaration of Independence, or of the Bible, in our land, we will not despair.\" For radical abolitionists such as Garrison, the most important part of the Declaration was its assertion of the right of revolution. Garrison called for the destruction of the government under the Constitution, and the creation of a new state dedicated to the principles of the Declaration.\nOn July 5, 1852, Frederick Douglass delivered a speech asking the question, \"What to the Slave Is the Fourth of July?\".\nThe controversial question of whether to allow additional slave states into the United States coincided with the growing stature of the Declaration. The first major public debate about slavery and the Declaration took place during the Missouri controversy of 1819 to 1821. Anti-slavery Congressmen argued that the language of the Declaration indicated that the Founding Fathers of the United States had been opposed to slavery in principle, and so new slave states should not be added to the country.604 Pro-slavery Congressmen led by Senator Nathaniel Macon of North Carolina argued that the Declaration was not a part of the Constitution and therefore had no relevance to the question.605\nWith the abolitionist movement gaining momentum, defenders of slavery such as John Randolph and John C. Calhoun found it necessary to argue that the Declaration's assertion that \"all men are created equal\" was false, or at least that it did not apply to black people.199246 During the debate over the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act in 1853, for example, Senator John Pettit of Indiana argued that the statement \"all men are created equal\" was not a \"self-evident truth\" but a \"self-evident lie\".200 Opponents of the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act, including Salmon P. Chase and Benjamin Wade, defended the Declaration and what they saw as its antislavery principles.\nJohn Brown's Declaration of Liberty.\nIn preparing for his raid on Harper's Ferry, said by Frederick Douglass to be the beginning of the end of slavery in the United States, abolitionist John Brown had many copies printed of a Provisional Constitution. When the seceding states created the Confederate States of America 16 months later, they operated for over a year under a Provisional Constitution. It outlines the three branches of government in the quasi-country he hoped to set up in the Appalachian Mountains. It was widely reproduced in the press, and in full in the Select Senate Committee report on John Brown's insurrection (the Mason Report).\nBrown did not have it printed, and his Declaration of Liberty, dated July 4, 1859, was found among his papers at the Kennedy Farm. It was written out on sheets of paper attached to fabric, to allow it to be rolled, and it was rolled when found. The hand is that of Owen Brown, who often served as his father's amanuensis.\nImitating the vocabulary, punctuation, and capitalization of the 73-year-old U.S. Declaration, the 2000-word document begins:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe document was apparently intended to be read aloud, but so far as is known Brown never did so, even though he read the Provisional Constitution aloud the day the raid on Harpers Ferry began. Very much aware of the history of the American Revolution, he would have read the Declaration aloud after the revolt had started. The document was not published until 1894, and by someone who did not realize its importance and buried it in an appendix of documents. It is missing from most but not all studies of John Brown.\nLincoln and the Declaration.\nThe Declaration's relationship to slavery was taken up in 1854 by Abraham Lincoln, a little-known former Congressman who idolized the Founding Fathers. Lincoln thought that the Declaration of Independence expressed the highest principles of the American Revolution, and that the Founding Fathers had tolerated slavery with the expectation that it would ultimately wither away.126 For the United States to legitimize the expansion of slavery in the Kansas\u2013Nebraska Act, thought Lincoln, was to repudiate the principles of the Revolution. In his October 1854 Peoria speech, Lincoln said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe meaning of the Declaration was a recurring topic in the famed debates between Lincoln and Stephen Douglas in 1858. Douglas argued that the phrase \"all men are created equal\", which appears in the Declaration. referred to white men only. The purpose of the Declaration, he said, had simply been to justify the independence of the United States, and not to proclaim the equality of any \"inferior or degraded race\".204 Lincoln, however, thought that the language of the Declaration was deliberately universal, setting a high moral standard to which the American republic should aspire. \"I had thought the Declaration contemplated the progressive improvement in the condition of all men everywhere\", he said. During the seventh and last joint debate with Stephen Douglas at Alton, Illinois, on October 15, 1858, Lincoln said about the declaration:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I think the authors of that notable instrument intended to include all men, but they did not mean to declare all men equal in all respects. They did not mean to say all men were equal in color, size, intellect, moral development, or social capacity. They defined with tolerable distinctness in what they did consider all men created equal\u2014equal in \"certain inalienable rights, among which are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness.\" This they said, and this they meant. They did not mean to assert the obvious untruth that all were then actually enjoying that equality, or yet that they were about to confer it immediately upon them. In fact, they had no power to confer such a boon. They meant simply to declare the right, so that the enforcement of it might follow as fast as circumstances should permit. They meant to set up a standard maxim for free society which should be familiar to all, constantly looked to, constantly labored for, and even, though never perfectly attained, constantly approximated, and thereby constantly spreading and deepening its influence, and augmenting the happiness and value of life to all people, of all colors, everywhere.\nAccording to Pauline Maier, Douglas's interpretation was more historically accurate, but Lincoln's view ultimately prevailed. \"In Lincoln's hands,\" wrote Maier, \"the Declaration of Independence became first and foremost a living document\" with \"a set of goals to be realized over time\".207\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[T]here is no reason in the world why the negro is not entitled to all the natural rights enumerated in the Declaration of Independence, the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. I hold that he is as much entitled to these as the white man.\n\u2014Abraham Lincoln, 1858100\nLike Daniel Webster, James Wilson, and Joseph Story before him, Lincoln argued that the Declaration of Independence was a founding document of the United States, and that this had important implications for interpreting the Constitution, which had been ratified more than a decade after the Declaration. The Constitution did not use the word \"equality\", yet Lincoln believed that the concept that \"all men are created equal\" remained a part of the nation's founding principles.145 He famously expressed this belief, referencing the year 1776, in the opening sentence of his 1863 Gettysburg Address: \"Four score and seven years ago our fathers brought forth on this continent, a new nation, conceived in Liberty, and dedicated to the proposition that all men are created equal.\"\nLincoln's view of the Declaration became influential, seeing it as a moral guide to interpreting the Constitution. \"For most people now,\" wrote Garry Wills in 1992, \"the Declaration means what Lincoln told us it means, as a way of correcting the Constitution itself without overthrowing it.\"147 Admirers of Lincoln such as Harry V. Jaffa praised this development. Critics of Lincoln, notably Willmoore Kendall and Mel Bradford, argued that Lincoln dangerously expanded the scope of the national government and violated states' rights by reading the Declaration into the Constitution.\nWomen's suffrage and the Declaration.\nIn July 1848, the Seneca Falls Convention was held in Seneca Falls, New York, the first women's rights convention. It was organized by Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Lucretia Mott, Mary Ann McClintock, and Jane Hunt. They patterned their \"Declaration of Sentiments\" on the Declaration of Independence, in which they demanded social and political equality for women. Their motto was that \"All men \"and women\" are created equal\", and they demanded the right to vote.\nExcerpt from \"Declaration of Sentiments\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men and women are created equal\u2014\u200a\nCivil Rights Movement and the Declaration.\nIn 1963, at the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom in Washington, D.C., Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his famous \"I Have a Dream\" speech. This speech was meant to inspire the nation, to take up the causes of the Civil Rights Movement. King uses quotations from the Declaration of Independence to encourage equal treatment of all persons regardless of race.\nExcerpt from King's speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: \"We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are created equal.\"\u2014\u200a\nIn 1966, Black Panther Party founders Huey P. Newton and Bobby Seale quoted the Declaration's preamble in its entirety in the party's Ten-Point Program\u2014for the tenth point, \"We want land, bread, housing, education, clothing, justice, peace and people's community control of modern technology\". The Black Panthers were dedicated to community organizing for self-defense and mutual benefit among working-class Black people, and the Ten-Point Program was intended to serve as a concise statement of what the Panthers organization hoped to achieve for Black people, including full employment, decent housing, freedom from compulsory military service, and an end to police brutality.\nLGBTQ+ rights movement and the Declaration.\nIn 1978, at the Gay Pride Celebration in San Francisco, activist and later politician Harvey Milk delivered a speech. Milk alluded to the Declaration of Independence, emphasizing that the inalienable rights established by the Declaration apply to all persons and cannot be hindered because of one's sexual orientation.\nExcerpt from Milk's speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All men are created equal and they are endowed with certain inalienable rights... that's what America is. No matter how hard you try, you cannot erase those words from the Declaration of Independence.\u2014\u200a\n20th century and later.\nThe Declaration was one of the first texts to be made into an ebook (1971).\nThe Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence was dedicated in 1984 in Constitution Gardens on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., where the signatures of all the original signers are carved in stone with their names, places of residence, and occupations.\nThe new One World Trade Center building in New York City (2014) is 1776 feet high to symbolize the year that the Declaration of Independence was signed.\nPopular culture.\nThe adoption of the Declaration of Independence was dramatized in the 1938 Academy Award\u2013winning short film \"Declaration of Independence\", the 1969 Tony Award\u2013winning musical \"1776\", the 1972 film version, and the 2008 television miniseries \"John Adams\". In 1970, The 5th Dimension recorded the opening of the Declaration on their album \"Portrait\" in the song \"Declaration\". It was first performed on \"The Ed Sullivan Show\" on December 7, 1969, and it was taken as a song of protest by some opposed to the Vietnam War.\nThe original handwritten and signed Declaration of Independence is a plot device in the 2004 American film \"National Treasure\".\n\"Fallout 3\" involves a quest in which the playable character acquires the Declaration of Independence from the National Archives. The player is tasked with bringing the document back to a history lover who wants to reclaim pieces of America following a nuclear war.\nAfter the 2009 death of radio broadcaster Paul Harvey, Focus Today aired a clip of Harvey speaking about the lives of all the signers of the Declaration of Independence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31875", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31875", "title": "Ulrich Leman", "text": "German painter\nUlrich Leman (15 October 1885 \u2013 22 April 1988) was a German painter. He was one of the last painters of Rhenish Expressionism.\nBorn in D\u00fcsseldorf, he became interested in painting at an early age and in 1919 he co-founded the group \"The Young Rheinland\" with other young painters of the day, including Otto Dix and Gert Heinrich Wollheim.\nDuring the early 1920s Ulrich Leman was a Meistersch\u00fcler under Heinrich Nauen at the Kunstakademie D\u00fcsseldorf.\nIn 1927 he befriended Johanna Ey, who as \"Mutter Ey\" became well known for her stewardship of young and upcoming artists of the day. Leman became a member of her circle, and his works began to appear in her galleries.\nAt the end of the 1920s Leman made his first trip to Mallorca and decided to move there. In 1930 the artist made his home in Dei\u00e0, Mallorca.\nThis began an intense time, up until his death, of major accomplishments. With his renowned style he incorporated the themes of the Spanish island, its landscapes, people and their personalities. No other artist has understood quite so well, the characteristic features of the island, its appeal and its inflexibility and captured it so well in his works.\nUlrich Leman died in 1988 in Dei\u00e0.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31876", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31876", "title": "United Nations/Member States", "text": ""}
{"id": "31878", "revid": "3091149", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31878", "title": "Ultimate", "text": "Ultimate or Ultimates may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31879", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31879", "title": "Universal Copyright Convention", "text": "1952 international copyright treaty\nUniversal Copyright Convention (UCC) is an international instrument which was drawn up in 1952 under the auspices of UNESCO. The UCC was adopted in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1952, and enforced in 1955. It is one of the two principal international conventions protecting copyright; the other is the Berne Convention.\nHistory.\nThe UCC was developed by UNESCO in 1952, adopted at Geneva, Switzerland, and came into force in 1955. It was developed as an alternative to the Berne Convention for those states that disagreed with aspects of the Berne Convention but still wished to participate in some form of multilateral copyright protection. These states included countries such as the United States and most of Latin America. The developing countries thought that the strong copyright protections granted by the Berne Convention overly benefited Western, developed, copyright-exporting nations; whereas the United States and Latin America were already members of the Buenos Aires Convention, a Pan-American copyright convention that was weaker than the Berne Convention. The Berne Convention states also became party to the UCC, so that their copyrights would exist in non-Berne convention states. In 1973 the Soviet Union joined the UCC.\nThe United States only provided copyright protection for a fixed renewable term, and required that, for a work to be copyrighted, it must contain a copyright notice and be registered at the Copyright Office. The Berne Convention, on the other hand, provided for copyright protection for a single term based on the life of the author, and did not require registration or the inclusion of a copyright notice for copyright to exist. Thus the United States would have to make several major modifications to its copyright law to become a party to the Berne Convention. At the time, the United States was unwilling to do so. The UCC thus permits those states that had a system of protection similar to the United States for fixed terms at the time of signature to retain them. Eventually, the United States became willing to participate in the Berne Convention and change its national copyright law as required. In 1989 it became a party to the Berne Convention as a result of the Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988.\nUnder the Second Protocol of the Universal Copyright Convention (Paris text), protection under U.S. copyright law is expressly required for works published by the United Nations, by UN specialized agencies and by the Organization of American States (OAS). The same requirement applies to other contracting states as well.\nBerne Convention states were concerned that the existence of the UCC would encourage parties to the Berne Convention to leave that convention and adopt the UCC instead. So the UCC included a clause stating that parties which were also Berne Convention parties need not apply the provisions of the convention to any former Berne Convention state that renounced the Berne Convention after 1951. Thus, any state that has once adopted the Berne Convention is penalised if it then decides to renounce the Berne Convention and use the UCC protections instead, as its copyrights might no longer exist in Berne Convention states.\nSince almost all countries are either members or aspiring members of the World Trade Organization (WTO), and thus comply with the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights Agreement (TRIPS), the UCC has lost significance. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31880", "revid": "12530063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31880", "title": "Universe", "text": "Everything in space and time\nThe universe is all of space and time and their contents. It comprises all of existence, any fundamental interaction, physical process and physical constant, and therefore all forms of matter and energy, and the structures they form, from sub-atomic particles to entire galactic filaments. Since the early 20th century, the field of cosmology establishes that space and time emerged together at the Big Bang ago and that the universe has been expanding since then. The portion of the universe that can be seen by humans is approximately 93 billion light-years in diameter at present, but the total size of the universe is not known.\nSome of the earliest cosmological models of the universe were geocentric, placing Earth at the center. During the European Scientific Revolution, astronomical observations led to a heliocentric model. Further observational improvements led to the realization that the Sun is one of a few hundred billion stars in the Milky Way, which is one of a few hundred billion galaxies in the observable universe. Many of the stars in a galaxy have planets. At the largest scale, galaxies are distributed uniformly and the same in all directions, meaning that the universe has neither an edge nor a center. At smaller scales, galaxies are distributed in clusters and superclusters which form immense filaments and voids in space, creating a vast foam-like structure. Discoveries in the early 20th century lead to the Big Bang theory with a hot fireball, cooling and becoming less dense as the universe expanded, allowing the first subatomic particles and simple atoms to form. Giant clouds of hydrogen and helium were gradually drawn to the places where matter was most dense, forming the first galaxies, stars, and everything else seen today.\nFrom studying the effects of gravity on both matter and light, it has been discovered that the universe contains much more matter than is accounted for by visible objects; stars, galaxies, nebulas and interstellar gas. This unseen matter is known as dark matter. In the widely accepted \u039bCDM cosmological model, dark matter accounts for about of the mass and energy in the universe while about is dark energy, a mysterious form of energy responsible for the acceleration of the expansion of the universe. Ordinary ('baryonic') matter therefore composes only of the universe. Stars, planets, and visible gas clouds only form about 6% of this ordinary matter.\nThere are many competing hypotheses about the ultimate fate of the universe and about what, if anything, preceded the Big Bang, while other physicists and philosophers refuse to speculate, doubting that information about prior states will ever be accessible. Some physicists have suggested various multiverse hypotheses, in which the universe might be one among many.\nDefinition.\nThe physical universe is defined as all of space and time (collectively referred to as spacetime) and their contents. Such contents comprise all of energy in its various forms, including electromagnetic radiation and matter, and therefore planets, moons, stars, galaxies, and the contents of intergalactic space. The universe also includes the physical laws that influence energy and matter, such as conservation laws, classical mechanics, and relativity.\nThe universe is often defined as \"the totality of existence\", or everything that exists, everything that has existed, and everything that will exist. In fact, some philosophers and scientists support the inclusion of ideas and abstract concepts\u2014such as mathematics and logic\u2014in the definition of the universe. The word \"universe\" may also refer to concepts such as \"the cosmos\", \"the world\", and \"nature\".\nEtymology.\nThe word \"universe\" derives from the Old French word , which in turn derives from the Latin word , meaning 'combined into one'. The Latin word 'universum' was used by Cicero and later Latin authors in many of the same senses as the modern English word is used.\nSynonyms.\nA term for \"universe\" among the ancient Greek philosophers from Pythagoras onwards was () 'the all', defined as all matter and all space, and () 'all things', which did not necessarily include the void. Another synonym was () meaning 'the world, the cosmos'. Synonyms are also found in Latin authors (, , ) and survive in modern languages, e.g., the German words , , and for \"universe\". The same synonyms are found in English, such as everything (as in the theory of everything), the cosmos (as in cosmology), the world (as in the many-worlds interpretation), and nature (as in natural laws or natural philosophy).\nChronology and the Big Bang.\nThe prevailing model for the evolution of the universe is the Big Bang theory. The Big Bang model states that the earliest state of the universe was an extremely hot and dense one, and that the universe subsequently expanded and cooled. The model is based on general relativity and on simplifying assumptions such as the homogeneity and isotropy of space. A version of the model with a cosmological constant (Lambda) and cold dark matter, known as the Lambda-CDM model, is the simplest model that provides a reasonably good account of various observations about the universe. \nThe initial hot, dense state is called the Planck epoch, a brief period extending from time zero to one Planck time unit of approximately 10\u221243 seconds. During the Planck epoch, all types of matter and all types of energy were concentrated into a dense state, and gravity\u2014currently the weakest by far of the four known forces\u2014is believed to have been as strong as the other fundamental forces, and all the forces may have been unified. The physics controlling this very early period (including quantum gravity in the Planck epoch) is not understood, so we cannot say what, if anything, happened before time zero. Since the Planck epoch, the universe has been expanding to its present scale, with a very short but intense period of cosmic inflation speculated to have occurred within the first 10\u221232 seconds. This initial period of inflation would explain why space appears to be very flat.\nWithin the first fraction of a second of the universe's existence, the four fundamental forces had separated. As the universe continued to cool from its inconceivably hot state, various types of elementary particles associated stably into ever larger combinations, including stable protons and neutrons, which then formed more complex atomic nuclei through nuclear fusion.\nThis process, known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis, lasted for about 17 minutes and ended about 20 minutes after the Big Bang, so only the fastest and simplest reactions occurred. About 25% of the protons and all the neutrons in the universe, by mass, were converted to helium, with small amounts of deuterium (a form of hydrogen) and traces of lithium. Any other element was only formed in very tiny quantities. The other 75% of the protons remained unaffected, as hydrogen nuclei.\nAfter nucleosynthesis ended, the universe entered a period known as the photon epoch. During this period, the universe was still far too hot for matter to form neutral atoms, so it contained a hot, dense, foggy plasma of negatively charged electrons, neutral neutrinos and positive nuclei. After about 377,000 years, the universe had cooled enough that electrons and nuclei could form the first stable atoms. This is known as recombination for historical reasons; electrons and nuclei were combining for the first time. Unlike plasma, neutral atoms are transparent to many wavelengths of light, so for the first time the universe also became transparent. The photons released (\"decoupled\") when these atoms formed can still be seen today; they form the cosmic microwave background (CMB).\nAs the universe expands, the energy density of electromagnetic radiation decreases more quickly than does that of matter because the energy of each photon decreases as it is cosmologically redshifted. At around 47,000 years, the energy density of matter became larger than that of photons and neutrinos, and began to dominate the large scale behavior of the universe. This marked the end of the radiation-dominated era and the start of the matter-dominated era.\nIn the earliest stages of the universe, tiny fluctuations within the universe's density led to concentrations of dark matter gradually forming. Ordinary matter, attracted to these by gravity, formed large gas clouds and eventually, stars and galaxies, where the dark matter was most dense, and voids where it was least dense. After around 100\u2013300 million years, the first stars formed, known as Population III stars. These were probably very massive, luminous, non metallic and short-lived. They were responsible for the gradual reionization of the universe between about 200\u2013500 million years and 1 billion years, and also for seeding the universe with elements heavier than helium, through stellar nucleosynthesis.\nThe universe also contains a mysterious energy\u2014possibly a scalar field\u2014called dark energy, the density of which does not change over time. After about 9.8 billion years, the universe had expanded sufficiently so that the density of matter was less than the density of dark energy, marking the beginning of the present dark-energy-dominated era. In this era, the expansion of the universe is accelerating due to dark energy.\nPhysical properties.\nOf the four fundamental interactions, gravitation is the dominant at astronomical length scales. Gravity's effects are cumulative; by contrast, the effects of positive and negative charges tend to cancel one another, making electromagnetism relatively insignificant on astronomical length scales. The remaining two interactions, the weak and strong nuclear forces, decline very rapidly with distance; their effects are confined mainly to sub-atomic length scales.\nThe universe appears to have much more matter than antimatter, an asymmetry possibly related to the CP violation. This imbalance between matter and antimatter is partially responsible for the existence of all matter existing today, since matter and antimatter, if equally produced at the Big Bang, would have completely annihilated each other and left only photons as a result of their interaction.\nSize and regions.\nDue to the finite speed of light, there is a limit (known as the particle horizon) to how far light can travel over the age of the universe.\nThe spatial region from which we can receive light is called the observable universe. The proper distance (measured at a fixed time) between Earth and the edge of the observable universe is 46 billion light-years (14 billion parsecs), making the diameter of the observable universe about 93 billion light-years (28 billion parsecs). Although the distance traveled by light from the edge of the observable universe is close to the age of the universe times the speed of light, , the proper distance is larger because the edge of the observable universe and the Earth have since moved further apart.\nFor comparison, the Milky Way is roughly 87,400 light-years in diameter, and the nearest sister galaxy to the Milky Way, the Andromeda Galaxy, is located roughly 2.5 million light-years away.\nBecause humans cannot observe space beyond the edge of the observable universe, it is unknown whether the size of the universe in its totality is finite or infinite. An estimate from 2011 suggests that if the cosmological principle holds, the whole universe must be more than 250 times larger than a Hubble sphere. Some disputed estimates for the total size of the universe, if finite, reach as high as formula_1 megaparsecs, as implied by a suggested resolution of the No-Boundary Proposal.\nAge and expansion.\nAssuming that the Lambda-CDM model is correct, the measurements of the parameters using a variety of techniques by numerous experiments yield a best value of the age of the universe at 13.799 \u00b1 0.021 billion years, as of 2015.\nOver time, the universe and its contents have evolved. For example, the relative population of quasars and galaxies has changed and the universe has expanded. This expansion is inferred from the observation that the light from distant galaxies has been redshifted, which implies that the galaxies are receding from us. Analyses of Type Ia supernovae indicate that the expansion is accelerating.\nThe more matter there is in the universe, the stronger the mutual gravitational pull of the matter. If the universe were \"too\" dense then it would re-collapse into a gravitational singularity. However, if the universe contained too \"little\" matter then the self-gravity would be too weak for astronomical structures, like galaxies or planets, to form. Since the Big Bang, the universe has expanded monotonically. Perhaps unsurprisingly, our universe has just the right mass\u2013energy density, equivalent to about 5 protons per cubic meter, which has allowed it to expand for the last 13.8 billion years, giving time to form the universe as observed today.\nThere are dynamical forces acting on the particles in the universe which affect the expansion rate. Before 1998, it was expected that the expansion rate would be decreasing as time went on due to the influence of gravitational interactions in the universe; and thus there is an additional observable quantity in the universe called the deceleration parameter, which most cosmologists expected to be positive and related to the matter density of the universe. In 1998, the deceleration parameter was measured by two different groups to be negative, approximately \u22120.55, which technically implies that the second derivative of the cosmic scale factor formula_2 has been positive in the last 5\u20136 billion years.\nSpacetime.\nModern physics regards events as being organized into spacetime. This idea originated with the special theory of relativity, which predicts that if one observer sees two events happening in different places at the same time, a second observer who is moving relative to the first will see those events happening at different times. The two observers will disagree on the time formula_3 between the events, and they will disagree about the distance formula_4 separating the events, but they will agree on the speed of light formula_5, and they will measure the same value for the combination formula_6. The square root of the absolute value of this quantity is called the \"interval\" between the two events. The interval expresses how widely separated events are, not just in space or in time, but in the combined setting of spacetime.\nThe special theory of relativity describes a flat spacetime. Its successor, the general theory of relativity, explains gravity as curvature of spacetime arising due to its energy content. A curved path like an orbit is not the result of a force deflecting a body from an ideal straight-line path, but rather the body's attempt to fall freely through a background that is itself curved by the presence of other masses. A remark by John Archibald Wheeler that has become proverbial among physicists summarizes the theory: \"Spacetime tells matter how to move; matter tells spacetime how to curve\", and therefore there is no point in considering one without the other. The Newtonian theory of gravity is a good approximation to the predictions of general relativity when gravitational effects are weak and objects are moving slowly compared to the speed of light.327\nThe relation between matter distribution and spacetime curvature is given by the Einstein field equations, which require tensor calculus to express.43 The universe appears to be a smooth spacetime continuum consisting of three spatial dimensions and one temporal (time) dimension. Therefore, an event in the spacetime of the physical universe can be identified by a set of four coordinates: (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\", \"t\").\nShape.\nCosmologists often work with space-like slices of spacetime that are surfaces of constant time in comoving coordinates. The geometry of these spatial slices is set by the density parameter, Omega (\u03a9), defined as the average matter density of the universe divided by a critical value. This selects one of three possible geometries depending on whether \u03a9 is equal to, less than, or greater than 1. These are called, respectively, the flat, open and closed universes.\nObservations, including the Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE), Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP), and Planck maps of the CMB, suggest that the universe is infinite in extent with a finite age, as described by the Friedmann\u2013Lema\u00eetre\u2013Robertson\u2013Walker (FLRW) models. These FLRW models thus support inflationary models and the standard model of cosmology, describing a flat, homogeneous universe presently dominated by dark matter and dark energy.\nSupport of life.\nThe fine-tuned universe hypothesis is the proposition that the conditions that allow the existence of observable life in the universe can only occur when certain universal fundamental physical constants lie within a very narrow range of values. According to this hypothesis, if any of several fundamental constants were only slightly different, the universe would have been unlikely to be conducive to the establishment and development of matter, astronomical structures, elemental diversity, or life as it is understood. Whether this is true, and whether that question is even logically meaningful to ask, are subjects of much debate. The proposition is discussed among philosophers, scientists, theologians, and proponents of creationism.\nComposition.\nThe universe is composed almost completely of dark energy, dark matter, and ordinary matter. Other contents are electromagnetic radiation (estimated to constitute from 0.005% to close to 0.01% of the total mass\u2013energy of the universe) and antimatter.\nThe proportions of all types of matter and energy have changed over the history of the universe. The total amount of electromagnetic radiation generated within the universe has decreased by 1/2 in the past 2 billion years. Today, ordinary matter, which includes atoms, stars, galaxies, and life, accounts for only 4.9% of the contents of the universe. The present overall density of this type of matter is very low, roughly 4.5 \u00d7 10\u221231 grams per cubic centimeter, corresponding to a density of the order of only one proton for every four cubic meters of volume. The nature of both dark energy and dark matter is unknown. Dark matter, a mysterious form of matter that has not yet been identified, accounts for 26.8% of the cosmic contents. Dark energy, which is the energy of empty space and is causing the expansion of the universe to accelerate, accounts for the remaining 68.3% of the contents.\nMatter, dark matter, and dark energy are distributed homogeneously throughout the universe over length scales longer than 300 million light-years (ly) or so. However, over shorter length-scales, matter tends to clump hierarchically; many atoms are condensed into stars, most stars into galaxies, most galaxies into clusters, superclusters and, finally, large-scale galactic filaments. The observable universe contains as many as an estimated 2 trillion galaxies and, overall, as many as an estimated 1024 stars \u2013 more stars (and earth-like planets) than all the grains of beach sand on planet Earth; but less than the total number of atoms estimated in the universe as 1082; and the estimated total number of stars in an inflationary universe (observed and unobserved), as 10100. Typical galaxies range from dwarfs with as few as ten million (107) stars up to giants with one trillion (1012) stars. Between the larger structures are voids, which are typically 10\u2013150 Mpc (33 million\u2013490 million ly) in diameter. The Milky Way is in the Local Group of galaxies, which in turn is in the Laniakea Supercluster. This supercluster spans over 500 million light-years, while the Local Group spans over 10 million light-years. The universe also has vast regions of relative emptiness; the largest known void measures 1.8 billion ly (550 Mpc) across.\nThe observable universe is isotropic on scales significantly larger than superclusters, meaning that the statistical properties of the universe are the same in all directions as observed from Earth. The universe is bathed in highly isotropic microwave radiation that corresponds to a thermal equilibrium blackbody spectrum of roughly 2.72548 kelvins. The hypothesis that the large-scale universe is homogeneous and isotropic is known as the cosmological principle. A universe that is both homogeneous and isotropic looks the same from all vantage points and has no center.\nDark energy.\nAn explanation for why the expansion of the universe is accelerating remains elusive. It is often attributed to the gravitational influence of \"dark energy\", an unknown form of energy that is hypothesized to permeate space. On a mass\u2013energy equivalence basis, the density of dark energy (~ 7 \u00d7 10\u221230 g/cm3) is much less than the density of ordinary matter or dark matter within galaxies. However, in the present dark-energy era, it dominates the mass\u2013energy of the universe because it is uniform across space.\nTwo proposed forms for dark energy are the cosmological constant, a \"constant\" energy density filling space homogeneously, and scalar fields such as quintessence or moduli, \"dynamic\" quantities whose energy density can vary in time and space while still permeating them enough to cause the observed rate of expansion. Contributions from scalar fields that are constant in space are usually also included in the cosmological constant. The cosmological constant can be formulated to be equivalent to vacuum energy.\nDark matter.\nDark matter is a hypothetical kind of matter that is invisible to the entire electromagnetic spectrum, but which accounts for most of the matter in the universe. The existence and properties of dark matter are inferred from its gravitational effects on visible matter, radiation, and the large-scale structure of the universe. Other than neutrinos, a form of hot dark matter, dark matter has not been detected directly, making it one of the greatest mysteries in modern astrophysics. Dark matter neither emits nor absorbs light or any other electromagnetic radiation at any significant level. Dark matter is estimated to constitute 26.8% of the total mass\u2013energy and 84.5% of the total matter in the universe.\nOrdinary matter.\nThe remaining 4.9% of the mass\u2013energy of the universe is ordinary matter, that is, atoms, ions, electrons and the objects they form. This matter includes stars, which produce nearly all of the light we see from galaxies, as well as interstellar gas in the interstellar and intergalactic media, planets, and all the objects from everyday life that we can bump into, touch or squeeze. The great majority of ordinary matter in the universe is unseen, since visible stars and gas inside galaxies and clusters account for less than 10 percent of the ordinary matter contribution to the mass\u2013energy density of the universe.\nOrdinary matter commonly exists in four states (or phases): solid, liquid, gas, and plasma. However, advances in experimental techniques have revealed other previously theoretical phases, such as Bose\u2013Einstein condensates and fermionic condensates. Ordinary matter is composed of two types of elementary particles: quarks and leptons. For example, the proton is formed of two up quarks and one down quark; the neutron is formed of two down quarks and one up quark; and the electron is a kind of lepton. An atom consists of an atomic nucleus, made up of protons and neutrons (both of which are baryons), and electrons that orbit the nucleus.\nSoon after the Big Bang, primordial protons and neutrons formed from the quark\u2013gluon plasma of the early universe as it cooled below two trillion degrees. A few minutes later, in a process known as Big Bang nucleosynthesis, nuclei formed from the primordial protons and neutrons. This nucleosynthesis formed lighter elements, those with small atomic numbers up to lithium and beryllium, but the abundance of heavier elements dropped off sharply with increasing atomic number. Some boron may have been formed at this time, but the next heavier element, carbon, was not formed in significant amounts. Big Bang nucleosynthesis shut down after about 20 minutes due to the rapid drop in temperature and density of the expanding universe. Subsequent formation of heavier elements resulted from stellar nucleosynthesis and supernova nucleosynthesis.\nParticles.\nOrdinary matter and the forces that act on matter can be described in terms of elementary particles. These particles are sometimes described as being fundamental, since they have an unknown substructure, and it is unknown whether or not they are composed of smaller and even more fundamental particles. In most contemporary models they are thought of as points in space. All elementary particles are currently best explained by quantum mechanics and exhibit wave\u2013particle duality: their behavior has both particle-like and wave-like aspects, with different features dominating under different circumstances.\nOf central importance is the Standard Model, a theory that is concerned with electromagnetic interactions and the weak and strong nuclear interactions. The Standard Model is supported by the experimental confirmation of the existence of particles that compose matter: quarks and leptons, and their corresponding \"antimatter\" duals, as well as the force particles that mediate interactions: the photon, the W and Z bosons, and the gluon. The Standard Model predicted the existence of the recently discovered Higgs boson, a particle that is a manifestation of a field within the universe that can endow particles with mass. Because of its success in explaining a wide variety of experimental results, the Standard Model is sometimes regarded as a \"theory of almost everything\". The Standard Model does not, however, accommodate gravity. A true force\u2013particle \"theory of everything\" has not been attained.\nHadrons.\nA hadron is a composite particle made of quarks held together by the strong force. Hadrons are categorized into two families: baryons (such as protons and neutrons) made of three quarks, and mesons (such as pions) made of one quark and one antiquark. Of the hadrons, protons are stable, and neutrons bound within atomic nuclei are stable. Other hadrons are unstable under ordinary conditions and are thus insignificant constituents of the modern universe.\nFrom approximately 10\u22126 seconds after the Big Bang, during a period known as the hadron epoch, the temperature of the universe had fallen sufficiently to allow quarks to bind together into hadrons, and the mass of the universe was dominated by hadrons. Initially, the temperature was high enough to allow the formation of hadron\u2013anti-hadron pairs, which kept matter and antimatter in thermal equilibrium. However, as the temperature of the universe continued to fall, hadron\u2013anti-hadron pairs were no longer produced. Most of the hadrons and anti-hadrons were then eliminated in particle\u2013antiparticle annihilation reactions, leaving a small residual of hadrons by the time the universe was about one second old.\nLeptons.\nA lepton is an elementary, half-integer spin particle that does not undergo strong interactions but is subject to the Pauli exclusion principle; no two leptons of the same species can be in exactly the same state at the same time. Two main classes of leptons exist: charged leptons (also known as the \"electron-like\" leptons), and neutral leptons (better known as neutrinos). Electrons are stable and the most common charged lepton in the universe, whereas muons and taus are unstable particles that quickly decay after being produced in high energy collisions, such as those involving cosmic rays or carried out in particle accelerators. Charged leptons can combine with other particles to form various composite particles such as atoms and positronium. The electron governs nearly all of chemistry, as it is found in atoms and is directly tied to all chemical properties. Neutrinos rarely interact with anything, and are consequently rarely observed. Neutrinos stream throughout the universe but rarely interact with normal matter.\nThe lepton epoch was the period in the evolution of the early universe in which the leptons dominated the mass of the universe. It started roughly 1 second after the Big Bang, after the majority of hadrons and anti-hadrons annihilated each other at the end of the hadron epoch. During the lepton epoch the temperature of the universe was still high enough to create lepton\u2013anti-lepton pairs, so leptons and anti-leptons were in thermal equilibrium. Approximately 10 seconds after the Big Bang, the temperature of the universe had fallen to the point where lepton\u2013anti-lepton pairs were no longer created. Most leptons and anti-leptons were then eliminated in annihilation reactions, leaving a small residue of leptons. The mass of the universe was then dominated by photons as it entered the following photon epoch.\nPhotons.\nA photon is the quantum of light and all other forms of electromagnetic radiation. It is the carrier for the electromagnetic force. The effects of this force are easily observable at the microscopic and at the macroscopic level because the photon has zero rest mass; this allows long distance interactions.\nThe photon epoch started after most leptons and anti-leptons were annihilated at the end of the lepton epoch, about 10 seconds after the Big Bang. Atomic nuclei were created in the process of nucleosynthesis which occurred during the first few minutes of the photon epoch. For the remainder of the photon epoch the universe contained a hot dense plasma of nuclei, electrons and photons. About 380,000 years after the Big Bang, the temperature of the universe fell to the point where nuclei could combine with electrons to create neutral atoms. As a result, photons no longer interacted frequently with matter and the universe became transparent. The highly redshifted photons from this period form the cosmic microwave background. Tiny variations in the temperature of the CMB correspond to variations in the density of the universe that were the early \"seeds\" from which all subsequent structure formation took place.\nHabitability.\nThe frequency of life in the universe has been a frequent point of investigation in astronomy and astrobiology, being the issue of the Drake equation and the different views on it, from identifying the Fermi paradox, the situation of not having found any signs of extraterrestrial life, to arguments for a biophysical cosmology, a view of life being inherent to the physical cosmology of the universe.\nCosmological models.\nModel of the universe based on general relativity.\nGeneral relativity is the geometric theory of gravitation published by Albert Einstein in 1915 and the current description of gravitation in modern physics. It is the basis of current cosmological models of the universe. General relativity generalizes special relativity and Newton's law of universal gravitation, providing a unified description of gravity as a geometric property of space and time, or spacetime. In particular, the curvature of spacetime is directly related to the energy and momentum of whatever matter and radiation are present.\nThe relation is specified by the Einstein field equations, a system of partial differential equations. In general relativity, the distribution of matter and energy determines the geometry of spacetime, which in turn describes the acceleration of matter. Therefore, solutions of the Einstein field equations describe the evolution of the universe. Combined with measurements of the amount, type, and distribution of matter in the universe, the equations of general relativity describe the evolution of the universe over time.\nWith the assumption of the cosmological principle that the universe is homogeneous and isotropic everywhere, a specific solution of the field equations that describes the universe is the metric tensor called the Friedmann\u2013Lema\u00eetre\u2013Robertson\u2013Walker metric,\nformula_7\nwhere (\"r\", \u03b8, \u03c6) correspond to a spherical coordinate system. This metric has only two undetermined parameters. An overall dimensionless length scale factor \"R\" describes the size scale of the universe as a function of time (an increase in \"R\" is the expansion of the universe), and a curvature index \"k\" describes the geometry. The index \"k\" is defined so that it can take only one of three values: 0, corresponding to flat Euclidean geometry; 1, corresponding to a space of positive curvature; or \u22121, corresponding to a space of positive or negative curvature. The value of \"R\" as a function of time \"t\" depends upon \"k\" and the cosmological constant \"\u039b\". The cosmological constant represents the energy density of the vacuum of space and could be related to dark energy. The equation describing how \"R\" varies with time is known as the Friedmann equation after its inventor, Alexander Friedmann.\nThe solutions for \"R(t)\" depend on \"k\" and \"\u039b\", but some qualitative features of such solutions are general. First and most importantly, the length scale \"R\" of the universe can remain constant \"only\" if the universe is perfectly isotropic with positive curvature (\"k\" = 1) and has one precise value of density everywhere, as first noted by Albert Einstein.\nSecond, all solutions suggest that there was a gravitational singularity in the past, when \"R\" went to zero and matter and energy were infinitely dense. It may seem that this conclusion is uncertain because it is based on the questionable assumptions of perfect homogeneity and isotropy (the cosmological principle) and that only the gravitational interaction is significant. However, the Penrose\u2013Hawking singularity theorems show that a singularity should exist for very general conditions. Hence, according to Einstein's field equations, \"R\" grew rapidly from an unimaginably hot, dense state that existed immediately following this singularity (when \"R\" had a small, finite value); this is the essence of the Big Bang model of the universe. Understanding the singularity of the Big Bang likely requires a quantum theory of gravity, which has not yet been formulated.\nThird, the curvature index \"k\" determines the sign of the curvature of constant-time spatial surfaces averaged over sufficiently large length scales (greater than about a billion light-years). If \"k\" = 1, the curvature is positive and the universe has a finite volume. A universe with positive curvature is often visualized as a three-dimensional sphere embedded in a four-dimensional space. Conversely, if \"k\" is zero or negative, the universe has an infinite volume. It may seem counter-intuitive that an infinite and yet infinitely dense universe could be created in a single instant when \"R\" = 0, but exactly that is predicted mathematically when \"k\" is nonpositive and the cosmological principle is satisfied. By analogy, an infinite plane has zero curvature but infinite area, whereas an infinite cylinder is finite in one direction and a torus is finite in both.\nThe ultimate fate of the universe is still unknown because it depends critically on the curvature index \"k\" and the cosmological constant \"\u039b\". If the universe were sufficiently dense, \"k\" would equal +1, meaning that its average curvature throughout is positive and the universe will eventually recollapse in a Big Crunch, possibly starting a new universe in a Big Bounce. Conversely, if the universe were insufficiently dense, \"k\" would equal 0 or \u22121 and the universe would expand forever, cooling off and eventually reaching the Big Freeze and the heat death of the universe. Modern data suggests that the expansion of the universe is accelerating; if this acceleration is sufficiently rapid, the universe may eventually reach a Big Rip. Observationally, the universe appears to be flat (\"k\" = 0), with an overall density that is very close to the critical value between recollapse and eternal expansion.\nMultiverse hypotheses.\nSome speculative theories have proposed that our universe is but one of a set of disconnected universes, collectively denoted as the multiverse, challenging or enhancing more limited definitions of the universe. Max Tegmark developed a four-part classification scheme for the different types of multiverses that scientists have suggested in response to various problems in physics. An example of such multiverses is the one resulting from the chaotic inflation model of the early universe.\nAnother is the multiverse resulting from the many-worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics. In this interpretation, parallel worlds are generated in a manner similar to quantum superposition and decoherence, with all states of the wave functions being realized in separate worlds. Effectively, in the many-worlds interpretation the multiverse evolves as a universal wavefunction. If the Big Bang that created our multiverse created an ensemble of multiverses, the wave function of the ensemble would be entangled in this sense. Whether scientifically meaningful probabilities can be extracted from this picture has been and continues to be a topic of much debate, and multiple versions of the many-worlds interpretation exist. The subject of the interpretation of quantum mechanics is in general marked by disagreement.\nThe least controversial, but still highly disputed, category of multiverse in Tegmark's scheme is . The multiverses of this level are composed by distant spacetime events \"in our own universe\". Tegmark and others have argued that, if space is infinite, or sufficiently large and uniform, identical instances of the history of Earth's entire Hubble volume occur every so often, simply by chance. Tegmark calculated that our nearest so-called doppelg\u00e4nger is 1010115 metres away from us (a double exponential function larger than a googolplex). However, the arguments used are of speculative nature.\nIt is possible to conceive of disconnected spacetimes, each existing but unable to interact with one another. An easily visualized metaphor of this concept is a group of separate soap bubbles, in which observers living on one soap bubble cannot interact with those on other soap bubbles, even in principle. According to one common terminology, each \"soap bubble\" of spacetime is denoted as a \"universe\", whereas humans' particular spacetime is denoted as \"the universe\", just as humans call Earth's moon \"the Moon\". The entire collection of these separate spacetimes is denoted as the multiverse.\nWith this terminology, different \"universes\" are not causally connected to each other. In principle, the other unconnected \"universes\" may have different dimensionalities and topologies of spacetime, different forms of matter and energy, and different physical laws and physical constants, although such possibilities are purely speculative. Others consider each of several bubbles created as part of chaotic inflation to be separate \"universes\", though in this model these universes all share a causal origin.\nHistorical conceptions.\nHistorically, there have been many ideas of the cosmos (cosmologies) and its origin (cosmogonies). Theories of an impersonal universe governed by physical laws were first proposed by the Greeks and Indians. Ancient Chinese philosophy encompassed the notion of the universe including both all of space and all of time. Over the centuries, improvements in astronomical observations and theories of motion and gravitation led to ever more accurate descriptions of the universe. The modern era of cosmology began with Albert Einstein's 1915 general theory of relativity, which made it possible to quantitatively predict the origin, evolution, and conclusion of the universe as a whole. Most modern, accepted theories of cosmology are based on general relativity and, more specifically, the predicted Big Bang.\nMythologies.\nMany cultures have stories describing the origin of the world and universe. Cultures generally regard these stories as having some truth. There are however many differing beliefs in how these stories apply amongst those believing in a supernatural origin, ranging from a god directly creating the universe as it is now to a god just setting the \"wheels in motion\" (for example via mechanisms such as the big bang and evolution).\nEthnologists and anthropologists who study myths have developed various classification schemes for the various themes that appear in creation stories. For example, in one type of story, the world is born from a world egg; such stories include the Finnish epic poem \"Kalevala\", the Chinese story of Pangu or the Indian Brahmanda Purana. In related stories, the universe is created by a single entity emanating or producing something by him- or herself, as in the Tibetan Buddhism concept of Adi-Buddha, the ancient Greek story of Gaia (Mother Earth), the Aztec goddess Coatlicue myth, the ancient Egyptian god Atum story, and the Judeo-Christian Genesis creation narrative in which the Abrahamic God created the universe. In another type of story, the universe is created from the union of male and female deities, as in the M\u0101ori story of Rangi and Papa. In other stories, the universe is created by crafting it from pre-existing materials, such as the corpse of a dead god\u2014as from Tiamat in the Babylonian epic \"Enuma Elish\" or from the giant Ymir in Norse mythology\u2014or from chaotic materials, as in Izanagi and Izanami in Japanese mythology. In other stories, the universe emanates from fundamental principles, such as Brahman and Prakrti, and the creation myth of the Serers.\nPhilosophical models.\nThe pre-Socratic Greek philosophers and Indian philosophers developed some of the earliest philosophical concepts of the universe. The earliest Greek philosophers noted that appearances can be deceiving, and sought to understand the underlying reality behind the appearances. In particular, they noted the ability of matter to change forms (e.g., ice to water to steam) and several philosophers proposed that all the physical materials in the world are different forms of a single primordial material, or \"arche\". The first to do so was Thales, who proposed this material to be water. Thales' student, Anaximander, proposed that everything came from the limitless \"apeiron\". Anaximenes proposed the primordial material to be air on account of its perceived attractive and repulsive qualities that cause the \"arche\" to condense or dissociate into different forms. Anaxagoras proposed the principle of \"Nous\" (Mind), while Heraclitus proposed fire (and spoke of \"logos\"). Empedocles proposed the elements to be earth, water, air and fire. His four-element model became very popular. Like Pythagoras, Plato believed that all things were composed of number, with Empedocles' elements taking the form of the Platonic solids. Democritus, and later philosophers\u2014most notably Leucippus\u2014proposed that the universe is composed of indivisible atoms moving through a void (vacuum), although Aristotle did not believe that to be feasible because air, like water, offers resistance to motion. Air will immediately rush in to fill a void, and moreover, without resistance, it would do so indefinitely fast.\nAlthough Heraclitus argued for eternal change, his contemporary Parmenides emphasized changelessness. Parmenides' poem \"On Nature\" has been read as saying that all change is an illusion, that the true underlying reality is eternally unchanging and of a single nature, or at least that the essential feature of each thing that exists must exist eternally, without origin, change, or end. His student Zeno of Elea challenged everyday ideas about motion with several famous paradoxes. Aristotle responded to these paradoxes by developing the notion of a potential countable infinity, as well as the infinitely divisible continuum.\nThe Indian philosopher Kanada, founder of the Vaisheshika school, developed a notion of atomism and proposed that light and heat were varieties of the same substance. In the 5th century AD, the Buddhist atomist philosopher Dign\u0101ga proposed atoms to be point-sized, durationless, and made of energy. They denied the existence of substantial matter and proposed that movement consisted of momentary flashes of a stream of energy.\nThe notion of temporal finitism was inspired by the doctrine of creation shared by the three Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam. The Christian philosopher, John Philoponus, presented the philosophical arguments against the ancient Greek notion of an infinite past and future. Philoponus' arguments against an infinite past were used by the early Muslim philosopher, Al-Kindi (Alkindus); the Jewish philosopher, Saadia Gaon (Saadia ben Joseph); and the Muslim theologian, Al-Ghazali (Algazel).\nPantheism is the philosophical religious belief that the universe itself is identical to divinity and a supreme being or entity. The physical universe is thus understood as an all-encompassing, immanent deity. The term 'pantheist' designates one who holds both that everything constitutes a unity and that this unity is divine, consisting of an all-encompassing, manifested god or goddess.\nAstronomical concepts.\nThe earliest written records of identifiable predecessors to modern astronomy come from Ancient Egypt and Mesopotamia from around 3000 to 1200 BCE. Babylonian astronomers of the 7th century BCE viewed the world as a flat disk surrounded by the ocean.\nLater Greek philosophers, observing the motions of the heavenly bodies, were concerned with developing models of the universe based more profoundly on empirical evidence. Some of the earliest cosmological models of the universe were developed by ancient Greek and Indian philosophers and were geocentric, placing Earth at the center. The first coherent model was proposed by Eudoxus of Cnidos, a student of Plato who followed Plato's idea that heavenly motions had to be circular. In order to account for the known complications of the planets' motions, particularly retrograde movement, Eudoxus' model included 27 different celestial spheres: four for each of the planets visible to the naked eye, three each for the Sun and the Moon, and one for the stars. All of these spheres were centered on the Earth, which remained motionless while they rotated eternally. Aristotle elaborated upon this model, increasing the number of spheres to 55 in order to account for further details of planetary motion. For Aristotle, normal matter was entirely contained within the terrestrial sphere, and it obeyed fundamentally different rules from heavenly material.\nThe post-Aristotle treatise \"De Mundo\" (of uncertain authorship and date) stated, \"Five elements, situated in spheres in five regions, the less being in each case surrounded by the greater\u2014namely, earth surrounded by water, water by air, air by fire, and fire by ether\u2014make up the whole universe\". This model was also refined by Callippus and after concentric spheres were abandoned, it was brought into nearly perfect agreement with astronomical observations by Ptolemy. The success of such a model is largely due to the mathematical fact that any function (such as the position of a planet) can be decomposed into a set of circular functions (the Fourier modes). Other Greek scientists, such as the Pythagorean philosopher Philolaus, postulated (according to Stobaeus' account) that at the center of the universe was a \"central fire\" around which the Earth, Sun, Moon and planets revolved in uniform circular motion.\nThe Greek astronomer Aristarchus of Samos was the first known individual to propose a heliocentric model of the universe. Though the original text has been lost, a reference in Archimedes' book \"The Sand Reckoner\" describes Aristarchus's heliocentric model. Archimedes wrote:\nYou, King Gelon, are aware the universe is the name given by most astronomers to the sphere the center of which is the center of the Earth, while its radius is equal to the straight line between the center of the Sun and the center of the Earth. This is the common account as you have heard from astronomers. But Aristarchus has brought out a book consisting of certain hypotheses, wherein it appears, as a consequence of the assumptions made, that the universe is many times greater than the universe just mentioned. His hypotheses are that the fixed stars and the Sun remain unmoved, that the Earth revolves about the Sun on the circumference of a circle, the Sun lying in the middle of the orbit, and that the sphere of fixed stars, situated about the same center as the Sun, is so great that the circle in which he supposes the Earth to revolve bears such a proportion to the distance of the fixed stars as the center of the sphere bears to its surface.\nAristarchus thus believed the stars to be very far away, and saw this as the reason why stellar parallax had not been observed, that is, the stars had not been observed to move relative each other as the Earth moved around the Sun. The stars are in fact much farther away than the distance that was generally assumed in ancient times, which is why stellar parallax is only detectable with precision instruments. The geocentric model, consistent with planetary parallax, was assumed to be the explanation for the unobservability of stellar parallax.\nThe only other astronomer from antiquity known by name who supported Aristarchus's heliocentric model was Seleucus of Seleucia, a Hellenistic astronomer who lived a century after Aristarchus. According to Plutarch, Seleucus was the first to prove the heliocentric system through reasoning, but it is not known what arguments he used. Seleucus' arguments for a heliocentric cosmology were probably related to the phenomenon of tides. According to Strabo (1.1.9), Seleucus was the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon, and that the height of the tides depends on the Moon's position relative to the Sun. Alternatively, he may have proved heliocentricity by determining the constants of a geometric model for it, and by developing methods to compute planetary positions using this model, similar to Nicolaus Copernicus in the 16th century. During the Middle Ages, heliocentric models were also proposed by the Persian astronomers Albumasar and Al-Sijzi.\nThe Aristotelian model was accepted in the Western world for roughly two millennia, until Copernicus revived Aristarchus's perspective that the astronomical data could be explained more plausibly if the Earth rotated on its axis and if the Sun were placed at the center of the universe.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In the center rests the Sun. For who would place this lamp of a very beautiful temple in another or better place than this wherefrom it can illuminate everything at the same time?\u2014\u200a\nAs noted by Copernicus, the notion that the Earth rotates is very old, dating at least to Philolaus (c.\u2009450 BC), Heraclides Ponticus (c.\u2009350 BC) and Ecphantus the Pythagorean. Roughly a century before Copernicus, the Christian scholar Nicholas of Cusa also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis in his book, \"On Learned Ignorance\" (1440). Al-Sijzi also proposed that the Earth rotates on its axis. Empirical evidence for the Earth's rotation on its axis, using the phenomenon of comets, was given by Tusi (1201\u20131274) and Ali Qushji (1403\u20131474).\nThis cosmology was accepted by Isaac Newton, Christiaan Huygens and later scientists. Newton demonstrated that the same laws of motion and gravity apply to earthly and to celestial matter, making Aristotle's division between the two obsolete. Edmund Halley (1720) and Jean-Philippe de Ch\u00e9seaux (1744) noted independently that the assumption of an infinite space filled uniformly with stars would lead to the prediction that the nighttime sky would be as bright as the Sun itself; this became known as Olbers' paradox in the 19th century. Newton believed that an infinite space uniformly filled with matter would cause infinite forces and instabilities causing the matter to be crushed inwards under its own gravity. This instability was clarified in 1902 by the Jeans instability criterion. One solution to these paradoxes is the Charlier universe, in which the matter is arranged hierarchically (systems of orbiting bodies that are themselves orbiting in a larger system, \"ad infinitum\") in a fractal way such that the universe has a negligibly small overall density; such a cosmological model had also been proposed earlier in 1761 by Johann Heinrich Lambert.\nDeep space astronomy.\nDuring the 18th century, Immanuel Kant speculated that nebulae could be entire galaxies separate from the Milky Way, and in 1850, Alexander von Humboldt called these separate galaxies \"Weltinseln\", or \"world islands\", a term that later developed into \"island universes\". In 1919, when the Hooker Telescope was completed, the prevailing view was that the universe consisted entirely of the Milky Way Galaxy. Using the Hooker Telescope, Edwin Hubble identified Cepheid variables in several spiral nebulae and in 1922\u20131923 proved conclusively that Andromeda Nebula and Triangulum among others, were entire galaxies outside our own, thus proving that the universe consists of a multitude of galaxies. With this Hubble formulated the Hubble constant, which allowed for the first time a calculation of the age of the Universe and size of the Observable Universe, which became increasingly precise with better meassurements, starting at 2 billion years and 280 million light-years, until 2006 when data of the Hubble Space Telescope allowed a very accurate calculation of the age of the Universe and size of the Observable Universe.\nThe modern era of physical cosmology began in 1917, when Albert Einstein first applied his general theory of relativity to model the structure and dynamics of the universe. The discoveries of this era, and the questions that remain unanswered, are outlined in the sections above.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31881", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31881", "title": "United States Civil War", "text": ""}
{"id": "31883", "revid": "44419887", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31883", "title": "Uncertainty principle", "text": "Foundational principle in quantum physics\nThe uncertainty principle, also known as Heisenberg's indeterminacy principle, is a fundamental concept in quantum mechanics. It states that there is a limit to the precision with which certain pairs of physical properties, such as position and momentum, can be simultaneously known. In other words, the more accurately one property is measured, the less accurately the other property can be known.\nMore formally, the uncertainty principle is any of a variety of mathematical inequalities asserting a fundamental limit to the product of the accuracy of certain related pairs of measurements on a quantum system, such as position, \"x\", and momentum, \"p\". Such paired-variables are known as complementary variables or canonically conjugate variables.\nFirst introduced in 1927 by German physicist Werner Heisenberg, the formal inequality relating the standard deviation of position \"\u03c3x\" and the standard deviation of momentum \"\u03c3p\" was derived by Earle Hesse Kennard later that year and by Hermann Weyl in 1928:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 is the reduced Planck constant.\nThe quintessentially quantum mechanical uncertainty principle comes in many forms other than position\u2013momentum. The energy\u2013time relationship is widely used to relate quantum state lifetime to measured energy widths but its formal derivation is fraught with confusing issues about the nature of time. The basic principle has been extended in numerous directions; it must be considered in many kinds of fundamental physical measurements.\nPosition\u2013momentum.\nIt is vital to illustrate how the principle applies to relatively intelligible physical situations since it is indiscernible on the macroscopic scales that humans experience. Two alternative frameworks for quantum physics offer different explanations for the uncertainty principle. The wave mechanics picture of the uncertainty principle is more visually intuitive, but the more abstract matrix mechanics picture formulates it in a way that generalizes more easily.\nMathematically, in wave mechanics, the uncertainty relation between position and momentum arises because the expressions of the wavefunction in the two corresponding orthonormal bases in Hilbert space are Fourier transforms of one another (i.e., position and momentum are conjugate variables). A nonzero function and its Fourier transform cannot both be sharply localized at the same time. A similar tradeoff between the variances of Fourier conjugates arises in all systems underlain by Fourier analysis, for example in sound waves: A pure tone is a sharp spike at a single frequency, while its Fourier transform gives the shape of the sound wave in the time domain, which is a completely delocalized sine wave. In quantum mechanics, the two key points are that the position of the particle takes the form of a matter wave, and momentum is its Fourier conjugate, assured by the de Broglie relation \"p\" \n \"\u0127k\", where k is the wavenumber.\nIn matrix mechanics, the mathematical formulation of quantum mechanics, any pair of non-commuting self-adjoint operators representing observables are subject to similar uncertainty limits. An eigenstate of an observable represents the state of the wavefunction for a certain measurement value (the eigenvalue). For example, if a measurement of an observable A is performed, then the system is in a particular eigenstate \u03a8 of that observable. However, the particular eigenstate of the observable A need not be an eigenstate of another observable B: If so, then it does not have a unique associated measurement for it, as the system is not in an eigenstate of that observable.\nVisualization.\nThe uncertainty principle can be visualized using the position- and momentum-space wavefunctions for one spinless particle with mass in one dimension.\nThe more localized the position-space wavefunction, the more likely the particle is to be found with the position coordinates in that region, and correspondingly the momentum-space wavefunction is less localized so the possible momentum components the particle could have are more widespread. Conversely, the more localized the momentum-space wavefunction, the more likely the particle is to be found with those values of momentum components in that region, and correspondingly the less localized the position-space wavefunction, so the position coordinates the particle could occupy are more widespread. These wavefunctions are Fourier transforms of each other: mathematically, the uncertainty principle expresses the relationship between conjugate variables in the transform.\nWave mechanics interpretation.\nAccording to the de Broglie hypothesis, every object in the universe is associated with a wave. Thus every object, from an elementary particle to atoms, molecules and on up to planets and beyond are subject to the uncertainty principle.\nThe time-independent wave function of a single-moded plane wave of wavenumber \"k\"0 or momentum \"p\"0 is\nformula_3\nThe Born rule states that this should be interpreted as a probability density amplitude function in the sense that the probability of finding the particle between \"a\" and \"b\" is\nformula_4\nIn the case of the single-mode plane wave, formula_5 is \"1\" if formula_6 and \"0\" otherwise. In other words, the particle position is extremely uncertain in the sense that it could be essentially anywhere along the wave packet.\nOn the other hand, consider a wave function that is a sum of many waves, which we may write as\nformula_7\nwhere \"A\"\"n\" represents the relative contribution of the mode \"p\"\"n\" to the overall total. The figures to the right show how with the addition of many plane waves, the wave packet can become more localized. We may take this a step further to the continuum limit, where the wave function is an integral over all possible modes\nformula_8\nwith formula_9 representing the amplitude of these modes and is called the wave function in momentum space. In mathematical terms, we say that formula_9 is the \"Fourier transform\" of formula_11 and that \"x\" and \"p\" are conjugate variables. Adding together all of these plane waves comes at a cost, namely the momentum has become less precise, having become a mixture of waves of many different momenta.\nOne way to quantify the precision of the position and momentum is the standard deviation\u00a0\"\u03c3\". Since formula_5 is a probability density function for position, we calculate its standard deviation.\nThe precision of the position is improved, i.e. reduced \"\u03c3\"\"x\", by using many plane waves, thereby weakening the precision of the momentum, i.e. increased \"\u03c3\"\"p\". Another way of stating this is that \"\u03c3\"\"x\" and \"\u03c3\"\"p\" have an inverse relationship or are at least bounded from below. This is the uncertainty principle, the exact limit of which is the Kennard bound.\nProof of the Kennard inequality using wave mechanics.\nWe are interested in the variances of position and momentum, defined as\nformula_13\nformula_14\nWithout loss of generality, we will assume that the means vanish, which just amounts to a shift of the origin of our coordinates. (A more general proof that does not make this assumption is given below.) This gives us the simpler form\nformula_15\nformula_16\nThe function formula_17 can be interpreted as a vector in a function space. We can define an inner product for a pair of functions \"u\"(\"x\") and \"v\"(\"x\") in this vector space:\nformula_18\nwhere the asterisk denotes the complex conjugate.\nWith this inner product defined, we note that the variance for position can be written as\nformula_19\nWe can repeat this for momentum by interpreting the function formula_20 as a vector, but we can also take advantage of the fact that formula_11 and formula_9 are Fourier transforms of each other. We evaluate the inverse Fourier transform through integration by parts:\nformula_23\nwhere formula_24 in the integration by parts, the cancelled term vanishes because the wave function vanishes at both infinities and formula_25, and then use the Dirac delta function which is valid because formula_26 does not depend on \"p\" .\nThe term formula_27 is called the momentum operator in position space. Applying Plancherel's theorem, we see that the variance for momentum can be written as\nformula_28\nThe Cauchy\u2013Schwarz inequality asserts that\nformula_29\nThe modulus squared of any complex number \"z\" can be expressed as\nformula_30\nwe let formula_31 and formula_32 and substitute these into the equation above to get\nformula_33\nAll that remains is to evaluate these inner products.\nformula_34\nPlugging this into the above inequalities, we get\nformula_35\nand taking the square root\nformula_36\nwith equality if and only if \"p\" and \"x\" are linearly dependent. Note that the only \"physics\" involved in this proof was that formula_11 and formula_9 are wave functions for position and momentum, which are Fourier transforms of each other. A similar result would hold for \"any\" pair of conjugate variables.\nMatrix mechanics interpretation.\nIn matrix mechanics, observables such as position and momentum are represented by self-adjoint operators. When considering pairs of observables, an important quantity is the \"commutator\". For a pair of operators \u00c2 and formula_39, one defines their commutator as\nformula_40\nIn the case of position and momentum, the commutator is the canonical commutation relation\nformula_41\nThe physical meaning of the non-commutativity can be understood by considering the effect of the commutator on position and momentum eigenstates. Let formula_42 be a right eigenstate of position with a constant eigenvalue \"x\"0. By definition, this means that formula_43 Applying the commutator to formula_42 yields\nformula_45\nwhere \u00ce is the identity operator.\nSuppose, for the sake of proof by contradiction, that formula_42 is also a right eigenstate of momentum, with constant eigenvalue \"p\"0. If this were true, then one could write\nformula_47\nOn the other hand, the above canonical commutation relation requires that\nformula_48\nThis implies that no quantum state can simultaneously be both a position and a momentum eigenstate.\nWhen a state is measured, it is projected onto an eigenstate in the basis of the relevant observable. For example, if a particle's position is measured, then the state amounts to a position eigenstate. This means that the state is \"not\" a momentum eigenstate, however, but rather it can be represented as a sum of multiple momentum basis eigenstates. In other words, the momentum must be less precise. This precision may be quantified by the standard deviations,\nformula_49\nformula_50\nAs in the wave mechanics interpretation above, one sees a tradeoff between the respective precisions of the two, quantified by the uncertainty principle.\nQuantum harmonic oscillator stationary states.\nConsider a one-dimensional quantum harmonic oscillator. It is possible to express the position and momentum operators in terms of the creation and annihilation operators:\nformula_51\nformula_52\nUsing the standard rules for creation and annihilation operators on the energy eigenstates,\nformula_53\nformula_54\nthe variances may be computed directly,\nformula_55\nformula_56\nThe product of these standard deviations is then\nformula_57\nIn particular, the above Kennard bound is saturated for the ground state \"n\"\n0, for which the probability density is just the normal distribution.\nQuantum harmonic oscillators with Gaussian initial condition.\nIn a quantum harmonic oscillator of characteristic angular frequency \"\u03c9\", place a state that is offset from the bottom of the potential by some displacement \"x\"0 as\nformula_58\nwhere \u03a9 describes the width of the initial state but need not be the same as \"\u03c9\". Through integration over the , we can solve for the full time-dependent solution. After many cancelations, the probability densities reduce to\nformula_59\nformula_60\nwhere we have used the notation formula_61 to denote a normal distribution of mean \"\u03bc\" and variance \"\u03c3\"2. Copying the variances above and applying trigonometric identities, we can write the product of the standard deviations as\nformula_62\nFrom the relations\nformula_63\nwe can conclude the following (the right most equality holds only when \u03a9 = \"\u03c9\"):\nformula_64\nCoherent states.\nA coherent state is a right eigenstate of the annihilation operator,\nformula_65\nwhich may be represented in terms of Fock states as\nformula_66\n(whenever the denominator is nonzero).\nWhile this is a universal result, it depends upon the observable chosen and that the deviations formula_67 and formula_68 are computed for a particular state.\nIdentifying formula_69 and the characteristic time\nformula_70\ngives an energy\u2013time relationship formula_71\nAlthough formula_72 has the dimension of time, it is different from the time parameter \"t\" that enters the Schr\u00f6dinger equation. This formula_72 can be interpreted as time for which the expectation value of the observable, formula_74 changes by an amount equal to one standard deviation.\nExamples:\nformula_78\nThe probability amplitude of this state has a time-dependent interference term:\nformula_79\nThe oscillation period varies inversely with the energy difference: formula_80.\nEach example has a different meaning for the time uncertainty, according to the observable and state used.\nQuantum field theory.\nSome formulations of quantum field theory uses temporary electron\u2013positron pairs in its calculations called virtual particles. The mass-energy and lifetime of these particles are related by the energy\u2013time uncertainty relation. The energy of a quantum systems is not known with enough precision to limit their behavior to a single, simple history. Thus the influence of \"all histories\" must be incorporated into quantum calculations, including those with much greater or much less energy than the mean of the measured/calculated energy distribution.\nThe energy\u2013time uncertainty principle does not temporarily violate conservation of energy; it does not imply that energy can be \"borrowed\" from the universe as long as it is \"returned\" within a short amount of time. The energy of the universe is not an exactly known parameter at all times. When events transpire at very short time intervals, there is uncertainty in the energy of these events.\nHarmonic analysis.\nIn the context of harmonic analysis the uncertainty principle implies that one cannot at the same time localize the value of a function and its Fourier transform. To wit, the following inequality holds,\nformula_81\nFurther mathematical uncertainty inequalities, including the above entropic uncertainty, hold between a function f and its Fourier transform \u0192\u0302:\nformula_82\nSignal processing.\nIn the context of time\u2013frequency analysis uncertainty principles are referred to as the Gabor limit, after Dennis Gabor, or sometimes the \"Heisenberg\u2013Gabor limit\". The basic result, which follows from \"Benedicks's theorem\", below, is that a function cannot be both time limited and band limited (a function and its Fourier transform cannot both have bounded domain)\u2014see bandlimited versus timelimited. More accurately, the \"time-bandwidth\" or \"duration-bandwidth\" product satisfies\nformula_83\nwhere formula_84 and formula_85 are the standard deviations of the time and frequency energy concentrations respectively. The minimum is attained for a Gaussian-shaped pulse (Gabor wavelet) [For the un-squared Gaussian (i.e. signal amplitude) and its un-squared Fourier transform magnitude formula_86; squaring reduces each formula_87 by a factor formula_88.] Another common measure is the product of the time and frequency full width at half maximum (of the power/energy), which for the Gaussian equals formula_89 (see bandwidth-limited pulse).\nStated differently, one cannot simultaneously sharply localize a signal f in both the time domain and frequency domain.\nWhen applied to filters, the result implies that one cannot simultaneously achieve a high temporal resolution and high frequency resolution at the same time; a concrete example are the resolution issues of the short-time Fourier transform\u2014if one uses a wide window, one achieves good frequency resolution at the cost of temporal resolution, while a narrow window has the opposite trade-off.\nAlternate theorems give more precise quantitative results, and, in time\u2013frequency analysis, rather than interpreting the (1-dimensional) time and frequency domains separately, one instead interprets the limit as a lower limit on the support of a function in the (2-dimensional) time\u2013frequency plane. In practice, the Gabor limit limits the \"simultaneous\" time\u2013frequency resolution one can achieve without interference; it is possible to achieve higher resolution, but at the cost of different components of the signal interfering with each other.\nAs a result, in order to analyze signals where the transients are important, the wavelet transform is often used instead of the Fourier.\nDiscrete Fourier transform.\nLet formula_90 be a sequence of \"N\" complex numbers and formula_91 be its discrete Fourier transform.\nDenote by formula_92 the number of non-zero elements in the time sequence formula_93 and by formula_94 the number of non-zero elements in the frequency sequence formula_95. Then,\nformula_96\nThis inequality is sharp, with equality achieved when \"x\" or \"X\" is a Dirac mass, or more generally when \"x\" is a nonzero multiple of a Dirac comb supported on a subgroup of the integers modulo \"N\" (in which case \"X\" is also a Dirac comb supported on a complementary subgroup, and vice versa).\nMore generally, if \"T\" and \"W\" are subsets of the integers modulo \"N\", let formula_97 denote the time-limiting operator and band-limiting operators, respectively. Then\nformula_98\nwhere the norm is the operator norm of operators on the Hilbert space formula_99 of functions on the integers modulo \"N\". This inequality has implications for signal reconstruction.\nWhen \"N\" is a prime number, a stronger inequality holds:\nformula_100\nDiscovered by Terence Tao, this inequality is also sharp.\nBenedicks's theorem.\nAmrein\u2013Berthier and Benedicks's theorem intuitively says that the set of points where f is non-zero and the set of points where \u0192\u0302 is non-zero cannot both be small.\nSpecifically, it is impossible for a function f in \"L\"2(R) and its Fourier transform \u0192\u0302 to both be supported on sets of finite Lebesgue measure. A more quantitative version is\nformula_101\nOne expects that the factor \"Ce\"\"C\"|\"S\"||\"\u03a3\"| may be replaced by \"Ce\"\"C\"(|\"S\"||\"\u03a3\"|)1/\"d\", which is only known if either S or \u03a3 is convex.\nHardy's uncertainty principle.\nThe mathematician G. H. Hardy formulated the following uncertainty principle: it is not possible for f and \u0192\u0302 to both be \"very rapidly decreasing\". Specifically, if f in formula_102 is such that\nformula_103\nand\nformula_104 (formula_105 an integer),\nthen, if \"ab\" &gt; 1, \"f\" = 0, while if \"ab\" = 1, then there is a polynomial P of degree \u2264 \"N\" such that\nformula_106\nThis was later improved as follows: if formula_107 is such that\nformula_108\nthen\nformula_109\nwhere P is a polynomial of degree (\"N\" \u2212 \"d\")/2 and A is a real \"d\" \u00d7 \"d\" positive definite matrix.\nThis result was stated in Beurling's complete works without proof and proved in H\u00f6rmander (the case formula_110) and Bonami, Demange, and Jaming for the general case. Note that H\u00f6rmander\u2013Beurling's version implies the case \"ab\" &gt; 1 in Hardy's Theorem while the version by Bonami\u2013Demange\u2013Jaming covers the full strength of Hardy's Theorem. A different proof of Beurling's theorem based on Liouville's theorem appeared in ref.\nA full description of the case \"ab\" &lt; 1 as well as the following extension to Schwartz class distributions appears in ref.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Math_theorem/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIf a tempered distribution formula_111 is such that\n&lt;math display=\"block\"&gt;e^{\\pi\u2014x\nAdditional uncertainty relations.\nHeisenberg limit.\nIn quantum metrology, and especially interferometry, the Heisenberg limit is the optimal rate at which the accuracy of a measurement can scale with the energy used in the measurement. Typically, this is the measurement of a phase (applied to one arm of a beam-splitter) and the energy is given by the number of photons used in an interferometer. Although some claim to have broken the Heisenberg limit, this reflects disagreement on the definition of the scaling resource. Suitably defined, the Heisenberg limit is a consequence of the basic principles of quantum mechanics and cannot be beaten, although the weak Heisenberg limit can be beaten.\nSystematic and statistical errors.\nThe inequalities above focus on the \"statistical imprecision\" of observables as quantified by the standard deviation formula_87. Heisenberg's original version, however, was dealing with the \"systematic error\", a disturbance of the quantum system produced by the measuring apparatus, i.e., an observer effect.\nIf we let formula_113 represent the error (i.e., inaccuracy) of a measurement of an observable \"A\" and formula_114 the disturbance produced on a subsequent measurement of the conjugate variable \"B\" by the former measurement of \"A\", then the inequality proposed by Masanao Ozawa \u2212 encompassing both systematic and statistical errors - holds:\nformula_115 and formula_68. There is increasing experimental evidence that the total quantum uncertainty cannot be described by the Heisenberg term alone, but requires the presence of all the three terms of the Ozawa inequality.\nUsing the same formalism, it is also possible to introduce the other kind of physical situation, often confused with the previous one, namely the case of \"simultaneous measurements\" (\"A\" and \"B\" at the same time):\nformula_117\nThe four terms can be written as:\nformula_118\nDefining:\nformula_119\nas the \"inaccuracy\" in the measured values of the variable \"A\" and\nformula_120\nas the \"resulting fluctuation\" in the conjugate variable \"B\", Kazuo Fujikawa established an uncertainty relation similar to the Heisenberg original one, but valid both for \"systematic and statistical errors\":\nformula_121 and formula_122\nthe Shannon information entropies\nformula_123\nand\nformula_124\nare subject to the following constraint,\nformula_125\nwhere the logarithms may be in any base.\nThe probability distribution functions associated with the position wave function \"\u03c8\"(\"x\") and the momentum wave function \"\u03c6\"(\"x\") have dimensions of inverse length and momentum respectively, but the entropies may be rendered dimensionless by\nformula_126\nformula_127\nwhere \"x\"0 and \"p\"0 are some arbitrarily chosen length and momentum respectively, which render the arguments of the logarithms dimensionless. Note that the entropies will be functions of these chosen parameters. Due to the Fourier transform relation between the position wave function \"\u03c8\"(\"x\") and the momentum wavefunction \"\u03c6\"(\"p\"), the above constraint can be written for the corresponding entropies as\nformula_128\nwhere h is the Planck constant.\nDepending on one's choice of the \"x0 p0\" product, the expression may be written in many ways. If \"x\"0 \"p\"0 is chosen to be h, then\nformula_129\nIf, instead, \"x\"0 \"p\"0 is chosen to be \u0127, then\nformula_130\nIf \"x\"0 and \"p\"0 are chosen to be unity in whatever system of units are being used, then\nformula_131\nwhere h is interpreted as a dimensionless number equal to the value of the Planck constant in the chosen system of units. Note that these inequalities can be extended to multimode quantum states, or wavefunctions in more than one spatial dimension.\nThe quantum entropic uncertainty principle is more restrictive than the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. From the inverse logarithmic Sobolev inequalities\nformula_132\nformula_133\n(equivalently, from the fact that normal distributions maximize the entropy of all such with a given variance), it readily follows that this entropic uncertainty principle is \"stronger than the one based on standard deviations\", because\nformula_134\nIn other words, the Heisenberg uncertainty principle, is a consequence of the quantum entropic uncertainty principle, but not vice versa. A few remarks on these inequalities. First, the choice of base e is a matter of popular convention in physics. The logarithm can alternatively be in any base, provided that it be consistent on both sides of the inequality. Second, recall the Shannon entropy has been used, \"not\" the quantum von Neumann entropy. Finally, the normal distribution saturates the inequality, and it is the only distribution with this property, because it is the maximum entropy probability distribution among those with fixed variance (cf. here for proof).\nA measurement apparatus will have a finite resolution set by the discretization of its possible outputs into bins, with the probability of lying within one of the bins given by the Born rule. We will consider the most common experimental situation, in which the bins are of uniform size. Let \"\u03b4x\" be a measure of the spatial resolution. We take the zeroth bin to be centered near the origin, with possibly some small constant offset \"c\". The probability of lying within the jth interval of width \"\u03b4x\" is\nformula_135\nTo account for this discretization, we can define the Shannon entropy of the wave function for a given measurement apparatus as\nformula_136\nUnder the above definition, the entropic uncertainty relation is\nformula_137\nHere we note that \"\u03b4x\" \"\u03b4p\"/\"h\" is a typical infinitesimal phase space volume used in the calculation of a partition function. The inequality is also strict and not saturated. Efforts to improve this bound are an active area of research.\nUncertainty relation with three angular momentum components.\nFor a particle of total angular momentum formula_138 the following uncertainty relation holds\nformula_139\nwhere formula_140 are angular momentum components. The relation can be derived from\nformula_141\nand\nformula_142\nThe relation can be strengthened as\nformula_143\nwhere formula_144 is the quantum Fisher information.\nHistory.\nIn 1925 Heisenberg published the \"Umdeutung\" (reinterpretation) paper where he showed that central aspect of quantum theory was the non-commutativity: the theory implied that the relative order of position and momentum measurement was significant. Working with Max Born and Pascual Jordan, he continued to develop matrix mechanics, that would become the first modern quantum mechanics formulation. \nIn March 1926, working in Bohr's institute, Heisenberg realized that the non-commutativity implies the uncertainty principle. Writing to Wolfgang Pauli in February 1927, he worked out the basic concepts.\nIn his celebrated 1927 paper \"\" (\"On the Perceptual Content of Quantum Theoretical Kinematics and Mechanics\"), Heisenberg established this expression as the minimum amount of unavoidable momentum disturbance caused by any position measurement, but he did not give a precise definition for the uncertainties \u0394x and \u0394\"p\". Instead, he gave some plausible estimates in each case separately. His paper gave an analysis in terms of a microscope that Bohr showed was incorrect; Heisenberg included an addendum to the publication.\nIn his 1930 Chicago lecture he refined his principle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLater work broadened the concept. Any two variables that do not commute cannot be measured simultaneously\u2014the more precisely one is known, the less precisely the other can be known. Heisenberg wrote:It can be expressed in its simplest form as follows: One can never know with perfect accuracy both of those two important factors which determine the movement of one of the smallest particles\u2014its position and its velocity. It is impossible to determine accurately \"both\" the position and the direction and speed of a particle \"at the same instant\".\nKennard in 1927 first proved the modern inequality:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere \"\u0127\" =, and \"\u03c3x\", \"\u03c3p\" are the standard deviations of position and momentum. (Heisenberg only proved relation (A2) for the special case of Gaussian states.) In 1929 Robertson generalized the inequality to all observables and in 1930 Schr\u00f6dinger extended the form to allow non-zero covariance of the operators; this result is referred to as Robertson-Schr\u00f6dinger inequality.\nTerminology and translation.\nThroughout the main body of his original 1927 paper, written in German, Heisenberg used the word \"Ungenauigkeit\",\nto describe the basic theoretical principle. Only in the endnote did he switch to the word \"Unsicherheit\". Later on, he always used \"Unbestimmtheit\". When the English-language version of Heisenberg's textbook, \"The Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory\", was published in 1930, however, only the English word \"uncertainty\" was used, and it became the term in the English language.\nHeisenberg's microscope.\nThe principle is quite counter-intuitive, so the early students of quantum theory had to be reassured that naive measurements to violate it were bound always to be unworkable. One way in which Heisenberg originally illustrated the intrinsic impossibility of violating the uncertainty principle is by using the observer effect of an imaginary microscope as a measuring device.\nHe imagines an experimenter trying to measure the position and momentum of an electron by shooting a photon at it.\nThe combination of these trade-offs implies that no matter what photon wavelength and aperture size are used, the product of the uncertainty in measured position and measured momentum is greater than or equal to a lower limit, which is (up to a small numerical factor) equal to the Planck constant. Heisenberg did not care to formulate the uncertainty principle as an exact limit, and preferred to use it instead, as a heuristic quantitative statement, correct up to small numerical factors, which makes the radically new noncommutativity of quantum mechanics inevitable.\nIntrinsic quantum uncertainty.\nHistorically, the uncertainty principle has been confused with a related effect in physics, called the observer effect, which notes that measurements of certain systems cannot be made without affecting the system, that is, without changing something in a system. Heisenberg used such an observer effect at the quantum level (see below) as a physical \"explanation\" of quantum uncertainty. It has since become clearer, however, that the uncertainty principle is inherent in the properties of all wave-like systems, and that it arises in quantum mechanics simply due to the matter wave nature of all quantum objects. Thus, the uncertainty principle actually states a fundamental property of quantum systems and is not a statement about the observational success of current technology.\nCritical reactions.\nThe Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics and Heisenberg's uncertainty principle were, in fact, initially seen as twin targets by detractors. According to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics, there is no fundamental reality that the quantum state describes, just a prescription for calculating experimental results. There is no way to say what the state of a system fundamentally is, only what the result of observations might be.\nAlbert Einstein believed that randomness is a reflection of our ignorance of some fundamental property of reality, while Niels Bohr believed that the probability distributions are fundamental and irreducible, and depend on which measurements we choose to perform. Einstein and Bohr debated the uncertainty principle for many years.\nIdeal detached observer.\nWolfgang Pauli called Einstein's fundamental objection to the uncertainty principle \"the ideal of the detached observer\" (phrase translated from the German):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Like the moon has a definite position,\" Einstein said to me last winter, \"whether or not we look at the moon, the same must also hold for the atomic objects, as there is no sharp distinction possible between these and macroscopic objects. Observation cannot \"create\" an element of reality like a position, there must be something contained in the complete description of physical reality which corresponds to the \"possibility\" of observing a position, already before the observation has been actually made.\" I hope, that I quoted Einstein correctly; it is always difficult to quote somebody out of memory with whom one does not agree. It is precisely this kind of postulate which I call the ideal of the detached observer.\u2014\u200a\nEinstein's slit.\nThe first of Einstein's thought experiments challenging the uncertainty principle went as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBohr's response was that the wall is quantum mechanical as well, and that to measure the recoil to accuracy \u0394\"p\", the momentum of the wall must be known to this accuracy before the particle passes through. This introduces an uncertainty in the position of the wall and therefore the position of the slit equal to , and if the wall's momentum is known precisely enough to measure the recoil, the slit's position is uncertain enough to disallow a position measurement.\nA similar analysis with particles diffracting through multiple slits is given by Richard Feynman.\nEinstein's box.\nBohr was present when Einstein proposed the thought experiment which has become known as Einstein's box. Einstein argued that \"Heisenberg's uncertainty equation implied that the uncertainty in time was related to the uncertainty in energy, the product of the two being related to the Planck constant.\" Consider, he said, an ideal box, lined with mirrors so that it can contain light indefinitely. The box could be weighed before a clockwork mechanism opened an ideal shutter at a chosen instant to allow one single photon to escape. \"We now know, explained Einstein, precisely the time at which the photon left the box.\" \"Now, weigh the box again. The change of mass tells the energy of the emitted light. In this manner, said Einstein, one could measure the energy emitted and the time it was released with any desired precision, in contradiction to the uncertainty principle.\"\nBohr spent a sleepless night considering this argument, and eventually realized that it was flawed. He pointed out that if the box were to be weighed, say by a spring and a pointer on a scale, \"since the box must move vertically with a change in its weight, there will be uncertainty in its vertical velocity and therefore an uncertainty in its height above the table. ... Furthermore, the uncertainty about the elevation above the Earth's surface will result in an uncertainty in the rate of the clock\", because of Einstein's own theory of gravity's effect on time. \"Through this chain of uncertainties, Bohr showed that Einstein's light box experiment could not simultaneously measure exactly both the energy of the photon and the time of its escape.\"\nEPR paradox for entangled particles.\nIn 1935, Einstein, Boris Podolsky and Nathan Rosen published an analysis of spatially separated entangled particles (EPR paradox). According to EPR, one could measure the position of one of the entangled particles and the momentum of the second particle, and from those measurements deduce the position and momentum of both particles to any precision, violating the uncertainty principle. In order to avoid such possibility, the measurement of one particle must modify the probability distribution of the other particle instantaneously, possibly violating the principle of locality.\nIn 1964, John Stewart Bell showed that this assumption can be falsified, since it would imply a certain inequality between the probabilities of different experiments. Experimental results confirm the predictions of quantum mechanics, ruling out EPR's basic assumption of local hidden variables.\nPopper's criticism.\nScience philosopher Karl Popper approached the problem of indeterminacy as a logician and metaphysical realist. He disagreed with the application of the uncertainty relations to individual particles rather than to ensembles of identically prepared particles, referring to them as \"statistical scatter relations\". In this statistical interpretation, a \"particular\" measurement may be made to arbitrary precision without invalidating the quantum theory.\nIn 1934, Popper published (\"Critique of the Uncertainty Relations\") in , and in the same year (translated and updated by the author as \"The Logic of Scientific Discovery\" in 1959), outlining his arguments for the statistical interpretation. In 1982, he further developed his theory in \"Quantum theory and the schism in Physics\", writing:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[Heisenberg's] formulae are, beyond all doubt, derivable \"statistical formulae\" of the quantum theory. But they have been \"habitually misinterpreted\" by those quantum theorists who said that these formulae can be interpreted as determining some upper limit to the \"precision of our measurements\". [original emphasis]\nPopper proposed an experiment to falsify the uncertainty relations, although he later withdrew his initial version after discussions with Carl Friedrich von Weizs\u00e4cker, Heisenberg, and Einstein; Popper sent his paper to Einstein and it may have influenced the formulation of the EPR paradox.\nFree will.\nSome scientists, including Arthur Compton and Martin Heisenberg, have suggested that the uncertainty principle, or at least the general probabilistic nature of quantum mechanics, could be evidence for the two-stage model of free will. One critique, however, is that apart from the basic role of quantum mechanics as a foundation for chemistry, nontrivial biological mechanisms requiring quantum mechanics are unlikely, due to the rapid decoherence time of quantum systems at room temperature. Proponents of this theory commonly say that this decoherence is overcome by both screening and decoherence-free subspaces found in biological cells.\nThermodynamics.\nThere is reason to believe that violating the uncertainty principle also strongly implies the violation of the second law of thermodynamics. See Gibbs paradox.\nRejection of the principle.\nUncertainty principles relate quantum particles \u2013 electrons for example \u2013 to classical concepts \u2013 position and momentum. This presumes quantum particles have position and momentum. Edwin C. Kemble pointed out in 1937 that such properties cannot be experimentally verified and assuming they exist gives rise to many contradictions; similarly Rudolf Haag notes that position in quantum mechanics is an attribute of an interaction, say between an electron and a detector, not an intrinsic property. From this point of view the uncertainty principle is not a fundamental quantum property but a concept \"carried over from the language of our ancestors\", as Kemble says.\nApplications.\nSince the uncertainty principle is such a basic result in quantum mechanics, typical experiments in quantum mechanics routinely observe aspects of it. All forms of spectroscopy, including particle physics use the relationship to relate measured energy line-width to the lifetime of quantum states. Certain experiments, however, may deliberately test a particular form of the uncertainty principle as part of their main research program. These include, for example, tests of number\u2013phase uncertainty relations in superconducting or quantum optics systems. Applications dependent on the uncertainty principle for their operation include extremely low-noise technology such as that required in gravitational wave interferometers.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31885", "revid": "43587982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31885", "title": "United Kindom", "text": ""}
{"id": "31886", "revid": "15242876", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31886", "title": "UKP", "text": "UKP may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31888", "revid": "4637213", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31888", "title": "U-boat", "text": "German submarine\nU-boats are naval submarines operated by Germany, especially during World War I and World War II. The term is an anglicized form of the German word , a shortening of (lit.\u2009'under-sea boat'). Austro-Hungarian Navy submarines were also known as U-boats.\nU-boats are especially known for their use in unrestricted submarine warfare in both world wars, attempting to disrupt merchant traffic towards the UK and force the UK out of the war. In World War I, Germany intermittently waged unrestricted submarine warfare against the UK: a first campaign in 1915 was abandoned after strong protests from the US but in February 1917 the Germans, facing deadlock on the continent, saw no other option than to resume the campaign. The renewed campaign failed to achieve its goal mainly because of the introduction of convoys. Instead the campaign ensured final defeat as the campaign was a contributing factor to the entry of the US in the First World War.\nIn World War II, Karl D\u00f6nitz, supreme commander of the 's U-boat arm (, was convinced the UK and its convoys could be defeated by new tactics, and tried to focus on convoy battles. Though U-boat tactics initially saw success in the Battle of the Atlantic, greatly disrupting Allied shipping, improved convoy and anti-submarine tactics such as high-frequency direction finding and the Hedgehog anti-submarine system began to take a toll on the German U-boat force. This ultimately came to a head in May 1943, known as Black May, in which U-boat losses began to outpace their effect on shipping.\nEarly U-boats (1850\u20131914).\nA more advanced submersible, the three-man \"Brandtaucher,\" was designed by Wilhelm Bauer in 1850 and constructed by Schweffel and Howaldt in Kiel. It was lost on 1 February 1851 during a test dive.\nSome 50 years later in 1903, the Friedrich Krupp Germaniawerft dockyard in Kiel completed the first fully functional German-built submarine, \"Forelle\", which Krupp sold to Russia during the Russo-Japanese War in April 1903.\nAt this time, the German commander of the Navy Alfred von Tirpitz was building the High Seas Fleet with which he intended to challenge the supremacy of the UK Royal Navy. He focused on expensive battleships and there was no role for submarines in his fleet.\nOnly when Krupp received an order for three U-boats from Russia, did Tirpitz order one submarine. The was a completely redesigned \"Karp\"-class and when the Imperial German Navy commissioned it on 14 December 1906, it was the last major navy to adopt submarines.\nThe \"U-1\" had a double hull and a single torpedo tube. It used an electric motor powered by batteries for submerged propulsion and a K\u00f6rting kerosene engine for charging the batteries and propulsion on the surface. The 50%-larger was commissioned in 1908, had four 45\u00a0cm torpedo tubes and a much larger battery capacity. But the boat was a failure due to problems with both the kerosene and electrical engines. The next two U-boats of the Type U 3-class, ordered on 13 August 1907, were more reliable.\nIn March 1907, the Germaniawerft received an order from the Austro-Hungarian Navy for two U-boats and in October Norway ordered a similar U-boat.\nThese foreign U-boats were based on an improved \"U-1\" design. Between 1908 and 1910, the German navy ordered fourteen boats with four 45\u00a0cm torpedo tubes and two reload torpedoes. These boats used a kerosene engine which was safer than gasoline and more powerful than steam, but the white exhaust of the kerosene betrayed the presence of the U-boats, robbing them of their primary asset, their stealth. Diesel engines did not have that disadvantage, but a powerful and reliable diesel engine was still under development. As some equipment could not be delivered within the specified weight limits, there was some variation in the total weight of each U-boat. Usually this was solved by reducing the number of battery cells, which affected underwater performance. The last two of these U-boats, the Type U 17, was designed to receive diesel engines but due to delays in developing a lightweight diesel engine, these U-boats were equipped with kerosene engines.\nBetween 1910 and 1912, twenty-three diesel U-boats were ordered when diesel engines finally became available: four Type U 19 U-boats on 20 November 1910 from KWD with MAN engines and four similar Type U 23 U-boats from Germaniawerft with Germaniawerft engines on 18 March 1911. These boats were larger to accommodate the diesel engines, and were equipped with torpedo tubes. On 12 February 1912 a further four similar Type U 27 were ordered from KWD, and although Germaniawerft experienced problems with its diesel engines, it received an order for eleven Type U 31 U-boats. Due to these problems, delivery of these U-boats was delayed up to eight months and ran into 1915.\nAt the start of World War I in 1914, Germany had 48 submarines of 13 classes in service or under construction.\nWorld War I (1914\u20131918).\nOperations.\nDuring 1914, the U-boats operated against the British fleet: on 5 September 1914, the light cruiser was sunk by , the first ship to be sunk by a submarine using a self-propelled torpedo. On 22 September, sank the armoured cruisers , , and . As a result, the British Grand Fleet had to withdraw to safer waters in Northern Ireland. Against merchant ships, U-boats observed the \"prize rules\" which meant they had to stop and inspect the ship, and take the crew off the ship before they could sink it. On 20 October 1914, sank the first merchant ship, , off Norway. Only ten merchants were sunk in that way before policy was changed on 18 February 1915.\nOn the continent German hopes for a quick victory were dashed and a stalemate had settled on the front. The Germans hoped to break the deadlock by starting an unrestricted submarine campaign against shipping in the waters around the British Isles. This was also cited as a retaliation for British minefields and shipping blockades. Under the instructions given to U-boat captains, they could sink merchant ships, even neutral ones, without warning. Only 29 U-boats were available for the campaign, and not more than seven were active around the British Isles at any time. The U-boats failed to enforce a blockade but the sinking of three liners including the RMS Lusitania, with loss of American lives, outraged the US so that the Kaiser had to stop the campaign on 19 September 1915. After the stop of the campaign, most of the U-boats were sent to the Mediterranean.\nAt the beginning of 1916, 54 U-boats were available, and the Kaiser allowed again operations around the British Isles, but with strict rules: no attacks on liners, and outside the war zone around the British Isles attacks were only allowed on armed merchant ships. But on 24 March, after 25 Americans were killed in the torpedoing of the ferry the US threatened to sever diplomatic ties, which persuaded the Germans to fully reapply prize rules.\nIn September 1916, 120 U-boats were in service, and again some were sent to the Mediterranean. Whilst around British Isles prize rules were observed, in the Mediterranean a new unrestricted campaign was started. The renewed German campaign was effective, sinking \u00a0GRT of shipping between October 1916 and January 1917. Despite this, the deadlock situation on the continent frontlines demanded even greater results, and on 1 February 1917, Germany restarted the unrestricted submarine campaign around British Isles. Germany took the gamble that the U-boat campaign would force the UK out of the war before the US could effectively enter. On 3 February, the US severed diplomatic relations with Germany, and on 6 April, the US declared war on Germany. Unrestricted submarine warfare in 1917 was very successful, sinking more than \u00a0GRT a month. With the introduction of convoys in August 1917, shipping losses declined to \u00a0GRT a month on average, which was not sufficient to force the UK out of the war. With deteriorating conditions on the continent, all U-boats were recalled on 31 October 1918. Under the terms of armistice of 11 November 1918, U-boats were to immediately surrender. All U-boats were either scrapped or given to Allied navies.\nOf the 373 German U-boats that had been built, 179 were operational or nearly operational at the end of the war. 178 were lost by enemy action. 512 officers and 4894 enlisted men were killed. Of the surviving German submarines, 14 U-boats were scuttled and 122 surrendered. They sank 10 pre-dreadnought battleships, 18 cruisers, and several smaller naval vessels. They further destroyed 5,708 merchant and fishing vessels for a total of \u00a0GRT and the loss of about 15,000 sailors. The Pour le M\u00e9rite, the highest decoration for gallantry for officers, was awarded to 29 U-boat commanders. The three most successful U-boat commanders were Lothar von Arnauld de la Peri\u00e8re (195 ships with \u00a0GRT), followed by Walter Forstmann (149 ships with \u00a0GRT ), and Max Valentiner (144 ships with \u00a0GRT ).\nWorld War I Classes.\nWhen the German Army captured three ports on the Belgian coast in the opening stages of the war, the German navy ordered coastal submarines to be operated from these ports against the English coast. As the war was then expected to end in a matter of months, only very small U-boats could be designed with an expected building time of four months. On 15 October 1914 fifteen Type UB I U-boats were ordered, and based on that design, on 23 November a further fifteen Type UC I coastal minelaying U-boats were ordered. Given the weakness of the Austro-Hungarian Navy and the need to help their Turkish Allies, the German Navy sent some of these U-boats to the Dardanelles and Black Sea.\nIn the spring of 1915 it became clear that the war would continue well into 1916 and more coastal U-boats were ordered. The Type UB I and UC I had fullfilled the expectations but were underpowered. Thirty U-boats of the successing Type UB II were ordered, which were with around double in size. As with the cessation of unrestricted U-boat warfare in September 1915, mine warfare became more prominent, a record number of 64 Type UC II minelaying U-boats were ordered, which allowed for the first time for the mass-production of a U-boat. The Type UC II proved to be an ideal combination of mine and torpedo armament: on the same patrol it could lay minefields and attack shipping on the way to its target.\nOn the resumption of the U-boat campaign in 1916, it was realized that not enough large U-boats could be built in time, and as a compromise it was decided to build an enlargened coastal U-boat capable of patrolling in the Western Approaches. The hull of the Type UC II was taken as a basis, the forward mineshaft room was replaced with a torpedo room, more powerful diesel engines provided better surface speed and larger fuel tanks extended the range. On 2 May 1916 the first twenty-four Type UB III were ordered and as the war prolonged, more than 200 were ordered but only 96 were commissioned before the armistice. \nInterwar years (1919\u20131939).\nConstruction.\nThe Treaty of Versailles ending World War I signed at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919 limited the surface navy of Germany's new Weimar Republic to only six battleships, six cruisers, twelve destroyers and twelve torpedo boats. The treaty also restricted the independent tonnage of ships and forbade the construction of submarines. In order to circumvent the restrictions of the treaty, a submarine design office called Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw (IVS) was set up in the Netherlands The IVS was run by Krupp and made it possible to maintain a lead in submarine technology by designing and constructing submarines in Holland for other nations. The IVS made designs for small 250-ton U-boats, medium 500-ton U-boats and large 750-ton U-boats.\nThe IVS constructed three 500-ton medium submarines in Finland between 1927 and 1931, known as the Vetehinen-class. These ships were the prototypes for the subsequent German Type VII U-boat. In 1933 a small 250-ton submarine, the \"Vesikko\" was built. This submarine was nearly identical to the subsequent German Type II U-boat. A fifth very small 100-ton submarine, the Saukko was built in 1933 as well. In Spain a large 750-ton boat was built between 1929 and 1930. After the Spanish lost interest in the U-boat, they sold it to Turkey where it entered service as G\u00fcr. German sailors assisted in the trials for these submarines. These secret programs were exposed in the Lohmann Affair and as a result the Head of the , Hans Zenker, had to resign. His successor Erich Raeder continued the policy of secretly breaching the Versailles treaty. On 15 November 1932, a plan was approved for an expansion of the German navy which included U-boats.\nIn 1935, Britain sought to limit Germany's increasingly apparent breaches of the Versailles treaty, negotiating the Anglo-German Naval Agreement. Under the agreement, Germany was relieved of some Treaty of Versailles restrictions and permitted to build ships in a 100:35 tonnage ratio to the British fleet. For submarines the Germans obtained parity in tonnage, but promised a 45 percent limit unless special circumstances arose. This allowed 24,000 tons for U-boat building. Only one week after the agreement was signed, the first of six Type II U-boats, was commissioned in the German Navy, which changed name from (Imperial Navy) to (War Navy). Within the year, the Germans commissioned a total of 36 U-boats for a total of 12,500 tons:\nKarl D\u00f6nitz was appointed as head of the submarine section of the . He believed firmly that in spite of the Anglo-German Naval agreement and Hitler's policy of avoiding conflict with Britain, the next war would be with Britain. He requested the remaining 11,500\u00a0tons be used to build twenty-three medium submarines, which he considered ideal for a commerce war against British convoys. Raeder disagreed, and opted for a more balanced expansion of the submarine fleet:\nTwenty-one of these twenty-three U-boats were commissioned before World War II. In 1937, Britain announced it would expand its submarine fleet from 52,700 to 70,000\u00a0tons. Again, Raeder decided that the extra 7,785\u00a0tons would be divided between medium and large U-boats:\nDuring 1938, Hitler changed his attitude towards Britain. Whilst he still hoped that Britain would not interfere in his foreign policy, he needed a navy that could act as a deterrent. Hitler wanted to invoke the escape clause of the naval agreement and to have 70,000\u00a0tons of submarines. Between May 1938 and January 1939, Raeder ordered 52 more U-boats to be completed by 1942:\nIn 1939, the ambitious Plan Z was launched. It called for the construction of a German navy capable of challenging the Royal Navy. The plan included 249 U-boats for a total of 200,000 tons. But when World War II broke out only months after the plan was announced, only a handful of the planned U-boats ended up being built.\nWhen World War II started, Germany had 56 U-boats commissioned, of which 46 were operational and 22 having sufficient range for Atlantic operations; the other 24 were limited to North Sea operations.\nDevelopments.\nGerman U-boat designs of World War II were significant improvements over their World War I equivalents. By using new steel alloy and welding instead of riveting, they had stronger hulls and could dive deeper. The diving time was improved to thirty seconds for a medium U-boat. The power of diesel engines rose, allowing higher speeds while surfaced. Range was increased by installing saddle tanks, which were on open to the sea on the bottom in order to balance pressure, with the diesel fuel floating freely atop the seawater. A technique was developed for economical cruising where only one of the two diesel engines would be run and would drive the two propeller shafts through a coupling with the two electro engines.\nAnother vast improvement was the introduction of new torpedo types for the U-boats: the classic G7a torpedo propelled by compressed air had a much larger warhead than its WWI equivalent, but more important was the introduction of the electric G7e torpedo. Though slow with range limitations, it left no telltale bubble wake, making it ideal for daylight attacks. During WWI, the Germans had briefly experimented with magnetic pistols and these were further developed now as the standard pistol for torpedoes. The classic contact pistol required a torpedo to detonate against the ship's hull, whilst a magnetic torpedo could detonate below a ship, resulting in a much more damaging explosion. Thus, it was hoped that one torpedo would suffice to break the back of a ship, and a U-boat could sink many more ships with its supply of torpedoes.\nAll U-boats were now also equipped with long- and short-wave transmitters, enabling communications with bases ashore and with other U-boats. This allowed for better operational information and guidance.\nU-Boat design and layout.\nFrom bow to stern, A typical U-boat design comprised these sections:\nWorld War II (1939\u20131945).\nOperations.\nDuring World War II, U-boat warfare was the major component of the Battle of the Atlantic, which began in 1939 and ended with Germany's surrender in 1945. British prime minister Winston Churchill later wrote \"The only thing that really frightened me during the war was the U-boat peril.\"\nAs convoying had been key in the defeat of German submarines during World War I, the British began organizing convoys at once in September 1939. The most common U-boat attack against convoys during the early years of the war was conducted on the surface and at night. During 1939 the Germans made a few attempts to attack convoys with their new 'wolfpack' tactic, but these were not successful. The invasion of Norway in April 1940 temporarily halted all U-boat operations against merchant shipping. During the invasion many technical problems with the German torpedoes were exposed and only in August 1940 could the campaign against convoys be revived. There were now fewer U-boats operational than at the beginning of the war, but thanks to the new bases in France and Norway U-boats could reach their operation grounds far more easily. During the following months the U-boats put their 'wolfpack' tactic against convoy in practice with spectacular results. This period, before the Allied forces developed truly effective antisubmarine warfare tactics, was referred to by German submariners as the happy time ().\nIn the beginning of 1941, British countermeasures began to take effect: in March 1941, the three leading U-boat aces were sunk during convoy battles. In May 1941, the British were able to break into German secret naval Enigma communications and could henceforth reroute convoys around U-boat concentrations. When American warships started to escort Atlantic convoys, the U-boats were restricted in their operations as Hitler wanted to avoid conflict with the US. The campaign against merchant shipping received further impediments when Hitler interfered on two occasions: first he insisted that a small force of U-boats be kept on station in the Arctic as a precaution against a possible Allied invasion in Norway, and next, he ordered a substantial force of U-boats to operate in the Mediterranean in order to support the Italians and Rommel's Afrika Korps.When the US entered the war, the focus of U-boat operations shifted to the Atlantic coast of the United States and Canada, where no convoys were organized and anti-submarine measures were inadequate. There followed a Second Happy Time when U-boats could extend their successful operation to the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean Sea. By mid-1942 an adequate defense was organized in these regions; U-boats returned to their original and crucial hunting grounds on the North Atlantic convoy lanes. The renewed offensive against convoys reached its climax in March 1943, when two-thirds of all ships sunk had been sailing in convoys. The Allies put effective countermeasures into effect, and only two months later on 24 May, D\u00f6nitz had to stop the campaign due to heavy losses.\nBy the end of the war, almost 3,000 Allied ships (175 warships; 2,825 merchant ships) had been sunk by U-boats. In total, 1181 U-boats entered service before the German surrender, of which 863 executed war patrols, and 785 were lost. 222 U-boats were scuttled by their crews and 174 surrendered to Allied forces. 121 U-boats were scuttled in 1945-46 during Operation Deadlight.\nU-boat developments.\nIn 1940 the Germans made successful tests with the V-80 experimental submarine featuring a new type of propulsion: surfaced, it used the classic diesel engines, but submerged it used a revolutionary hydrogen peroxide air-independent propellant system designed by Hellmuth Walter. With this Walter-turbine, underwater speeds of above 20 knots were possible, much greater than the 4-knot cruising and 6-knot maximum speeds attainable through battery-powered electrical engines. Four more experimental Type XVIIA U-boats with Walter turbines were built and tested but could not be implemented into a big frontline U-boat. Unlike a classic U-boat that could recharge its batteries with the diesel engines, once a Walter U-boat had consumed its hydrogen peroxide propellant it could not submerge anymore. The Germans did not possess the resources and plants to produce sufficient hydrogen peroxide to operate a fleet of Walter submarines. Despite these limitations, 24 frontline Type XVIIB coastal submarines were ordered, but only three were built and none were operational before the end of the war.\nThe Walter U-boats had very large hulls to store fuel for submerged propulsion. Once it became clear these Walter U-boats would not be operational in time, the Walter U-boat hull design was reused with a different approach: the space for the hydrogen peroxide tanks was used to store much larger batteries. With massively increased battery power, U-boats enjoyed much greater speeds and endurance when submerged. Based on the design of an Atlantic Walter U-boat, the Type XXI \"\" was designed to boost submerged performance. Smaller Type XXIII coastal were also taken into production. These were mass-produced, with prefabricated segments constructed at different sites and then assembled at the bigger shipyards.\nAfter the German invasion of the Netherlands in 1940, the Germans captured some Dutch submarines equipped with a \"Schnorchel\" (snorkel) but saw no need for them until 1943. The was a retractable pipe that supplied air to the diesel engines while submerged at periscope depth, allowing the boats to cruise submerged on diesel engines and recharge their batteries. It was far from a perfect solution: problems occurred with the device's valve sticking shut or closing as it dunked in rough weather; since the system used the entire pressure hull as a buffer, the diesels would instantaneously suck huge volumes of air from the boat's compartments, often causing painful ear injuries. Speed was limited to , lest the device snap from stress. Whilst running submerged with the , the Gruppenhorchger\u00e4t was rendered useless by diesel engine noise. The nonetheless allowed old Type VII and IX U-boats to operate in waters that previously denied to them.\nPost\u2013World War II and Cold War (after 1945).\nType 201, 202 and 205.\nThe London and Paris Conferences in 1954 paved the way for West Germany to join NATO, and from 1955 the West German was allowed to commission submarines up to 350 tons for coastal operations. Two classes were designed: the 350-ton Type 201 and the 100-ton Type 202. Pending the completion of the first of these U-boats, the Bundesmarine needed submarines to test the new equipment and to train crews. No submarines could be purchased from foreign navies, so in 1957, two Type XXIIIs and a Type XXI U-boats sunk in 1945 were raised and repaired. In 1959, twelve Type 201 and three Type 202 U-boats were ordered. As both types were designed to be deployed in the Baltic Sea, they were built in non-magnetic steel to protect against magnetic naval mines and magnetic anomaly detectors. By using non-ejectable, non-reloadable torpedo tubes which needed much less space because of smaller fittings and the absence of compensation trim tanks, it was possible to mount eight tubes in the small Type 201. The Type 202 was even smaller and equipped with two torpedo tubes.\nThe first three Type 201 U-boats were commissioned in 1962. To continue the U-boat tradition, the new boats received the classic \"U\" designation starting with \"U-1\". In 1962, a redefinition of the tonnage calculation to include solid ballast meant the Type 201 would displace 395 tons. Consequently, tonnage limits established in the London and Paris Conferences were increased to 450 tons for current submarines and future U-boats limited to 1,000 tons. During construction of the first U-boats, it became apparent that an extra sonar needed to be installed. Since the Type 201 was constructed in sections, it was easy to enlarge the hull with an extra 1.8-meter section to accommodate the sonar. This extra section increased displacement to 420 tons, remaining well-within conference limits. Deemed the Type 205, five of these enlarged vessels would be completed by the end of 1963.\nType 206 and 207.\nIn 1962, Norway placed an order for fifteen coastal submarines. In order to train crews, \"U-3\" was loaned to the Norwegian Navy, between 10 July 1962 and 20 June 1964, she was named HNoMS \"Kobben\". The fifteen U-boats built between 1963 and 1967 had a high-tension steel hull for increased diving depth and were classified as Type 207. The Danish Navy bought the licences to build two coastal submarines based on the Type 205 plans in 1965. Due to complications with the installation of Danish equipment in these designs, construction was not completed until 1970.By 1963, it became obvious that the new non-magnetic steel had corrosion problems when small cracks began to form in the pressure hull. Whilst U-3 continued training and testing in the Norwegian Navy, \"U-1\" and \"U-2\" were laid up. The five U-boats \"U-4\" to \"U-8\" received zinc paint coating to protect the hull, but nevertheless had to undergo regular testing of their maximum diving depth. Eventually, these five U-boats were assigned to the U-boat Training Group. Two new hulls in classic magnetic steel were built, and as much as possible equipment of the old Type 201 \"U-1\" and \"U-2\" was recovered for these new type 205 U-boats, which received the same identification \"U-1\" and \"U-2\". Meanwhile, the German Navy found little use for the two ordered Type 202 U-boats had been completed by 1965; these U-boats did not receive an official U-boat number but were named \"Hans Techel\" and \"Friedrich Sch\u00fcrer.\" They were only in service with the Test Centre of U-boats until end of 1966. The last four U-boats \"U-9\" to \"U-12,\" from the original order of twelve U-boats were constructed with new non-magnetic steel which delayed their delivery to the Navy until 1967-1969.\nType 209 and variants.\nIn 1968, the German Navy ordered twelve more coastal submarines, named \"U-13\" to \"U-24.\" The Type 205 design was again enlarged, accommodating extra batteries to feed the ever-increasing array of electronics. This resulted in the 450-ton Type 206. A further six of these U-boats named \"U-25\" to \"U-30\" were ordered in 1970 to replace the six faulty U-boats \"U-3\" to \"U-8\". The German Navy wanted to order six larger Type 208 submarine-hunter U-boats, and although permission was obtained from the Western European Union for construction up to 1,000 tons, this order was never placed because there were financial burdens with the fiasco of the nonmagnetic U-boats and since a diesel-electric submarine was too slow as a submarine hunter for nuclear propelled submarines.\nHaving secured the permission to build larger submarines, the Type 209 diesel-electric submarine was designed as a much larger Type 205, with the same characteristics and armament, but with much larger battery capacity, the possibility for torpedo reloads and extra sensors. It was proposed as a very customizable export-sales submarine, available in five variants with a displacement between 1,000\u20131,500\u00a0tons. The first customer was the Hellenic Navy, which received four Type 209's in 1971-72. As of 2002[ [update]], fifty-one boats had been built for thirteen navies, with another twelve still ordered. In 1974, three 540 tons U-boats were built for the Israeli Navy. Based both on the type 206 and as a smaller Type 209, these three U-boats were classified as the Type 540. For political reasons these U-boats were not built in Germany but by Vickers Limited in England. In 1982, the Norwegian Navy ordered six 1,000 tons U-boats, to replace half of the Kobben-class submarines, these were classified as the Type 210. After receiving two Type 209 U-boats in 1974, the Argentine Navy ordered six larger 2,000 tons TR-1700 U-boats in 1977. Two of these were built in Germany and delivered after the Falklands War in 1984-85, the remaining four were to be built in Argentina, but these were never completed. In the early 1990s, Israel ordered three 1,565 tons submarines which were enlarged versions of the Type 209 but resembled more the later Type 212. The first three submarines were delivered in 1999-2000 as the Dolphin-class or Type 800.\nType 212 and variants.\nIn 1998, Germany started to construct the first of six Type 212 U-boats. Before the first was launched, two were ordered by Italy, and Greece ordered four enlarged Type 212 U-boats, which were classified as Type 214. Between 2005 and 2007, the four Type 212 , , and were commissioned in the German Navy and two in the Italian Navy. In 2015\u20132016, a further two Type 212 and were delivered to the German Navy, and in 2016-2017, the Italian Navy commissioned also two more Type 212. The Type 212 features an air-independent propulsion system using hydrogen fuel cells. While the Type 212 is also being purchased by Norway, the Type 214 has been designed as the follow-on export model. Nine Type 214s have been sold to South Korea and were delivered between 2007 and 2020. Two were delivered to Portugal as Type U 209PN sub-class U-boats in 2010-2011. Six Type 214s were ordered by Turkey in 2011 as the Reis-class for construction at the G\u00f6lc\u00fck Naval Shipyard. The first was commissioned in 2024.\nThe Type 216 was a design for a 4,000 tons U-boat with a much larger endurance. It was proposed to but was not bought by Australia. As of 2025[ [update]], no Type 216s have been ordered. Between 2022 and 2024, Germany built four 2,000 tons Type 218 U-boats for the Republic of Singapore Navy, which are based on the Type 212 and Type 214, with the same propulsion method and 'X' rudder, but armed with eight torpedo tubes.\nFootnotes.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31892", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31892", "title": "UK (disambiguation)", "text": "UK usually refers to the United Kingdom, a country in Europe.\nUK, U.K., Uk, or uk may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "31895", "revid": "2376", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31895", "title": "Useless language", "text": ""}
{"id": "31897", "revid": "50653992", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31897", "title": "Ubbi dubbi", "text": "Language game based on English\nUbbi dubbi is a language game spoken with the English language. After decades of history and predecessors, it was widely popularized by the 1972\u20131978 PBS children's show \"Zoom\". When \"Zoom\" was revived in 1999 on PBS, Ubbi dubbi was again a feature of the show.\nRules.\nUbbi dubbi works by adding \"-ub-\" before each vowel sound in a syllable (or, as a linguist might put it, \"insert [\u02c8\u028cb] after each syllable onset\"). The stress falls on the \"ub\" of the syllable that is stressed in the original word. In the word \"hello\" for example, which is stressed on the \"-lo\" syllable, the stress falls on the \"lub\" in \"hubellubo\".\nThe method of adding \"ub\" before each vowel sound has been described as \"iterative infixation\".\nIn popular culture.\nA variant of Ubbi Dubbi was popularized as the signature speech pattern of the cartoon character Mushmouth from the animated series \"Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids\" (1972), voiced by Bill Cosby. Cosby also used this speech variation in his \"Dentist\" monologue to illustrate the effects of Novocaine.\nIt was used in the episode \"Mentalo Case\" from the TV series \"The King of Queens\", between character Spence Olchin (Patton Oswalt) and a salesman at a toy convention.\nIt was also used between Penny and Amy in the episode \"The Veracity Elasticity\" of \"The Big Bang Theory\" as a means of having a secret conversation, to counter Sheldon and Leonard's use of Klingon.\nIn the video game \"Rayman Origins\", the Bubble Dreamer speaks Ubbi Dubbi.\nSince 2019, the \"Ubbi Dubbi Festival\" in Texas has been a major electronic dance music event, whose founder named it after the language game.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31898", "revid": "50018146", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31898", "title": "United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change", "text": "International environmental treaty\nThe United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) is the UN process for negotiating an agreement to limit dangerous climate change. It is an international treaty among countries to combat \"dangerous human interference with the climate system\". The main way to do this is limiting the increase in greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. It was signed in 1992 by 154 states at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), informally known as the Earth Summit, held in Rio de Janeiro. The treaty entered into force on 21 March 1994. \"UNFCCC\" is also the name of the Secretariat charged with supporting the operation of the convention, with offices on the UN Campus in Bonn, Germany.\nThe convention's main objective is explained in Article 2. It is the \"stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic [i.e., human-caused] interference with the climate system\". The treaty calls for continuing scientific research into the climate. This research supports meetings and negotiations to lead to agreements. The aim is to allow ecosystems to adapt to climate change. At the same time it aims to ensure there are no threats to food production from climate change or measures to address it. And it aims to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner. The UNFCCC's work currently focuses on implementing the Paris Agreement. This agreement entered into force in 2016. It aims to limit the rise in global temperature to well below above levels before the Industrial Revolution, and even aiming to hold it at . The Paris Agreement superseded the UNFCCC's Kyoto Protocol which had been signed in 1997 and ran from 2005 to 2020.\nBy 2022, the UNFCCC had 198 parties. Its supreme decision-making body, the Conference of the Parties (COP), meets every year. Other meetings at the regional and technical level take place throughout the year. The Paris Agreement mandates a review or \"global stocktake\" of progress towards meeting its goals every five years. The first of these took place at COP28 in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in 2023.\nThe treaty sets out responsibilities for three categories of states. These are developed countries, developed countries with special financial responsibilities, and developing countries. The developed countries are called Annex I countries. At first there were 38 of them. Annex I countries should adopt national policies and take corresponding measures to limit their emissions of greenhouse gases. They should also report on steps for returning individually or jointly to their 1990 greenhouse gas emission levels.\nIt is problematic that key signatory states are not adhering to their individual commitments. For this reason, the UNFCCC has been criticized as being unsuccessful in reducing greenhouse gas emission since its adoption. Parties to the convention have not agreed on a process allowing for majority voting. All decisions are taken by consensus, giving individual parties or countries a veto. The effectiveness of the Paris Agreement to reach its climate goals is also under debate, especially with regards to its more ambitious goal of keeping the global temperature rise to under 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C.\nIn a recent study, a hybrid meeting cycle alternating in-person summits with virtual thematic sessions is proposed as a means of enhancing equity and effectiveness in climate governance under the UNFCCC framework \nDevelopment.\nThe IPCC's First Assessment Report appeared in 1990. The report gave a broad overview of climate change science and the scientific consensus to date. It discussed uncertainties and provided evidence of warming. The authors said they are certain that greenhouse gases are increasing in the atmosphere because of human activity. This is resulting in more warming of the Earth's surface. The report led to the establishment of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).\nConvention Agreement in 1992.\nThe text of the convention was produced during the meeting of an Intergovernmental Negotiating Committee in New York from 30 April to 9 May 1992. The convention was adopted on 9 May 1992 and opened for signature on 4 June 1992 at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de Janeiro (known by its popular title, the Earth Summit). On 12 June 1992, 154 nations signed the UNFCCC, which upon ratification committed signatories' governments to reduce atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases with the goal of \"preventing dangerous anthropogenic interference with Earth's climate system\". This commitment would require substantial reductions in greenhouse gas emissions (see the later section, \"Stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations\"). Parties to the Convention have met annually from 1995 in Conferences of the Parties (COPs) to assess progress in dealing with climate change.\nArticle 3(1) of the Convention states that Parties should act to protect the climate system on the basis of \"common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities\", and that developed country Parties should \"take the lead\" in addressing climate change. Under Article 4, all Parties make general commitments to address climate change through, for example, climate change mitigation and adapting to the eventual impacts of climate change. Article 4(7) states:\nThe extent to which developing country Parties will effectively implement their commitments under the Convention will depend on the effective implementation by developed country Parties of their commitments under the Convention related to financial resources and transfer of technology and will take fully into account that economic and social development and poverty eradication are the first and overriding priorities of the developing country Parties.\nThe Convention specifies the aim of Annex I Parties was stabilizing their greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide and other anthropogenic greenhouse gases not regulated under the Montreal Protocol) at 1990 levels, by 2000.\nOverarching objective.\nThe ultimate objective of the Framework Convention is specified in Article 2: \"stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic [i.e., human-caused] interference with the climate system\". Article 2 of the convention says this \"should be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened and to enable economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner\".\nSix priority areas (Action for Climate Empowerment).\nAction for Climate Empowerment (ACE) is a term adopted by the UNFCCC in 2015 to have a better name for this topic than \"Article 6\". It refers to Article 6 of the convention's original text (1992), focusing on six priority areas: education, training, public awareness, public participation, public access to information, and international cooperation on these issues. The implementation of all six areas has been identified as the pivotal factor for everyone to understand and participate in solving the challenges presented by climate change. ACE calls on governments to develop and implement educational and public awareness programmes, train scientific, technical and managerial personnel, foster access to information, and promote public participation in addressing climate change and its effects. It also urges countries to cooperate in this process, by exchanging good practices and lessons learned, and strengthening national institutions. This wide scope of activities is guided by specific objectives that, together, are seen as crucial for effectively implementing climate adaptation and mitigation actions, and for achieving the ultimate objective of the UNFCCC.\nKey agreements and protocols.\nFurther commitments.\nIn addition to the Kyoto Protocol (and its amendment) and the Paris Agreement, parties to the Convention have agreed to further commitments during UNFCCC Conferences of the Parties. These include the Bali Action Plan (2007), the Copenhagen Accord (2009), the Canc\u00fan agreements (2010), and the Durban Platform for Enhanced Action (2012).\nAs part of the Bali Action Plan, adopted in 2007, all developed country Parties have agreed to \"quantified emission limitation and reduction objectives, while ensuring the comparability of efforts among them, taking into account differences in their national circumstances\". Developing country Parties agreed to \"[nationally] appropriate mitigation actions context of sustainable development, supported and enabled by technology, financing and capacity-building, in a measurable, reportable and verifiable manner.\" 42 developed countries have submitted mitigation targets to the UNFCCC secretariat, as have 57 developing countries and the African Group (a group of countries within the UN).\nAs part of the 2009 Copenhagen negotiations, a number of countries produced the Copenhagen Accord. The Accord states that global warming should be limited to below . The Accord does not specify what the baseline is for these temperature targets (e.g., relative to pre-industrial or 1990 temperatures). According to the UNFCCC, these targets are relative to pre-industrial temperatures.\n114 countries agreed to the Accord. The UNFCCC secretariat notes that \"Some Parties ... stated in their communications to the secretariat specific understandings on the nature of the Accord and related matters, based on which they have agreed to [the Accord].\" The Accord was not formally adopted by the Conference of the Parties. Instead, the COP \"took note of the Copenhagen Accord.\"\nAs part of the Accord, 17 developed country Parties and the EU-27 submitted mitigation targets, as did 45 developing country Parties. Some developing country Parties noted the need for international support in their plans.\nAs part of the Canc\u00fan agreements, developed and developing countries submitted mitigation plans to the UNFCCC. These plans were compiled with those made as part of the Bali Action Plan.\nAt the 2021 annual meeting UNFCCC launched the 'UN Race-to-Zero Emissions Breakthroughs'. The aim of the campaign is to transform 20 sectors of the economy in order to achieve zero greenhouse gas emissions. At least 20% of each sector should take specific measures, and 10 sectors should be transformed before COP\u00a026 in Glasgow. According to the organizers, 20% is a tipping point, after which the whole sector begins to irreversibly change.\nAt Berlin, Canc\u00fan, and Durban, the development needs of developing country parties were reiterated. For example, the Durban Platform reaffirms that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[...] social and economic development and poverty eradication are the first and overriding priorities of developing country Parties, and that a low-emission development strategy is central to sustainable development, and that the share of global emissions originating in developing countries will grow to meet their social and development needs.\nGreen Climate Fund.\nThe UN Sustainable Development Goal 13 (SDG 13) includes a target about the UNFCCC and explains how the Green Climate Fund is meant to be used: One of the five targets under SDG 13, meant to be achieved by 2030, states: \"Implement the commitment undertaken by developed-country parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to a goal of mobilizing jointly $100 billion annually by 2020 from all sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and fully operationalize the Green Climate Fund through its capitalization as soon as possible.\"\nThis target only has one indicator: Indicator 13.a is the \"Amounts provided and mobilized in United States dollars per year in relation to the continued existing collective mobilization goal of the $100 billion commitment through to 2025\".\nSecretariat and offices.\n\"UNFCCC\" is also the name of the Secretariat charged with supporting the operation of the convention, with offices on the UN Campus in Bonn, Germany. Offices were formerly located in Haus Carstanjen and in a building on the UN Campus known as Langer Eugen.\nThe secretariat is established under Article8 of the convention and headed by the Executive Secretary. The secretariat, augmented through the parallel efforts of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), aims to gain consensus through meetings and the discussion of various strategies. Since the signing of the UNFCCC treaty, Conferences of the Parties (COPs) have discussed how to achieve the treaty's aims.\nFrom 2010 to 2016 the head of the secretariat was Christiana Figueres, following by Patricia Espinosa who was appointed Executive Secretary on 18 May 2016 by United Nations Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon and took office on 18 July 2016. Espinosa retired on 16 July 2022. UN Under Secretary General Ibrahim Thiaw served as the acting Executive Secretary in the interim. On 15 August 2022, Secretary-General Ant\u00f3nio Guterres appointed former Grenadian climate minister Simon Stiell as Executive Secretary, replacing Espinosa.\nCurrent and former executive secretaries are:\nProcesses.\nRelationship with IPCC reports.\nThe reports published by IPCC play a key role in the annual climate negotiations held by the UNFCCC. For example, the UNFCCC invited the IPCC to prepare a report on global warming of 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C. The IPCC subsequently released the Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5 \u00b0C (SR15) in 2018. The report showed that it was possible to keep warming below 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C during the 21st century. But this would mean deep cuts in emissions. It would also mean rapid, far-reaching changes in all aspects of society. The report showed warming of 2\u00a0\u00b0C would have much more severe impacts than 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C. In other words: every bit of warming matters. SR15 had an unprecedented impact for an IPCC report in the media and with the public. It put the 1.5\u00a0\u00b0C target at the center of climate activism.\nConferences of the Parties (CoP).\nThe United Nations Climate Change Conference are yearly conferences held in the framework of the UNFCCC. They serve as the formal meeting of the UNFCCC Parties (\"Conferences of the Parties\") (COP) to assess progress in dealing with climate change, and beginning in the mid-1990s, to negotiate the Kyoto Protocol to establish legally binding obligations for developed countries to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions. Since 2005 the Conferences also served as the Meetings of Parties of the Kyoto Protocol (CMP) and since 2016 the Conferences also serve as Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement (CMA).\nThe first conference (COP1) was held in 1995 in Berlin. The 3rd conference (COP3) was held in Kyoto and resulted in the Kyoto protocol, which was amended during the 2012 Doha Conference (COP18, CMP 8). The COP21 (CMP11) conference was held in Paris in 2015 and resulted in adoption of the Paris Agreement. COP28 took place in the United Arab Emirates in 2023 and included the first global stocktake under the Paris Agreement. The UAE nominated Sultan al-Jaber, who is also head of Abu Dhabi's national oil company ADNOC, to preside over COP28. Azerbaijan will host COP29 in 2024.\nSubsidiary bodies.\nA subsidiary body is a committee that assists the Conference of the Parties. Subsidiary bodies include:\nNational communication.\nA \"National Communication\" is a type of report submitted by the countries that have ratified the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). Developed countries are required to submit National Communications every four years and developing countries should do so. Some Least Developed Countries have not submitted National Communications in the past 5\u201315 years, largely due to capacity constraints.\nNational Communication reports are often several hundred pages long and cover a country's measures to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions as well as a description of its vulnerabilities and impacts from climate change. National Communications are prepared according to guidelines that have been agreed by the Conference of the Parties to the UNFCCC. The (Intended) Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) that form the basis of the Paris Agreement are shorter and less detailed but also follow a standardized structure and are subject to technical review by experts.\nNationally Determined Contributions.\nAt the 19th session of the Conference of the Parties in Warsaw in 2013, the UNFCCC created a mechanism for \"Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs)\" to be submitted in the run up to the 21st session of the Conference of the Parties in Paris (COP21) in 2015. Countries were given freedom and flexibility to ensure that these climate change mitigation and adaptation plans were nationally appropriate. This flexibility, especially regarding the types of actions to be undertaken, allowed for developing countries to tailor their plans to their specific adaptation and mitigation needs, as well as towards other needs.\nIn the aftermath of COP21, these INDCs became Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) as each country ratified the Paris Agreement, unless a new NDC was submitted to the UNFCCC at the same time. The 22nd session of the Conference of the Parties (COP22) in Marrakesh focused on these Nationally Determined Contributions and their implementation, after the Paris Agreement entered into force on 4 November 2016.\nMembership and participation.\nAs of 2022, the UNFCCC has 198 parties including all United Nations member states, United Nations General Assembly observers the State of Palestine and the Holy See, UN non-member states Niue and the Cook Islands, and the supranational union European Union.\nClassification of Parties and their commitments.\nParties to the UNFCCC are classified as:\nAnnex I countries.\nThere are 43 Annex I Parties including the European Union. These countries are classified as industrialized countries and economies in transition. Of these, 24 are also Annex II Parties, including the European Union, and 14 are Economies in Transition.\nAnnex I countries (24 of these are also \"Annex II Parties)\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAnnex I countries that are \"Economies in Transition\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEngagement of civil society.\nIn 2014, The UN with Peru and France created the Global Climate Action Portal NAZCA for writing and checking all the climate commitments.\nThousands of observers from civil society, business and academia attend the COPs. They organize a huge programme of activities including officially coordinated \"side events\". These complement and inform the official negotiations.\nCivil Society Observers under the UNFCCC have organized themselves in loose groups, covering about 90% of all admitted organisations. Some groups remain outside these broad groupings, such as faith groups or national parliamentarians. The UNFCCC secretariat also recognizes the following groups as informal NGO groups (2016): Faith-based organizations, Education and Capacity Building and Outreach NGOs, parliamentarians.\nAn overview is given in the table below:\nAnalysis.\nInterpreting ultimate objective in Article 2.\nThe ultimate objective of the Framework Convention contains some key words that are discussed further below and shown here in italics: \"\"stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations\" in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent \"dangerous\" anthropogenic [i.e., human-caused] interference with the climate system\".\nTo stabilize atmospheric GHG concentrations, global anthropogenic GHG emissions would need to peak then decline (see climate change mitigation). Lower stabilization levels would require emissions to peak and decline earlier compared to higher stabilization levels. These lower stabilization levels are associated with lower magnitudes of global warming compared to higher stabilization levels.\nThere are a range of views over what level of climate change is \"dangerous\". Scientific analysis can provide information on the risks of climate change, but deciding which risks are dangerous requires value judgements.\nThe global warming that has already occurred poses a risk to some human and natural systems. Higher magnitudes of global warming will generally increase the risk of negative impacts. Climate change risks are \"considerable\" with 1 to 2\u00a0\u00b0C of global warming, relative to pre-industrial levels. 4\u00a0\u00b0C warming would lead to significantly increased risks, with potential impacts including widespread loss of biodiversity and reduced global and regional food security.\nClimate change policies may lead to costs that are relevant to the article 2. For example, more stringent policies to control GHG emissions may reduce the risk of more severe climate change, but may also be more expensive to implement.\nIn decision making, the precautionary principle is considered when possibly dangerous, irreversible, or catastrophic events are identified, but scientific evaluation of the potential damage is not sufficiently certain. The precautionary principle implies an emphasis on the need to prevent such adverse effects. Following the precautionary principle, uncertainty (about the exact effects of climate change) is not a reason for inaction, and this is acknowledged in Article 3.3 of the UNFCCC.\nInternational trade.\nAcademics and environmentalists criticize article 3(5) of the convention, which states that any climate measures that would restrict international trade should be avoided.\nReception.\nCriticism of processes.\nThe overall umbrella and processes of the UNFCCC and the adopted Kyoto Protocol have been criticized by some as not having achieved their stated goals of reducing the emission of greenhouse gases. The UNFCCC is a multilateral body concerned with climate change and can be an inefficient system for enacting international policy: Because the framework system includes over 190 countries and because negotiations are governed by consensus, small groups of countries can often block progress.\nThere has been a failure to achieve effective greenhouse gas emission reduction policy treaties since 1992. This has driven some countries like the United States to hold back from ratifying the UNFCCC's most important agreement\u2014the Kyoto Protocol\u2014in large part because the treaty did not cover developing countries which now include the largest CO2 emitters. However, this failed to take into account both the historical responsibility for climate change since industrialization, which is a contentious issue in the talks, and also responsibility for emissions from consumption and importation of goods (see carbon footprint). It has also led Canada to withdraw from the Kyoto Protocol in 2011 out of a wish not to make its citizens pay penalties that would result in wealth transfers out of Canada. Both the US and Canada are looking at internal Voluntary Emissions Reduction schemes to curb carbon dioxide emissions outside the Kyoto Protocol.\nThe perceived lack of progress has also led some countries to seek and focus on alternative high-value activities like the creation of the Climate and Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate Pollutants which seeks to regulate short-lived pollutants such as methane, black carbon and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), which together are believed to account for up to one third of current global warming but whose regulation is not as fraught with wide economic impacts and opposition.\nIn 2010, Japan stated that it will not sign up to a second Kyoto term, because it would impose restrictions on it not faced by its main economic competitors, China, India and Indonesia. A similar indication was given by the Prime Minister of New Zealand in November 2012. At the 2012 conference, last-minute objections at the conference by Russia, Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan were ignored by the governing officials, and they have indicated that they will likely withdraw or not ratify the treaty. These defections place additional pressures on the UNFCCC process that is seen by some as cumbersome and expensive: in the UK alone, the climate change department has taken over 3,000 flights in two years at a cost of over \u00a31,300,000 (British pounds sterling).\nFurther, the UNFCCC (mainly during the Kyoto protocol) failed to facilitate the transfer of environmentally sound technologies (SETs) which are mechanisms used to decrease the vulnerability of the human race against the unfavorable effects of climate change. One of the more widely used of these being renewable energy sources. The UNFCCC created the body \"technology mechanism\" who would distribute these resources to developing countries; however this distribution was too moderate and, coupled with the failings of the first commitment period of the Kyoto protocol, led to low ratification numbers for the second commitment (resulting in it not going ahead).\nBefore the 2015 United Nations Climate Change Conference, \"National Geographic\" magazine added to the criticism, writing: \"Since 1992, when the world's nations agreed at Rio de Janeiro to avoid 'dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system,' they've met 20 times without moving the needle on carbon emissions. In that interval we've added almost as much carbon to the atmosphere as we did in the previous century.\"\nAwards.\nIn 2016, the UNFCCC received the \"Prince or Princess of Asturias Award for International Cooperation\" by the Princess of Asturias Awards.\nMeetings of the Parties.\nA Conference of the Parties (COP) has been held annually for most years since 1995.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31899", "revid": "28167610", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31899", "title": "Universal Declaration of Human Rights", "text": "Document of human rights by the United Nations\nThe Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is an international document adopted by the United Nations General Assembly that codifies some of the rights and freedoms of all human beings. Drafted by a United Nations (UN) committee chaired by Eleanor Roosevelt, it was accepted by the General Assembly as Resolution 217 during its third session on 10 December 1948 at the Palais de Chaillot in Paris, France. Of the 58 members of the UN at the time, 48 voted in favour, none against, eight abstained, and two did not vote.\nA foundational text in the history of human and civil rights, the Declaration consists of 30 articles detailing an individual's \"basic rights and fundamental freedoms\" and affirming their universal character as inherent, inalienable, and applicable to all human beings. Adopted as a \"common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations\", the UDHR commits nations to recognize all humans as being \"born free and equal in dignity and rights\" regardless of \"nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, language, or any other status\".\nThe Declaration is generally considered to be a milestone document for its universalist language, which makes no reference to a particular culture, political system, or religion. It directly inspired the development of international human rights law, and was the first step in the formulation of the International Bill of Human Rights, which was completed in 1966 and came into force in 1976. Although not legally binding, the contents of the UDHR have been elaborated and incorporated into subsequent international treaties, regional human rights instruments, and national constitutions and legal codes.\nAll 193 member states of the UN have ratified at least one of the nine binding treaties influenced by the Declaration, with the vast majority ratifying four or more. While there is a wide consensus that the declaration itself is non-binding and not part of customary international law, there is also a consensus in most countries that many of its provisions are part of customary law, although courts in some nations have been more restrictive in interpreting its legal effect. Nevertheless, the UDHR has influenced legal, political, and social developments on both the global and national levels, with its significance partly evidenced by its 530 translations.\nStructure and content.\nThe underlying structure of the Universal Declaration was influenced by the \"Code Napol\u00e9on\", including a preamble and introductory general principles. Its final structure took form in the second draft prepared by French jurist Ren\u00e9 Cassin, who worked on the initial draft prepared by Canadian legal scholar John Peters Humphrey.\nThe Universal Declaration of Human Rights consists of the following:\nCassin compared the Declaration to the portico of a Greek temple, with a foundation, steps, four columns, and a pediment. Articles 1 and 2\u2014with their principles of dignity, liberty, equality and brotherhood\u2014serve as the foundation blocks. The seven paragraphs of the preamble, setting out the reasons for the Declaration, represent the steps leading up to the temple. The main body of the Declaration forms the four columns. The first column (articles 3\u201311) constitutes rights of the individual, such as the right to life and the prohibition of slavery. The second column (articles 12\u201317) constitutes the rights of the individual in civil and political society. The third column (articles 18\u201321) is concerned with spiritual, public, and political freedoms, such as freedom of religion and freedom of association. The fourth column (articles 22\u201327) sets out social, economic, and cultural rights. The final three articles provide the \"pediment\" which binds the structure together, as they emphasize the mutual duties of every individual to one another and to society.\nCharles Malik, the Lebanese representative on the drafting commission, pointed out the need for an article on the right or popular entitlement to \"a social and international order in which the rights and freedoms set forth in this Declaration can be fully realised\", which became Article 28.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nDuring World War II, the Allies\u2014known formally as the United Nations\u2014adopted as their basic war aims the Four Freedoms: freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom from want, and freedom from fear. Towards the end of the war, the United Nations Charter was debated, drafted, and ratified to reaffirm \"faith in fundamental human rights, and dignity and worth of the human person\" and commit all member states to promote \"universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms for all without distinction as to race, sex, language, or religion\". When the atrocities committed by Nazi Germany became fully apparent after the war, the consensus within the world community was that the UN Charter did not sufficiently define the rights to which it referred. It was deemed necessary to create a universal declaration that specified the rights of individuals so as to give effect to the Charter's provisions on human rights.\nThe drafting committee.\nIn June 1946, the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC)\u2014a principal organ of the newly founded United Nations that is responsible for promoting human rights, created the Commission on Human Rights (CHR)\u2014a standing body within the United Nations that was tasked with preparing what was initially conceived as an International Bill of Rights. It had 18 members from various national, religious, and political backgrounds, so as to be representative of humanity. In February 1947, the Commission established a special Universal Declaration of Human Rights Drafting Committee, chaired by Eleanor Roosevelt of the United States, to write the articles of the Declaration. Roosevelt, in her position, was key to the U.S. effort to encourage the General Assembly's adoption of a Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The Committee met in two sessions over the course of two years.\nCanadian John Peters Humphrey, the newly appointed Director of the Division of Human Rights within the United Nations Secretariat, was called upon by the UN Secretary-General to work on the project, becoming the Declaration's principal drafter. Other prominent members of the Drafting Committee included Vice-Chairman P.C. Chang of the Republic of China, Ren\u00e9 Cassin of France; and its Committee Rapporteur Charles Malik of Lebanon. A month after its creation, the Drafting Committee was expanded to include representatives of Australia, Chile, France, the Soviet Union, and the United Kingdom, in addition to the inaugural members from China, France, Lebanon, and the United States.\nCreation and drafting.\nHumphrey is credited with devising the \"blueprint\" for the Declaration, while Cassin composed the first draft. Both received considerable input from other members, each of whom reflected different professional and ideological backgrounds. The Declaration's pro-family phrases allegedly derived from Cassin and Malik, who were influenced by the Christian Democracy movement; Malik, a Christian theologian, was known for appealing across religious lines; he cited the Summa Theologica of Thomas Aquinas, and studied the different Christian sects. Chang urged removing all references to religion to make the document more universal, and used aspects of Confucianism to settle stalemates in negotiations. Hern\u00e1n Santa Cruz of Chile, an educator and judge, strongly supported the inclusion of socioeconomic rights, which had been opposed by some Western nations. The members agreed that the philosophical debate centered between the opposing opinions of Chang and Malik, with Malik later singling out Chang when thanking the members, saying that there were too many to mention, but Chang's ideas impacted his own opinions in the making of the draft.\nIn her memoirs, Roosevelt commented on the debates and discussions that informed the UDHR, describing one such exchange during the Drafting Committee's first session in June 1947:Dr. Chang was a pluralist and held forth in charming fashion on the proposition that there is more than one kind of ultimate reality. The Declaration, he said, should reflect more than simply Western ideas and Dr. Humphrey would have to be eclectic in his approach. His remark, though addressed to Dr. Humphrey, was really directed at Dr. Malik, from whom it drew a prompt retort as he expounded at some length the philosophy of Thomas Aquinas. Dr. Humphrey joined enthusiastically in the discussion, and I remember that at one point Dr. Chang suggested that the Secretariat might well spend a few months studying the fundamentals of Confucianism!\nIn May 1948, roughly a year after its creation, the Drafting Committee held its second and final session, where it considered the comments and suggestions of member states and international bodies, principally the United Nations Conference on Freedom of Information, which took place the prior March and April; the Commission on the Status of Women, a body within ECOSOC that reported on the state of women's rights worldwide; and the Ninth International Conference of American States, held in Bogota, Colombia from March to May 1948, which adopted the South American-based American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man, the world's first general international human rights instrument. Delegates and consultants from several United Nations bodies, international organizations, and nongovernmental organizations also attended and submitted suggestions. It was also hoped that an International Bill of Human Rights with legal force could be drafted and submitted for adoption alongside the Declaration.\nThe final draft.\nUpon the session's conclusion on 21 May 1948, the Committee submitted to the Commission on Human Rights a redrafted text of the \"International Declaration of Human Rights\" and the \"International Covenant of Human Rights\", which together would form an International Bill of Rights. The redrafted Declaration was further examined and discussed by the Commission on Human Rights in its third session in Geneva 21 May through 18 June 1948. The so-called \"Geneva text\" was circulated among member states and subject to several proposed amendments; for example, Hansa Mehta of India notably suggested that the Declaration assert that \"all human beings are created equal\", instead of \"all men are created equal\", to better reflect gender equality.\nCharles Theodore Te Water of South Africa fought very hard to have the word dignity removed from the declaration, saying that \"dignity had no universal standard and that it was not a 'right'\". Te Water believed\u2014correctly, as it turned out\u2014that listing human dignity as a human right would lead to criticism of the \"apartheid\" system that had just been introduced by the new National Party government of South Africa. Malik in response stated that Prime Minister Jan Smuts of South Africa had played an important role in drafting the United Nations Charter in 1945, and it was Smuts who inserted the word dignity as a human right into the charter. Despite te Water's efforts, the word dignity was included in the declaration as a human right.\nApproval.\nWith a vote of 12 in favour, none opposed, and four abstaining, the CHR approved the proposed Declaration, though was unable to examine the contents and implementation of the proposed Covenant. The Commission forwarded the approved text of the Declaration, as well as the Covenant, to the Economic and Social Council for its review and approval during its seventh session in July and August 1948. The Council adopted Resolution 151(VII) of 26 August 1948, transmitting the draft International Declaration of Human Rights to the UN General Assembly.\nThe Third Committee of the General Assembly, which convened from 30 September to 7 December 1948 during the third session of the United Nations General Assembly, held 81 meetings concerning the draft Declaration, including debating and resolving 168 proposals for amendments by United Nations member states. On its 178th meeting on 6 December, the Third Committee adopted the Declaration with 29 votes in favour, none opposed and seven abstentions. The document was subsequently submitted to the wider General Assembly for its consideration on 9 and 10 December 1948.\nAdoption.\nThe Universal Declaration was adopted by the General Assembly as UN Resolution A/RES/217(III)[A] on 10\u00a0December 1948 in the Palais de Chaillot, Paris. Of the 58 United Nations members at the time, 48 voted in favour, none against, eight abstained, and Honduras and Yemen failed to vote or abstain.\nEleanor Roosevelt is credited with having been instrumental in mustering support for the Declaration's adoption, both in her native U.S. and across the world, owing to her ability to appeal to different and often opposing political blocs.\nThe meeting record provides firsthand insight into the debate on the Declaration's adoption. South Africa's position can be seen as an attempt to protect its system of apartheid, which clearly violated several articles in the Declaration. Saudi Arabia's abstention was prompted primarily by two of the Declaration's articles: Article 18, which states that everyone has the right \"to change his religion or belief\", and Article 16, on equal marriage rights. The abstentions by the six communist nations were explained by their claim that the Declaration did not go far enough in condemning fascism and national-socialism. However, Eleanor Roosevelt felt that the reason for the abstentions was Article 13, which provided the right of citizens to leave their countries. Other observers pin the Soviet bloc's opposition to the Declaration's \"negative rights\", such as provisions calling on governments not to violate certain civil and political rights.\nThe British delegation, while voting in favour of the Declaration, expressed frustration that the proposed document had moral obligations but lacked legal force; it would not be until 1976 that the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights came into force, giving a legal status to most of the Declaration.\nThe 48 countries that voted in favour of the Declaration are:\n with group=lower-alpha was used in the infobox, and is not expected to be displayed until the Notes section is encountered below --&gt;\n\nEight countries abstained:\nTwo countries did not vote:\nCurrent UN member states, particularly in Africa, gained sovereignty later, and many nations in Europe and the Pacific were under administration due to the recently concluded World War II, which accounts for the comparatively smaller number of states who participated in the historic vote.\nInternational Human Rights Day.\n10 December, the anniversary of the adoption of the Universal Declaration, is celebrated annually as World Human Rights Day or International Human Rights Day. The commemoration is observed by individuals, community and religious groups, human rights organizations, parliaments, governments, and the United Nations. Decadal commemorations are often accompanied by campaigns to promote awareness of the Declaration and of human rights in general. 2008 marked the 60th anniversary of the Declaration, and was accompanied by year-long activities around the theme \"Dignity and justice for all of us\". Likewise, the 70th anniversary in 2018 was marked by the global \"#StandUpForHumanRights\" campaign, which targeted youth.\nImpact.\nSignificance.\nAt the time of the Declaration's adoption by the General Assembly in 1948, Eleanor Roosevelt said:318\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In giving our approval to the declaration today, it is of primary importance that we keep clearly in mind the basic character of the document. It is not a treaty; it is not an international agreement. It is not and does not purport to be a statement of law or of legal obligation. It is a declaration of basic principles of human rights and freedoms, to be stamped with the approval of the General Assembly by formal vote of its members, and to serve as a common standard of achievement for all peoples of all nations.\nThe UDHR is considered groundbreaking for providing a comprehensive and universal set of principles in a secular, apolitical document that explicitly transcends cultures, religions, legal systems, and political ideologies. Its claim to universality has been described as \"boundlessly idealistic\" and the \"most ambitious feature\".\nThe Declaration was officially adopted as a French document, with official translations in English, Chinese, Russian and Spanish, all of which are official working languages of the UN. Due to its inherently universalist nature, the United Nations has made a concerted effort to translate the document into as many languages as possible, in collaboration with private and public entities and individuals. In 1999, the \"Guinness Book of Records\" described the Declaration as the world's \"Most Translated Document\", with 298 translations; the record was once again certified a decade later when the text reached 370 different languages and dialects. The UDHR achieved a milestone of over 500 translations in 2016, and as of 2024, has been translated into 562 languages, remaining the most translated document.\nIn its preamble, governments commit themselves and their people to progressive measures that secure the universal and effective recognition and observance of the human rights set out in the Declaration. Eleanor Roosevelt supported the adoption of the text as a declaration, rather than as a treaty, because she believed that it would have the same kind of influence on global society as the United States Declaration of Independence had within the United States. Even though it is not legally binding, the Declaration has been incorporated into or influenced most national constitutions since 1948. It has also served as the foundation for a growing number of national laws, international laws, and treaties, as well as for a growing number of regional, subnational, and national institutions protecting and promoting human rights. These kinds of measures focus on some principles that regard every culture/community especially when martial status take place or inheritance. In other words, every culture has its own norms and every individual is allowed to practice them unless he/she use them as a source of power.\nThe Declaration's all-encompassing provisions serve as a \"yardstick\" and point of reference by which countries' commitments to human rights are judged, such as through the treaty bodies and other mechanisms of various human rights treaties that monitor implementation.\nLegal effect.\nIn international law, a declaration is distinct from a treaty in that it generally states aspirations or understandings among the parties, rather than binding obligations. The Declaration was explicitly adopted to reflect and elaborate on the customary international law reflected in the \"fundamental freedoms\" and \"human rights\" referenced in the United Nations Charter, which is binding on all member states. For this reason, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a fundamental constitutive document of the United Nations and, by extension, all 193 parties of the United Nations Charter.\nNevertheless, the status of the Declaration as a legally enforceable document varies widely around the world: some countries have incorporated it into their domestic laws, while other countries consider it merely a statement of ideals, with no binding provisions.287\u2013397\nMany international lawyers believe that the Declaration forms part of customary international law and is a powerful tool in applying diplomatic and moral pressure to governments that violate its articles. One prominent international jurist described the UDHR as being \"universally regarded as expounding generally accepted norms\". Other legal scholars have further argued that the Declaration constitutes \"jus cogens\", fundamental principles of international law from which no state may deviate or derogate. The 1968 United Nations International Conference on Human Rights advised that the Declaration \"constitutes an obligation for the members of the international community\" to all persons.\nThe Declaration has served as the foundation for two binding United Nations human rights covenants: the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The principles of the Declaration are elaborated in other binding international treaties such as the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination, the International Convention on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women, the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child, the United Nations Convention Against Torture, and many more. The Declaration continues to be widely cited by governments, academics, advocates, and constitutional courts, and by individuals who appeal to its principles for the protection of their recognized human rights.\nNational law.\nAccording to a 2022 study, the UDHR \"significantly accelerated the adoption of a particular set of [national]\u00a0constitutional rights\". One scholar estimates that at least 90 national constitutions drafted since the Declaration's adoption in 1948 \"contain statements of fundamental rights which, where they do not faithfully reproduce the provisions of the Universal Declaration, are at least inspired by it\". At least 20 African nations that attained independence in the decades immediately following 1948 explicitly referenced the UDHR in their constitutions. As of 2014, the constitutions that still directly cite the Declaration are those of Afghanistan, Benin, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Chad, Comoros, C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Gabon, Guinea, Haiti, Mali, Mauritania, Nicaragua, Niger, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, Senegal, Somalia, Spain, Togo, and Yemen. Moreover, the constitutions of Portugal, Romania, S\u00e3o Tom\u00e9 and Pr\u00edncipe, and Spain compel their courts to \"interpret\" constitutional norms consistently with the Universal Declaration.\nJudicial and political figures in many nations have directly invoked the UDHR as an influence or inspiration on their courts, constitutions, or legal codes. Indian courts have ruled the Indian Constitution \"[embodies] most of the articles contained in the Declaration\". Nations as diverse as Antigua, Chad, Chile, Kazakhstan, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Zimbabwe have derived constitutional and legal provisions from the Declaration. In some cases, specific provisions of the UDHR are incorporated or otherwise reflected in national law. The right to health or to protection of health is found in the constitutions of France, Belgium, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Peru, Thailand, and Togo; constitutional obligations on the government to provide health services exist in Armenia, Cambodia, Ethiopia, Finland, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Paraguay, Thailand, and Yemen.\nA survey of U.S. cases through 1988 found five references to the Declaration by the United States Supreme Court; sixteen references by federal courts of appeal; twenty-four references by federal district courts; one reference by a bankruptcy court; and several references by five state courts. Likewise, research conducted in 1994 identified 94 references to the Declaration by federal and state courts across the U.S.\nIn 2004, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in \"Sosa v. Alvarez-Machain\" that the Declaration \"does not of its own force impose obligations as a matter of international law\", and that the political branches of the U.S. federal government can \"scrutinize\" the nation's obligations to international instruments and their enforceability. However, U.S. courts and legislatures may still use the Declaration to inform or interpret laws concerned with human rights, a position shared by the courts of Belgium, the Netherlands, India, and Sri Lanka.\nPraise and support.\nThe Universal Declaration has received praise from a number of notable activists, jurists, and political leaders. Lebanese philosopher and diplomat Charles Malik called it \"an international document of the first order of importance\", while Eleanor Roosevelt\u2014first chairperson of the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) that helped draft the Declaration\u2014stated that it \"may well become the international Magna Carta of all men everywhere\". At the 1993 United Nations World Conference on Human Rights, one of the largest international gatherings on human rights, diplomats and officials representing 100 nations reaffirmed their governments' \"commitment to the purposes and principles contained in the Charter of the United Nations and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights\" and emphasized that the Declaration as \"the source of inspiration and has been the basis for the United Nations in making advances in standard setting as contained in the existing international human rights instruments\". In a speech on 5 October 1995, Pope John Paul II called the Declaration \"one of the highest expressions of the human conscience of our time\", despite the Vatican never adopting it. In a statement on 10 December 2003 on behalf of the European Union, Marcello Spatafora said that the Declaration \"placed human rights at the centre of the framework of principles and obligations shaping relations within the international community\".\nAs a pillar of international human rights, the UDHR enjoys widespread support among international and nongovernmental organizations. The International Federation for Human Rights (FIDH), one of the oldest human rights organizations, has as its core mandate the promotion of the respect for all rights set out in the Declaration, the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. Amnesty International, the third oldest international human rights organization, has regularly observed Human Rights Day and organized worldwide events to bring awareness and support of the UDHR. Some organizations, such as the Quaker United Nations Office and the American Friends Service Committee have developed curriculum or programmes to educate young people on the UDHR.\nSpecific provisions of the UDHR are cited or elaborated by interest groups in relation to their specific area of focus. In 1997, the council of the American Library Association (ALA) endorsed Articles 18 through 20 concerning freedoms of thought, opinion, and expression, which were codified in the ALA Universal Right to Free Expression and the Library Bill of Rights. The Declaration formed the basis of the ALA's claim that censorship, invasion of privacy, and interference of opinions are human rights violations.\nCriticism.\nSoviet Union and Marxism\u2013Leninism.\nDuring the creation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Soviet Union criticized its promoters for not prioritizing social rights over individual rights and positive rights over negative rights enough according to Marxism\u2013Leninism.\nIslam.\nMost Muslim-majority countries that were then members of the United Nations signed the Declaration in 1948, including the kingdoms of Afghanistan, Egypt, and Iraq, Pahlavi Iran, and the First Syrian Republic; the Republic of Turkey, which had an overwhelmingly Muslim population but an officially secular government, also voted in favour. Saudi Arabia was the sole abstainer on the Declaration among Muslim-majority countries, claiming that it violated the Islamic law (\"shar\u012b\u02bfa\"). Pakistan, officially an Islamic state, signed the declaration and critiqued the Saudi position, strongly arguing in favour of including freedom of religion as a fundamental human right of the UDHR.\nMoreover, some Muslim diplomats would later help draft other United Nations human rights treaties. For example, Iraq's representative to the United Nations, Bedia Afnan's insistence on wording that recognized gender equality resulted in Article 3 within the ICCPR and ICESCR, which, together with the UDHR, form the International Bill of Rights. Pakistani diplomat Shaista Suhrawardy Ikramullah influenced the drafting of the Declaration, especially with respect to women's rights, and played a role in the preparation of the 1951 Genocide Convention.\nIn 1982, the Iranian diplomat to the United Nations, who represented the country's newly installed Islamic republic, stated that the Declaration was \"a secular understanding of the Judeo-Christian tradition\" that could not be implemented by Muslims without conflict with \"shar\u012b\u02bfa\" law.\nOn 30 June 2000, member states of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation, which represents the Muslim world's largest intergovernmental body, officially resolved to support the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, an alternative document that says people have \"freedom and right to a dignified life in accordance with the Islamic Shari'ah\", without any discrimination on grounds of \"race, colour, language, sex, religious belief, political affiliation, social status or other considerations\". The Cairo Declaration is widely acknowledged to be a response to the UDHR, and uses similar universalist language, albeit derived solely from Islamic jurisprudence (\"fiqh\").\nRegarding the promulgation of the Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam, T. Jeremy Gunn, Professor of Law and Political Science at the International University of Rabat in Morocco, has stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA number of scholars in different fields have expressed concerns with the Declaration's alleged Western and secularist bias. Abdulaziz Sachedina observes that Muslims broadly agree with the Declaration's universalist premise, which is shared by Islam, but differ on specific contents, which many find \"insensitive to particular Muslim cultural values, especially when it comes to speaking about individual rights in the context of collective and family values in Muslim society\". However, he notes that most Muslim scholars, while opposing the inherently secular framework of the document, do respect and acknowledge some of its \"foundations\". Sachedina further argues that many Christians similarly criticized the Declaration for allegedly reflecting a secular and liberal bias in opposition to certain religious values.\nKazakh religious scholars Galym Zhussipbek and Zhanar Nagayeva have argued that the rejection or failed implementation of human rights in Muslim-majority countries and their seeming incompatibility with \"shar\u012b\u02bfa\" law originates from the current \"epistemological crisis of conservative Islamic scholarship and Muslim mind\", rooted in the centuries-old confinement of a role for reason within strict limits, and in the disappearance of rationalistic discursive Islamic theology (\"kal\u0101m\") as a dynamic science from the Muslim world. Furthermore, they affirm the necessity of undertaking an epistemological reform in Islamic scholarship, which denotes the incorporation of international standards of human rights and justice into the epistemology and methodology of Islamic jurisprudence (\"usul al-fiqh\").\nRiffat Hassan, a Pakistani-born American Islamic feminist scholar and Muslim theologian, has argued:What needs to be pointed out to those who uphold the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to be the highest, or sole, model, of a charter of equality and liberty for all human beings, is that given the Western origin and orientation of this Declaration, the \"universality\" of the assumptions on which it is based is\u2014at the very least\u2014problematic and subject to questioning. Furthermore, the alleged incompatibility between the concept of human rights and religion in general, or particular religions such as Islam, needs to be examined in an unbiased way.Faisal Kutty, a Muslim Canadian human rights activist, opines that a \"strong argument can be made that the current formulation of international human rights constitutes a cultural structure in which western society finds itself easily at home [...]. It is important to acknowledge and appreciate that other societies may have equally valid alternative conceptions of human rights.\" Irene Oh, director of the peace studies programme at Georgetown University, has argued that Muslim reservations towards some provisions of the UDHR, and the broader debate about the document's secular and Western bias, could be resolved through mutual dialogue grounded in comparative descriptive ethics.\n\"The Right to Refuse to Kill\".\nGroups such as Amnesty International and War Resisters International have advocated for \"The Right to Refuse to Kill\" to be added to the Universal Declaration, as has Se\u00e1n MacBride, a former Assistant Secretary-General of the United Nations and Nobel Peace Prize laureate. War Resisters International has stated that the right to conscientious objection to military service is primarily derived from Article 18 of the UDHR, which preserves the right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion. Some steps have been taken within the UN to make the right more explicit, with the Human Rights Council repeatedly affirming that Article 18 enshrines \"the right of everyone to have conscientious objection to military service as a legitimate exercise of the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion\".\nAmerican Anthropological Association.\nThe American Anthropological Association criticized the UDHR during its drafting process, warning that its definition of universal rights reflected a Western paradigm that was unfair to non-Western nations. They further argued that the West's history of colonialism and evangelism made them a problematic moral representative for the rest of the world. They proposed three notes for consideration with underlying themes of cultural relativism:\nThis stance has gradually been abandoned by most anthropologists, many of whom today see universal human rights as an important way through which discrimination and oppression of cultural minorities can be reduced.\nBangkok Declaration.\nDuring the lead-up to the World Conference on Human Rights that was held in 1993, ministers from several Asian states adopted the Bangkok Declaration, which reaffirms their governments' commitment to the principles of the United Nations Charter and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. They stated their belief that human rights are interdependent and indivisible, and stressed the need for universality, objectivity, and non-selectivity of human rights. However, at the same time, they emphasized the principles of sovereignty and non-interference, calling for greater emphasis upon economic, social, and cultural rights, and in particular, the right to economic development by establishing international collaboration directives between the signatories. The Bangkok Declaration is considered to be a landmark expression of Asian values with respect to human rights, which offers an extended critique of human rights universalism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31900", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31900", "title": "Universal Declaration of Human Rights/Text", "text": ""}
{"id": "31902", "revid": "47725437", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31902", "title": "Universalism", "text": "Concept that some ideas have universal applicability\nUniversalism is the philosophical and theological concept that some ideas have universal application or applicability.\nA belief in one fundamental truth is another important tenet in universalism. The living truth is seen as more far-reaching than the national, cultural, or religious boundaries or interpretations of that one truth. A community that calls itself \"universalist\" may emphasize the universal principles of most religions, and accept others in an inclusive manner.\nUniversalism can also mean the pursuit of unification of all human beings across geographic and other boundaries under Western values, or the application of Western universal or universalist constructs, such as human rights or international law.\nUniversalism has had an influence on modern-day Hinduism, in turn influencing modern Western spirituality.\nChristian universalism refers to the idea that every human will eventually receive salvation in a religious or spiritual sense, a concept also referred to as universal reconciliation.\nPhilosophy.\nPhilosophical universalism.\nIn philosophy, universality is the idea that universal facts exist and can be discovered, as opposed to relativism, which asserts that all facts are relative to one's perspective.\nMoral universalism.\nMoral universalism (also called \"moral objectivism\" or \"universal morality\") is the meta-ethical position that some system of ethics applies universally. That system is inclusive of all individuals, regardless of culture, race, sex, religion, nationality, sexual orientation, or any other distinguishing feature. Moral universalism is opposed to moral nihilism and moral relativism. However, not all forms of moral universalism are absolutist, nor do they necessarily value monism. Many forms of universalism, such as utilitarianism, are non-absolutist. Other forms such as those theorized by Isaiah Berlin, may value pluralist ideals.\nReligion.\nBah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith.\nIn the teachings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, a single God has sent all the historic founders of the world religions in a process of progressive revelation. As a result, the major world religions are seen as divine in origin and are continuous in their purpose. In this view, there is unity among the founders of world religions, but each revelation brings a more advanced set of teachings in human history and none are syncretic. In addition, the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings acknowledge that in every country and every people God has always revealed the divine purpose via messengers and prophets, masters and sages since time immemorial.\nWithin this universal view, the unity of humanity is one of the central teachings of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith. The Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed teachings state that since all humans have been created in the image of God, God does not make any distinction between people with regard to race, colour or religion. Thus, because all humans have been created equal, they all require equal opportunities and treatment. Hence the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed view promotes the unity of humanity, and that people's vision should be world-embracing and that people should love the whole world rather than just their nation.\nThe teaching, however, does not equate unity with uniformity; instead the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed writings advocate the principle of \"unity in diversity\" where the variety in the human race is valued. Operating on a worldwide basis this cooperative view of the peoples and nations of the planet culminates in a vision of the practicality of the progression in world affairs towards, and the inevitability of, world peace.\nBuddhism.\nThe term Universalism has been applied to different aspects of Buddhist thought by different modern authors.\nThe idea of universal salvation is key to the Mahayana school of Buddhism. A common feature of Mahayana Buddhism is the idea that all living beings have Buddha nature and thus all beings can aspire to become bodhisattvas, beings who are on the path to Buddhahood. This capacity is seen as something that all beings in the universe have. This idea has been termed \"bodhisattva universalism\" by the Buddhist studies scholar Jan Nattier.\nThe idea of universal Buddha nature has been interpreted in various ways in Buddhism, from the idea that all living beings have Buddha nature and thus \"can\" become Buddhas to the idea that because all beings have Buddha nature, all beings \"will definitely\" become Buddhas. Some forms of East Asian Mahayana Buddhism even extended the Buddha nature theory to plants and insentient phenomena. Some thinkers (such as Kukai) even promote the idea that the entire universe is the Buddha's body.\nThe \"Lotus Sutra\", an influential Mahayana scripture, is often seen as promoting the universality of Buddhahood, the Buddha's teaching as well as the equality of all living beings. Mahayana Buddhism also promotes a universal compassion towards all sentient beings and sees all beings as equally deserving of compassion. The doctrine of the One Vehicle (which states that all Buddhist paths lead to Buddhahood) is also often seen as a universalist doctrine.\nAdherents to Pure Land Buddhism point to Amitabha Buddha as a Universal Savior. According to the Pure Land Sutras (scriptures), before becoming a Buddha Amitabha vowed that he would save all beings and according to some Pure Land authors, all beings will be eventually saved through the work of Amida Buddha. As such, Pure Land Buddhism is often seen as an expression of a Buddhist universalism that compares to Christian universalism. This comparison has also been commented on by Christian theologians like Karl Barth.\nChinese Buddhism developed a form of Buddhist universalism which saw Confucianism, Daoism and Buddhism as different aspects of a single universal truth.\nIn Western Buddhism, the term Universalism may also refer to an nonsectarian and eclectic form of Buddhism which emphasizes ecumenism among the different Buddhism schools. American clergyman Julius A. Goldwater was one Buddhist figure who promoted a modern kind of Buddhist Universalism. For Goldwater, Buddhism transcends local contexts and culture, and his practice grew increasingly eclectic over time. Goldwater established the nonsectarian Buddhist Brotherhood of America which focused on ecumenical and nonsectarian Buddhism while also drawing on Protestant vocabulary and ideas.\nThe desire to develop a more universalist and nonsectarian form of Buddhism was also shared by some modernist Japanese Buddhist authors, including the influential D.T. Suzuki.\nChristianity.\nThe fundamental idea of Christian universalism is universal reconciliation \u2013 that all humans will ultimately receive salvation and be reconciled to God. They will eventually enter God's kingdom in Heaven, through the grace and works of the Lord Jesus Christ. Christian universalists hold that an everlasting hell does not exist (though most believe there is a temporary hell of some kind), and that unending torment was not what Jesus taught. They point to historical evidence showing that many early fathers of the church were universalists and attribute the origin of the idea of hell as eternal punishment to mistranslation. They also appeal to many texts of Scripture to argue that the concept of eternal hell is not biblically or historically supported either in Judaism or early Christianity.\nUniversalists cite numerous biblical passages which reference the salvation of all beings (such as Jesus' words in John 12:31-32, and Paul's words in Romans 5:18-19). In addition, they argue that an eternal hell is both unjust and contrary to the nature and attributes of a loving God.\nThe beliefs of Christian universalism are generally compatible with the essentials of Christianity, as they do not contradict any of the central affirmations summarized in the Nicene Creed. More specifically, universalists often emphasize the following teachings:\nIn 1899 the Universalist General Convention, later called the Universalist Church of America, adopted the Five Principles: the belief in God, Jesus Christ, the immortality of the human soul, the reality of sin and universal reconciliation.\nHistory.\nUniversalist writers such as George T. Knight have claimed that Universalism was a widely held view among theologians in Early Christianity. These included such important figures such as Alexandrian scholar Origen as well as Clement of Alexandria, a Christian theologian. Origen and Clement both included the existence of a non-eternal Hell in their teachings. Hell was remedial, in that it was a place one went to purge one's sins before entering into Heaven.\nBetween 1648-1697 English activist Gerrard Winstanley, writer Richard Coppin, and dissenter Jane Leade, each taught that God would grant all human beings salvation. The same teachings were later spread throughout 18th-century France and America by George de Benneville. People who taught this doctrine in America would later become known as the Universalist Church of America. The first Universalist Church in America was founded by John Murray (minister).\nThe Greek term \"apocatastasis\" came to be related by some to the beliefs of Christian universalism, but central to the doctrine was the restitution, or restoration of all sinful beings to God, and to His state of blessedness. In early Patristics, usage of the term is distinct.\nUniversalist theology.\nUniversalist theology is grounded in history, scripture, and assumptions about the nature of God. \"That All Shall Be Saved\" (2019) by Orthodox Christian theologian David Bentley Hart contains arguments from all three areas but with a focus on arguments from the nature of God. Thomas Whittemore wrote the book \"100 Scriptural Proofs that Jesus Christ Will Save All Mankind\" quoting both Old and New Testament verses which support the Universalist viewpoint.\nSome Bible verses he cites and are cited by other Christian universalists are:\nQuestions of Biblical Translation.\nChristian universalists point towards the mistranslations of the Greek word \u03b1\u03b9\u03ce\u03bd (literally \"age,\" but often assumed to mean \"eternity\") and its adjectival form \u03b1\u1f30\u03ce\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 (usually assumed to mean \"eternal\" or \"everlasting\"), as giving rise to the idea of an endless hell and the idea that some people will never be saved. For example, Revelation 14:11 says \"the smoke of their torment goes up \u03b5\u1f30\u03c2\u00a0\u03b1\u1f30\u1ff6\u03bd\u03b1\u03c2 \u03b1\u1f30\u03ce\u03bd\u03c9\u03bd\" which most literally means \"until ages of ages\" but is often paraphrased in translations as \"forever and ever.\"\nThis Greek word is the origin of the modern English word eon, which refers to a period of time or an epoch/age.\nThe 19th century theologian Marvin Vincent wrote about the word \"aion\", and the supposed connotations of \"eternal\" or \"temporal\":\nAion, transliterated aeon, is a period of longer or shorter duration, having a beginning and an end, and complete in itself. [...] Neither the noun nor the adjective, in themselves, carry the sense of \"endless\" or \"everlasting\".\"A number of scholars have argued that, in some cases, the adjective may not indicate duration at all, but may instead have a qualitative meaning. For instance, Dr. David Bentley Hart translates Matthew 25:46 as \"And these will go to the chastening of that Age, but the just to the life of that Age.\" In this reading, Jesus is not necessarily indicating how long the life and punishment last, but instead what kind the life and punishment are\u2014they are \"of the age [to come]\" rather than being earthly life or punishment. Dr. Thomas Talbott writes:[The writers of the New Testament] therefore came to employ the term \"ai\u014dnios\" as an eschatological term, one that functioned as a handy reference to the realities of the age to come. In that way they managed to combine the more literal sense of \"that which pertains to an age\" with the more religious sense of \"that which manifests the presence of God in a special way.\"Dr. Ken Vincent writes that \"When it (aion) was translated into Latin Vulgate, 'aion' became 'aeternam' which means 'eternal'. Likewise, Dr. Ilaria Ramelli explains:The mistranslation and misinterpretation of \u03b1\u1f30\u03ce\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 as \"eternal\" (already in Latin, where both \u03b1\u1f30\u03ce\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 and \u1f00\u0390\u03b4\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 are rendered \"aeternus\" and their fundamental semantic difference is blurred) certainly contributed a great deal to the rise of the doctrine of \"eternal damnation\" and of the \"eternity of hell.\"Among the English translations that do not render \u03b1\u1f30\u03ce\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2 as \"eternal\" or \"everlasting\" are Young's Literal Translation (\"age-during\"), the Weymouth New Testament (\"of the ages\"), the Concordant Literal Version (\"eonian\"), Rotherham's Emphasized Bible (\"age-abiding\"), Hart's New Testament (\"of that Age\"), and more.\nCatholicism.\nThe Catholic church believes that God judges everyone based only on their moral acts, that no one should be subject to human misery, that everyone is equal in dignity yet distinct in individuality before God, that no one should be discriminated against because of their sin or concupiscence, and that apart from coercion God exhausts every means to save mankind from evil: original holiness being intended for everyone, the irrevocable Old Testament covenants, each religion being a share in the truth, elements of sanctification in non-Catholic Christian communities, the good people of every religion and nation, everyone being called to baptism and confession, and Purgatory, suffrages, and indulgences for the dead. The church believes that everyone is predestined to Heaven, that no one is predestined to Hell, that everyone is redeemed by Christ's Passion, that no one is excluded from the church except by sin, and that everyone can either love God by loving others unto going to Heaven or reject God by sin unto going to Hell. The church believes that God's predestination takes everything into account, and that his providence brings out of evil a greater good, as evidenced, the church believes, by the Passion of Christ being all at once predestined by God, foretold in Scripture, necessitated by original sin, authored by everyone who sins, caused by Christ's executioners, and freely planned and undergone by Christ. The church believes that everyone who goes to Heaven joins the church, and that from the beginning God intended Israel to be the beginning of the church, wherein God would unite all persons to each other and to God. The church believes that Heaven and Hell are eternal.\nHinduism.\nAuthor David Frawley says that Hinduism has a \"background universalism\" and its teachings contain a \"universal relevance.\" Hinduism is also naturally religiously pluralistic. A well-known \"Rig Vedic\" hymn says: \"Ekam Sat Vipra Bahudha Vadanti\" meaning, \"Truth is One, though the sages know it variously.\" Similarly, in the \"Bhagavad G\u012bt\u0101\" (4:11), God, manifesting as an incarnation, states: \"As people approach me, so I receive them. All paths lead to me.\" The Hindu religion has no theological difficulties in accepting degrees of truth in other religions. Hinduism emphasizes that everyone actually worships the same God, whether one knows it or not.\nWhile Hinduism has an openness and tolerance towards other religions, it also has a wide range of diversity within it. There are considered to be six orthodox Hindu schools of philosophy/theology, as well as multiple unorthodox or \"heterodox\" traditions called \"darshanas\".\nHindu universalism.\nHindu universalism, also called Neo-Vedanta and neo-Hinduism, is a modern interpretation of Hinduism which developed in response to western colonialism and orientalism. It denotes the ideology that all religions are true and therefore worthy of toleration and respect.\nIt is a modern interpretation that aims to present Hinduism as a \"homogenized ideal of Hinduism\" with Advaita Vedanta as its central doctrine. For example, it presents that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... an imagined \"integral unity\" that was probably little more than an \"imagined\" view of the religious life that pertained only to a cultural elite and that empirically speaking had very little reality \"on the ground,\" as it were, throughout the centuries of cultural development in the South Asian region.\nHinduism embraces universalism by conceiving the whole world as a single family that deifies the one truth, and therefore it accepts all forms of beliefs and dismisses labels of distinct religions which would imply a division of identity.\nThis modernised re-interpretation has become a broad current in Indian culture, extending far beyond the Dashanami Sampradaya, the Advaita Vedanta Sampradaya founded by Adi Shankara. An early exponent of Hindu Universalism was Ram Mohan Roy, who established the Brahmo Samaj. Hindu Universalism was popularised in the 20th century in both India and the west by Vivekananda and Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan. Veneration for all other religions was articulated by Gandhi:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;After long study and experience, I have come to the conclusion that [1] all religions are true; [2] all religions have some error in them; [3] all religions are almost as dear to me as my own Hinduism, in as much as all human beings should be as dear to one as one's own close relatives. My own veneration for other faiths is the same as that for my own faith; therefore no thought of conversion is possible.\nWestern orientalists played an important role in this popularisation, regarding Vedanta to be the \"central theology of Hinduism\". Oriental scholarship portrayed Hinduism as a \"single world religion\", and denigrated the heterogeneity of Hindu beliefs and practices as 'distortions' of the basic teachings of Vedanta.\nIslam.\nIslam recognizes to a certain extent the validity of the Abrahamic religions, the Quran identifying Jews, Christians, and \"Sabi'un\" (usually taken as a reference to the Mandaeans) as \"people of the Book\" (\"ahl al-kitab\"). Later Islamic theologians expanded this definition to include Zoroastrians, and later even Hindus, as the early Islamic empire brought many people professing these religions under its dominion, but the Qur'an explicitly identifies only Jews, Christians, and Sabians as People of the Book., , The relation between Islam and universalism has assumed crucial importance in the context of political Islam or Islamism, particularly in reference to Sayyid Qutb, a leading member of the Muslim Brotherhood movement, and one of the key contemporary philosophers of Islam.\nThere are several views within Islam with respect to Universalism. According to the most inclusive teachings all peoples of the book have a chance of salvation. For example, Surah 2:62 states: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Indeed, the believers, Jews, Christians, and Sabians\u2014whoever \u02f9truly\u02fa believes in Allah and the Last Day and does good will have their reward with their Lord. And there will be no fear for them, nor will they grieve.\nHowever, the most exclusive teachings disagree. For example, Surah 9:5 states:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But once the Sacred Months have passed, kill the polytheists \u02f9who violated their treaties\u02fa wherever you find them, capture them, besiege them, and lie in wait for them on every way. But if they repent, perform prayers, and pay alms-tax, then set them free. Indeed, Allah is All-Forgiving, Most Merciful.\nThe interpretation of all of these passages are hotly contested amongst various schools of thought and branches of Islam as is the doctrine of abrogation (\"naskh\") which is used to determine which verses take precedence, based on reconstructed chronology, with later verses superseding earlier ones. The ahadith also play a major role in this, and different schools of thought assign different weightings and rulings of authenticity to different hadith, with the four schools of Sunni thought accepting the Six Authentic Collections, generally along with the Muwatta Imam Malik. Depending on the level of acceptance of rejection of certain traditions, the interpretation of the Koran can be changed immensely, from the Qur'anists who reject the ahadith, to the \"ahl al-hadith\", who hold the entirety of the traditional collections in great reverence.\nSome Islamic scholars view the world as bipartite, consisting of the House of Islam, that is, where people live under the Sharia; and the House of War, that is, where the people do not live under Sharia, which must be proselytized using whatever resources available, including, in some traditionalist and conservative interpretations, the use of violence, as holy struggle in the path of God, to either convert its inhabitants to Islam, or to rule them under the Shariah (cf. dhimmi).\nJudaism.\nJudaism teaches that God chose the Jewish people to be in a unique covenant with God, and one of their beliefs is that Jewish people were charged by the Torah with a specific mission\u2014to be a light unto the nations, and to exemplify the covenant with God as described in the Torah to other nations. This view does not preclude a belief that God also has a relationship with other peoples\u2014rather, Judaism holds that God had entered into a covenant with all humanity as Noachides, and that Jews and non-Jews alike have a relationship with God, as well as being universal in the sense that it is open to all mankind.\nModern Jews such as Emmanuel Levinas advocate a universalist mindset that is performed through particularist behavior. An on-line organization, the Jewish Spiritual Leaders Institute founded and led by Steven Blane, who calls himself an \"American Jewish Universalist Rabbi\", believes in a more inclusive version of Jewish Universalism, stating that \"God equally chose all nations to be lights unto the world, and we have much to learn and share with each other. We can only accomplish Tikkun Olam by our unconditional acceptance of each other's peaceful doctrines.\"\nManichaeism.\nManichaeism, like Christian Gnosticism and Zurvanism, was arguably in some ways inherently universalist. Yet in other respects, it was quite contrary to universalistic principles, holding instead to an eternal dualism.\nSikhism.\nIn Sikhism, all the religions of the world are compared to rivers flowing into a single ocean. Although the Sikh gurus did not agree with the practices of fasting, idolatry and pilgrimage during their times, they stressed that all religions should be tolerated. The Sikh scripture, the Guru Granth Sahib, contains the writings of not just the Sikh guru themselves, but the writings of several Hindu and Muslim saints, known as the \"Bhagats\".\nThe very first word of the Sikh scripture is \"Ik\", followed by \"Omkar\". This literally means that there is only one god, and that one is wholesome, inclusive of the whole universe. It further goes on to state that all of creation, and all energy is part of this primordial being. As such, it is described in scripture over and over again, that all that occurs is part of the divine will, and as such, has to be accepted. It occurs for a reason, even if it is beyond the grasp of one person to understand.\nAlthough Sikhism does not teach that men are created as an image of God, it states that the essence of the One is to be found throughout all of its creation. As was said by Yogi Bhajan, the man who is credited with having brought Sikhism to the West:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you can't see God in all, you can't see God at all.\u2014\u200a\nThe First Sikh Guru, Guru Nanak said himself:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;There is no Hindu, there is no Muslim\".\nBy this, Guru Nanak meant that there is no real \"religion\" in God's eyes. Unlike many of the major world religions, Sikhism does not have missionaries, instead it believes men have the freedom to find their own path to salvation.\nUnitarian Universalism.\nUnitarian Universalism (UU) is a theologically liberal religion characterized by a \"free and responsible search for truth and meaning\". Unitarian Universalists do not share a creed; rather, they are unified by their shared search for spiritual growth and by the understanding that an individual's theology is a result of that search and not a result of obedience to an authoritarian requirement. Unitarian Universalists draw from all major world religions and many different theological sources and have a wide range of beliefs and practices.\nWhile having its origins in Christianity, UU is no longer a Christian church. As of 2006, fewer than about 20% of Unitarian Universalists identified themselves as Christian. Contemporary Unitarian Universalism espouses a pluralist approach to religious belief, whereby members may describe themselves as humanist, agnostic, deist, atheist, pagan, Christian, monotheist, pantheist, polytheist, or assume no label at all.\nThe Unitarian Universalist Association (UUA) was formed in 1961, a consolidation of the American Unitarian Association, established in 1825, and the Universalist Church of America, established in 1866. It is headquartered in Boston, and mainly serves churches in the United States. The Canadian Unitarian Council became an independent body in 2002.\nZoroastrianism.\nSome varieties of Zoroastrian (such as Zurvanism) are universalistic in application to all races, but not necessarily universalist in the sense of universal salvation.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31903", "revid": "2414472", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31903", "title": "Unitarian Universalist Association", "text": "Liberal religious Unitarian Universalist congregations, formed in 1961\nUnitarian Universalist Association (UUA) is a liberal religious association of Unitarian Universalist congregations. It was formed in 1961 by the consolidation of the American Unitarian Association and the Universalist Church of America, respectively. However, modern Unitarian Universalists see themselves as a separate religion with its own beliefs and affinities. They define themselves as non-creedal, and draw wisdom from various religions and philosophies, including humanism, pantheism, Christianity, Hinduism, Buddhism, Taoism, Judaism, Islam, and Earth-centered spirituality. Thus, the UUA is a religious group with liberal leanings.\nIn the United States, Unitarian Universalism grew by 15.8% between 2000 and 2010 to include 211,000 adherents nationwide. In 2024, 0.5% of American adults, or approximately 1.3 million people, identified as Unitarian Universalists according to the Public Religion Research Institute's \"Census of American Religion\". The UUA was one of the seventeen members of the now defunct International Council of Unitarians and Universalists (1995\u20132021).\nCongregations.\nMost of the member congregations of the UUA are in the United States and Canada, but the UUA has also admitted congregations from Australia, New Zealand, the Philippines and Pakistan. In recent times, UUA policy is for new congregations from outside the USA to form their own national bodies and having these bodies join the International Council of Unitarians and Universalists or, after the ICUU dissolution in 2021, its successor organization. Until 2002, almost all member congregations of the Canadian Unitarian Council (CUC) were also members of the UUA and most services to CUC member congregations were provided by the UUA. However, after an agreement between the UUA and the CUC, since 2002 most services have been provided by the CUC to its own member congregations, with the UUA continuing to provide ministerial settlement services. Since 2002, some Canadian congregations have continued to be members of both the UUA and CUC while others are members of only the CUC.\nThe Church of the Larger Fellowship (CLF) is a member church of the Unitarian Universalist Association providing denominational services to persons unable to attend a physical congregation because of distance or mobility, or who wish to belong to a congregation other than their local congregation. Many of these are Unitarian Universalists in other countries, members of the military, prisoners or non-mobile elderly.\nOrganization.\nThe Unitarian Universalist Association is headquartered at 24 Farnsworth Street, within Boston, Massachusetts. This serves as the historical center of Unitarianism in the U.S. As of 2009, the UUA comprised 19 Districts, 1,041 congregations with 164,656 certified members and 61,795 church school enrollees served by 1,623 ministers. However, as of 2011 the UUA had 162,796 certified members and 54,671 church school enrollees. This shows a decline of 1,860 members and 7,124 enrollees in church school since 2008. The UUA has, for the first time, also reported decline in average weekly attendance to 100,693 people. This is a drop of 1.5% on the 2010 reported figure. Many atheists and humanists are also a part of the various congregations of the Unitarian Universalist Association.\nCorporate status.\nThe UUA was given corporate status in May 1961 under special acts of legislature of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the State of New York. See Chapter 148 of the acts of 1960 of the Massachusetts legislature and Chapter 827 of the Acts of 1960 of the New York legislature. Copies of said acts are attached to the minutes of the organizing meeting of the association held in Boston, Massachusetts, in May 1961 and also are printed in the 1961\u201362 directory of the association.\nDecentralized association.\nThe UUA is not a denomination in the traditional sense; the UUA is an association of congregations with no one organization able to speak authoritatively for the whole. It is the congregations that have authority over the larger body, through the annual General Assembly of the Unitarian Universalist Association. Since the general public understands \"denomination\" much more readily than \"association of congregations\", the distinction is generally omitted in conversation. Because of this relationship between the congregations and the association, Unitarian Universalist congregations have a congregationalist polity of governance. However, day-to-day decisions are made by the president, the moderator, and the board of trustees.\nIn its role as a national organization representing the congregations, the UUA is a member of various organizations, both religious and secular.\nCovenant of Values.\nMembers of the UUA covenanted together via the seven Principles and Purposes, a part of Article II of the UUA bylaws. These Principles and Purposes were statements of shared values that Unitarian Universalist congregations agreed to uphold:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThese principles, first adopted in 1960 and later revised in 1984 and 1985, proved so popular that many Unitarian Universalists came to see them as a wisdom source in and of themselves and a guide for participation in Unitarian Universalist congregations.\nIn June, 2024, the UUA General Assembly voted to replace the 7 principles in Article II of the UUA bylaws with a new covenant of 7 values. The central value is love. The other 6 are: interdependence, equity, transformation, pluralism, generosity, and justice.\nGeneral Assembly.\nGeneral Assembly (GA) is held every year in June in a different city in the USA. Member congregations (and three associate member organizations) send delegates and conventioneers to participate in the plenary sessions, workshops, district gatherings, and worship services.\nFinances and membership fees.\nThe UUA requests annual contributions from its member congregations. The requested contribution, known as Fair Share, is calculated for each congregation by multiplying an annually determined membership fee times the number of registered members of that congregation. The UUA also has alternative modes of raising funds. In order for congregations to participate in certain programming, they will pay a nominal fee. Some funds are earned through charitable gifts or estate planning. Additionally, the UUA pools together investment funds from congregations or other constituents and manages them for a small percentage.\nAlternate growth strategies.\nUUA leaders concerned with membership numbers fluctuating from barely perceptible growth to slight decline, are working with a variety of experimental UU communities that represent alternative models of congregational formation\u2014or that may point to new forms of affiliation.\nRelated organizations.\nTwo non-congregational organizations belong to the UUA as Associate Member organizations. Associate Member organizations are esteemed as inherently integral to the work of the UUA and its member congregations, and are accorded two voting delegates each to the annual General Assembly. The Associate Member organizations are the Unitarian Universalist Service Committee (UUSC), which is active in social change actions, and the Unitarian Universalist Women's Federation, which provides education and advocacy on women's issues. The Unitarian Universalist United Nations Office, which is a center of information and action at the United Nations, was an Associate Member organization until it became an office within the UUA in 2011.\nThe UUA also recognizes many organizations as Independent Affiliate organizations. These organizations are created by Unitarian Universalists as needed to meet the special needs of the diversity within Unitarian Universalism. These groups may provide specialized spiritual support, work for specific social justice issues, provide support for religious professionals, etc.\nThe UUA owns Beacon Press, a nationally known publisher of both fiction and non-fiction books. Skinner House Books publishes books primarily of interest to Unitarian Universalists.\nThe UUA also participates in interfaith organizations such as the Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility.\nGovernance.\nThe UUA is governed by delegates elected to the annual General Assembly. GA delegates elect the president, the moderator, and members of the board of trustees.\nFrom when the association was established in 1961 until 2010, the president and moderator were each elected to four-year terms by delegates at General Assembly. An individual could not be elected to more than two successive terms. Candidates ran by petition. The 2010 General Assembly adopted a bylaw amendment, to take effect in stages beginning in 2013, making changes in the composition of the board of trustees and in the terms and election procedures for president and moderator. Under the new system, the president and moderator are each limited to a single term of six years. A Presidential Search Committee nominates candidates for president. The board of trustees nominates candidates for moderator. Individuals who are not nominated by the committee or the board may run by petition. The 2010 amendment also reduced the size of the board of trustees and changed the election process so that all trustees are elected by General Assembly. (The prior board consisted of one trustee elected by each UUA district and several at-large trustees elected by General Assembly.)\nPresident.\nThe president of the UUA is its CEO and the religious leader of Unitarian Universalism in the United States. A former UUA president is Rev. Susan Frederick-Gray, who was elected at the 2017 UUA General Assembly in New Orleans, Louisiana; she was expected to be the first president to serve a single six-year term, per a 2010 bylaw change. Frederick-Gray was the first woman to be elected as president of the UUA. As of October 2023, the president is Rev. Dr. Sof\u00eda Betancourt. She is the first woman of color and openly queer person to be elected to the office.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nModerator and co-moderators.\nThe moderator of the UUA is the chair of the Board of Trustees and is the presiding officer at General Assembly. The moderator is the highest UUA position traditionally held by laity.\nModerator Jim Key was elected for a six-year term at General Assembly in 2013. Due to \"significant health concerns\", Key resigned from office on May 13, 2017, less than a month before his death. Because of the amount of work needed for the moderator position, in 2017, the position was split into two co-moderator positions. In August 2017, Mr. Barb Greve and Elandria Williams were appointed to serve as Interim Co-Moderators until a special election for Moderator can be held at the 2018 General Assembly, where they were elected as co-moderators. In 2020, Rev. Meg Riley was elected as co-moderator, the first minister to serve as moderator of the UUA.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBoy Scouts of America controversy.\nThe Religion in Life religious emblems program of UUA were once unrecognized by the Boy Scouts of America (BSA). The UUA published statements opposing the BSA's policies on homosexuals, atheists, and agnostics in 1992; and in 1993, the UUA updated Religion in Life to include criticism of these BSA policies. In 1998, the BSA withdrew recognition of Religion in Life, stating that such information was incompatible with BSA programs. The UUA removed the material from their curriculum and the BSA renewed their recognition of the program. When the BSA found that the UUA was issuing supplemental material with the Religion in Life workbooks that included statements critical of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or personal religious viewpoint, the BSA again withdrew recognition.\nThe Unitarian Universalist Scouters Organization (UUSO) created the Living Your Religion program in 2004 as a parallel award for Unitarian Universalist youth. The program was approved by the BSA Religious Relationships committee in 2005 and was promoted at the 2005 National Scout Jamboree as well as at the following jamborees in 2010 and 2013. The UUA stated that the UUSO was not recognized as an affiliate organization despite the stated UUSO goal to create a set of awards that are recognized by the UUA and BSA. In 2013, BSA opened membership to gay youth, followed by opening membership to gay adults in 2015; this policy change resolved the main UUA objection to supporting BSA and by December 2015, the UUSO had self-dissolved and the UUA religious emblems programs were again recognized by BSA.\nAlternative UU-friendly scouting organizations.\nIn the wake of this controversy, a number of SpiralScouts International circles and dozens of Navigators USA Chapters have formed within congregations of the UUA, despite having no official affiliation with the UUA.\nNavigators USA, was founded by volunteers of All Souls Unitarian Church in New York City after terminating its charter with Boy Scout Troop 103 because of the BSA policies. Its founders describe as \"...committed to providing a quality scouting experience that is inclusive and available to all children and families regardless of gender, race, religion, economic status, sexual orientation and social background.\" There are currently 120 chapters in the United States, plus a number in the UK, France, and Kenya.\nIn addition to SpiralScouts and Navigators USA, the UUA website also suggests Camp Fire as an alternative scout-like organization that comports with UU principles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31904", "revid": "44141905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31904", "title": "United Nations University", "text": "Think tank and academic arm of the UN\nThe is the think tank and academic arm of the United Nations. Headquartered in Shibuya, Tokyo, Japan, with diplomatic status as a UN institution, its mission is to help resolve global issues related to human development and welfare through collaborative research and education. \nIn 1969, UN Secretary-General U Thant proposed \"the establishment of a United Nations university, truly international and devoted to the Charter objectives of peace and progress\". Following three annual sessions discussing the matter, the United Nations General Assembly (UNGA) approved the founding of the United Nations University in December 1972. Tokyo was chosen as the main location due to the Japanese government's commitment to provide facilities and $100 million to the UNU endowment fund. The United Nations University was formally inaugurated in January 1975 as the world's first international university.\nSince 2010, UNU has been authorized by the UNGA to grant postgraduate degrees, offering several master's and doctoral programs. The university's research officially prioritises three thematic areas: peace and governance; global development and inclusion; and environment, climate and energy. UNU also facilitates the UN's engagement with academic institutions and policymakers around the world, in part through campuses, programmes, and affiliated institutes spanning twelve countries.\nOrganisation and leadership.\nThe university is headed by a rector, who holds the rank of Under-Secretary-General of the United Nations.\nTo date, there have been seven Rectors at UNU. The current Rector is Professor Tshilidzi Marwala of South Africa, who took over the role on 1 March 2023. Marwala succeeded David M. Malone of Canada, a two-term Rector who had been serving since 2013.\nList of rectors.\nThe Council of UNU is the governing board of the University and is composed of 12 members who are appointed by the Secretary-General of the United Nations with the concurrence of the Director-General of UNESCO.\nHistory.\nThe University was formally established in 1972 and began its activities in 1975 following the signature of the permanent headquarters agreement between the United Nations and Japan. The creation of the United Nations University was set in motion by Secretary-General U Thant in 1969.\nThe UNU headquarters building was designed by renowned architect Dr. Kenzo Tange. The handover ceremony of the building by the Japanese Government took place on 30 June 1992, and the physical move of UNU into the new building was completed the following month. The official inauguration of the UNU headquarters building,\u00a0held on 17 February 1993,\u00a0was attended by then Secretary-General of the United Nations, Dr. Boutros Boutros-Ghali.\nUNU Institutes and Vice-Rectorate.\nOver the years, several Institutes of UNU were created to help with the research initiatives of the United Nations. Most notably, in 2007, a vice-rectorate was established in Bonn (UNU-ViE), Germany, as a way of strengthening UNU's presence in Europe. \nUNU as a degree-granting institution.\nIn December 2009, the UN General Assembly amended the UNU Charter to make it possible for UNU to \"grant and confer master's degrees and doctorates, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions under conditions laid down for that purpose in the statutes by the Council.\"\nIn 2013, the UNU Institute for Sustainability and Peace (UNU-ISP) in Tokyo announced its intention to seek accreditation from the National Institution for Academic Degrees and University Evaluation (NIAD-UE), which is the Japanese accreditation agency for higher education institutions. In 2014, UNU-ISP was consolidated with UNU Institute of Advanced Studies in Yokohama to form the UNU Institute for the Advanced Study of Sustainability (UNU-IAS). UNU-IAS was formally accredited in April 2015, making it the first international organization to be recognized by the NIAD-UE.\nIn 2014, UNU-MERIT, in collaboration with Maastricht University, started to grant a double degree Master of Science in Public Policy and Human Development. In 2018, the programme was re-accredited by the Accreditation Organisation of the Netherlands and Flanders (NVAO) and received the official EAPAA accreditation by the European Association for Public Administration Accreditation.\nLocations.\nThe university has several campuses spread over five continents. Its headquarters are located at the UNU Centre in Tokyo, Japan.\nResearch.\nThe role of the UN University is to generate new knowledge, educate, enhance individual and institutional capacities, and disseminate useful information to relevant audiences. Between 2020 and 2024, the University will be guided by the following four overarching objectives:\nAs prescribed in the United Nations University Strategic Plan 2020\u20132024, the UN University's academic work falls within three thematic areas:\nCollectively, these thematic clusters define the programme space within which the UN University undertakes its academic activities. Some key perspectives (such as gender equality, human rights and sustainability) pervade all aspects of the UN University's work.\nInstitutes and programmes.\nThe academic work of the United Nations University is carried out by a global system of Institutes, Operating Units, and Programmes located in 12 countries around the world."}
{"id": "31907", "revid": "19404073", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31907", "title": "U.S.", "text": ""}
{"id": "31908", "revid": "50574140", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31908", "title": "Until the End of the World", "text": "1991 film by Wim Wenders\nUntil the End of the World (; ) is a 1991 epic science fiction drama film directed by Wim Wenders. Set at the turn of the millennium in the shadow of a world-changing catastrophe, the film follows a man and woman, played by William Hurt and Solveig Dommartin, as they are pursued across the globe, in a plot involving a device that can record visual experiences and visualize dreams.\nAn initial draft of the screenplay was written by American filmmaker Michael Almereyda, but the final screenplay is credited to Wenders and Peter Carey, from a story by Wenders and Dommartin. Wenders, whose career had been distinguished by his exploration of the road movie, intended this as the ultimate example of the genre.\nThe film has been released in several editions, ranging in length from 158 to 287 minutes.\nPlot.\nAct 1.\nIn 1999, panic ensues when an orbiting Indian nuclear satellite begins to spiral toward Earth. Claire Tourneur, who has been traveling around Europe trying unsuccessfully to distract herself after discovering that her boyfriend Eugene slept with her best friend, is unconcerned by the impending nuclear disaster though her sleep has been troubled by a recurring nightmare. When she gets stuck in a traffic jam in Southern France after it is projected as a possible impact site, she takes a side road and encounters a pair of friendly bank robbers who enlist her to carry their stolen cash to Paris in exchange for a cut of the loot. En route to Paris, Claire meets Trevor McPhee and agrees to let him travel with her to the city to escape an armed man named Burt who is following him. After parting ways in Paris, Claire discovers Trevor took some of the stolen money while she slept.\nClaire crosses paths with Burt and finds out that he is going to Berlin. She makes the trip as well and hires missing-persons detective Phillip Winter to help her locate Trevor. The detective reveals that Trevor has a bounty on his head for stealing a big opal from a mining syndicate in Australia, and has just boarded a flight to Lisbon. When Claire and Winter catch up with Trevor, Winter handcuffs Trevor to Claire, but she voluntarily goes along with Trevor when he runs away. They go to a hotel, where Winter finds them having sex, though Trevor is able to handcuff both Winter and Claire to the bed and escape with more of Claire's money.\nStill after the bounty, Winter takes Claire with him to Moscow where they meet up with Eugene, whom Claire has asked to bring her more money. A local bounty hunter helps them discover that Trevor's real name is Sam Farber, he is wanted by the U.S. government for industrial espionage, and he has a significantly larger bounty on his head than Trevor McPhee does. Winter says he is quitting the job and going home, and Eugene buys a tracking computer to help Claire, who sees Burt again and learns that Sam is wanted for stealing a camera he had helped develop at a lab in Palo Alto.\nWhen Sam buys a ticket to Beijing on the Trans-Siberian Railway, the computer alerts Claire and she leaves Eugene while she thinks he is sleeping. Sam evades Claire, and she ends up traveling through China alone for months. She finally calls Eugene, who tells her to go to Tokyo and meets her there. They go to the capsule hotel where Sam is supposed to be staying, only to find a tied-up Winter and an ambush of bounty hunters and international government agents, tipped off by the bounty hunter from Moscow. Claire escapes and stumbles upon Sam, who is rapidly losing his eyesight, at a pachinko parlor. She buys them train tickets to a random mountain inn, where the kindly innkeepers provide herbs that heal Sam's eyes. Sam reveals to Claire that the prototype camera he stole was invented by his father, Henry, and is a device that, by recording brain impulses of the photographer for later transfer, takes pictures blind people can see. Though the recording process is hard on his eyes, he has been traveling around the world making recordings of places and people that are important to his mother, Edith, who is blind, so she can see them.\nThe next stop on Sam's itinerary is San Francisco. He and Claire are robbed by a used car salesman shortly after arriving, so Claire calls Chico, one of the French bank robbers, for more money. Sam cannot get the camera to work when he is trying to make a recording of his sister and niece, so Claire takes over. The final recording done, Sam, Claire, and Chico board a small boat to Australia, where Sam's parents are.\nAct 2.\nEugene and Winter, who teamed up and went to Coober Pedy, Australia, to wait for Claire and Sam after losing track of them in Tokyo, pick up the trail when Claire uses her credit card to place a video call nearby. When Eugene sees Sam in town, he punches Sam and they have a brief fight before they are arrested. While Winter tries to bail them out, Burt arrives looking for Sam and the camera, but Chico is able to subdue him. The next day, Sam only takes Claire with him when he takes off to fly to the compound where his parents are hiding and his father has built a secret lab, but the others are able to follow thanks to a secret tracking device that is still on the bag Chico gave to Claire when she first transported the money to Paris.\nWhile Claire and Sam are in the air, the satellite is shot down by the U.S. government, and the resulting nuclear electromagnetic pulse interferes with the functioning of unshielded electronics and wipes their memory units. The engine of Sam's plane stops, so he has to execute an emergency landing. He and Claire walk across the desert until they are found by Sam's friend David, who has Eugene, Winter, and Chico in the bed of his hand-cranked diesel-powered truck. David takes everyone to Sam's father's lab, which is sheltered in a massive cave. Burt eventually arrives and everyone settles in to wait and see whether communications with the outside world will be restored. Eugene, who was writing a novel about Claire and her adventures before it was erased from his computer by the NEMP, begins rewriting it on an antique typewriter.\nThe process Henry developed requires the person who recorded the images to watch them while being monitored in the lab before they can be transmitted to someone else's brain. Sam, who has a strained relationship with his father, attempts to do this immediately after arriving, but he fails because he is too tired, which leads to an argument with Henry. Claire tries the experiment with her recording of Sam's sister with phenomenal success, and Sam later succeeds with his recordings. Although Edith is at first exhilarated to be able to \"see\" again, the ugly, pixellated images she receives contribute to her growing despondency. On New Year's Eve, the same evening the group have intercepted a mundane radio broadcast that indicates human civilization has not ended, she \"just let[s] go\" and dies quietly.\nAfter Edith's burial, Winter, Chico, and Burt leave the compound to go home. Henry begins working on how to use his technology to record human dreams, but the Aborigines who have been assisting him disagree with this and abandon him. He continues by experimenting on himself, Sam, and Claire, and they eventually become addicted to viewing their dreams on portable video screens. Eugene finds a catatonic Claire and takes her away from the lab, driving her into painful withdrawal when he refuses to replace the batteries for her screen. He finishes his novel, in which he writes her as being healthy and happy, and gives it to her, using the \"truth of the words\" to cure her of the \"disease of images\". Meanwhile, Sam wanders away from the lab and is ultimately cured by David and an Aboriginal ritual, and Henry is taken by the CIA while lying in the lab's dream-recording chair.\nEugene and Claire break up for good, but remain friends. Henry later dies in 2001, with Sam visiting his grave. While in San Francisco, Sam sees his wife (who has since remarried) and son from a distance, realizing that he has lost them forever. On Claire's 30th birthday, Eugene's book comes out and he, Winter, and the French bank robbers call Claire, who is in the middle of a six-month stint as an ecological observer on a space station, to sing her \"Happy Birthday\".\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Solveig Dommartin as Claire Tourneur\nProduction.\nWenders began working on the film as early as late 1977, when, during his first visit to Australia, it struck him that his surroundings would be the perfect setting for a science fiction film. In addition to fleshing out the complex plot, preproduction also involved extensive still photography. It was not until Wenders found commercial success with \"Paris, Texas\" and \"Wings of Desire\", however, that he was able to secure funding for the project.\nWith a budget of around $22\u00a0million ($3.7\u00a0million of which came from the Australian Film Finance Corporation), which was more than he had spent on all of his previous films combined, Wenders set off on an ambitious production. Principal photography lasted 22 weeks and spanned 11 countries. Wenders, who had a long-standing fascination with the Australian Outback, shot a substantial amount of the film in and around Alice Springs, Northern Territory, Australia.\nThe imagery in the dream sequences were achieved with early high-definition video. Wenders and technicians at NHK (the only facility which could play back HD video at the time) worked for six weeks on these sequences, intentionally distorting the imagery to create strange visual effects. They often recorded a fast-forwarded version of the image, then played it back at normal speed.\nGraeme Revell composed the theme and other music for the film. For additional music, Wenders commissioned original songs from a number of his favorite recording artists, asking them to anticipate the kind of music they would be making a decade later, when the film was set. His desire to use all of the pieces he received contributed to his decision to make the film as long as it turned out to be.\nReception.\nThe truncated version of \"Until the End of the World\" that received a theatrical release was poorly received, being both a critical and commercial failure. In the United States, the film was released by Warner Bros. in December 1991 on 4 screens. The total U.S. box office gross was just under $830,000.\nIn January 1992, reviewing the theatrical version of the film, Roger Ebert gave the film 2 stars out of 4, describing it as lacking the \"narrative urgency\" required to sustain interest in the story, and wrote that it \"plays like a film that was photographed before it was written, and edited before it was completed\". He went on to say that a documentary about the globe-trekking production would likely have been more interesting than the film itself.\nLater critics \u2013 some responding to Wenders' director's cut \u2013 were more favorable toward it. On Rotten Tomatoes the film has an 89% approval rating based on 18 reviews. Metacritic which uses a weighted average, assigned the film a score of 63 out of 100, based on 12 critics, indicating \"generally favorable\" reviews.\nVersions.\nThe initial cut of the film was, reportedly, 20 hours long. Several shortened versions of the film have been commercially distributed or publicly screened. Wenders was contractually obligated by his backers to deliver a standard feature-length film, so he edited it down to the 158- and 179-minute American and European cuts, which he refers to as the \"Reader's Digest\" versions of the film. Meanwhile, he and his editor Peter Przygodda secretly made a complete copy of the film negatives for themselves at their own expense, and over the next year they worked on a 5-hour version of the film, which they then screened at events over the next decade. A version similar to the one shown at these screenings was released at one point as a 280-minute trilogy of films.\nThere is also a 239-minute letter-boxed and subtitled laserdisc release from Japan, and there are several unauthorized fan edits that combine portions of the aforementioned releases.\nA 4K digital restoration from the original Super 35mm camera negative of the 287-minute director's cut was commissioned by the Wim Wenders Foundation in 2014. The restoration, which was supervised by the director and his wife Donata, was undertaken by ARRI Film &amp; TV Services Berlin, with the support of the CNC. This version was screened for the first time in the U.S. at several art house theaters in the fall of 2015 as part of a retrospective tour of Wenders' filmography by Janus Films. It was in two parts, with an intermission at 2 hours, 11 minutes, and debuted on television in the U.S. on Turner Classic Movies in July 2017.\nIn September 2019, The Criterion Collection announced a special-edition Blu-ray and DVD of the 4K restoration of the 287-minute director's cut of the film, which was released on 10 December 2019.\nSoundtrack.\n\"Until The End of the World: Music From the Motion Picture Soundtrack\" was released on 10 December 1991, and includes the following tracks:\nSongs used in the film, but not included on the soundtrack, include:\nThe German film director Uli M Schueppel made a documentary film about the recording of \"(I'll Love You) Till The End of the World\" by Nick Cave &amp; The Bad Seeds. The film was released in 1990 as \"The Song\" and re-released in 2004 under a new arrangement.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31911", "revid": "39177298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31911", "title": "Ultrafilter", "text": "Maximal proper filter\nIn the mathematical field of order theory, an ultrafilter on a given partially ordered set (or \"poset\") formula_1 is a certain subset of formula_2 namely a maximal filter on formula_3 that is, a proper filter on formula_1 that cannot be enlarged to a bigger proper filter on formula_5\nIf formula_6 is an arbitrary set, its power set formula_7 ordered by set inclusion, is always a Boolean algebra and hence a poset, and ultrafilters on formula_8 are usually called ultrafilters on the set formula_6. An ultrafilter on a set formula_6 may be considered as a finitely additive 0-1-valued measure on formula_8. In this view, every subset of formula_6 is either considered \"almost everything\" (has measure 1) or \"almost nothing\" (has measure 0), depending on whether it belongs to the given ultrafilter or not.\u00a74\nUltrafilters have many applications in set theory, model theory, topology and combinatorics.\nUltrafilters on partial orders.\nIn order theory, an ultrafilter is a subset of a partially ordered set that is maximal among all proper filters. This implies that any filter that properly contains an ultrafilter has to be equal to the whole poset.\nFormally, if formula_1 is a set, partially ordered by formula_14 then \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Types and existence of ultrafilters.\nEvery ultrafilter falls into exactly one of two categories: principal or free. A principal (or fixed, or trivial) ultrafilter is a filter containing a least element. Consequently, each principal ultrafilter is of the form formula_37 for some element formula_38 of the given poset. In this case formula_38 is called the principal element of the ultrafilter. Any ultrafilter that is not principal is called a free (or non-principal) ultrafilter. For arbitrary formula_38, the set formula_41 is a filter, called the principal filter at formula_38; it is a principal ultrafilter only if it is maximal.\nFor ultrafilters on a powerset formula_7 a principal ultrafilter consists of all subsets of formula_6 that contain a given element formula_45 Each ultrafilter on formula_8 that is also a principal filter is of this form. Therefore, an ultrafilter formula_27 on formula_8 is principal if and only if it contains a finite set. If formula_6 is infinite, an ultrafilter formula_27 on formula_8 is hence non-principal if and only if it contains the Fr\u00e9chet filter of cofinite subsets of formula_52Proposition 3 If formula_6 is finite, every ultrafilter is principal. \nIf formula_6 is infinite then the Fr\u00e9chet filter is not an ultrafilter on the power set of formula_6 but it is an ultrafilter on the finite\u2013cofinite algebra of formula_52 \nEvery filter on a Boolean algebra (or more generally, any subset with the finite intersection property) is contained in an ultrafilter (see ultrafilter lemma) and free ultrafilters therefore exist, but the proofs involve the axiom of choice (AC) in the form of Zorn's lemma. On the other hand, the statement that every filter is contained in an ultrafilter does not imply AC. Indeed, it is equivalent to the Boolean prime ideal theorem (BPIT), a well-known intermediate point between the axioms of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF) and the ZF theory augmented by the axiom of choice (ZFC). In general, proofs involving the axiom of choice do not produce explicit examples of free ultrafilters, though it is possible to find explicit examples in some models of ZFC; for example, G\u00f6del showed that this can be done in the constructible universe where one can write down an explicit global choice function. In ZF without the axiom of choice, it is possible that every ultrafilter is principal.\nUltrafilter on a Boolean algebra.\nAn important special case of the concept occurs if the considered poset is a Boolean algebra. In this case, ultrafilters are characterized by containing, for each element formula_57 of the Boolean algebra, exactly one of the elements formula_57 and formula_59 (the latter being the Boolean complement of formula_57):\nIf formula_1 is a Boolean algebra and formula_17 is a proper filter on formula_2 then the following statements are equivalent:\nA proof that 1. and 2. are equivalent is also given in (Burris, Sankappanavar, 2012, Corollary 3.13, p.133).\nMoreover, ultrafilters on a Boolean algebra can be related to maximal ideals and homomorphisms to the 2-element Boolean algebra {true, false} (also known as 2-valued morphisms) as follows:\nUltrafilter on the power set of a set.\nGiven an arbitrary set formula_72 its power set formula_7 ordered by set inclusion, is always a Boolean algebra; hence the results of the above section apply. An (ultra)filter on formula_8 is often called just an \"(ultra)filter on formula_6\". Given an arbitrary set formula_72 an ultrafilter on formula_8 is a set formula_78 consisting of subsets of formula_6 such that:\nEquivalently, a family formula_78 of subsets of formula_6 is an ultrafilter if and only if for any finite collection formula_95 of subsets of formula_6, there is some formula_97 such that formula_98 where formula_99 is the principal ultrafilter seeded by formula_57. In other words, an ultrafilter may be seen as a family of sets which \"locally\" resembles a principal ultrafilter.\nAn equivalent form of a given formula_78 is a 2-valued morphism, a function formula_102 on formula_8 defined as formula_104 if formula_81 is an element of formula_78 and formula_107 otherwise. Then formula_102 is finitely additive, and hence a content on formula_7 and every property of elements of formula_6 is either true almost everywhere or false almost everywhere. However, formula_102 is usually not countably additive, and hence does not define a measure in the usual sense.\nFor a filter formula_95 that is not an ultrafilter, one can define formula_104 if formula_114 and formula_107 if formula_116 leaving formula_102 undefined elsewhere.\nApplications.\nUltrafilters on power sets are useful in topology, especially in relation to compact Hausdorff spaces, and in model theory in the construction of ultraproducts and ultrapowers. Every ultrafilter on a compact Hausdorff space converges to exactly one point. Likewise, ultrafilters on Boolean algebras play a central role in Stone's representation theorem. In set theory ultrafilters are used to show that the axiom of constructibility is incompatible with the existence of a measurable cardinal \u03ba. This is proved by taking the ultrapower of the set theoretical universe modulo a \u03ba-complete, non-principal ultrafilter.\nThe set formula_118 of all ultrafilters of a poset formula_1 can be topologized in a natural way, that is in fact closely related to the above-mentioned representation theorem. For any element formula_57 of formula_1, let formula_122 This is most useful when formula_1 is again a Boolean algebra, since in this situation the set of all formula_124 is a base for a compact Hausdorff topology on formula_118. Especially, when considering the ultrafilters on a powerset formula_126, the resulting topological space is the Stone\u2013\u010cech compactification of a discrete space of cardinality formula_127\nThe ultraproduct construction in model theory uses ultrafilters to produce a new model starting from a sequence of formula_6-indexed models; for example, the compactness theorem can be proved this way.\nIn the special case of ultrapowers, one gets elementary extensions of structures. For example, in nonstandard analysis, the hyperreal numbers can be constructed as an ultraproduct of the real numbers, extending the domain of discourse from real numbers to sequences of real numbers. This sequence space is regarded as a superset of the reals by identifying each real with the corresponding constant sequence. To extend the familiar functions and relations (e.g., + and &lt;) from the reals to the hyperreals, the natural idea is to define them pointwise. But this would lose important logical properties of the reals; for example, pointwise &lt; is not a total ordering. So instead the functions and relations are defined \"pointwise modulo\" formula_27, where formula_27 is an ultrafilter on the index set of the sequences; by \u0141o\u015b' theorem, this preserves all properties of the reals that can be stated in first-order logic. If formula_27 is nonprincipal, then the extension thereby obtained is nontrivial.\nIn geometric group theory, non-principal ultrafilters are used to define the asymptotic cone of a group. This construction yields a rigorous way to consider looking at the group from infinity, that is the large scale geometry of the group. Asymptotic cones are particular examples of ultralimits of metric spaces.\nG\u00f6del's ontological proof of God's existence uses as an axiom that the set of all \"positive properties\" is an ultrafilter.\nIn social choice theory, non-principal ultrafilters are used to define a rule (called a \"social welfare function\") for aggregating the preferences of \"infinitely\" many individuals. Contrary to Arrow's impossibility theorem for \"finitely\" many individuals, such a rule satisfies the conditions (properties) that Arrow proposes (for example, Kirman and Sondermann, 1972). Mihara (1997, 1999) shows, however, such rules are practically of limited interest to social scientists, since they are non-algorithmic or non-computable.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31912", "revid": "1559905", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31912", "title": "UseMod", "text": ""}
{"id": "31914", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31914", "title": "\u00datgar\u00f0ar", "text": "Norse mythology stronghold of the giants\nIn Norse mythology, \u00datgar\u00f0ar (literally: \"Outyards\", the plural of \u00datgar\u00f0r; the word can, according to Old Norse orthography, be anglicized as Utgard, Utgardar and in other ways) surrounded a stronghold of the j\u00f6tnar. They are associated with \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki, a great and devious jotunn featured in one of the myths concerning Thor and the other Loki who competed in rigged competitions held in the Outyards. These outdoor arenas contrasted with the putrid, indoor cave where \u00datgar\u00f0a-Loki is said to have dwelt, when chained, in the 12th-century \"Gesta Danorum\". \nIn another version of Norse mythology, Utgard is thought to be the last of the three worlds connected to Yggdrasil, being the home of the external cosmic forces. Utgard needs to be compared with the Midgard, the world of human affairs, and Asgard, variously attested at the crux of the matter, the centre of the world, as identified with Troy by Snorri Sturluson.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31916", "revid": "38001712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31916", "title": "UCSF", "text": ""}
{"id": "31918", "revid": "38001712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31918", "title": "University of Rochester", "text": "Private university in Rochester, New York, US\nThe University of Rochester is a private research university in Rochester, New York, United States. It was founded in 1850 and moved into its current campus, next to the Genesee River in 1930. With approximately 30,000 full-time employees, the university is the largest private employer in Upstate New York and the seventh-largest in all of New York State.\nWith over 12,000 students, the university offers 160 undergraduate and 30 graduate programs across seven schools spread throughout five campuses. The College of Arts, Sciences, and Engineering is the largest school, and it includes the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. The Eastman School of Music, founded by and named after George Eastman, is located in Downtown Rochester.\nThe university is also home to Rochester's Laboratory for Laser Energetics, a national laboratory supported by the US Department of Energy. The university is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\" and is a member of the Association of American Universities, which emphasizes academic research. The university's sports teams, the Rochester Yellowjackets, compete in NCAA Division III. The school is a founding member of the University Athletic Association (UAA).\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nThe University of Rochester traces its origins to The First Baptist Church of Hamilton, New York, which was founded in 1796. The church established the Baptist Education Society of the State of New York, later renamed the Hamilton Literary and Theological Institution, in 1817. This institution gave birth to both Madison University and the University of Rochester. Its function was to train clergy in the Baptist tradition. When it aspired to grant higher degrees, it created a collegiate division separate from the theological division.\nThe collegiate division was granted a charter by the State of New York in 1846, after which its name was changed to Madison University. John Wilder and the Baptist Education Society urged that the new university be moved to Rochester, New York. However, legal action prevented the move. In response, dissenting faculty, students, and trustees defected and departed for Rochester, where they sought a new charter for a new university. Madison University was eventually renamed Colgate University.\nFounding.\nAsahel C. Kendrick, professor of Greek, was among the faculty that departed Madison University for Rochester. Kendrick served as acting president while a national search was conducted. He reprised this role until 1853, when Martin Brewer Anderson of the Andover Newton Theological Seminary in Massachusetts was selected to fill the inaugural posting.\nThe University of Rochester's new charter was awarded by the Regents of the State of New York on January 31, 1850. The charter stipulated that the university have $100,000 in endowment within five years, upon which the charter would be reaffirmed. An initial gift of $10,000 was pledged by John Wilder, which helped catalyze significant gifts from individuals and institutions.\nClasses began that November, with approximately 60 students enrolled, including 28 transfers from Madison. From 1850 to 1862, the university was housed in the old United States Hotel in downtown Rochester on Buffalo Street near Elizabeth Street (now West Main Street near the I-490 overpass).\nFor the next 10 years, the college expanded its scope and secured its future through an expanding endowment, student body, and faculty. In parallel, a gift of 8 acres of farmland from local businessman and Congressman Azariah Boody secured the first campus of the university, upon which Anderson Hall was constructed and dedicated in 1862. Over the next sixty years, this Prince Street Campus grew by a further 17 acres and was developed to include fraternities houses, dormitories, and academic buildings including Anderson Hall, Sibley Library, Eastman and Carnegie Laboratories, the Memorial Art Gallery, and Cutler Union.\nTwentieth century.\nThe first female students were admitted in 1900, the result of an effort led by famous suffragist Susan B. Anthony and Helen Barrett Montgomery. During the 1890s, a number of women took classes and labs at the university as \"visitors\" but were not officially enrolled nor were their records included in the college register. President David Jayne Hill allowed the first woman, Helen E. Wilkinson, to enroll as a normal student, although she was not allowed to matriculate or pursue a degree. Thirty-three women enrolled among the first class in 1900, and Ella S. Wilcoxen was the first to receive a degree, in 1901. The first female member of the faculty was Elizabeth Denio who retired as Professor Emeritus in 1917. Male students moved to River Campus upon its completion in 1930 while the female students remained on the Prince Street campus until 1955.\nAnthony's work left a lasting impression on the university, with multiple awards, buildings and centers being named after her.\nExpansion.\nMajor growth occurred under the leadership of Benjamin Rush Rhees over his 1900\u20131935 tenure. During this period, George Eastman became a major donor, giving more than $50 million to the university during his life. Under the patronage of Eastman, the Eastman School of Music was created in 1921. In 1925, at the behest of the General Education Board and with significant support from John D. Rockefeller, George Eastman, and Henry A. Strong's family, medical and dental schools were created. The university awarded its first PhD that same year.\nDuring World War II, Rochester was one of 131 colleges and universities nationally that took part in the V-12 Navy College Training Program which offered students a path to a Navy commission. In 1942, the university was invited to join the Association of American Universities as an affiliate member and it was made a full member by 1944. Between 1946 and 1947, in infamous uranium experiments, researchers at the university injected uranium-234 and uranium-235 into six people to study how much uranium their kidneys could tolerate before becoming damaged. In 1955, the separate colleges for men and women were merged into the college on the River Campus. In 1958, three new schools were created in engineering, business administration, and education. With guidance provided by Lewis White Beck at this time, the university also acquired widespread international recognition for the excellence of its Ph.D. program in Philosophy as well as close research collaborations with Kantian scholars throughout Germany and the United States. The Graduate School of Management was named after William E. Simon, former Secretary of the Treasury in 1986. He committed significant funds to the school because of his belief in the school's free market philosophy and grounding in economic analysis.\nUnder the leadership of William Riker, the Department of Political Science at Rochester went from a six-person faculty with no graduate program to one of the most exciting political science departments in the United States. Riker established a new undergraduate program and trained an extraordinary number of graduate students. What emerged at Rochester, in the words of University of Georgia's Keith T. Poole and Princeton's Howard Rosenthal, was \"the best doctoral program in political science in the world.\" According to Berkeley professors Nelson Polby and Eric Shickler, Rochester professor Richard Fenno \"contributed more to the understanding of the U.S. Congress than any other scholar in the more than 200 years since the founding of the American nation\".\nName change controversy.\nFollowing the princely gifts given throughout his life, George Eastman left the entirety of his estate to the university after his death by suicide. The total of these gifts surpassed $100 million, before inflation, and, as such, Rochester enjoyed a privileged position amongst the most well-endowed universities. During the expansion years between 1936 and 1976, the University of Rochester's financial position ranked third, near Harvard University's endowment and the University of Texas System's Permanent University Fund. Due to financial mismanagement combined with a decline in the value of large investments and a lack of portfolio diversity, the university's place dropped to the top 25 by the end of the 1980s. At the same time, the preeminence of the city of Rochester's major employers began to decline.\nIn response, the university commissioned a study to determine if the name of the institution should be changed to \"Eastman University\" or \"Eastman Rochester University\". The study concluded a name change could be beneficial because the use of a place name in the title led respondents to incorrectly believe it was a public university, and because the name \"Rochester\" connoted a \"cold and distant outpost.\" Reports of the latter conclusion led to controversy and criticism in the Rochester community. Ultimately, the name \"University of Rochester\" was retained.\nIn response, university president Thomas H. Jackson announced the launch of a \"Renaissance Plan\" for the college that reduced enrollment from 4,500 to 3,600, creating a more selective admissions process. The plan also revised the undergraduate curriculum significantly, creating the current system with only one required course and only a few distribution requirements, known as clusters. Part of this plan called for the end of graduate doctoral studies in chemical engineering, comparative literature, linguistics, and mathematics, the last of which was met by national outcry. The plan was largely scrapped and mathematics exists as a graduate course of study to this day.\nTwenty-first century.\nShortly after taking office, university president Joel Seligman commenced the private phase of the Meliora Challenge, a $1.2 billion capital campaign, in 2005. The campaign reached its goal in 2015, a year before the campaign was slated to conclude. In 2016, the university announced the Meliora Challenge had exceeded its goal and surpassed $1.36 billion. These funds were allocated to support over 100 new endowed faculty positions and nearly 400 new scholarships.\nAfter and during the completion of the challenge, the university embarked on a new phase of construction, resulting in the addition of significant campus facilities. This expansion included the construction of two new student dormitories, O'Brien Hall (2013) and Genesee Hall (2017). Furthermore, other additions included Wegmans Hall (2016), a new building for the Computer and Data Science Departments, LeChase Hall (2013), designed to host the Warner School of Education, and Rettner Hall (2013). The University also expanded the Medical Center, constructing a new Children's Hospital, cancer center and research building.\nOn September 1, 2017, a complaint was filed by eight current and former faculty members at the University of Rochester with the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC). The complaint includes allegations of sexual misconduct/harassment by a tenure track faculty member, and condemnation of the response of the university administration. The university's initial public response to the complaint was a claim that the allegations were thoroughly investigated and could not be substantiated. A new, independent investigation found the individuals covered in the report had not violated policy; however, significant recommendations were made to push the university towards leadership in policy regarding relationships between faculty, staff, employees, and students. On the same day as the release of the report, university president Joel Seligman publicly announced his previously tendered resignation. In 2019, federal judge Lawrence Vilardo ruled in favor of the plaintiffs on 15 of 16 legal claims, allowing their lawsuit to proceed. After a mediation process, the lawsuit was settled in 2020 when the university agreed to pay the plaintiffs $9.4 million, and thanked them for their efforts.\nSarah C. Mangelsdorf succeeded Feldman as president of the university in 2019. Mangelsdorf is the first woman to serve as president of the university.\nIn 2021, the Sloan Performing Arts Center opened, providing space for theatrical programs, dance programs, concerts, and other activities and serves as a home for the Institute for the Performing Arts. In 2023, the university completed the $51.5m purchase of College Town, a 312,000-square-foot, mixed-use complex near the Medical Center and began work on a $42m expansion of the Laboratory for Laser Energetics.\nAfter student protests against the Israel\u2013Hamas war in November 2023, University of Rochester students joined other campuses across the United States in setting up encampments on campus. The university suspended and banned several students from campus for participating in the protests. The Department of Public Safety also arrested four students on felony criminal mischief charges in November 2024 for allegedly plastering \"wanted\" posters across campus that the university denounced as \"antisemitic\". \nStrong Memorial Hospital, the main teaching hospital at the university, is currently undergoing its largest expansion, tripling the size of its Emergency department and adding a new, nine-story patient tower, which is the largest capital project in university history. In 2024, Tom Golisano announced that he had made a $50 million donation, the largest single gift in the university's history, to build the Golisano Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Institute and expand care for people with intellectual and developmental disabilities in the Rochester region.\nAdministration.\nThe university is headed by a board of trustees, with Richard B. Handler as the chairman. The board appoints the president of the university. As of 2018, ten people have held the role of regularly-appointed president, with the eleventh to be inaugurated in 2019. On four occasions, the board of trustees has called upon members of the faculty to serve as an executive officer (Kendrick), acting president (Lattimore and Burton), or interim president (Feldman) during periods of transition.\nCampuses.\nRiver Campus.\nThe River Campus is in a bend of the Genesee River about south of downtown Rochester and covers around . It is bounded by Bausch &amp; Lomb Riverside Park, an public park along the east bank of the Genesee River formerly known as the Olmstead River Walk, and Mount Hope Cemetery, where the grave sites of Susan B. Anthony and Frederick Douglass can be found. The River Campus was acquired in the late 1920s from the Oak Hill Country Club through a land swap deal orchestrated in part by Edwin Sage Hubbell and funded largely by George Eastman.\nAfter a period of landscaping, grading, and construction, the original buildings of the campus were dedicated in 1930 when the first class of River Campus was welcomed to the Men's college. The main academic buildings are examples of the Greek Revival style in 20th-century collegiate architecture. The main buildings situated upon the Eastman Quadrangle are Rush Rhees Library at the head, flanked by the Morey Hall, Bausch &amp; Lomb Hall, Lattimore Hall, and Dewey Hall. The Rush Rhees Library, the unofficial symbol of the university, is also home to the Hopeman Memorial Carillon, the largest carillon in New York State, featuring 50 bells that chime on the quarter-hour. Todd Union, constructed in 1930, has been recommended by New York State's Board for Historic Preservation to be added to the State and National Registers of Historic Places as \"a key site associated with Rochester's LGBTQ+ history\". Todd Union has an early and significant association with the University of Rochester's Gay Liberation Front (UR GLF), an organization that worked to advance the gay liberation movement on campus and in the city of Rochester in the 1970s.\nRiver Campus is home to a number of student exhibition spaces. The AsIs Gallery in the Sage Art Center showcases rotating exhibitions of student works from studio classes at U of R. As a work-in-progress critique space, this exhibition space provides students the opportunity to develop their work in a semi-professional space. The Gallery at the Art and Music Library features work from students and local artists in the highly trafficked Rush Rhees Art and Music Library. Hartnett Gallery, in Wilson Commons, is a student-supported gallery that showcases international and professional contemporary artists as well as an annual juried student exhibition. The pasSAGE is an annex of the Sage Art Center which features a long-term exhibition selected by a faculty committee. There is also a Senior Thesis Gallery in the Sage Arts Center that features senior undergraduate works.\nMedical Center.\nThe University of Rochester Medical Center (URMC) is the primary campus for the university's medical education, research and main patient care facility. The Medical Center is next to the River Campus and is dominated by Strong Memorial Hospital, the School of Medicine and Dentistry building, and the Arthur Kornberg Medical Research Building. URMC also houses the School of Nursing, Golisano Children's Hospital, and a variety of research centers, including the Wilmot Cancer Center, the Aab Institute of Biomedical Sciences, and the Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute.\nEastman School of Music.\nThe Eastman School of Music is situated on its own campus in downtown Rochester, which includes a residence for students, classroom and performance facilities, and the Eastman Theatre, a 2,326-seat concert hall which also serves as the primary venue of the Rochester Philharmonic Orchestra. The campus also features the Sibley Music Library, which is the largest academic music library in North America, as well as the largest privately owned collection of sheet music. Students are housed at 100 Gibbs Street, a dormitory building constructed in 1991.\nSouth Campus.\nThe South Campus is in Brighton, immediately south of Rochester proper. The campus includes student housing for graduate students, the Laboratory for Laser Energetics, a Department of Energy-funded national lab, the Larry and Cindy Bloch Alumni and Advancement Center, the Center for Optics Manufacturing, the Center for Optoelectronics and Imaging, and the now-defunct Nuclear Structure Research Laboratory (NSRL).\nMount Hope Campus.\nThe Mount Hope Campus consists of a number of old mansion homes including the Witmer Family House, the residence of the president of the university, and the Patrick Barry House, which serves as the official residence of the provost of the university.\nMemorial Art Gallery.\nThe university's first permanent campus was at the former farm of Azariah Boody. While a number of buildings still stand including Anderson Hall, the Eastman Laboratories, and a number of student dormitories, these buildings have been absorbed by private companies or the Rochester School of the Arts. The university retains control of a few acres of land including the land under the Sibley Library (razed), old campus gates, the Memorial Art Gallery's old and new wings, and the Cutler Union, a prime example of the Collegiate Gothic style of 20th-century architecture.\nThe Memorial Art Gallery was founded in 1913 as a part of the University of Rochester through a gift from Emily Sibley Watson as a memorial to her son, James George Averell. It was designed by the prominent American architectural firm McKim, Mead, and White and occupies the southern half of the university's Prince Street campus.\nAcademics.\nThe University of Rochester's undergraduate enrollment includes approximately 6,400 full-time and about 330 part-time students from across the U.S. and over 115 countries. Graduate enrollment includes approximately 3,750 full-time and about 1,600 part-time graduate students. The university has more than 103,000 living alumni and employs nearly 2,300 tenure-track faculty, with more than 20,000 faculty and staff across the university and the Strong Health System. The only required undergraduate course is the first-year writing seminar. In lieu of a core curriculum, undergraduates complete coursework in each of three disciplines: humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences. Students choose a major, consisting of more than ten courses, and a cluster, consisting of three related courses. The student must ensure at least a cluster is met in each discipline; however, second majors and minors are often used to fulfill these requirements. Students who pursue accredited engineering fields are exempt from this system and are required to have only one humanities or social science cluster.\nResearch.\nRochester is a member of the Association of American Universities and is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very High Research Activity\". Rochester had a research expenditure of $481 million in 2023. In 2008, Rochester ranked 44th nationally in research spending, but this ranking has declined gradually to 70 in 2023. Some of the major research centers include the Laboratory for Laser Energetics, a laser-based nuclear fusion facility, and the extensive research facilities at the University of Rochester Medical Center. Recently, the university has also engaged in a series of new initiatives to expand its programs in biomedical engineering and optics, including the construction of the new $37 million Robert B. Goergen Hall for Biomedical Engineering and Optics on the River Campus. Other new research initiatives include a cancer stem cell program and a Clinical and Translational Sciences Institute. The university also has the ninth highest technology revenue among U.S. higher education institutions, with $46 million being paid for commercial rights to university technology and research in 2009.\nNotable patents include Zoloft and Gardasil. WeBWorK, a web-based system for checking homework and providing immediate feedback for students, was developed by University of Rochester professors Gage and Pizer. The system is now in use at over 800 universities and colleges, as well as several secondary and primary schools. Rochester scientists work in diverse areas. For example, physicists developed a technique for etching metal surfaces, such as platinum, titanium, and brass, with powerful lasers, enabling self-cleaning surfaces that repel water droplets and will not rust if tilted at a 4-degree angle and medical researchers are exploring how brains rid themselves of toxic waste during sleep.\nColleges of Arts, Sciences and Engineering.\nArts, Sciences and Engineering (ASE) at the University of Rochester comprises the School of Arts and Sciences and the Hajim School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. Within ASE, the College is home for most undergraduates during their studies at the University of Rochester. The graduate training provided by the departments and programs at ASE account for over 60% of the PhD degrees awarded by the university. With 19 departments, more than a dozen programs, and numerous centers and institutes, Arts &amp; Sciences is the largest school at the university. These include the Goergen Institute for Data Science, the Humanities Center, and the Institute for Performing Arts.\nEstablished in 1958, the Hajim School comprises a variety of programs, departments, and institutes, including Audio and music engineering, Biomedical engineering, Chemical engineering, Computer science, Electrical and computer engineering, the Institute of Optics, and Mechanical engineering. The school has doubled the number of undergraduate students it encompasses since 2008. The school was named after Edmund Hajim, a trustee of the university, in 2009 after a $30-million gift to the university. The Institute of Optics has been regarded among the premier optics programs in the world.\nEastman School of Music.\nThe Eastman School of Music is a music conservatory offering both undergraduate and graduate education in a number of music fields, including composition, theory, and performance.\nSchool of Medicine and Dentistry.\nThe School of Medicine and Dentistry is a medical and dental school with both research and clinical programs.\nEstablished in 1921, the School consists of approximately 1200 full-time faculty members and 650 voluntary clinical faculty members organized into 32 departments and centers. Nearly 500 graduate students and 200 postdoctoral appointees are in training.\nIn 2022, the school received 5,669 applications and accepted 70 students from AMCAS and 38 students from special matriculating programs, with an acceptance rate of 1.2%. \"U.S. News\" ranks the school 32nd for research and 40th for primary care. The university is known for its competitive Rochester Early Medical Scholars (REMS) program, an eight-year BA/BS + MD program. Admission to the program is separate from admission to the college and requires additional application materials and interviews.\nThe School of Dentistry is known as the Eastman Institute for Oral Health. Established in 1905 as Eastman Dental Center, it merged with the university in 1997. As of 2020, it was the 7th top funded institution by the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research (NIDCR), part of National Institutes of Health (NIH).\nSchool of Nursing.\nThe School of Nursing is a nursing school on the campus of the University of Rochester Medical Center.\nWarner School of Education.\nThe Warner School of Education is the university's graduate school of education. It is located on the River Campus in LeChase Hall.\nSimon Business School.\nSimon Business School is the graduate business school, based out of Schlegel and Gleason Halls on the River Campus.\nRankings.\nThe University of Rochester is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. In 2025, \"Forbes\" magazine's America's Top Colleges series ranked the university 69th in the United States overall. The 2025-26 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Colleges Ranking placed the university 46th in the country overall, while \"Washington Monthly\" placed the University of Rochester 48th in the country (best college for research) and \"The Wall Street Journal\" ranked it 58th in the United States overall.\nStudent life.\nUR's official symbol is the seal of the university, which features a book, representing arts and sciences, a lyre symbolizing music, and a modified symbol of medicine. The official flower of the university is the dandelion, purportedly prolific on the cow pasture that became the university's second campus.\nThe official mascot of the university is a predatory wasp found throughout Rochester, the yellowjacket. From 1983 to 2008, the mascot was named \"URBee.\" However, when the university re-designed the mascot during the 2007\u20132008 academic year, a new name was chosen. As of February 1, 2008, the school's mascot is now known as \"Rocky\".\nThe university uses Rochester Blue and Dandelion Yellow as its official colors, which are the prominent colors on the official regalia. The motto of the university is \"\"Meliora\",\" which loosely translates to \"better\" with the connotation of \"ever better,\" the meaning adopted by the university.\nThe image of Rush Rhees Library's main dome serves as an additional icon for the University of Rochester. Rush Rhees Library at The University of Rochester was featured on the cover of the \"Princeton Review 373 Best Colleges 2011 Edition\".\nThe song most often sung at college events, led often by the school's many a cappella groups, is \"The Genesee\", written by former Rochester student Thomas Thackeray Swinburne (Class of 1892). Although less frequently used, the university also has an official Alma Mater, \"The Dandelion Yellow\".\nStudent organizations.\nThere are over 200 active groups on campus, which range from cultural dance groups to the university's improvisational comedy troupe In Between the Lines. Since 1873, the university has regularly printed its student newspaper, the \"Campus Times\". There is also the student-run, online-only publication, \"The Rival Rochester\". This is a source of opinion, commentary, and satire.\nThe university is well known for its a cappella groups, the YellowJackets, the Midnight Ramblers, Vocal Point, After Hours, and Trebellius, who have multiple local, state and national awards. The University of Rochester is also home to its own radio station, WRUR, that is located in Todd Union.\nActivities and events.\nWilson Commons Students Activities (WCSA) is a student-led group in charge of planning and organizing events for undergraduate students.\nAnnual events include the Celebrate Diversity concert and Yellowjacket Weekend during orientation week, Winterfest Weekend in February, Spirit Week, Springfest Weekend and Senior Day.\nMeliora Weekend is the annual alumni reunion, usually held in October or September, bringing together thousands of alumni for a week of food, drink and dance.\nStudents' Association.\nThe Students' Association (SA) is the primary student governing body and includes most of the student groups at the university. It is governed by the SA Senate, President, and Vice President, all of whom are elected by the student body. The SA President may choose to appoint an advisory cabinet made up of a group of volunteer students. There is also a judicial branch, composed of the All Campus Judicial Council (ACJC), the members of whom are nominated by an interview committee and approved by the SA Senate.\nSpiritual life.\nThe central space on campus for spiritual activity is the university's Interfaith Chapel, located just opposite Rush Rhees Library and the Eastman Quad. Housing a large sanctuary, river level worship area, kitchen, lounge, meeting, and office space, the Chapel serves some twelve chaplaincies, including those within Buddhist; Christian; Hindu; Interfaith, Non-Religious, and Secular; Jewish; Muslim; and Pagan communities, and several student spiritual clubs.\nThere are additional spaces off and on campus that serve students of these communities, including Chabad House and the future Catholic Center and Center for Jewish Life.\nHousing and dining.\nThe majority of undergraduate students at the university live and take classes on the River Campus. Students are required to live on campus for their Freshman and Sophomore years, and then have the option of remaining on campus or moving off campus. 7 out of 10 undergraduates choose to live on campus for all four years.\nFreshman live in one of two groupings of dorms - the First-Year Hill or the First-Year Quad. The First-Year Hill consists of Susan B Anthony Hall, the largest undergraduate dorm, and Genesee Hall, the newest undergraduate dorm. The First-Year Quad consists of Lovejoy, Tiernan, Gilbert and Hoeing Halls. Most freshman live in a double room, with a few in single or triples. Upperclassman have multiple options to choose from, ranging from older dorms on the river campus to newer apartment-style options across the Genesee River. These include a mixture of singles, doubles, and suites.\nThere are seven fraternities with houses on campus, situated on the fraternity quadrangle near the First-Year Quad. Smaller fraternities and all sororities occupies floors in residential buildings in Jackson Court and Hill Court. There are a number of off-campus fraternities situated across the Genesee River on Plymouth Avenue and Genesee Street.\nThe university has two main dining halls, Danforth Dining (located in Susan B Anthony Hall) and Douglas Dining (located in Douglas Commons). Other options include Rocky's, a sandwich shop and lounge and the Pit (both located in Wilson Commons).\nCampus and area transportation.\nThe university's campuses have their own university-sponsored system of buses, or shuttles, which provide free transportation from the River Campus to the Medical Center, South Campus, Eastman Campus, and Downtown Rochester. There are also lines that run between the River Campus and local shopping and entertainment destinations in Henrietta and Pittsford. On the weekends, a special shuttle loops to Rochester Public Market and Marketplace Mall. Most of the university-sponsored buses are named using a color system (e.g. Red Line) that indicates their respective route and allows for easy identification. Several bus lines of the Rochester-Genesee Regional Transportation Authority (RTS) made stops at the university until 2020.\nThe Frederick Douglass Greater Rochester International Airport is a ten-minute drive to the west of the River Campus. In addition, Amtrak train and Greyhound bus have stations in downtown Rochester to the north of the campus. SA traditionally sponsors free student shuttles to the airport, train station, and bus station for Move-in, Move-out, Christmas, Thanksgiving and Spring Break.\nTraditions.\nBoar's Head Dinner.\nThe Boar's Head Dinner is an annual medieval student feast that was first celebrated on December 17, 1934. Students dress up in costumes, and the setting resembles a 16th Century English Court. The first dinners were held in Todd Union and are currently held at the Feldman Ballroom in Douglas Commons. Among the evening's events is an annual 'Reading of the Boar', a retelling of the Boar's Head legend by a member of the faculty.\nDandelion Day.\nUsually referred to as 'D-Day' or 'Drinking Day' by students, Dandelion Day is one of the university's longest standing traditions that celebrates the last full week of classes in the spring semester. Events usually include food trucks, a concert, and special parties held by fraternities and sororities. In 2008, Dandelion Day lost funding from the school administration but was eventually brought back due to student demand. Dandelion Day is usually held on the Friday of Springfest Weekend.\nAthletics.\nThe University of Rochester's athletics teams are collectively known as the Yellowjackets. The university is a member of the Division III of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA), primarily competing in dual membership with the University Athletic Association (UAA) and the Liberty League. One exception to this is the men's squash team, which is consistently ranked top 5 in the NCAA Division I ranks.\nRochester competes in 23 intercollegiate varsity sports: Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, soccer, squash, swimming &amp; diving, tennis and track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor); while women's sports include basketball, cross country, field hockey, lacrosse, rowing, soccer, softball, swimming &amp; diving, tennis, track &amp; field (indoor and outdoor) and volleyball.\nAccomplishments.\nIn 2009 women's soccer coach Terry Gurnett set records with over 400-lifetime wins. In March 2010 the women's basketball team made it to the NCAA's Final Four. The men's soccer team made it to the NCAA Elite Eight in 2017 and the NCAA Final Four in 2018. In 2021, the softball team reached the Division III women's college world series.\nClub/intramural sports.\nThere are also numerous clubs and intramural athletics groups. Popular club sports include hockey, ultimate frisbee, rugby, and soccer, which all have men's and women's teams. The men's rugby team has enjoyed recent success, with a New York State Conference Championship in 2011. The team was ranked 9th in the nation out of 151 Division III teams for the 2011\u20132012 season.\nFacilities.\nThe main athletic facilities of the university are in Goergen Athletic Center and Prince Athletic Complex on the River Campus, with other facilities in the Spurrier building (River Campus) and the Medical Center.\nPrince Athletic Complex include Fauver Stadium, home of the track &amp; field, football and soccer teams and Towers Field, the baseball stadium.\nFacilities in the Goorgen Athletic Center include the Speegle-Wilbraham Center, home of the Swimming and Diving program, Louis Alexander Palestra, Lyman Squash Center, an Indoor Recreation and Tennis Center, Bloch Fitness Center and the Hajim Gymnasium.\nNotable alumni and faculty.\nThe University of Rochester has more than 120,000 alumni. Alumni, faculty, and affiliates of the university include recipients of 9 National Medals of Science, and 13 Pulitzer Prizes.\nThirteen graduates or faculty members have earned a Nobel Prize, and 13 have earned a Pulitzer Prize, while others have earned the highest honors awarded to Americans by the United States government. These include 4 recipients of the National Medal of Technology and Innovation (Alejandro Zaffaroni, Rangaswamy Srinivasan, Dace Viceps Madore, Maya Koster). Many scientists on NASA's advisory board for the James Webb Space Telescope are alumni or faculty members.\nRochester graduates have been leaders in business. Notable alumni include Joseph C. Wilson, founder and CEO of Xerox; Barry Meyer, chairman and CEO of Warner Bros., and billionaires Paul Singer and Alan Zekelman.\nIn addition, Rochester alumni have served in the United States Congress or held other senior government positions. These include Congressmen Sereno E. Payne, Jacob Sloat Fassett, and Samuel S. Stratton, Ambassadors Kenneth Keating and George F. Ward, senior government officials Steven Chu, Vittorio Grilli, Lawrence Kudlow, Anthony Petruccelli and Donald C. Winter, as well as Governor Josh Shapiro.\nOther notable alumni include:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31920", "revid": "1318214616", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31920", "title": "University of California, San Francisco", "text": "Public university in California, US\nThe University of California, San Francisco (UCSF or UC San Francisco) is a public land-grant research university in San Francisco, California, United States. It is part of the University of California system and is dedicated entirely to health science and life science. It conducts research and teaching in medical and biological sciences.\nUCSF was founded as Toland Medical College in 1864. In 1873, it became affiliated with the University of California as its medical department. In the same year, it incorporated the California College of Pharmacy and in 1881 it established a dentistry school. Its facilities were located in both Berkeley and San Francisco. In 1964, the school gained full administrative independence as a campus of the UC system, headed by its own chancellor, and in 1970 it gained its current name. Historically based at Parnassus Heights with satellite facilities throughout the city, UCSF developed a second major campus in the newly redeveloped Mission Bay district in the early 2000s.\nIn 2023, UCSF received the 2nd highest research funding from the National Institutes of Health. In 2021, the university spent $1.71 billion in research and development, the second most among institutions of higher education in the U.S. With 25,398 employees, UCSF is the second-largest public agency employer in the San Francisco Bay Area. UCSF faculty have treated patients and trained residents since 1873 at the San Francisco General Hospital and for over 50 years at the San Francisco VA Medical Center.\nHistory.\nBeginnings.\nThe University of California, San Francisco traces its history to Hugh Toland, a South Carolina surgeon who found great success and wealth after moving to San Francisco in 1852. A previous school, the Cooper Medical College of the University of the Pacific (founded 1858), entered a period of uncertainty in 1862 when its founder, Elias Samuel Cooper, died. In 1864, Toland founded a new medical school, Toland Medical College, and the faculty of Cooper Medical College chose to suspend operations and join the new school.\nThe University of California was founded on March 23, 1868, with the enacting of its Organic Act. Section 8 of the Organic Act authorized the Board of Regents to affiliate the University of California with independent self-sustaining professional colleges. In 1870, Toland Medical School began to negotiate an affiliation with the new public university. Meanwhile, some faculty of Toland Medical School elected to reopen the Medical Department of the University of the Pacific, which would later become Stanford University School of Medicine. Negotiations between Toland and UC were complicated by Toland's demand that the medical school continue to bear his name, an issue on which he finally conceded. In March 1873, the trustees of Toland Medical College transferred it to the Regents of the University of California, and it became The Medical Department of the University of California. At the same time, the University of California also negotiated the incorporation of the California College of Pharmacy, the first pharmacy school in the West, established in 1872 by the California Pharmaceutical Society. The Pharmacy College was affiliated in June 1873, and together the Medical College and the Pharmacy College came to be known as the \"Affiliated Colleges\". The third college, the College of Dentistry, was established in 1881.\nExpansion and growth.\nInitially, the three Affiliated Colleges were located at different sites around San Francisco, but near the end of the 19th Century interest in bringing them together grew. To make this possible, San Francisco Mayor Adolph Sutro donated 13 acres in Parnassus Heights at the base of Mount Parnassus (now known as Mount Sutro). The new site, overlooking Golden Gate Park, opened in the fall of 1898, with the construction of the new Affiliated Colleges buildings. The school's first female student, Lucy Wanzer, graduated in 1876, after having to appeal to the UC Board of Regents to gain admission in 1873.\nUntil 1906, the faculty of the medical school had provided care at the City-County Hospital (named San Francisco General Hospital from 1915 to 2016 and Zuckerberg San Francisco General Hospital and Trauma Center (SFGH) since 2016), but the medical school still did not have a teaching hospital of its own. Following the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, more than 40,000 people were relocated to a makeshift tent city in Golden Gate Park and were treated by the faculty of the Affiliated Colleges. This brought the Affiliated Colleges, which until then were located on the western outskirts of the city, in contact with significant population numbers. By fueling the Affiliated Colleges' commitment to civic responsibility and health care, the earthquake increased the momentum towards the eventual construction of their own healthcare facilities.\nWithin a month after the 1906 earthquake, the faculty of the medical school voted to make room in their building for a teaching hospital by moving the three departments responsible for the first two years of preclinical instruction\u2014anatomy, pathology, and physiology\u2014across San Francisco Bay to the Berkeley campus. As a result, for over 50 years, students pursuing the M.D. degree took their first two years at Berkeley and their last two years at Parnassus Heights. By October 1906, an outpatient clinic was operational on the first floor of the medical building, and by April 1907, the new teaching hospital started to admit inpatients. This created the need to train nursing students, of whom the first was informally admitted in June; in December 1907, the UC Training School for Nurses was formally established, adding a fourth professional school to the Affiliated Colleges.\nAround this time, the Affiliated Colleges agreed to submit to the Regents' governance during the term of President Benjamin Ide Wheeler, as the Board of Regents had come to recognize the problems inherent in the existence of independent entities that shared the UC brand but over which UC had no real control. The last of the Affiliated Colleges to become an integral part of the university was the pharmacy school, in 1934.\nPost-War 20th century.\nThe schools continued to grow in numbers and reputation in the following years. One notable event was the incorporation of the Hooper Foundation for Medical Research in 1914, a medical research institute second only to the Rockefeller Institute. This addition bolstered the prestige of the Parnassus site during the long-running dispute over whether the schools should consolidate at Parnassus or in Berkeley. The final decision came in 1949 when the Regents of the University of California designated the Parnassus campus as the UC Medical Center in San Francisco. After the medical facilities were updated and expanded, the preclinical departments returned to San Francisco in 1958, and from that point forward the M.D. degree program was again provided entirely in Parnassus Heights.\nDuring this era, a number of research institutes were established, and many new facilities were added, such as the 225-bed UC Hospital (1917), the Clinics Building (1934), the Langley Porter Clinic (1942) and the Herbert C. Moffitt Hospital (1955). In 1958, the addition of the \"Guy S. Millberry Union\" offered dorms and services for students.\nWith medical education again concentrated in San Francisco, the UC Medical Center gained more independence and autonomy from the Berkeley campus during the 1950s and 1960s. The deans of the Affiliated Colleges reported directly to the UC president at Berkeley for several decades. In 1954, an administrative advisory committee chaired by the dean of the School of Medicine was created to run the campus. In 1958, the Medical Center got its own chief campus officer with the title of provost. In 1961, the four departments were renamed as \"School of ...\" and the Graduate Division was founded.\nFinally, in 1964 the institution obtained full administrative independence from Berkeley under the name University of California, San Francisco Medical Center, becoming the ninth campus in the University of California system and the only one devoted exclusively to the health sciences.\nThe first Chancellor under the new independent configuration was John B. de C.M. Saunders, previously provost, a White South African who had a strong preference for clinical medical training over research. The resulting controversy \"became front-page news in San Francisco\". On one side was most of the clinical faculty, who owed their appointments to Saunders. On the other side was the basic sciences faculty, many of whom were recent transplants from Berkeley. UC President Clark Kerr and the regents ultimately decided in favor of the research model. As part of a compromise designed to heal the UCSF community, Kerr and Board of Regents chair Edward W. Carter negotiated the simultaneous resignations of both Saunders and Dean William Reinhardt of the UCSF School of Medicine, who had been held responsible for the researchers' rebellion by Saunders' supporters.\nIn 1966, Willard C. Fleming, DDS, was named UCSF's second Chancellor. Fleming brought balance between clinicians and researchers and a new level of stability to the administration. By the end of the 1960s, the university was starting to become a leading research center; its research enterprise was bolstered by the opening of Health Sciences East and Health Sciences West the same year.\nUnder the guidance of the third Chancellor, Philip R. Lee, the institution was renamed to its current form, the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), a symbol of its coequal status as a UC campus and a research university, while the Medical Center name was kept for its hospital facilities. Lee also was crucial in guiding UCSF through the turmoil of the late 1960s and worked to increase minority recruitment and enrollment. By then, UCSF had already reached the top ranks of US schools in the health sciences through its innovative programs that blended basic science, research, and clinical instruction. This stature was further augmented by Francis A. Sooy, fourth Chancellor, who dedicated his ten years to recruiting the top physicians and scientists in the field.\nLate 20th century.\nThe 1970s saw a dramatic expansion of UCSF, both in its medical capacities and as a research institute. The increase in researchers, physicians and students brought a need for additional space. The nursing school opened its own building in 1972 and the medical center opened the Ambulatory Care Center in 1973. The discovery of recombinant DNA technology by UCSF and Stanford scientists in the mid-1970s opened many new avenues of research and attracted more people. UCSF scientists also played a central role in the birth and development of the biotechnology industry in the San Francisco Bay area during this period. Herbert Boyer, a Professor of UCSF's biochemistry and biophysics department co-founded Genentech, the first therapeutic biotech firm, and UCSF scientists were also involved in the formation of most other major biotech firms in the San Francisco region that date back to the late 1970s and early 1980s. Furthermore, a 2006 analysis of the roots of the ten largest biotech firms measured in terms of their market capitalization in the San Francisco region highlighted the central position of UCSF continued to play within the region's industry: six biotech firms out of the top ten were either directly or indirectly linked to UCSF\u2014a direct link meaning that the firm was founded by a UCSF scientist, an indirect link meaning that the firm was spun-off from a firm founded by a UCSF scientist.\nOn the clinical side, great advances in patient care, diagnostics, and treatments advanced UCSF's reputation in the health field. 1975 also saw the opening of the UCSF Center in Fresno.\nJulius R. Krevans, the fifth Chancellor from 1982 to 1993, was a strong advocate of biomedical research and public policy in the health sciences. During his tenure, UCSF rose to become one of the leading recipients of NIH funding. This led to the need for new space, and additions included the Marilyn Reed Lucia Child Care Center in 1978, the Dental Clinics Building (1980), the new Joseph M. Long Hospital in 1983 (which was integrated with the existing Moffitt Hospital), the Beckman Vision Center and the Koret Vision Research Laboratory (1988), and the Kalmanovitz Library (1990).\nDue to the space constraints of the Parnassus Heights campus, UCSF started looking into expanding into other areas of the city. The university opened UCSF Laurel Heights in 1985 in the Laurel Heights neighborhood. Initially intended for pharmacy school laboratory research and instruction, neighborhood concerns pushed the university to instead employ the building for academic desktop research, social and behavioral science departments, and administrative offices. On the western side of the city, the university acquired Mount Zion Hospital in 1990, which became the second major clinical site and since 1999 has hosted the first comprehensive cancer center in Northern California. Under the chancellorship of Joseph B. Martin, UCSF attempted a short-lived merger of its health system with Stanford Health and laid the groundwork for the expansion into Mission Bay.\n21st century.\nA pivotal moment in UCSF history was the deal between Vice Chancellor Bruce Spaulding and San Francisco Mayor Willie Brown for the development of the Mission Bay campus in 1999. The development of a second campus in San Francisco was planned carefully and with business and community input. The Mission Bay neighborhood was occupied by old warehouses and rail yards. Initially, the campus consisted of 29.2 acres donated by the Catellus Development Corporation and 13.2 acres donated by the City and County of San Francisco. A later addition of a 14.5-acre parcel brought the total campus area to about 57 acres. The Mission Bay expansion was overseen by a one-year chancellorship of surgeon Haile Debas. Under his guidance, UCSF further increased its lead in the field of surgery, transplant surgery, and surgical training. The Mission Bay Campus doubled the university's research and provided new opportunities for biomedical discovery and student training. The first phase of construction cost $800 million and included four research buildings, a community center, a student housing complex, two parking structures, and development of large open spaces.\nScientist J. Michael Bishop, a Nobel Prize in Medicine recipient, became the eighth Chancellor in 1998. He oversaw one of UCSF's transition and growth periods, including the expanding Mission Bay development and philanthropic support recruitment. During his tenure, he unveiled the first comprehensive, campus-wide, strategic plan to promote diversity and foster a supportive work environment. During this time, UCSF also adopted a new mission: \"advancing health worldwide\"\u2122.\nIn 2009, Susan Desmond-Hellmann became the ninth Chancellor and first woman to lead UCSF. She was tasked with guiding the university through the aftermath of the 2008 financial crisis. In the same year, UCSF professor Elizabeth Blackburn won the Nobel Prize for Medicine and in 2012 UCSF professor Shinya Yamanaka won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine.\nThe 2010s saw increased construction and expansion at Mission Bay, with the Smith Cardiovascular Research Building, the UCSF Medical Center at Mission Bay, the Benioff Children's Hospital in 2010, the Sandler Neuroscience Center in 2012, Mission Hall and the Baker Cancer Hospital in 2013. The Children's Hospital was named after Marc Benioff, who donated $100 million toward the new facility. In 2011, expansion also resumed at the Parnassus campus, with the construction of the Regeneration Medicine Building, a $123 million construction designed by New York architect Rafael Vi\u00f1oly. The Stem Cell Center was named in honor of Eli Broad, who donated $25 million to the cause of research for diabetes, cardiovascular disease, Parkinson's disease, HIV/AIDS, and cancer.\nIn 2014, UCSF celebrated its 150th anniversary with a year of events. That same year Neonatologist and Dean of the UCSF School of Medicine Sam Hawgood, MBBS, became the tenth Chancellor. In 2015, the Mission Bay campus saw the opening of the new UCSF Medical Center at Mission Bay, a 289-bed integrated hospital complex serving children, women and cancer patients.\nSince 2015 UCSF has increased its focus on novel biomedical research and has attracted many acts of philanthropy. UCSF became one of the three institutions (together with Berkeley and Stanford) that comprise the Biohub, which is housed on the Mission Bay campus. The project consists of a medical science research center funded by a $600 million commitment from Facebook CEO and founder Mark Zuckerberg and UCSF alumna pediatrician Priscilla Chan, his wife. In January 2017, UCSF announced a $500 million gift from the Helen Diller Foundation to increase financial aid for faculty and students, invest in cutting-edge research projects, and expand scholarships for dental, medical, nursing and pharmacy students. This gift is tied with that of Nike Inc. co-founder Phil Knight for the largest single donation ever to a public university. In 2017, UCSF launched a capital campaign, The Campaign, to raise $5 billion to increase the endowment and funds for research and medical services. In 2018, UCSF received a commitment of $500 million for the construction of a new hospital, which will be built at Parnassus, replacing the Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute.\nIn June 2020, UCSF paid $1.1 million (116 bitcoins) to the Netwalker criminal gang who had attacked their computer systems with malware and stole student data. The university negotiated with the gang after initially offering $780,000, which was rejected by the gang due to their perception of UCSF's wealth. UCSF said in a statement to the BBC that they had \"made the difficult decision to pay some portion of the ransom...to the individuals behind the malware attack in exchange for a tool to unlock the encrypted data and the return of the data they obtained. It would be a mistake to assume that all of the statements and claims made in the negotiations are factually accurate\".\nIn 2021 the UCSF teamed up with Thermo Fisher Scientific on the construction of a cell therapy development, manufacturing and collaboration center on the school's Mission Bay campus.\nCampus.\nUCSF operates four major campus sites within the city of San Francisco and one in Fresno, California, as well as numerous other minor sites scattered through San Francisco and the San Francisco Bay Area.\nParnassus.\nThe Parnassus Heights campus was the site of the Affiliated Colleges, which later evolved into the present-day institution. The site was established along Parnassus Avenue in 1898 on land donated by Mayor Adolph Sutro. At the time, the site was in the remote and uninhabited western part of San Francisco, but its medical facilities became vital in saving lives when 40,000 people were hosted in the nearby Golden Gate Park after the 1906 earthquake. In the early 1900s, the medical research operations of the medical center were split between Parnassus and UC Berkeley, and discussions arose about which site should become the center of medical activity. In 1914, the Hooper Foundation for Medical Research decided to move its research work to the Parnassus site, becoming the first medical research foundation in the United States to be incorporated into a university. This expansion led to a 1949 decision by the UC Board of Regents designating the UCSF campus, rather than UC Berkeley, as the main site for all medical sciences of the UC system. The 20th century saw remarkable growth, with the expansion of new research institutes and facilities, which led to the administrative independence of UCSF and the selection of John B. de C.M. Saunders as the first Chancellor in 1964.\nParnassus serves as the main campus of the university and includes administration offices, numerous research labs, the 682-patient bed UCSF Medical Center, the Langley Porter Psychiatric Institute, the Mulberry Student Union, and the UCSF Library. Additionally, the Schools of Dentistry, Pharmacy, Medicine, Nursing are also located at Parnassus. It also houses the UCSF neurology outpatient practice that serves as a referral center for most of northern California and Reno, Nevada. UCSF's Beckman Vision Center is also located at the Parnassus campus. It is a center for the diagnosis, treatment, and research of all areas of eye care, including vision correction surgery. Also located on the Parnassus campus is the UCSF Fetal Treatment Center, a multidisciplinary care center dedicated to the diagnosis, treatment, and long-term follow-up of fetal birth defects.\nMission Bay.\nUCSF's Mission Bay Campus, also located in San Francisco, is the largest ongoing biomedical construction project in the world. The Mission Bay campus, opened in 2003 with construction still ongoing, contains additional research space and facilities to foster biotechnology and life sciences companies. It will double the size of UCSF's research enterprise over the next 10 years. The biotechnology company Genentech contributed $50\u00a0million toward construction of a building as part of a settlement regarding alleged theft of UCSF technology several decades earlier. \nAlso located on the Mission Bay campus, the Arthur and Toni Rembe Rock Hall was designed by C\u00e9sar Pelli and opened in February 2004. The building is named in honor of Arthur Rock and his wife, who made a $25\u00a0million gift to the university. Byers Hall serves as the headquarters for the California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences (QB3), a cooperative effort between the UC campuses at San Francisco, Berkeley, and Santa Cruz. The building is named after venture capitalist Brook Byers, co-chair of UCSF's capital campaign that concluded in 2005 and raised over $1.6\u00a0billion.\nAdditionally, the William J. Rutter Center, designed along with the adjacent 600-space parking structure by Ricardo Legorreta, opened in October 2005 and contains a fitness and recreation center, swimming pools, student services, and conference facilities. The building is named in honor of William J. Rutter, former chairman of the university's Department of Biochemistry &amp; Biophysics and co-founder of Chiron Corporation. A housing complex for 750 students and postdoctoral fellows and an 800-space parking garage also opened in late 2005. And a fourth research building, designed by Rafael Vi\u00f1oly and named the Helen Diller Family Cancer Research Building, opened in June 2009. Two additional research buildings designated for neuroscience and cardiovascular research are currently in the planning and design phase. A new specialty hospital focused on women, children, and cancer on the Mission Bay campus opened in February 2015.\nOther centers, institutes, and programs.\nThe Mount Zion Campus contains UCSF's NCI-designated Comprehensive Cancer Center, its Women's Health Center, the UCSF Osher Center for Integrative Medicine and outpatient resources. The San Francisco General Hospital campus cares for the indigent population of San Francisco and contains San Francisco's only Level I trauma center. The hospital itself is owned and operated by the City and County of San Francisco, but all of its doctors are UCSF faculty physicians and UCSF maintains research laboratories at the hospital campus. The earliest cases of HIV/AIDS were discovered at San Francisco General Hospital in the 1980s. To this day SF General Hospital has one of the world's leading HIV/AIDS treatment and research centers.\nUCSF is also affiliated with the San Francisco VA Medical Center and the J. David Gladstone Institutes, a private biomedical research entity that has recently moved to a new building adjacent to UCSF's Mission Bay campus. Since 2014, there has also been an affiliation with UCSF Benioff Children's Hospital Oakland (formerly Children's Hospital &amp; Research Center Oakland).\nUCSF has its own police department, which serves its two major campuses as well as all satellite sites within the city and South San Francisco.\nHealth policy.\nAmong the related Institutes that are part of UCSF is the Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies, founded in 1972 by Philip Randolph Lee.\nUCSF cooperates with the University of California College of the Law, a separate University of California institution located in San Francisco. This includes the formation of the UCSF/UC Law SF Consortium on Law, Science, and Health Policy. The program offers an LLM and MSL Degree program for health and science professionals. The Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies is a partner in this consortium.\nUCSF is home to the Industry Documents Library (IDL), a digital library of previously secret internal industry documents, including over 14 million documents in the internationally known Truth Tobacco Industry Documents, the Food Industry Documents Archive, Chemical Industry Documents Archive and the Drug Industry Documents Archive. The IDL contains millions of documents created by major companies related to their advertising, manufacturing, marketing, sales, and scientific research activities.\nAcademics.\nUniversity of California, San Francisco is unique among University of California campuses in that it performs only biomedical and patient-centered research in its Schools of Medicine, Pharmacy, Nursing, and Dentistry, and the Graduate Division, and their hundreds of associated laboratories. The university is known for innovation in medical research, public service, and patient care. UCSF's faculty includes 7 Nobel Prize winners, 31 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 69 members of the Institute of Medicine, and 30 members of the Academy of Arts and Sciences. UCSF graduate degrees include the Master of Science, Doctor of Philosophy, Doctor of Pharmacy, Doctor of Medicine, Doctor of Dental Surgery, and Doctor of Physical Therapy.\nRankings and reputation.\n\"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2023\u201324 ranked the UCSF school of medicine as one of the Tier 1 medical school for research in the nation and Tier 1 medical school for primary care. In 2019, the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\", published annually by Shanghai Jiaotong University, ranked UCSF 1st in the world for Clinical Medicine and 2nd in the world for Pharmacy. Among U.S. medical schools, UCSF is ranked 3rd for research and ranked 2nd for clinical training in the primary care specialties (internal medicine, family medicine, and pediatrics) by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nThe UCSF Medical Center is rated as the 12th best hospital in the US and 3rd best in California (behind Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and UCLA Medical Center, which are both located in Los Angeles) according to the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nFaculty.\nUCSF has 3,000 full-time faculty. Among its 2018 faculty members are:\nSchool of Medicine.\nThe UCSF school of medicine is the oldest in the Western United States. In 2021, the School of Medicine was the second-highest recipient of National Institutes of Health research funds among all U.S. medical schools, receiving awards totaling $630 million.\nIn 2016, the School of Medicine launched the Bridges curriculum, more than half of which is dedicated to diagnostic reasoning.\nIn 2017, 8,078 people applied and 505 were interviewed for 145 positions in the entering class.\nGraduate Division.\nThe Graduate Division, established in 1961, is home to 1,600 students enrolled in 31 degree programs (both PhD and Masters) and 1,100 postdoctoral scholars. Programs are based basic, translational, clinical, social, and population sciences, and focus on the understanding of the mechanisms of biology, analyzing the social, cultural, and historical determinants of health, alleviating human disease, reducing health disparities, and advancing health worldwide. \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". In 2018, UCSF graduate programs ranked 1st in immunology and molecular biology, 3rd in neuroscience, 4th in cell biology and biochemistry, fifth in biochemistry/biophysics/structural biology.\nSchool of Nursing.\nThe School of Nursing was established in 1907, following the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, which lead to UCSF becoming active in providing health care in San Francisco. It is recognized as one of the premier nursing schools in the United States. In the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" for 2016, the UCSF School of Nursing tied for 2nd overall in the nation. UCSF also ranked in the top 10 in all six of its rated nursing specialties, including ranking #1 for its psychiatric/mental health nurse practitioner program, and ranking #2 for its family nurse practitioner program. Previously, in 2012, the nursing specialties were ranked as #1 for adult/medical-surgical nurse, family nurse practitioner and psychiatric/mental health nurse programs, and #2 for its adult nurse practitioner program.\nThe School of Nursing in 2016 ranked first nationally in total NIH research funds with $7.85 million, for the 10th time in the last dozen years. This was the second year in a row that all four of UCSF's professional schools (Medicine, Nursing, Pharmacy, and Dentistry) ranked first for \"federal biomedical research funding in their fields.\"\nSchool of Pharmacy.\nFounded in 1872, it is the oldest pharmacy school in California and the western United States. For 39 consecutive years it has been the number one pharmacy school by NIH funding, with close to $29 million in 2018.\nIn 2015, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked the UCSF School of Pharmacy number three in its \"America's Best Graduate Schools\" edition. In 2014, the School of Pharmacy also ranked first in NIH research funding among all US pharmacy schools, receiving awards totaling $31.8\u00a0million. The UCSF School of Pharmacy was also ranked as the top program in the US, according to a 2002 survey published in \"The Annals of Pharmacotherapy\", which weighed key criteria, including funding for research and the frequency of scientific publications by faculty, that are not considered in other rankings. In 2013, the UCSF pharmacy program implemented the multiple mini interview, developed by McMaster University Medical School, as a replacement for the more traditional panel interview as the MMI had shown to be a better predictor of subsequent performance in school.\nSchool of Dentistry.\nFounded in 1881, the School of Dentistry is the oldest dental school in the state of California and in the Western United States. It is accredited by the American Dental Association and offers the Doctor of Dental Surgery (DDS), PhD in Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, MS in Oral and Craniofacial Sciences, and MS in Dental Hygiene degrees.\nThe School of Dentistry in 2016 ranked first among all dental schools in NIH research funding for the 25th consecutive year, with $19.5 million in awards. In Quacquarelli Symonds's Dentistry Subject Ranking in 2021, UCSF was ranked 7th in the world and 2nd in the United States.\nUCSF Health.\nUCSF Medical Center.\nIn 2022\u201323, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" recognized UCSF Medical Center as the 12th best hospital in the nation and the third best in California. UCSF received the following ranking in 17 adult medical specialities:\nThe UCSF Medical Center at Mission Bay opened February 1, 2015 and hosts three hospitals (UCSF Benioff children's hospital, UCSF Betty Irene Moore Women's Hospital, and UCSF Bakar Cancer Hospital) and an outpatient facility.\nResearch.\nUCSF is among the world's leading institutions in biological and medical research. Its departments span all fields of biomedical science, from basic to translational sciences. In fiscal year 2021, it spent $1.71 billion in research and development, the second most among institutions of higher education in the U.S. In fiscal year 2020, UCSF received $680 million in funding from the National Institutes of Health, which is the 2nd highest of all US domestic higher education universities.\nMilestones include:\nStudent life.\nThere are 230 registered campus organizations at UCSF. These groups and clubs cover a broad range of interests, including educational, social, cultural, artistic, recreational, political and spiritual. Every year, these organizations sponsor more than 1,200 activities and events.\nThe student government at UCSF consists of the Graduate and Professional Student Association (GPSA), which serves the collective interests of graduate and professional students. It aims at improving student life on a university and system-wide level with dialogue, action, and activities between students, faculty, and staff. It focuses on discussing University policy, informing constituents, advocating student interests, fostering relationships between academic programs, strengthening connections to better support students, and initiating actions and proposals.\n\"Synapse\" is the student newspaper at UCSF. It was founded in 1957, and since 1997 the newspaper has been both in print and online. In the fall 2015 the newspaper rebranded from \"Synapse: The UCSF Newspaper\" to \"Synapse: UCSF Student Voices\". The mission of \"Synapse\" is to serve as the forum for the campus community, and it covers campus news and events, entertainment, and restaurant reviews, and a wide range of feature stories, editorials, and weekly columns, to the entire UCSF community. The newspaper focuses heavily on science and health, but it also covers arts, national news, and opinion articles.\nUCSF students are eligible to become University of California student regent, a position on the University of California Board of Regents created by a 1974 California ballot proposition to represent University of California students on the university system's governing board. Student regents serve an approximately one-year term as 'student regent-designate', followed by a one-year term as a full voting member of the Regents. Virtually any UC student in good academic standing may apply to be student regent. Traditionally, the position alternates between undergraduate and graduate students as well as between the various UC campuses.\nNotable people.\nList of chancellors.\nThe following persons led UCSF as chancellor:\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31921", "revid": "1318494150", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31921", "title": "University of California", "text": "Public university system in California\nThe University of California (UC) is a public land-grant research university system in the U.S. state of California. Headquartered in Oakland, the system is composed of its ten campuses at Berkeley, Davis, Irvine, Los Angeles, Merced, Riverside, San Diego, San Francisco, Santa Barbara, and Santa Cruz, along with numerous research centers and academic centers abroad. The system is the state's land-grant university.\nIn 1900, UC was one of the founders of the Association of American Universities and since the 1970s seven of its campuses, in addition to Berkeley, have been admitted to the association. Berkeley, Davis, Irvine, Los Angeles, Santa Barbara, Santa Cruz, Riverside, and San Diego are considered Public Ivies, making California the state with the most universities in the nation to hold the title. UC campuses have large numbers of distinguished faculty in almost every academic discipline, with UC faculty and researchers having won 75 Nobel Prizes as of 2025.\nThe system's ten campuses have a combined student body of 299,407 students, 26,100 faculty members, 192,400 staff members and over 2.5 million alumni. Its newest campus in Merced opened in fall 2005. Nine campuses enroll both undergraduate and graduate students; one campus, UC San Francisco, enrolls only graduate and professional students in the medical and health sciences. In addition, the University of California College of the Law located in San Francisco is legally affiliated with UC and shares its name but is otherwise autonomous. Under the California Master Plan for Higher Education, the University of California is a part of the state's three-system public higher education plan, which also includes the California State University system and the California Community Colleges system. UC is governed by a Board of Regents whose autonomy from the rest of the state government is protected by the state constitution. The University of California also manages or co-manages three national laboratories for the U.S. Department of Energy: Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory (LBNL), Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL), and Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL).\nThe University of California was founded on March 23, 1868, and operated in Oakland, where it absorbed the assets of the College of California before moving to Berkeley in 1873. It also affiliated itself with independent medical and law schools in San Francisco. Over the next eight decades, several branch locations and satellite programs were established across the state. In March 1951, the University of California began to reorganize itself into something distinct from its campus in Berkeley, with UC president Robert Gordon Sproul staying in place as chief executive of the UC system, while Clark Kerr became Berkeley's first chancellor and Raymond B. Allen became the first chancellor of UCLA. However, the 1951 reorganization was stalled by resistance from Sproul and his allies, and it was not until Kerr succeeded Sproul as UC president that UC was able to evolve into a university system from 1957 to 1960. At that time, chancellors were appointed for additional campuses and each was granted some degree of greater autonomy.\nHistory.\nEarly history.\nIn 1849, the state of California ratified its first constitution, which contained the express objective of creating a complete educational system including a state university. Taking advantage of the Morrill Land-Grant Acts, the California State Legislature established an Agricultural, Mining, and Mechanical Arts College in 1866. However, it existed only on paper, as a placeholder to secure federal land-grant funds.\nMeanwhile, Congregational minister Henry Durant, an alumnus of Yale, had established the private Contra Costa Academy, on June 20, 1853, in Oakland, California. The initial site was bounded by Twelfth and Fourteenth Streets and Harrison and Franklin Streets in downtown Oakland (and is marked today by State Historical Plaque No. 45 at the northeast corner of Thirteenth and Franklin). In turn, the academy's trustees were granted a charter in 1855 for a College of California, though the college continued to operate as a college preparatory school until it added college-level courses in 1860. The college's trustees, educators, and supporters believed in the importance of a liberal arts education (especially the study of the Greek and Roman classics), but ran into a lack of interest in liberal arts colleges on the American frontier (for post-secondary degrees, the college was graduating only three or four students per year).\nIn November 1857, the college's trustees began to acquire various parcels of land facing the Golden Gate in what is now Berkeley for a future planned campus to the north of Oakland. But first, they needed to secure the college's water rights by buying a large farm to the east. In 1864, they organized the College Homestead Association, which borrowed $35,000 to purchase the land, plus another $33,000 to purchase 160 acres (650,000 m2) of land to the south of the future campus. The association subdivided the latter parcel and started selling lots with the hope it could raise enough money to repay its lenders and also create a new college town. But sales of new homesteads fell short.\nGovernor Frederick Low favored the establishment of a state university based upon the University of Michigan plan, and thus in one sense may be regarded as the founder of the University of California. At the College of California's 1867 commencement exercises, where Low was present, Yale University professor Benjamin Silliman Jr. criticized Californians for establishing a polytechnic school, instead of a real university. That same day, Low reportedly first suggested a merger of the already-functional College of California (which had a liberal arts focus, land, buildings, faculty, and students, but not enough money) with the nonfunctional state college (which had a polytechnical focus, money and nothing else), and went on to participate in the ensuing negotiations. \nOn October 9, 1867, the college's trustees reluctantly agreed to join forces with the state college to their mutual advantage, but under one condition\u2014that there not be simply an \"Agricultural, Mining, and Mechanical Arts College\", but a complete university, within which the assets of the College of California would be used to create a College of Letters (now known as the College of Letters and Science). Accordingly, the Organic Act, establishing the University of California, was introduced as a bill by Assemblyman John W. Dwinelle on March 5, 1868, and after it was duly passed by both houses of the state legislature, it was signed into state law by Governor Henry H. Haight (Low's successor) on March 23, 1868.\nHowever, as legally constituted, the new university was \"not\" an actual merger of the two colleges, but was an entirely new institution which merely inherited certain objectives and assets from each of them. Governor Haight saw no need to honor any tacit understandings reached with his predecessor about institutional continuity. Only two college trustees became regents and a single faculty member (Martin Kellogg) was hired by the new university. By April 1869, the trustees had second thoughts about their agreement to donate the college's assets and disincorporate. To get them to proceed, regent John B. Felton helped them bring a \"friendly suit\" against the university to test the agreement's legality\u2014which they promptly lost.\nThe University of California's second president, Daniel Coit Gilman, opened its new campus in Berkeley in September 1873.\nUC affiliates.\nSection 8 of the Organic Act authorized the Board of Regents to affiliate the University of California with independent self-sustaining professional colleges. \"Affiliation\" meant UC and its affiliates would \"share the risk in launching new endeavors in education\". The affiliates shared the prestige of the state university's brand, and UC agreed to award degrees in its own name to their graduates on the recommendation of their respective faculties, but the affiliates were otherwise managed independently by their own boards of trustees, charged their own tuition and fees, and maintained their own budgets separate from the UC budget. It was through the process of affiliation that UC was able to claim it had medical and law schools in San Francisco within a decade of its founding.\nIn 1879, California adopted its second and current constitution, which included unusually strong language to ensure UC's independence from the rest of the state government. This had lasting consequences for the Hastings College of the Law, which had been separately chartered and affiliated in 1878 by an act of the state legislature at the behest of founder Serranus Clinton Hastings. After a falling out with his own handpicked board of directors, the founder persuaded the state legislature in 1883 and 1885 to pass new laws to place his law school under the direct control of the Board of Regents. In 1886, the Supreme Court of California declared those newer acts to be unconstitutional because the clause protecting UC's independence in the 1879 state constitution had stripped the state legislature of the ability to amend the 1878 act. To this day, the College of the Law (which dropped Hastings from its name in 2023) remains a UC affiliate, maintains its own board of directors, and is not governed by the regents.\nIn contrast, Toland Medical College (founded in 1864 and affiliated in 1873) and later, the dental, pharmacy, and nursing schools in San Francisco were affiliated with UC through written agreements, and not statutes invested with constitutional importance by court decisions. In the early 20th century, the Affiliated Colleges (as they came to be called) began to agree to submit to the regents' governance during the term of President Benjamin Ide Wheeler, as the Board of Regents had come to recognize the problems inherent in the existence of independent entities that shared the UC brand but over which UC had no real control. While Hastings remained independent, the Affiliated Colleges were able to increasingly coordinate their operations with one another under the supervision of the UC president and regents, and evolved into the health sciences campus known today as the University of California, San Francisco.\nBecoming a research university.\nSection 1 of the Organic Act authorized the university to \"provide instruction and complete education\" in many different fields and professions, but the text of the Organic Act is notably silent about research. It was not until the 1930s, during the administration of President Sproul, that UC's mission drifted away from its traditional focus on instruction\u2014which became the province of the California State University\u2014and towards research. Sproul started to speak of UC's missions as \"teaching, research, and public service\", which remains true today. Thus, UC evolved into a research university whose faculty and staff would perform research to contribute directly to society, as opposed to indirect contributions by instructing students to equip them with the skills needed to later perform research in their own careers. The Master Plan for Higher Education, as enacted into state law in 1960, provides that UC \"shall be the primary state-supported academic agency for research\".\nNorth-south tensions.\nIn August 1882, the California State Normal School (whose original normal school in San Jose is now San Jose State University) opened a second school in Los Angeles to train teachers for the growing population of Southern California. In 1887, the Los Angeles school was granted its own board of trustees independent of the San Jose school. The state constitution prohibited the legislature from directly commanding the Board of Regents to create a southern campus, but it did not prohibit the state legislature from passing legislation to create additional state universities, and the supporters of the Los Angeles State Normal School used the possibility of that scenario to pressure the Board of Regents to voluntarily accept the normal school as UC's southern campus. In 1919, the state legislature transferred the normal school to UC control and renamed it the Southern Branch of the University of California. In 1927, it became the University of California at Los Angeles; the \"at\" would be replaced with a comma in 1958.\nLos Angeles surpassed San Francisco in the 1920 census to become the most populous metropolis in California. Because Los Angeles had become the state government's single largest source of both tax revenue and votes, its residents felt entitled to demand more prestige and autonomy for their campus. Their efforts bore fruit in March 1951, when UCLA became the first UC site outside of Berkeley to achieve \"de jure\" coequal status with the Berkeley campus. That month, the regents approved a reorganization plan under which both the Berkeley and Los Angeles campuses would be supervised by chancellors reporting to the UC president. However, the 1951 plan was severely flawed; it was overly vague about how the chancellors were to become the \"executive heads\" of their campuses. Due to stubborn resistance from President Sproul and several vice presidents and deans\u2014who simply carried on as before\u2014the chancellors ended up as glorified provosts with limited control over academic affairs and long-range planning while the president and the regents retained \"de facto\" control over everything else.\nTransformation and decentralization.\nUpon becoming president in October 1957, Clark Kerr supervised UC's rapid transformation into a true public university system through a series of proposals adopted unanimously by the regents from 1957 to 1960. Kerr's reforms included expressly granting all campus chancellors the full range of executive powers, privileges, and responsibilities which Sproul had denied to Kerr himself, as well as the radical decentralization of a tightly knit bureaucracy in which all lines of authority had always run directly to the president at Berkeley or to the regents themselves. In 1965, UCLA Chancellor Franklin D. Murphy tried to push this to what he saw as its logical conclusion: he advocated for authorizing all chancellors to report directly to the Board of Regents, thereby rendering the UC president redundant. Murphy wanted to transform UC from one federated university into a confederation of independent universities, similar to the situation in Kansas (from where he was recruited). Murphy was unable to develop any support for his proposal, Kerr quickly put down what he thought of as \"Murphy's rebellion\", and therefore Kerr's vision of UC as a university system prevailed: \"one university with pluralistic decision-making\".\nDuring the 20th century, UC acquired additional satellite locations which, like Los Angeles, were all subordinate to administrators at the Berkeley campus. California farmers lobbied for UC to perform applied research responsive to their immediate needs; in 1905, the Legislature established a \"University Farm School\" at Davis and in 1907 a \"Citrus Experiment Station\" at Riverside as adjuncts to the College of Agriculture at Berkeley. In 1912, UC acquired a private oceanography laboratory in San Diego, which had been founded nine years earlier by local business promoters working with a Berkeley professor. In 1944, UC acquired Santa Barbara State College from the California State Colleges, the descendants of the State Normal Schools. In 1958, the regents began promoting these locations to general campuses, thereby creating UCSB (1958), UC Davis (1959), UC Riverside (1959), UC San Diego (1960), and UCSF (1964). Each campus was also granted the right to have its own chancellor upon promotion. In response to California's continued population growth, UC opened two additional general campuses in 1965, with UC Irvine opening in Irvine and UC Santa Cruz opening in Santa Cruz. The youngest campus, UC Merced opened in fall 2005 to serve the San Joaquin Valley.\nAfter losing campuses in Los Angeles and Santa Barbara to the University of California system, supporters of the California State College system arranged for the state constitution to be amended in 1946 to prevent similar losses from happening again in the future.\nWith decentralization complete, it was decided in 1986 that the UC president should no longer be based at the Berkeley campus, and the UC Office of the President moved to Kaiser Center in Oakland in 1989. That lakefront location was subject to widespread criticism as \"too elegant and too corporate for a public university\". In 1998, the Office of the President moved again, to a newly constructed but much more modest building near the former site of the College of California in Oakland.\nModern history.\nThe Master Plan for Higher Education of 1960 established that UC must admit undergraduates from the top 12.5% (one-eighth) of graduating high school seniors in California. Prior to the promulgation of the Master Plan, UC was to admit undergraduates from the top 15%. UC does not currently adhere to all tenets of the original Master Plan, such as the directives that no campus was to exceed total enrollment of 27,500 students (in order to ensure quality) and that public higher education should be tuition-free for California residents. Five campuses, Berkeley, Davis, Irvine, Los Angeles, and San Diego, each have current total enrollment at over 30,000, and of these five, all but Irvine have undergraduate enrollments over 30,000.\nAfter the state electorate severely limited long-term property tax revenue by enacting Proposition 13 in 1978, UC was forced to make up for the resulting collapse in state financial support by imposing a variety of fees which were tuition in all but name. On November 18, 2010, the regents finally gave up on the longstanding legal fiction that UC does not charge tuition by renaming the Educational Fee to \"Tuition\". As part of its search for funds during the 2000s and 2010s, UC quietly began to admit higher percentages of highly accomplished (and more lucrative) students from other states and countries, but was forced to reverse course in 2015 in response to the inevitable public outcry and start admitting more California residents.\nOn November 14, 2022, about 48,000 academic workers at all ten UC campuses, as well as the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, went on strike for higher pay and benefits as authorized by the United Auto Workers (UAW) union. UAW alleged more than 20 unfair labor practice charges against UC, including unilateral changes in policy and obstructing worker negotiation. The strike lasted almost six weeks, officially ending on December 23.\nGovernance.\nAll University of California campuses except the College of the Law in San Francisco are governed by the Regents of the University of California as required by the Constitution of the State of California. Eighteen regents are appointed by the governor for 12-year terms. One member is a student appointed for a one-year term. There are also seven \"\" members\u2014the governor, lieutenant governor, speaker of the State Assembly, State Superintendent of Public Instruction, president and vice president of the UC alumni associations, and the UC president. The Academic Senate, made up of faculty members, is empowered by the regents to set academic policies. In addition, the system-wide faculty chair and vice-chair sit on the Board of Regents as non-voting members.\nPresident of the University of California.\nOriginally, the president was the chief executive of the first campus, Berkeley. In turn, other UC locations (with the exception of the Hastings College of the Law) were treated as off-site departments of the Berkeley campus, and were headed by provosts who were subordinate to the president. In March 1951, the regents reorganized the university's governing structure. Starting with the 1952\u201353 academic year, day-to-day \"chief executive officer\" functions for the Berkeley and Los Angeles campuses were transferred to chancellors who were vested with a high degree of autonomy, and reported as equals to UC's president. As noted above, the regents promoted five additional UC locations to campuses and allowed them to have chancellors of their own in a series of decisions from 1958 to 1964, and the three campuses added since then have also been run by chancellors. In turn, all chancellors (again, with the exception of Hastings) report as equals to the University of California President. Today, the UC Office of the President (UCOP) and the Office of the Secretary and Chief of Staff to the Regents of the University of California share an office building in downtown Oakland that serves as the UC system's headquarters.\nKerr's vision for UC governance was \"one university with pluralistic decision-making\". In other words, the internal delegation of operational authority to chancellors at the campus level and allowing nine other campuses to become separate centers of academic life independent of Berkeley did not change the fact that all campuses remain part of one legal entity. As a 1968 UC centennial coffee table book explained: \"Yet for all its campuses, colleges, schools, institutes, and research stations, it remains one University, under one Board of Regents and one president\u2014the University of California.\" UC continues to take a \"united approach\" as one university in matters in which it inures to UC's advantage to do so, such as when negotiating with the legislature and governor in Sacramento. The University of California continues to manage certain matters at the systemwide level in order to maintain common standards across all campuses, such as student admissions, appointment and promotion of faculty, and approval of academic programs.\nList of presidents.\nThe following persons have led the University of California as president since 1869:\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAll UC presidents had been white men until 2013, when former Homeland Security Secretary, and Governor of Arizona, Janet Napolitano became the first woman to hold the office of UC President. On July 7, 2020, Dr. Michael V. Drake, a former UC chancellor and medical research professor, was selected as the 21st president of the University of California system, making him the first black president to hold the office in UC's 152-year history. He took office on August 1, 2020.\nOfficial residences.\nBesides substantial six-figure incomes, the UC president and all UC chancellors enjoy controversial perks such as free housing in the form of university-maintained mansions. In 1962, Anson Blake's will donated his estate (Blake Garden) and mansion (Blake House) in Kensington to the University of California's Department of Landscape Architecture. In 1968, the regents decided to make Blake House the official residence of the UC president. As of 2005, it cost around $300,000 per year to maintain Blake Garden and Blake House; the latter, built in 1926, is a mansion with a view of San Francisco Bay.\nBlake House has sat vacant since President Dynes departed in 2008, due to the high cost of needed seismic strengthening and renovating its dilapidated interior (estimated at $3.5 million in 2013). From 2008 to 2022, all three UC presidents during that timeframe (i.e., Yudof, Napolitano, and Drake) lived in rented homes. In 2022, UC finally purchased the Selden Williams House, a house in Berkeley, for $6.5 million to serve as the UC president's official residence. UC had previously owned the same home from 1971 to 1991, when it served as the official residence of the UC vice president. (UC no longer has a single \"vice president\"; the president's direct reports now have titles like \"executive vice president\", \"senior vice president\", or \"vice president\".) \nAll UC chancellors traditionally live for free in a mansion on or near campus that is usually known as \"University House\", where they host social functions attended by guests and donors. Berkeley's University House formerly served as the official residence of the UC president, but is now the official residence of Berkeley's chancellor. UCSD's University House was closed from 2004 to 2014 for $10.5 million in renovations paid for by private donors, which were so expensive because the 12,000-square-foot structure sits on top of a sacred Native American cemetery and next to an unstable coastal bluff. Not all chancellors prefer to live on campus; at Santa Barbara, Chancellor Robert Huttenback found that campus's University House to be unsatisfactory, then was convicted in 1988 of embezzlement for his unauthorized use of university funds to improve his off-campus residence.\nFinances.\nThe State of California currently (2021\u20132022) spends $3.467 billion on the UC system, out of total UC operating revenues of $41.6 billion. The \"UC Budget for Current Operations\" lists the medical centers as the largest revenue source, contributing 39% of the budget, the federal government 11%, Core Funds (State General Funds, UC General Funds, student tuition) 21%, private support (gifts, grants, endowments) 7%, and Sales and Services at 21%. In 1980, the state funded 86.8% of the UC budget. While state funding has somewhat recovered, as of 2019 state support still lags behind even recent historic levels (e.g. 2001) when adjusted for inflation.\nAccording to the California Public Policy Institute, California spends 12% of its General Fund on higher education, but that percentage is divided between the University of California, California State University and California Community Colleges. Over the past forty years, state funding of higher education has dropped from 18% to 12%, resulting in a drop in UC's per student funding from $23,000 in 2016 to a current $8,000 per year per student.\nIn May 2004, UC President Robert C. Dynes and CSU Chancellor Charles B. Reed struck a private deal, called the \"Higher Education Compact\", with Governor Schwarzenegger. They agreed to slash spending by about a billion dollars (about a third of the university's core budget for academic operations) in exchange for a funding formula lasting until 2011. The agreement calls for modest annual increases in state funds (but not enough to replace the loss in state funds Dynes and Schwarzenegger agreed to), private fundraising to help pay for basic programs, and large student fee hikes, especially for graduate and professional students. A detailed analysis of the Compact by the Academic Senate \"Futures Report\" indicated, despite the large fee increases, the university core budget did not recover to 2000 levels. Undergraduate student fees have risen 90% from 2003 to 2007. In 2011, for the first time in UC's history, student fees exceeded contributions from the State of California.\nThe First District Court of Appeal in San Francisco ruled in 2007 that the University of California owed nearly $40 million in refunds to about 40,000 students who were promised that their tuition fees would remain steady, but were hit with increases when the state ran short of money in 2003.\nIn September 2019, the University of California announced it will divest its $83 billion in endowment and pension funds from the fossil fuel industry, ostensibly to avoid the \"financial risk\" inherent in that industry because of climate change, but also in response to pleas to stop investing in fossil fuel.\nCriticism.\nIn 2008, the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, the regional accreditor of the UC schools, criticized the UC system for \"significant problems in governance, leadership and decision making\" and \"confusion about the roles and responsibilities of the university president, the regents and the 10 campus chancellors with no clear lines of authority and boundaries\".\nIn 2016, university system officials admitted that they monitored all e-mails sent to and from their servers.\nCampuses and rankings.\nAt present, the UC system officially describes itself as a system of \"10 campuses\" consisting of the campuses listed below. These campuses are under the direct control of the regents and president. Only ten campuses are listed on the official UC letterhead.\nAlthough it shares the name and public status of the UC system, the College of the Law, San Francisco (formerly Hastings College of the Law) is not controlled by the regents or president; it has a separate board of directors and must seek funding directly from the Legislature. However, under the California Education Code, Hastings degrees are awarded in the name of the regents and bear the signature of the UC president. Furthermore, Education Code section 92201 states that Hastings \"is affiliated with the University of California, and is the law department thereof\".\nUniversity rankings.\nAnnually, UC campuses are ranked highly by various publications. Six UC campuses rank in the top 50 U.S. National Universities of 2026 by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\": Berkeley, UCLA, UC Santa Barbara, UC San Diego, UC Irvine, and UC Davis. Four UC campuses also ranked in the top 50 in the \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Global Universities Rankings in 2026, namely Berkeley, UCLA, UCSF, and UC San Diego. UCSF is ranked as one of the top universities in biomedicine in the world and the UCSF School of Medicine is ranked 3rd in the United States among research-oriented medical schools and for primary care by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nThree UC campuses: Berkeley, UCLA, and UC San Diego all ranked in the top 15 universities in the US according to the 2020 \"Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU)\" US National University Rankings and also in the top 20 in World University Rankings. The \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" also ranked UCSF, UC Davis, UC Irvine, and UC Santa Barbara in the top 50 US National Universities and in the top 100 World Universities in 2020.\nBerkeley, UCLA, and UC San Diego all ranked in the top 50 universities in the world according to both the \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" for 2021 and the \"Center for World University Rankings (CWUR)\" for 2020, while UC Irvine, UC Santa Barbara, and UC Davis ranked in the top 100 universities in the world. \"Forbes\" also ranked the six UC campuses mentioned above as being in the top 50 universities in America in 2021. Forbes also named the top three public universities in America as all being UC campuses, namely, Berkeley, UCLA, and UCSD, and ranked three more campuses, UC Davis, UC Santa Barbara, and UC Irvine as being among the top 20 public universities in America in 2021. The six aforementioned campuses are all considered Public Ivies. The \"QS World University Rankings\" for 2021 ranked three UC campuses: Berkeley, UCLA and UC San Diego as being in the top 100 universities in the world.\nIndividual academic departments also rank highly among the UC campuses. The 2021 \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" Best Graduate Schools report ranked Berkeley as being among the top 5 universities in the nation in the departments of Psychology, Economics, Political Science, Computer Science, Engineering, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics, Earth Sciences, Physics, Sociology, History, and English, and ranked UCLA in the top 20 in the same departments. \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" also ranked the same departments at UC San Diego among the top 20 in the nation, with the exception of the departments of Sociology, History, and English. UC Davis, UC Irvine and UC Santa Barbara ranked in the top 50 in the departments of Psychology, Economics, Political Science, Computer Science, Engineering, Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Mathematics, Earth Sciences, Physics, Sociology, History, and English, with the exception of UC Santa Barbara's Psychology and Political Science departments, according to \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". UC Santa Cruz and UC Riverside ranked in the top 100 in the nation in the same departments, along with UC Merced's Psychology and Political Science departments.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAcademics.\nAs of the end of fiscal year 2023, UC controls 13,810 active patents. UC researchers and faculty were responsible for 1,440 new inventions that same year. On average, UC researchers create four new inventions per day.\nEight of UC's ten campuses (Berkeley, UC Davis, UCI, UCLA, UC Riverside, UCSD, UC Santa Barbara, and UC Santa Cruz) are members of the Association of American Universities (AAU), an alliance of elite American research universities founded in 1900 at UC's suggestion. Collectively, the system counts among its faculty (as of 2002):\nNobel Prize winners.\nOf the twelve Nobel laureates named in 2024, five have prior UC affiliations as alumni (Gary Ruvkun and David Baker), faculty (John Hopfield, Geoffrey Hinton, and James A. Robinson), and postdocs (Baker and Hinton).\nAs of October 2021, the following data are taken from List of Nobel laureates by university affiliation, which counts university alumni and staff, and are not the official count from the University of California. \nUC Libraries.\nAt 40.8 million print volumes, the University of California library system is home to one of the largest collections of printed materials in the world. On July 27, 2021, all ten campuses went live with a unified online library catalog, UC Library Search. Besides on-campus libraries, the UC system also maintains two regional library facilities (one each for Northern and Southern California), which each accept older items from all UC campus libraries in their respective region. As of 2019, Northern Regional Library Facility is home to 7.4 million items, while Southern Regional Library Facility is home to 6.5 million items.\nAcademic calendar.\nIn 1966, UC switched its academic calendar from the semester system to the quarter system. This was \"part of a national trend to join state campuses across the U.S. that were aligning with private universities, including Stanford, that had operated on quarters since World War I to accommodate students in military training programs\".\nBerkeley returned to the semester system in 1983, and Merced has operated on the semester system since its 2005 opening. However, all five law schools operate on the semester system, as does the David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA.\nIn fall 2024, with the quarter system in decline nationwide (down to about 50 institutions and falling), UC initiated a systemwide study of switching all campuses back to the semester system.\nAcademic organization.\nDavis, Los Angeles, Riverside, and Santa Barbara all followed Berkeley's example by aggregating the majority of arts, humanities, and science departments into a relatively large College of Letters and Science. Therefore, at Berkeley, Davis, Los Angeles, and Santa Barbara, their respective College of Letters and Science is by far the single largest academic unit on each campus. The College of Letters and Science at Los Angeles is the largest academic unit in the entire UC system. Riverside later separated the natural sciences and kept only social sciences grouped with arts and humanities, an example followed by Merced at its founding (although Merced organizes its departments into schools and not colleges).\nDue to President Kerr's interest in not reproducing the impersonal undergraduate experience often seen in such gigantic academic units, San Diego and Santa Cruz both implemented residential college systems inspired by British models (in which each college has distinctive general education requirements reflecting its chosen theme) and grouped most academic departments into a small number of broadly defined divisions which are all independent of the colleges. In February 2022, San Diego turned its divisions into schools.\nIrvine is organized into 13 schools and San Francisco is organized into four schools, all of which are relatively narrow in scope. Originally, Irvine was also going to have a College of Letters and Science, like Berkeley. But the original UCI plan, written by Ivan Hinderaker, granted the college's five divisions so much autonomy from one another that by 1967, the UCI Academic Senate voted to transform the divisions into \"schools\" whose deans would report directly to the vice chancellor for academic affairs.\nAdmissions.\nEach UC campus handles admissions separately, but a student wishing to apply for an undergraduate or transfer admission uses one application for all UC campuses. Graduate and professional school admissions are handled directly and separately by each department or program to which one applies.\nIn May 2020, UC approved plans to suspend standardized testing score requirements in admissions until 2024. In May 2021, after a student lawsuit, the University of California announced that it would no longer consider SAT and ACT scores in admissions and scholarship decisions.\nThe Early Academic Outreach Program (EAOP) was established in 1976 by University of California (UC) in response to the State Legislature's recommendation to expand post-secondary opportunities to all of California's students including those who are first-generation, socioeconomically disadvantaged, and English-language learners. As UC's largest academic preparation program, EAOP assists middle and high school students with academic preparation, admissions requirements, and financial aid requirements for higher education. The program designs and provides services to foster students' academic development, and delivers those services in partnership with other academic preparation programs, schools, other higher education institutions and community/industry partners.\nThe University of California admits a significant number of transfer students primarily from the California Community Colleges. Approximately one out of three UC students begin at a community college before graduating. In evaluating a transfer student's application the universities conduct a \"comprehensive review\" process that includes consideration of grade point averages of the generally required, transferable and or related courses for the intended major. The review may also include consideration of an applicant's enrollment in selective honor courses or programs, extracurricular activities, essay, family history, life challenges, and the location of the student's residence. Different universities emphasize different factors in their evaluations.\nFreshmen.\nBefore 1986, students who wanted to apply to UC for undergraduate study could only apply to one campus. Students who were rejected at that campus but otherwise met the UC minimum eligibility requirements were \"redirected\" to another campus with available space. Students who did not want to be redirected were refunded their application fees. UC Riverside chancellor Ivan Hinderaker explained in 1972: \"Redirection has been a negative rather than a plus. Some come with a chip on their shoulders so big they never give the campus a chance. They poison the attitudes of the students around them.\"\nTherefore, in 1986, the undergraduate application system was changed to the current \"multiple filing\" system, in which students can apply to as many or as few UC campuses as they want on one application, paying a fee for each campus. This significantly increased the number of applications to the Berkeley and Los Angeles campuses, since students could choose a campus to attend after they received acceptance letters, without fear of being redirected to a campus they did not want to attend.\nThe University of California accepts fully eligible students from among the top one-eighth (1/8) of California public high school graduates through regular statewide admission, or the top 9% of any given high school class through Eligibility in the Local Context (see below). Part of the eligibility process is completion of the A-G requirements in high school. All eligible California high school students who apply are accepted to the university, though not necessarily to the campus of choice. Eligible students who are not accepted to the campus(es) of their choice are placed in the \"referral pool\", where campuses with open space may offer admission to those students; in 2003, 10% of students who received an offer through this referral process accepted it. In 2007, about 4,100 UC-eligible students who were not offered admission to their campus of choice were referred to UC Riverside or the system's newest campus, UC Merced. In 2015, all UC-eligible students rejected by their campus of choice were redirected to UC Merced, which is now the only campus that has space for all qualified applicants.\nThe old undergraduate admissions were conducted on a two-phase basis. In the first phase, students were admitted based solely on academic achievement. This accounted for between 50 and 75% of the admissions. In the second phase, the university conducted a \"comprehensive review\" of the student's achievements, including extracurricular activities, essay, family history, and life challenges, to admit the remainder. Students who did not qualify for regular admission were \"admitted by exception\"; in 2002, approximately 2% of newly admitted undergraduates were admitted by exception.\nThe process for determining admissions varies. At some campuses, such as Santa Barbara and Santa Cruz, a point system is used to weight grade point average, SAT Reasoning or ACT scores, and SAT Subject scores, while at San Diego, Berkeley, and Los Angeles, academic achievement is examined in the context of the school and the surrounding community, known as a holistic review.\nRace, gender, national origin, and ethnicity were not used as UC admission criteria due to the passing of Proposition 209. This information was collected for statistical purposes.\nEligibility in the Local Context, commonly referred to as ELC, is met by applicants ranked in the top 9% of their high school class in terms of performance on an 11-unit pattern of UC-approved high school courses. Beginning with fall 2007 applicants, ELC also requires a UC-calculated GPA of at least 3.0. Fully eligible ELC students are guaranteed a spot at one of UC's undergraduate campuses, though not necessarily at their first-choice campus or even to a campus to which they applied.\nIn 2021, the University of California freshmen class was its most diverse and largest ever, with 84,223 students. Latinos were the largest group at 37%; Asian Americans at 34%; white non-Hispanics at 20%; African-Americans at 5%; and 4% composed of American Indians, Pacific Islanders or those who declined to state their race or ethnicity.\nAdmissions practices.\nIn many recent years, the University of California has faced growing criticism for high admissions of out-of-state or international students as opposed to in-state, California students. In particular, UC Berkeley and UCLA have been heavily criticized for this phenomenon due to their extraordinarily low acceptance rates compared to other campuses in the system. At a Board of Regents meeting in 2015, California Governor Jerry Brown reportedly said about the problem: \"And so you got your foreign students and you got your 4.0 folks, but just the kind of ordinary, normal students, you know, that got good grades but weren't at the top of the heap there\u2014they're getting frozen out.\" State lawmakers have proposed legislation that would reduce out-of-state admission.\nA 2020 California auditor's report indicated that at least 64 wealthy students were wrongfully admitted to UC schools as favors to powerful figures. Many of the admissions were justified by falsely classifying the applicants as student athletes. The incidents disproportionately (55 of 64) occurred at UC Berkeley.\nResearch.\nIn 2006 the Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition (SPARC) awarded the University of California the SPARC Innovator Award for its \"extraordinarily effective institution-wide vision and efforts to move scholarly communication forward\", including the 1997 founding (under then UC President Richard C. Atkinson) of the California Digital Library (CDL) and its 2002 launching of CDL's eScholarship, an institutional repository. The award also specifically cited the widely influential 2005 academic journal publishing reform efforts of UC faculty and librarians in \"altering the marketplace\" by publicly negotiating contracts with publishers, as well as their 2006 proposal to amend UC's copyright policy to allow open access to UC faculty research.\nOn July 24, 2013, the UC Academic Senate adopted an Open Access Policy, mandating that all UC faculty produced research with a publication agreement signed after that date be first deposited in UC's eScholarship open access repository.\nUniversity of California systemwide research on the SAT exam found that, after controlling for familial income and parental education, so-called achievement tests known as the SAT II had 10 times more predictive ability of college aptitude than the SAT I.\nPeripheral enterprises.\nThe University of California has a long tradition of involvement in many enterprises that are often geographically or organizationally separate from its general campuses, including national laboratories, observatories, hospitals, continuing education programs, hotels, conference centers, an airport, a seaport, and an art institute.\nNational laboratories.\nThe University of California directly manages and operates one United States Department of Energy National Laboratory:\nUC is a limited partner in two separate private limited liability companies that manage and operate two other Department of Energy national laboratories:\nThe Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory conducts unclassified research across a wide range of scientific disciplines with key efforts focused on fundamental studies of the universe, quantitative biology, nanoscience, new energy systems and environmental solutions, and the use of integrated computing as a tool for discovery.\nThe Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory uses advanced science and technology to ensure that U.S. nuclear weapons remain reliable. LLNL also has major research programs in supercomputing and predictive modeling, energy and environment, bioscience and biotechnology, basic science and applied technology, counter-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, and homeland security. It is also home to the most powerful supercomputers in the world.\nThe Los Alamos National Laboratory focuses most of its work on ensuring the reliability of U.S. nuclear weapons. Other work at LANL involves research programs into preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction and US national security, such as protection of the US homeland from terrorist attacks.\nThe UC system's ties to the three laboratories have occasionally sparked controversy and protest, because all three laboratories have been intimately linked with the development of nuclear weapons. During the World War II Manhattan Project, Lawrence Berkeley Lab developed the electromagnetic method for the separation of uranium isotopes used to develop the first atomic bombs. The Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore labs have been involved in designing U.S. nuclear weapons from their inception until the shift into stockpile stewardship after the end of the Cold War. Historically the two national laboratories in Berkeley and Livermore named after Ernest O. Lawrence, have had very close relationships on research projects, as well as sharing some business operations and staff. In fact, LLNL was not officially severed administratively from LBNL until the early 1970s. They also have much deeper ties to the university than the Los Alamos Lab, a fact seen in their respective original names; the University of California Berkeley Radiation Laboratory and the University of California Radiation Laboratory at Livermore.\nThe UC system's ties to the labs have so far outlasted all periods of internal controversy. However, in 2003, the U.S. Department of Energy for the first time opened the Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL) contract for bidding by other vendors. UC entered into a partnership with Bechtel Corporation, BWXT, and the Washington Group International, and together they created a private company called Los Alamos National Security, LLC (LANS). The only other bidder on the LANL contract was a Lockheed Martin Corporation-created company that included, among others, the University of Texas System. In December 2005, a seven-year contract to manage the laboratory was awarded to the Los Alamos National Security, LLC. On October 1, 2007, the University of California ended its direct involvement in operating the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. Management of the laboratory was taken over by Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC, a limited liability company whose members are Bechtel National, the University of California, Babcock &amp; Wilcox, the Washington Division of URS Corporation, Battelle Memorial Institute, and The Texas A&amp;M University System. Other than UC appointing three members to the two separate boards of directors (each with eleven members) that oversee LANS and LLNS, UC now has virtually no responsibility for or direct involvement in either LANL or LLNL. UC policies and regulations that apply to UC campuses and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory in California no longer apply to LANL and LLNL, and the LANL and LLNL directors no longer report to the UC Regents or UC Office of the President.\nObservatories.\nThe University of California manages two observatories as a multi-campus research unit headquartered at UC Santa Cruz.\nHigh-performance networking.\nThe University of California is a founding and charter member of the Corporation for Education Network Initiatives in California, a nonprofit organization that provides high-performance Internet-based networking to California's K-20 research and education community.\nUC Natural Reserve System.\nThe NRS was established in January 1965 to provide UC faculty with large areas of land where they could conduct long-term ecosystem research without having to worry about outside disturbances like tourists. Today, the NRS manages 39 reserves that total more than .\nUC Agriculture and Natural Resources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;University of California Agriculture and Natural Resources (UCANR, Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources) plays an important role in the state's agriculture industry, as mandated by UC's legacy as a land-grant institution. In addition to conducting agriculture and Youth development research, every county in the state has a cooperative extension office with county farm advisors. The county offices also support 4-H programs and have nutrition, family, and consumer sciences advisors who assist local government. Currently, the division's University of California 4-H Youth Development Program is a national leader in studying thriving in the field of youth development.\nOther national research centers.\nFrom September 2003 to July 2016, UC managed a contract valued at more than $330 million to establish and operate a University Affiliated Research Center (UARC) at the NASA Ames Research Center at Moffett Federal Airfield \u2014the largest grant ever awarded the university. UC Santa Cruz managed the UARC for the University of California, with the goal of increasing the science output, safety, and effectiveness of NASA's missions through new technologies and scientific techniques.\nSince 2002, the NSF-funded San Diego Supercomputer Center at UC San Diego has been managed by the University of California, which took over from the previous manager, General Atomics.\nMedical centers and schools.\nThe University of California operates five medical centers throughout the state:\nThere are two medical centers that bear the UCLA name, but are not operated by UCLA: Harbor\u2013UCLA Medical Center and Olive View\u2013UCLA Medical Center. They are actually Los Angeles County-operated facilities that UCLA uses as teaching hospitals.\nEach medical center serves as the primary teaching site for that campus's medical school. UCSF is perennially among the top five programs in both research and primary care, and both UCLA and UC San Diego consistently rank among the top fifteen research schools, according to annual rankings published by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\". The teaching hospitals affiliated with each school are also highly regarded \u2013 the UCSF Medical Center was ranked the number one hospital in California and number 5 in the country by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2017 Honor Roll for Best Hospitals in the United States. UC also has a sixth medical school\u2014UC Riverside School of Medicine, the only one in the UC system without its own hospital.\nIn the latter half of the 20th century, the UC hospitals became the cores of full-fledged regional health systems; they were gradually supplemented by many outpatient clinics, offices, and institutes. Three UC hospitals are actually county hospitals that were sold to UC, which means that UC currently plays a major role in providing healthcare to the indigent. The medical hospitals operated by UC Irvine (acquired in 1976), UC Davis (acquired in 1978), and UC San Diego (acquired in 1984) each began as the respective county hospitals of Orange County, Sacramento County, and San Diego County. As of 2025, UC medical centers handle each year about 10.8 million outpatient visits, 474,000 emergency room visits, and roughly 1.32 million inpatient days.\nFacilities outside of California.\nUC operates several other miscellaneous sites to support faculty, students, and researchers away from its general campuses:\nHospitality facilities.\nUnlike other land-grant institutions (e.g., Cornell) UC does not provide a hospitality management program, but it does provide general hospitality at some locations: \nUniversity Airport.\nUC Davis operates the University Airport as a utility airport for air shuttle service in the contractual transportation of university employees and agricultural samples. It is also a public general aviation airport. University Airport's ICAO identifier is KEDU.\nSeaport.\nUC San Diego's Scripps Institution of Oceanography owns a seaport, the Nimitz Marine Facility, which is just south of Shelter Island on Point Loma, San Diego. The port is used as an operating base for all of its oceanographic vessels and platforms.\nUC Extension.\nFor over a century, the university has operated a continuing education program for working adults and professionals. At present, UC Extension has enrolled over 700,000 students, (500,000 of which are unique) in over 3,000 courses, with approximately 100,000 students attending during 2022-2023. One of the reasons for its large size is that UC Extension is a approved and the dominant provider of education for WIOA and TAAP workers in California. Also, the systemwide portion of UC Extension (directly controlled by the UC Office of the President) operates Continuing Education of the Bar under a joint venture agreement with the State Bar of California.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31922", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31922", "title": "University of California, Berkeley", "text": "Public university in Berkeley, California\nThe University of California, Berkeley (UC Berkeley, Berkeley, Cal, or California) is a public land-grant research university in Berkeley, California, United States. Founded in 1868 and named after the Anglo-Irish philosopher George Berkeley, it is the state's first land-grant university and the founding campus of the University of California system.\nBerkeley has an enrollment of more than 45,000 students. The university is organized around fifteen schools of study on the same campus, including the College of Chemistry, the College of Engineering, College of Letters and Science, and the Haas School of Business. It is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory was originally founded as part of the university.\nBerkeley was a founding member of the Association of American Universities and was one of the original eight \"Public Ivy\" schools. In 2021, the federal funding for campus research and development exceeded $1 billion. Thirty-two libraries also compose the Berkeley library system which is the sixth largest research library by number of volumes held in the United States.\nBerkeley students compete in thirty varsity athletic sports, and the university is one of eighteen full-member institutions in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC). Berkeley's athletic teams, the California Golden Bears, have also won 107 national championships, 196 individual national titles, and 223 Olympic medals (including 121 gold). Berkeley's alumni, faculty, and researchers include 63 Nobel laureates and 19 Academy Award winners, and the university is also a producer of Rhodes Scholars, Marshall Scholars, and Fulbright Scholars.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nMade possible by President Lincoln's signing of the Morrill Act in 1862, the University of California was founded in 1868 as the state's first land-grant university, inheriting the land and facilities of the private College of California and the federal-funding eligibility of a public agricultural, mining, and mechanical arts college. The Organic Act states that the \"University shall have for its design, to provide instruction and thorough and complete education in all departments of science, literature and art, industrial and professional pursuits, and general education, and also special courses of instruction in preparation for the professions.\"\nTen faculty members and forty male students made up the fledgling university when it opened in Oakland in 1869. Frederick Billings, a trustee of the College of California, suggested that a new campus site north of Oakland be named in honor of Anglo-Irish philosopher George Berkeley. The university began admitting women the following year. In 1870, Henry Durant, founder of the College of California, became its first president. With the completion of North and South Halls in 1873, the university relocated to its Berkeley location with 167 male and 22 female students. The first female student to graduate was in 1874, admitted in the first class to include women in 1870.\nBeginning in 1891, Phoebe Apperson Hearst funded several programs and new buildings and, in 1898, sponsored an international competition in Antwerp, where French architect \u00c9mile B\u00e9nard submitted the winning design for a campus master plan.\n20th century.\nIn 1905, the University Farm was established near Sacramento, ultimately becoming the University of California, Davis. In 1919, the Los Angeles branch of the California State Normal School became the southern branch of the university, which ultimately became the University of California, Los Angeles. By the 1920s, the number of campus buildings in Berkeley had grown substantially and included twenty structures designed by architect John Galen Howard. In 1917, one of the nation's first ROTC programs was established at Berkeley and its School of Military Aeronautics began training pilots, including Jimmy Doolittle. In 1926, future Fleet Admiral Chester W. Nimitz established the first Naval ROTC unit at Berkeley. Berkeley ROTC alumni include former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Army Chief of Staff Frederick C. Weyand, sixteen other general officers, ten Navy flag officers, and AFROTC alumna Captain Theresa Claiborne.\nIn the 1930s, Ernest Orlando Lawrence helped establish the Radiation Laboratory (now Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory) and invented the cyclotron, which won him the Nobel physics prize in 1939. Using the cyclotron, Berkeley professors and Berkeley Lab researchers went on to discover sixteen chemical elements\u2014more than any other university in the world. In particular, during World War II and following Glenn Seaborg's then-secret discovery of plutonium, Lawrence's Radiation Laboratory began to contract with the U.S. Army to develop the atomic bomb. Physics professor J. Robert Oppenheimer was named scientific head of the Manhattan Project in 1942. Along with the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley founded and was then a partner in managing two other labs, Los Alamos National Laboratory (1943) and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (1952).\nIn 1952, the University of California reorganized itself into a system of semi-autonomous campuses, with each campus given a chancellor, and Clark Kerr became Berkeley's first chancellor, while Robert Sproul remained in place as the president of the University of California. Berkeley gained a worldwide reputation for political activism in the 1960s. In 1964, the Free Speech Movement organized student resistance to the university's restrictions on political activities on campus\u2014most conspicuously, student activities related to the Civil Rights Movement.\nThe arrest in Sproul Plaza of Jack Weinberg, a recent Berkeley alumnus and chair of Campus CORE, prompted a series of student-led acts of formal remonstrance and civil disobedience that ultimately gave rise to the Free Speech Movement, which movement would prevail and serve as a precedent for student opposition to America's involvement in the Vietnam War. In 1982, the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute (MSRI) was established on campus with support from the National Science Foundation and at the request of three Berkeley mathematicians\u2014Shiing-Shen Chern, Calvin Moore, and Isadore M. Singer. The institute is now widely regarded as a leading center for collaborative mathematical research, drawing thousands of visiting researchers from around the world each year.\n21st century.\nDemocrats outnumber Republicans on the faculty by a ratio of nine to one, which is a ratio similar to that of American academia generally. The school has become more focused on STEM disciplines and fundraising. In 2007, the Energy Biosciences Institute was established with funding from BP and Stanley Hall, a research facility and headquarters for the California Institute for Quantitative Biosciences, opened. Supported by a grant from alumnus Jim Simons, the Simons Institute for the Theory of Computing was established in 2012. In 2015, Berkeley and its sister campus, UCSF, established the Innovative Genomics Institute to develop CRISPR gene editing, and, in 2020, an anonymous donor pledged $252 million to help fund a new center for computing and data science. For the 2020 fiscal year, Berkeley set a fundraising record, receiving over $1 billion in gifts and pledges, and two years later, it broke that record, raising over $1.2 billion. In 2024, protests at Berkeley regarding the Gaza war resulted in police action. \nOrganization and administration.\nName.\nOfficially named the \"University of California, Berkeley\" it is often shortened to \"Berkeley\" in general reference or in an academic context (Berkeley Law, Berkeley Engineering, Berkeley Haas, Berkeley Public Health) and to \"California\" or \"Cal\" particularly when referring to its athletic teams (California Golden Bears).\nGovernance.\nThe University of California is governed by a twenty-six member Board of Regents, eighteen of whom are appointed by the Governor of California to 12-year terms. The board also has seven \"ex officio\" members, a student regent, and a non-voting student regent-designate. Prior to 1952, Berkeley was the University of California, so the university president was also Berkeley's chief executive. In 1952, the university reorganized itself into a system of semi-autonomous campuses, with each campus having its own chief executive, a chancellor, who would, in turn, report to the president of the university system. Twelve vice-chancellors report directly to Berkeley's chancellor, and the deans of the fifteen colleges and schools report to the executive vice chancellor and provost, Berkeley's chief academic officer. Twenty-three presidents and chancellors have led Berkeley since its founding. \nFunding.\nWith the exception of government contracts, public support is apportioned to Berkeley and the other campuses of the University of California system through the UC Office of the President and accounts for 12 percent of Berkeley's total revenues. Berkeley has benefited from private philanthropy and alumni and their foundations have given to the university for operations and capital expenditures with the more prominent being J. Paul Getty, Ann Getty, Sanford Diller, Donald Fisher, Flora Lamson Hewlett, David Schwartz (Bio-Rad) and members of the Haas (Walter A. Haas, Rhoda Haas Goldman, Walter A. Haas Jr., Peter E. Haas, Bob Haas) family.\nBerkeley has also benefited from benefactors beyond its alumni ranks, notable among which are Mark Zuckerberg and Priscilla Chan; Vitalik Buterin, Patrick Collison, John Collison, the Ron Conway family, Daniel Gross, Dustin Moskovitz and Cari Tuna, along with Jane Street principals; BP; the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, billionaire Sir Li Ka-Shing, Israeli-Russian billionaire Yuri Milner, Thomas and Stacey Siebel, Sanford and Joan Weill, and professor Gordon Rausser ($50 million gift in 2020). Hundreds of millions of dollars have been given anonymously. The 2008\u201313 \"Campaign for Berkeley\" raised $3.13 billion from 281,855 donors, and the \"Light the Way\" campaign, which concluded at the end of 2023, has raised over $6.2 billion.\nAcademics.\nFaculty and departments.\nBerkeley is a large, primarily residential research university with a majority of its enrollment in undergraduate programs but also offering a comprehensive doctoral program. The university has been accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges Senior College and University Commission since 1949. The university operates on a semester calendar and awarded 8,725 bachelor's, 3,286 master's or professional and 1,272 doctoral degrees in 2018\u20132019.\nThere are 1,789 full-time and 886 part-time faculty members among the university's academic enterprise which is organized into fifteen colleges and schools that comprise 180 departments and 80 interdisciplinary units offering over 350 degree programs. Colleges serve both undergraduate and graduate students, while schools are generally graduate only, though some offer undergraduate majors or minors:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUndergraduate programs.\nThe four-year, full-time undergraduate program offers 107 bachelor's degrees across the Haas School of Business (1), College of Chemistry (5), College of Engineering (20), College of Environmental Design (4), College of Letters and Science (67), Rausser College of Natural Resources (10), and individual majors (2). The most popular majors are electrical engineering and computer sciences, political science, molecular and cell biology, environmental science, and economics.\nRequirements for undergraduate degrees include an entry-level writing requirement before enrollment (typically fulfilled by minimum scores on standardized admissions exams such as the SAT or ACT), completing coursework on \"American History and Institutions\" before or after enrollment by taking an introductory class, passing an \"American Cultures Breadth\" class at Berkeley, as well as requirements for reading and composition and specific requirements declared by the department and school.\nGraduate and professional programs.\nBerkeley has a \"comprehensive\" graduate program, with high coexistence with the programs offered to undergraduates, and offers interdisciplinary graduate programs with the medical schools at the University of California, San Francisco and Stanford University. The university offers Master of Arts, Master of Science, Master of Fine Arts, and PhD degrees in addition to professional degrees such as the Juris Doctor, Master of Business Administration, Master of Public Health, and Master of Design. The university awarded 963 doctoral degrees and 3,531 master's degrees in 2017. Admission to graduate programs is decentralized; applicants apply directly to the department or degree program. Most graduate students are supported by fellowships, teaching assistantships, or research assistantships.\nLibrary system.\nDoe Library serves as the Berkeley library system's reference, periodical, and administrative center, while most of the main collections reside in the subterranean Gardner Main Stacks and Moffitt Undergraduate Library. The Bancroft Library, which has over 400,000 printed volumes and 70 million manuscripts, pictures, and maps, maintains special collections that document the history of the western part of North America, with an emphasis on California, Mexico and Central America. The Bancroft Library also houses the Mark Twain Papers, the Oral History Center, the Center for the Tebtunis Papyri, and the University Archives.\nReputation and rankings.\nHistorical rankings.\nIn his memoirs, Clark Kerr records Berkeley's rise in the rankings (according to the National Academies) during the 20th century. The school's first ranking in 1906 placed it among the top six schools (\"Big Six\") in the nation. In 1934, it ranked second, tied with Columbia and the University of Chicago, behind only Harvard; in 1957, it was ranked as the only school second to Harvard. In 1964, Berkeley was named the \"best balanced distinguished university\", meaning the school had not only the most top departments but also the highest percentage of top ranking departments in its school. The school in 1993 was the only remaining member of the original 1906 \"Big Six\", along with Harvard; in that year Berkeley ranked first.\nThe American Council on Education, a private non-profit association, ranked Berkeley tenth in 1934. However, by 1942, private funding had helped Berkeley rise to second place, behind only Harvard, based on the number of distinguished departments. In 1985, Yale University admissions officer Richard Moll published \"Public Ivies: A Guide to America's Best Public Undergraduate Colleges and Universities\" which named Berkeley a \"Public Ivy\". \nThe 2010 United States National Research Council Rankings identified Berkeley as having the highest number of top-ranked doctoral programs in the nation. Berkeley doctoral programs that received a #1 ranking included English, German, Political Science, Geography, Agricultural and Resource Economics, Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Genetics, Genomics, Epidemiology, Plant Biology, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, and Civil and Environmental Engineering.\nAdmissions and enrollment.\nFor Fall 2022, Berkeley's total enrollment was 45,745: 32,831 undergraduate and 12,914 graduate students, with women accounting for 56% of undergraduates and 49% of graduate and professional students. It had 128,226 freshman applicants and accepted 14,614 (11.4%). Among enrolled freshman, the average unweighted GPA was 3.90.\nBerkeley's enrollment of National Merit Scholars was third in the nation until 2002, when participation in the National Merit program was discontinued. For 2019, Berkeley ranked fourth in enrollment of recipients of the National Merit $2,500 Scholarship (132 scholars). 27% of admitted students receive federal Pell grants.\nBerkeley students are eligible for a variety of public and private financial aid. Inquiries are processed through the Financial Aid and Scholarships Office, although schools such as the Haas School of Business and Berkeley Law, have their own financial aid offices. \nCampus.\nMuch of the Berkeley campus is in the city limits of Berkeley with portion of the property extending into Oakland. It encompasses approximately 1,232-acres, though the \"central campus\" occupies only the low-lying western 178-acres of this area. Of the remaining acres, approximately 200-acres are occupied by the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory; other facilities above the main campus include the Lawrence Hall of Science and several research units, notably the Space Sciences Laboratory, the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, an ecological preserve, the University of California Botanical Garden and a recreation center in Strawberry Canyon. Portions of the mostly undeveloped, eastern area of the campus are actually within the City of Oakland; these portions extend from the Claremont Resort north through the Panoramic Hill neighborhood to Tilden Park.\nTo the west of the central campus is the downtown business district of Berkeley; to the northwest is the neighborhood of North Berkeley, including the so-called Gourmet Ghetto, a commercial district known for high quality dining due to the presence of such world-renowned restaurants as Chez Panisse. Immediately to the north is a quiet residential neighborhood known as Northside with a large graduate student population; situated north of that are the upscale residential neighborhoods of the Berkeley Hills. Immediately southeast of campus lies fraternity row and beyond that the Clark Kerr Campus and an upscale residential area named Claremont. The area south of the university includes student housing and Telegraph Avenue, one of Berkeley's main shopping districts with stores, street vendors and restaurants catering to college students and tourists. In addition, the university also owns land to the northwest of the main campus, a married student housing complex in the nearby town of Albany (\"Albany Village\" and the \"Gill Tract\"), and a field research station several miles to the north in Richmond, California.\nThe campus is home to several museums including the University of California Museum of Paleontology, the Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive, and the Lawrence Hall of Science. The Museum of Paleontology, found in the lobby of the Valley Life Sciences Building, showcases a variety of dinosaur fossils including a complete cast of a Tyrannosaurus Rex. The campus also offers resources for innovation and entrepreneurship, such as the Big Ideas Competition, the Sutardja Center for Entrepreneurship and Technology, and the Berkeley Haas Innovation Lab. The campus is also home to the University of California Botanical Garden, with more than 12,000 individual species.\nArchitecture.\nWhat is considered the historic campus today was the result of the 1898 \"International Competition for the Phoebe Hearst Architectural Plan for the University of California,\" funded by William Randolph Hearst's mother and initially held in the Belgian city of Antwerp; eleven finalists were judged again in San Francisco in 1899. The winner was Frenchman \u00c9mile B\u00e9nard, who refused to personally supervise the implementation of his plan and the task was subsequently given to architecture professor John Galen Howard. Howard designed over twenty buildings, which set the tone for the campus up until its expansion in the 1950s and 1960s.\nThe structures forming the \"classical core\" of the campus were built in the Beaux-Arts Classical style, and include Hearst Greek Theatre, Hearst Memorial Mining Building, Doe Memorial Library, California Hall, Wheeler Hall, Le Conte Hall, Gilman Hall, Haviland Hall, Wellman Hall, Sather Gate, and the Sather Tower (nicknamed \"the Campanile\" after its architectural inspiration, St Mark's Campanile in Venice), the tallest university clock tower in the United States. Buildings he regarded as temporary and non-academic were designed in shingle or Collegiate Gothic styles; examples of these are North Gate Hall, Dwinelle Annex, and Stephens Hall. Many of Howard's designs are recognized California Historical Landmarks and are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.\nBuilt in 1873 in a Victorian Second-Empire-style, South Hall, designed by David Farquharson, is the oldest university building in California. It, and the Frederick Law Olmsted-designed Piedmont Avenue east of the main campus, are two of the only surviving examples of the nineteenth-century campus. Other notable architects and firms whose work can be found in the campus and surrounding area are Bernard Maybeck (Faculty Club); Julia Morgan (Hearst Women's Gymnasium and Julia Morgan Hall); William Wurster (Stern Hall); Moore Ruble Yudell (Haas School of Business); Tod Williams Billie Tsien Architects (C.V. Starr East Asian Library), and Diller Scofidio + Renfro (Berkeley Art Museum and Pacific Film Archive).\nNatural features.\nFlowing into the main campus are two branches of Strawberry Creek. The south fork enters a culvert upstream of the recreational complex at the mouth of Strawberry Canyon and passes beneath California Memorial Stadium before appearing again in Faculty Glade. It then runs through the center of the campus before disappearing underground at the west end of campus. The north fork appears just east of University House and runs through the glade north of the Valley Life Sciences Building, the original site of the Campus Arboretum.\nTrees in the area date from the founding of the university. The campus features numerous wooded areas, including: Founders' Rock, Faculty Glade, Grinnell Natural Area, and the Eucalyptus Grove, which is both the tallest stand of such trees in the world and the tallest stand of hardwood trees in North America. The campus sits on the Hayward Fault, which runs directly through California Memorial Stadium.\nStudent life and traditions.\nThe official university mascot is Oski the Bear, who debuted in 1941. Previously, live bear cubs were used as mascots at Memorial Stadium until it was decided in 1940 that a costumed mascot would be a better alternative. Named after the Oski-wow-wow yell, he is cared for by the Oski Committee, whose members have exclusive knowledge of the identity of the costume-wearer. The University of California Marching Band, which has served the university since 1891, performs at every home football game and at select road games as well. A smaller subset of the Cal Band, the Straw Hat Band, performs at basketball games, volleyball games, and other campus and community events.\nThe UC Rally Committee, formed in 1901, is the official guardian of California's Spirit and Traditions. Wearing their traditional blue and gold rugbies, Rally Committee members can be seen at all major sporting and spirit events. Committee members are charged with the maintenance of the six Cal flags, the large California banner overhanging the Memorial Stadium Student Section and Haas Pavilion, the California Victory Cannon, Card Stunts and The Big \"C\" among other duties. The Rally Committee is also responsible for safekeeping of the Stanford Axe when it is in Cal's possession.\nOverlooking the main Berkeley campus from the foothills in the east, The Big \"C\" is an important symbol of California school spirit. The Big \"C\" has its roots in an early 20th-century campus event called \"Rush\", which pitted the freshman and sophomore classes against each other in a race up Charter Hill that often developed into a wrestling match. It was eventually decided to discontinue Rush and, in 1905, the freshman and sophomore classes banded together in a show of unity to build \"the Big C.\"\nStudents invented the college football tradition of card stunts. Then known as Bleacher Stunts, they were first performed during the 1910 Big Game and consisted of two stunts: a picture of the Stanford Axe and a large blue \"C\" on a white background. The tradition is continued today by the Rally Committee in the Cal student section and incorporates complicated motions, for example tracing the Cal script logo on a blue background with an imaginary yellow pen.\nThe California Victory Cannon, placed on Tightwad Hill overlooking the stadium, is fired before every football home game, after every score, and after every Cal victory. First used in the 1963 Big Game, it was originally placed on the sidelines before moving to Tightwad Hill in 1971. The only time the cannon ran out of ammunition was during a game against Pacific in 1991, when Cal scored 12 touchdowns. The Cal Mic Men, a standard at home football games, has recently expanded to involve basketball and volleyball. The traditional role comes from students holding megaphones and yelling, but now includes microphones, a dedicated platform during games, and the direction of the entire student section.\nStudent housing.\nBerkeley students are offered a variety of housing options, including university-owned or affiliated residences, private residences, fraternities and sororities, and cooperative housing (co-ops). Berkeley students, and those of other local schools, have the option of living in one of the twenty cooperative houses participating in the Berkeley Student Cooperative (BSC), a nonprofit housing cooperative network consisting of 20 residences and 1250 member-owners.\nFraternities and sororities.\nAbout three percent of undergraduate men and nine percent of undergraduate women\u2014or 3,400 of total undergraduates\u2014are active in Berkeley's Greek system. University-sanctioned fraternities and sororities comprise over 60 houses affiliated with four Greek councils.\nStudent-run organizations.\nAssociated Students of the University of California (ASUC).\nThe Associated Students of the University of California (ASUC) is the official student association that controls funding for student groups and organizes on-campus student events. The two main political parties are \"Student Action\" and \"CalSERVE\". The organization was founded in 1887 and has an annual operating budget of $1.7 million (excluding the budget of the Graduate Assembly of the ASUC), in addition to various investment assets. Its alumni include multiple State Senators, Assemblymembers, and White House Administration officials.\nMedia and publications.\nBerkeley's student-run online television station, CalTV, was formed in 2005 and broadcasts online. It is run by students with a variety of backgrounds and majors. Since the mid-2010s, it has been a program of the ASUC. Berkeley's independent student-run newspaper is \"The Daily Californian\". Founded in 1871, \"The Daily Cal\" became independent in 1971 after the campus administration fired three senior editors for encouraging readers to take back People's Park. The Daily Californian has both a print and online edition. Berkeley's FM student radio station, KALX, broadcasts on 90.7\u00a0MHz. It is run largely by volunteers, including both students and community members. Berkeley also features an assortment of student-run publications:\nStudent groups.\nThere are ninety-four political student groups on campus, including MEChXA de UC Berkeley, Berkeley ACLU, Berkeley Students for Life, Campus Greens, The Sustainability Team (STEAM), the Berkeley Student Food Collective, Students for Sensible Drug Policy, Cal Berkeley Democrats, and the Berkeley College Republicans. The Residence Hall Assembly (RHA) is the student-led umbrella organization that oversees event planning, legislation, sponsorships and other activities for over 7,200 on-campus undergraduate residents.\nBerkeley students also run a number of consulting groups, including the Berkeley Group, founded in 2003 and affiliated with the Haas School. Students from various concentrations are recruited and trained to work on pro-bono consulting engagements with actual nonprofit clients. Berkeley Consulting, founded in 1996, has served over 140 companies across the high-tech, retail, banking, and non-profit sectors.\nImagiCal has been the college chapter of the American Advertising Federation at Berkeley since the late 1980s. The team competes annually in the National Student Advertising Competition, with students from disparate majors working together on a marketing case underwritten by a corporate sponsor. The Berkeley Forum is a nonpartisan student organization that hosts panels, debates, and speeches across a variety of fields. Past speakers include Senator Rand Paul, entrepreneur and venture capitalist Peter Thiel, and Khan Academy founder Salman Khan.\nDemocratic Education at Cal, or DeCal, is a program that promotes the creation of professor-sponsored, student-facilitated classes. DeCal arose out of the 1960s Free Speech movement and was officially established in 1981. The program offers around 150 courses on a vast range of subjects that appeal to the student community, including classes on the Rubik's Cube, blockchain, web design, metamodernism, cooking, Jewish art, 3D animation, and bioprinting.\nThe campus is home to several a cappella groups, including Drawn to Scale, Artists in Resonance, Berkeley Dil Se, the UC Men's Octet, the California Golden Overtones, DeCadence, and Noteworthy. The University of California Men's Octet was founded in 1948. Since 1967, students and staff jazz musicians have had an opportunity to perform and study with the University of California Jazz Ensembles. For several decades it hosted the Pacific Coast Collegiate Jazz Festival, part of the American Collegiate Jazz Festival, a competitive forum for student musicians. PCCJF brought jazz artists including Hubert Laws, Sonny Rollins, Freddie Hubbard, and Ed Shaughnessy to the Berkeley campus as performers. Berkeley also hosts other performing arts groups in comedy, dance, acting and instrumental music.\nEngineering student teams.\nGiven Berkeley's STEM education, there are a variety of student-run engineering teams that focus on winning design and engineering competitions.\nBerkeley has two prominent amateur rocketry teams: Space Enterprise at Berkeley (SEB) and Space Technologies and Rocketry (STAR). Both have launched solid-fuel sounding rockets and are currently developing liquid propellant rockets. The university also has two Formula SAE teams: Berkeley Formula Racing and Formula Electric Berkeley. Both of these teams participate in Formula SAE\u2013run competitions, with the former focusing on internal combustion engines and the latter on electric motors. Berkeley has a number of other vehicle teams, including CalSol, CalSMV, and Human Powered Vehicle.\nAthletics.\nThe university's athletic teams are known as the California Golden Bears, often shortened to \"Cal Bears\" or just \"Cal,\" and were historically members of the NCAA Division I Pac-12 Conference (Pac-12). Cal is also a member of the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation in several sports not sponsored by the Pac-12 and the America East Conference in women's field hockey. In 2024, Cal joined the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC). The first school colors, established in 1873 by a committee of students, were Yale Blue and gold. Yale Blue was originally chosen because many of the university's inaugural faculty were Yale graduates, including Henry Durant, its first president. Blue and gold were specified and made the official colors of the university and the state colors of California in 1955. In 2014, the athletic department specified a darker blue.\nThe California Golden Bears have won national championships in baseball (2), men's basketball (2), men's crew (15), women's crew (3), football (5), men's golf (1), men's gymnastics (4), men's lacrosse (1), men's rugby (26), softball (1), men's swimming &amp; diving (4), women's swimming &amp; diving (3), men's tennis (1), men's track &amp; field (1), and men's water polo (13). Students and alumni have also won 207 Olympic medals.\nCalifornia finished in first place in the 2007\u201308 Fall U.S. Sports Academy Directors' Cup standings (now the NACDA Directors' Cup), a competition measuring the best overall collegiate athletic programs in the country, with points awarded for national finishes in NCAA sports. It finished the 2007\u201308 competition in seventh place with 1119 points.\nMost recently, California finished in third place in the 2010\u201311 NACDA Directors' Cup with 1219.50 points, finishing behind Stanford and Ohio State. This is California's highest ever finish in the Director's Cup. The Golden Bears' traditional arch-rival is the Stanford Cardinal, and the most anticipated sporting event between the two universities is the annual football match dubbed the Big Game, celebrated with spirit events on both campuses. Since 1933, the winner of the Big Game has been awarded custody of the Stanford Axe. Other sporting games between these rivals have related names such as the Big Splash (water polo) or the Big Kick (soccer).\nNotable alumni, faculty, and staff.\nAlumni.\nAlumni have included 260 American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows, 34 Pulitzer Prize winners, 25 living billionaire alumni, 22 cabinet members, 68 recipients of the National Medal of Science, 190 recipients of the MacArthur Fellowship, 144 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 139 Guggenheim Fellows, and 125 Sloan Fellows, and 75 members of the National Academy of Engineering.\nGovernment.\nBerkeley alumni have served in a range of prominent government offices, both domestic and foreign, including Chief Justice of the United States Supreme Court (Earl Warren, BA, JD); United States Attorney General (Edwin Meese III, JD); United States Secretary of State (Dean Rusk, LLB); United States Secretary of the Treasury (W. Michael Blumenthal, BA, and G. William Miller, JD); United States Secretary of Defense (Robert McNamara, BS); United States Secretary of the Interior (Franklin Knight Lane, 1887); United States Secretary of Transportation and United States Secretary of Commerce (Norman Mineta, BS); United States Secretary of Agriculture (Ann Veneman, MPP); National Security Advisor (Robert C. O'Brien, JD); scores of federal judges and members of the United States Congress (10 currently serving) and United States Foreign Service; governors of California (George C. Pardee; Hiram W. Johnson; Earl Warren, BA and LLB; Jerry Brown, BA; and Pete Wilson, JD), Michigan (Jennifer Granholm, BA), and the United States Virgin Islands (Walter A. Gordon, BA); Lieutenant General of the United States Army (Jimmy Doolittle, BA); Major General of the United States Marine Corps (Oliver Prince Smith); Brigadier General of the United States Marine Corps (Bertram A. Bone, BS); Director of the Central Intelligence Agency and Chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission (John A. McCone, BS); chair and members of the Council of Economic Advisers (Michael Boskin, BA, PhD.; Sandra Black, BA; Jesse Rothstein, PhD; Robert Seamans, PhD; Jay Shambaugh, PhD; James Stock, MA, PhD); Governor of the Federal Reserve System (H. Robert Heller, PhD) and President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (William C. Dudley, PhD); Commissioners of the SEC (Troy A. Paredes, BA) and the FCC (Rachelle Chong, BA); and United States Surgeon General (Kenneth P. Moritsugu, MPH).\nForeign alumni include the President of Colombia 1922\u20131926, (Pedro Nel Ospina V\u00e1zquez, BA); the President of Mexico (Francisco I. Madero, attended 1892\u201393); the President and Prime Minister of Pakistan; the Premier of the Republic of China (Sun Fo, BA); the President of Costa Rica (Miguel Angel Rodriguez, MA, PhD); and members of parliament of the United Kingdom (House of Lords, Lydia Dunn, Baroness Dunn, BS), India (Rajya Sabha, the upper house, Prithviraj Chavan, MS); Iran (Mohammad Javad Larijani, PhD); Nigerian Minister of Science and Technology and first Executive Governor of Abia State (Ogbonnaya Onu, PhD); Barbados' Ambassador to Brazil (Tonika Sealy-Thompson, PhD). Alumni have also served in many supranational posts, notable among which are President of the World Bank (Robert McNamara, BS); Deputy Prime Minister of Spain and managing director of the International Monetary Fund (Rodrigo Rato, MBA); executive director of UNICEF (Ann Veneman, MPP); member of the European Parliament (Bruno Megret, MS); and judge of the World Court (Joan Donoghue, JD).\nScience.\n Nobel laureate William F. Giauque (BS 1920, PhD 1922) investigated chemical thermodynamics, Nobel laureate Willard Libby (BS 1931, PhD 1933) pioneered radiocarbon dating, Nobel laureate Willis Lamb (BS 1934, PhD 1938) examined the hydrogen spectrum, Nobel laureate Hamilton O. Smith (BA 1952) applied restriction enzymes to molecular genetics, Nobel laureate Robert Laughlin (BA 1972) explored the fractional quantum Hall effect, and Nobel laureate Andrew Fire (BA 1978) helped to discover RNA interference-gene silencing by double-stranded RNA. Nobel laureate Glenn T. Seaborg (PhD 1937) collaborated with Albert Ghiorso (BS 1913) to discover twelve chemical elements, such as \"americium\", \"berkelium\", and \"californium\". David Bohm (PhD 1943) discovered Bohm diffusion. Nobel laureate Yuan T. Lee (PhD 1965) developed the crossed molecular beam technique for studying chemical reactions. Carol Greider (PhD 1987) was awarded the 2009 Nobel Prize in medicine for discovering a key mechanism in the genetic operations of cells. Harvey Itano (BS 1942) conducted breakthrough work on sickle cell anemia that marked the first time a disease was linked to a molecular origin.\nNarendra Karmarkar (PhD 1983) is known for the interior point method, a polynomial algorithm for linear programming known as Karmarkar's algorithm. National Medal of Science laureate Chien-Shiung Wu (PhD 1940), often known as the \"Chinese Madame Curie\", disproved the Law of Conservation of Parity for which she was awarded the inaugural Wolf Prize in Physics. Kary Mullis (PhD 1973) was awarded the 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for his role in developing the polymerase chain reaction, a method for amplifying DNA sequences. Olga Hartman (MA 1933, PhD 1936) was a zoologist who described hundreds of species of polychaete worms. Edward P. Tryon (PhD 1967) is the physicist who first said our universe originated from a quantum fluctuation of the vacuum. John N. Bahcall (BS 1956) worked on the Standard Solar Model and the Hubble Space Telescope, resulting in a National Medal of Science. Peter Smith (BS 1969) was the principal investigator and project leader for the NASA robotic explorer \"Phoenix\", which physically confirmed the presence of water on the planet Mars for the first time. Astronauts James van Hoften (BS 1966), Margaret Rhea Seddon (BA 1970), Leroy Chiao (BS 1983), and Rex Walheim (BS 1984) have orbited the Earth in NASA's fleet of Space Shuttles.\nComputers.\nBerkeley alumni have developed a number of key technologies associated with the personal computer and the Internet. Unix was created by alumnus Ken Thompson (BS 1965, MS 1966) along with colleague Dennis Ritchie. Alumni such as L. Peter Deutsch (PhD 1973), Butler Lampson (PhD 1967), and Charles P. Thacker (BS 1967) worked with Ken Thompson on Project Genie and then formed the ill-fated US Department of Defense-funded Berkeley Computer Corporation (BCC), which was scattered throughout the Berkeley campus in non-descript offices to avoid anti-war protestors. After BCC failed, Deutsch, Lampson, and Thacker joined Xerox PARC, where they developed a number of pioneering computer technologies, culminating in the Xerox Alto that inspired the Apple Macintosh. In particular, the Alto used a computer mouse, which had been invented by Doug Engelbart (BEng 1952, PhD 1955). Thompson, Lampson, Engelbart, and Thacker all later received a Turing Award. Also at Xerox PARC was Ronald Schmidt (BS 1966, MS 1968, PhD 1971), who became known as \"the man who brought Ethernet to the masses.\"\nAnother Xerox PARC researcher, Charles Simonyi (BS 1972), pioneered the first WYSIWIG word processor program and was recruited personally by Bill Gates to join the fledgling company known as Microsoft to create Microsoft Word. Simonyi later became the first repeat space tourist, blasting off on Russian Soyuz rockets to work at the International Space Station orbiting the Earth. In 1977, a graduate student in the computer science department named Bill Joy (MS 1982) assembled the original Berkeley Software Distribution, commonly known as BSD Unix. Joy, who went on to co-found Sun Microsystems, also developed the original version of the terminal console editor vi, while Ken Arnold (BA 1985) created Curses, a terminal control library for Unix-like systems that enables the construction of text user interface (TUI) applications. Working alongside Joy at Berkeley were undergraduates William Jolitz (BS 1997) and his future wife Lynne Jolitz (BA 1989), who together created 386BSD, a version of BSD Unix that runs on Intel CPUs and evolved into the BSD family of free operating systems and the Darwin operating system underlying Apple Mac OS X. Eric Allman (BS 1977, MS 1980) created SendMail, a Unix mail transfer agent that delivers about twelve percent of the email in the world.\nThe XCF, an undergraduate research group located in Soda Hall, has been responsible for a number of notable software projects, including GTK+ (Peter Mattis, BS 1997), The GIMP (Spencer Kimball, BS 1996), and the initial diagnosis of the Morris worm. In 1992, Pei-Yuan Wei (BS 1990) an undergraduate at the XCF, created ViolaWWW, one of the first graphical web browsers. ViolaWWW was the first browser to have embedded scriptable objects, stylesheets, and tables. He donated the code to Sun Microsystems, inspiring Java applets. ViolaWWW also inspired researchers at the National Center for Supercomputing Applications to create the Mosaic web browser, a pioneering web browser that became Microsoft Internet Explorer.\nBillionaires.\nBillionaire alumni include Gordon Moore (Intel founder), James Harris Simons (Renaissance Technologies), Masayoshi Son (SoftBank), Jon Stryker (Stryker Medical Equipment), Eric Schmidt (former Google Chairman) and Wendy Schmidt, Michael Milken, Bassam Alghanim, Kutayba Alghanim, Charles Simonyi (Microsoft), Cher Wang (HTC), Robert Haas (Levi Strauss &amp; Co.), Carlos Rodr\u00edguez-Pastor (Interbank, Peru), Fayez Sarofim, Daniel S. Loeb, Paul Merage, David Hindawi, Orion Hindawi, Bill Joy (Sun Microsystems founder), Victor Koo, Tony Xu (DoorDash), Lowell Milken, Nathaniel Simons and Laura Baxter-Simons, Liong Tek Kwee and Liong Seen Kwee, Elizabeth Simons and Mark Heising, Oleg Tinkov, and Alice Schwartz.\nPulitzer Prize winners.\nPulitzer Prize\u2013winning journalist Marguerite Higgins (BA 1941) was a pioneering female war correspondent who covered World War II, the Korean War, and the Vietnam War. Novelist Robert Penn Warren (MA 1927) won three Pulitzer Prizes, including one for his novel \"All the King's Men\", which was later made into an Academy Award-winning movie. Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning cartoonist Rube Goldberg (BS 1904) invented the comically complex\u2014yet ultimately trivial\u2014contraptions known as Rube Goldberg machines. Journalist Alexandra Berzon (MA 2006) won a Pulitzer Prize in 2009, and journalist Matt Richtel (BA 1989), who also coauthors the comic strip \"Rudy Park\" under the pen name of \"Theron Heir\", won the 2010 Pulitzer Prize for National Reporting. Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning historian Leon Litwack (BA 1951, PhD 1958) taught as a professor at UC Berkeley for 43 years; three other UC Berkeley professors have also received the Pulitzer Prize. Alumna and professor Susan Rasky (BA 1974) won the Polk Award for journalism in 1991. USC Professor and Berkeley alumnus Viet Thanh Nguyen's (PhD 1997) first novel \"The Sympathizer\" won the 2016 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction.\nFiction and screenwriters.\nIrving Stone (BA 1923) wrote the novel \"Lust for Life\", which was later made into an Academy Award-winning film of the same name starring Kirk Douglas as Vincent van Gogh. Stone also wrote \"The Agony and the Ecstasy\", which was later made into a film of the same name starring Oscar winner Charlton Heston as Michelangelo. Mona Simpson (BA 1979) wrote the novel \"Anywhere But Here\", which was later made into a film of the same name starring Oscar-winning actress Susan Sarandon. Terry McMillan (BA 1986) wrote \"How Stella Got Her Groove Back\", which was later made into a film of the same name starring Oscar-nominated actress Angela Bassett. Randi Mayem Singer (BA 1979) wrote the screenplay for \"Mrs. Doubtfire\", which starred Oscar-winning actor Robin Williams and Oscar-winning actress Sally Field. Audrey Wells (BA 1981) wrote the screenplay \"The Truth About Cats &amp; Dogs\", which starred Oscar-nominated actress Uma Thurman. James Schamus (BA 1982, MA 1987, PhD 2003) collaborated on screenplays with Oscar-winning director Ang Lee on the Academy Award-winning movies \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\" and \"Brokeback Mountain\".\nAcademy and Emmy Award winners.\nBerkeley alumni have won 20 Academy Awards and 25 Emmy Awards. Gregory Peck (BA 1939), nominated for four Oscars during his career, won an Oscar for acting in \"To Kill a Mockingbird\". Chris Innis (BA 1991) won the 2010 Oscar for film editing for her work on best picture winner, \"The Hurt Locker\". Walter Plunkett (BA 1923) won an Oscar for costume design (for \"An American in Paris\"). Freida Lee Mock (BA 1961) and Charles H. Ferguson (BA 1978) have each won an Oscar for documentary filmmaking. Mark Berger (BA 1964) has won four Oscars for sound mixing and is an adjunct professor at UC Berkeley. Edith Head (BA 1918), who was nominated for 34 Oscars during her career, won eight Oscars for costume design. Joe Letteri (BA 1981) has won four Oscars for Best Visual Effects in the James Cameron film \"Avatar\" and the Peter Jackson films \"King Kong\", ', and \"\". Emmy Award winners include Jon Else (BA 1968) for cinematography; Andrew Schneider (BA 1973) for screenwriting; Linda Schacht (BA 1966, MA 1981), two for broadcast journalism; Christine Chen (dual-BA's 1990), two for broadcast journalism; Kathy Baker (BA 1977), three for acting; Ken Milnes (BS 1977), four for broadcasting technology; and Leroy Sievers (BA 1977), twelve for production. Elisabeth Leamy (BA 1989) is the recipient of thirteen Emmy awards.\nMusic and entertainment.\nFormer undergraduates have participated in the contemporary music industry, such as Grateful Dead bass guitarist Phil Lesh, the Police drummer Stewart Copeland, \"Rolling Stone Magazine\" founder Jann Wenner, the Bangles lead singer Susanna Hoffs (BA 1980), Counting Crows lead singer Adam Duritz, electronic music producer Giraffage, MTV correspondent Suchin Pak (BA 1997), AFI musicians Davey Havok and Jade Puget (BA 1996), and solo artist Mari\u00e9 Digby (\"Say It Again\"). \"People Magazine\" included Third Eye Blind lead singer and songwriter Stephan Jenkins (BA 1987) in the magazine's list of \"50 Most Beautiful People\". Alumni have also acted in classic television series such as Karen Grassle (BA 1965) who played Caroline Ingalls in \"Little House on the Prairie\", Jerry Mathers (BA 1974) who starred in \"Leave it to Beaver\", and Roxann Dawson (BA 1980) who portrayed B'Elanna Torres on \"\".\nSports.\nSport alumni include tennis athlete Helen Wills Moody (BA 1925) won 31 Grand Slam titles, including eight singles titles at Wimbledon. Tarik Glenn (BA 1999) is a Super Bowl XLI champion. Michele Tafoya (BA 1988) is a sports television reporter for ABC Sports and ESPN. Sports agent Leigh Steinberg (BA 1970, JD 1973) has represented professional athletes such as Steve Young, Troy Aikman, and Oscar De La Hoya; Steinberg has been called the real-life inspiration for the title character in the Oscar-winning film \"Jerry Maguire\" (portrayed by Tom Cruise). Matt Biondi (BA 1988) won eight Olympic gold medals during his swimming career, in which he participated in three different Olympics. At the Beijing Olympics in 2008, Natalie Coughlin (BA 2005) became the first American female athlete in modern Olympic history to win six medals in one Olympics.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31923", "revid": "50511579", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31923", "title": "University of California, Santa Cruz", "text": "Public university in Santa Cruz, California\nThe University of California, Santa Cruz (UC Santa Cruz or UCSC) is a public land-grant research university in Santa Cruz, California, United States. It is one of the ten campuses in the University of California system. Located in Monterey Bay, on the edge of the coastal community of Santa Cruz, the main campus lies on of rolling, forested hills overlooking the Pacific Ocean. As of Fall 2024, its ten residential colleges enroll some 17,940 undergraduate and 1,998 graduate students. Satellite facilities in other Santa Cruz locations include the Coastal Science Campus and the Westside Research Park and the Silicon Valley Center in Santa Clara, along with administrative control of the Lick Observatory near San Jose in the Diablo Range and the Keck Observatory near the summit of Mauna Kea in Hawaii.\nFounded in 1965, UC Santa Cruz is a collegiate university, using a residential college system consisting of ten small colleges that were established as a variation of the Oxbridge university system.\nAmong the faculty are Nobel Prize laureates, Rhodes Scholars, Fulbright Scholars, Breakthrough Prize in Life Sciences recipients, 16 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 29 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and 46 members of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. UC Santa Cruz alumni include 13 Pulitzer Prizes for 11 recipients, 7 MacArthur 'genius' Award fellows, Rhodes Scholars, Fulbright Scholars, and Marshall Scholars, amongst others. UC Santa Cruz is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". The university is also a member of the Association of American Universities.\nHistory.\nPrior to campus development.\nPrior to Spanish colonization, the Uypi tribe of the Awaswas Nation, who spoke Mutsun Costanoan of the Ohlone peoples, lived in what is now the campus of UCSC. During this time, the missionaries of Mission Santa Cruz removed a part of the forest to build a vineyard on top of what is now the Great Meadow.\nAfter the California Gold Rush, many mining firms came to the area. The Cowell Lime Works operated on the entirety of what is now the Santa Cruz campus until 1920.\nSite selection and campus planning.\nAlthough some of the original founders had already outlined plans for an institution like UCSC as early as the 1930s, the opportunity to realize their vision did not present itself until the City of Santa Cruz made a bid to the UC Board of Regents in the mid-1950s to build a campus just outside town, in the foothills of the Santa Cruz Mountains. During the mid-1950s, there was widespread public sentiment in favor of the establishment of a new UC campus somewhere south of the original campus at Berkeley. In 1957, the California State Senate passed a resolution asking the Regents to consider the Monterey Peninsula, and that same year, the California State Assembly passed its own resolution asking the Regents to consider the Santa Clara Valley. In December 1959, the Regents voted to focus their site selection process on the Almaden Valley in San Jose (i.e., within the Santa Clara Valley and the larger region now known as Silicon Valley), but the public announcement of the Regents' decision immediately caused property values throughout that area to increase to the extent that the Regents could no longer afford to buy the necessary land. After another year of study, the Regents finally selected Santa Cruz as the location of the next UC campus.\nHowever, Santa Cruz was selected for the beauty, rather than the practicality, of its location, and its remoteness led to the decision to develop a residential college system that would house most of the students on-campus. The formal design process for the Santa Cruz campus began in the late 1950s, culminating in the Long Range Development Plan of 1963. 1963 was also the year when the Regional History Project, an oral history project and the first major research project of UCSC, was started. Its purpose was originally to interview longtime residents of the Central California Coast area in order to help better understand the history of the region. Originally concentrated in the economic history of the area, it expanded to also cover the social and cultural history of the region before expanding its scope in 1967 to include a series of interviews on the history of UCSC and the Lick Observatory. These series of interviews later expanded in scope and lead to a two volume series, \"Seeds of Something Different: An Oral History of the University of California, Santa Cruz.\" UCSC is one of only two UC campuses to have an oral history projected dedicated to covering the history of the area around the university and the university itself.\nPlanning the new UC campus was just as hard as picking the site. The first plan was to build the campus on what is now the Great Meadow, so it would be close to the existing city of Santa Cruz. The second plan, conceived by Thomas Church, put the colleges into the redwood forest at the top of the hill above the Great Meadow. This was clearly the better idea, but presented the problem of how to place the colleges inside the forest. The original design for College One (Cowell College) scattered its buildings among the trees, which was sarcastically compared by one regent to \"a series of motels on the shores of Lake Tahoe.\" Having recently visited Aigues-Mortes, UC President Clark Kerr was inspired by the layout of that French medieval town to suggest concentrating each college's buildings into distinct clusters in the forest, and that is how UC Santa Cruz was actually built.\nConstruction started by 1964, and the university was able to accommodate its first students (albeit living in trailers on what is now the East Field athletic area) in 1965. The campus was intended to be a showcase for contemporary architecture, progressive teaching methods, and undergraduate research. According to founding chancellor Dean McHenry, the purpose of the distributed college system was to combine the benefits of a major research university with the intimacy of a smaller college. Kerr shared a passion with former Stanford roommate McHenry to build a university modeled as \"several Swarthmores\" (i.e., small liberal arts colleges) in close proximity to each other. Both men were well aware that Santa Cruz \"was located in the shadow not only of Berkeley but also of Stanford, and was bound to remain in their shadows for a very long time to come and perhaps forever.\" Therefore, they hoped to shape a \"distinctive personality\" for the Santa Cruz campus and let it \"flourish as first rate within its own type.\"\nThe \"Santa Cruz dream\".\nIn his memoirs, Kerr ruefully recounted the myriad errors made by himself and McHenry in launching the new campus. They had created Santa Cruz as the \"most experimental\" of the UC campuses, but opened it just in time for their cherished \"Santa Cruz dream\" to die amidst the counterculture of the 1960s. Santa Cruz quickly became the \"counterculture campus\" where students and faculty either \"mellowed out\" among the redwood trees or turned into \"activist-radical[s]\". For example, when Kerr came to deliver an address at UC Santa Cruz's first commencement exercises in 1969, the ceremony was hijacked by students who denounced Kerr and McHenry for having \"planned and created Santa Cruz as a capitalist-imperialist-fascist plot to divert the students from their revolution against the evils of American society and, in particular, against the horrors of the Vietnam War.\" The students then tried to award an honorary degree to Huey P. Newton (who was in jail at the time, although he went on to earn his bachelor's, master's, and doctorate degrees at Santa Cruz). Kerr later recalled this episode of \"guerrilla theatre\" as \"one of the worst afternoons of my life.\"\nAccording to Kerr's account, during the 1970s, the quality of UC Santa Cruz's incoming freshman classes deteriorated as Baby Boom students increasingly chose to matriculate at less experimental UC campuses in order to major in subjects such as engineering and business administration (both absent from Santa Cruz). Another major factor behind the decrease in quality was a series of \"grisly murders\" around Santa Cruz, which at the time was labeled the \"murder capital of the world\". The average SAT scores of UC Santa Cruz's incoming students dropped from 1250 in the early 1970s to 1050 by the early 1980s.\nSinsheimer Reforms.\nA series of major reforms were implemented by Chancellor Robert Sinsheimer (1977\u20131987) at the cost of making Santa Cruz less experimental and more conventional. In 1981, after a two-year battle, the faculty narrowly voted to give students the option of receiving grades for the first time, in lieu of Santa Cruz's traditional narrative evaluations. By the fall of 1984, 45% of Santa Cruz students were already majoring in the sciences, and that year, the campus offered computer engineering as a major for the first time (in order to take advantage of its proximity to Silicon Valley), followed by business economics a year later. In May 1985, Sinsheimer, a molecular biologist, welcomed several scientists to Santa Cruz for one of the first meetings at which the idea of a Human Genome Project was discussed.\nSinsheimer got Santa Cruz involved in intercollegiate athletics for the first time as part of NCAA Division III. In 1981, he supported student athletes' preference for the sea lion as the campus mascot, but was forced to back down in 1986 when the student body voted to support the banana slug instead.\nBy the early 1990s, the campus was still inefficient in that average teaching loads were still light compared to other UC campuses, but SAT scores had stopped falling, the faculty was performing good research, and the campus was beginning to rise in university rankings. In 1997, an engineering school was finally launched.\nIn 2019, the University of California, Santa Cruz was elected to the Association of American Universities (AAU), the most prestigious alliance of American research universities. Along with UCI, UC Santa Cruz was the youngest university to gain admittance to the AAU.\n2020 strike action.\nOn December 9, 2019, over 200 graduate student-workers initiated a wildcat strike by withholding Fall quarter grades with the following demands: (1) a COLA (cost of living adjustment) of $1,412/month to address the housing crisis in Santa Cruz, (2) a promise of non-retaliation against those participating in the strike, and (3) a cap on tuition for undergraduate students, to ensure that the increase in graduate student-worker pay would not increase the rent-burden and precarity of their students. On February 10, 2020, graduate student-workers responded to disciplinary threats from UCSC administrators with a full teaching strike, including withholding grades. UCSC administrators' called in police from various counties. 17 students were arrested, and several were injured, but UCSC denied the claims of police brutality and excessive force. On February 27, 2020, UC Davis and UC Santa Barbara joined the strike. On February 28, 2020, 54 graduate student-workers were terminated and continued strikes shut down the campus for at least one day the following week. The arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic led to the end of the strike. On August 7, 2020, UCSC agreed to reinstate 41 graduate student-workers, allowing them to be rehired by their respective departments, while also agreeing to seal their disciplinary records and reinstate their funding guarantees. In return, UAW, who represents UC graduate student-workers but did not authorize the strike at any point, agreed to drop complaints filed on behalf of the graduate student-workers. UCSC also granted graduate student-workers a $2,500 annual housing stipend, but did not grant the COLA adjustment or cap on tuition for undergraduate students.\nImpact on Santa Cruz.\nAlthough the city of Santa Cruz already exhibited a strong conservation ethic before the founding of the university, the coincidental rise of the counterculture of the 1960s together with the university's establishment fundamentally altered its subsequent development. Early student and faculty activism at UCSC pioneered an approach to environmentalism that greatly impacted the industrial development of the surrounding area. The lowering of the voting age to 18 in 1971 led to the emergence of a powerful student-voting bloc. A large and growing population of politically liberal UCSC alumni changed the electorate of the town from predominantly Republican to markedly left-leaning, consistently voting against expansion measures on the part of both town and gown.\nExpansion plans.\nPlans for increasing enrollment to 19,500 students and adding 1,500 faculty and staff by 2020, and the anticipated environmental impacts of such action, encountered opposition from the city, the local community, and the student body. City voters in 2006 passed two measures calling on UCSC to pay for the impacts of campus growth. A Santa Cruz Superior Court judge invalidated the measures, ruling they were improperly put on the ballot. In 2008, the university, city, county and neighborhood organizations reached an agreement to set aside numerous lawsuits and allow the expansion to occur. UCSC agreed to local government scrutiny of its north campus expansion plans, to provide housing for 67 percent of the additional students on campus, and to pay municipal development and water fees.\nGeorge Blumenthal, UCSC's 10th Chancellor, intended to mitigate growth constraints in Santa Cruz by developing off-campus sites in Silicon Valley. The NASA Ames Research Center campus is planned to ultimately hold 2,000 UCSC students \u2013 about 10% of the entire university's future student body as envisioned for 2020.\nIn April 2010, UC Santa Cruz opened its new $35 million Digital Arts Research Center; a project in planning since 2004.\nThe $72 million Coastal Biology Building officially opened on 21 October 2017 on the Coastal Science Campus. The new campus houses the Ecology &amp; Evolutionary Biology Department and faculty interested in the study of ecology and evolution in ocean, terrestrial and freshwater environments.\nMain Campus.\nThe UCSC main campus is located south of San Francisco, in the Ben Lomond Mountain ridge of the Santa Cruz Mountains. Elevation varies from at the campus entrance to at the northern boundary, a difference of about . The southern portion of the campus primarily consists of a large, open meadow, locally known as the Great Meadow. To the north of the meadow lie most of the campus' buildings, many of them among redwood groves. The campus is bounded on the south by the city's upper-west-side neighborhoods, on the east by Harvey West Park and the Pogonip open space preserve, on the north by Henry Cowell Redwoods State Park near the town of Felton, and on the west by Gray Whale Ranch, a portion of Wilder Ranch State Park. \nThe campus is built on a portion of the Cowell Family ranch, which was purchased by the University of California in 1961. The northern half of the campus property has remained in its undeveloped, forested state apart from fire roads and hiking and bicycle trails. The heavily forested area has allowed UC Santa Cruz to operate a recreational vehicle park as a form of student housing since 1984. However in 2024 UCSC announced the closure of this park, known as the camper park, due to rising concerns about fire safety, along with mold issues and rising maintenance requests that had created an unsafe situation in the park. In 2017 the University finished building the Coastal Science Facility for the Ecology and Evolutionary Biology Department. The facility, equipped with teaching classrooms, labs and greenhouses, is located on McAllister Way. In the same year, renovations to the campus' Quarry Amphitheater were completed.\nA number of shrines, dens and other student-built curiosities are scattered around the northern campus. These structures, mostly assembled from branches and other forest detritus, were formerly concentrated in the area known as Elfland, a glen the university razed in 1992 to build colleges Nine and Ten. Students were able to relocate and save some of the structures, however.\nCreeks traverse the UCSC campus within several ravines. Footbridges span those ravines on pedestrian paths linking various areas of campus. The footbridges make it possible to walk to any part of campus within 20 minutes in spite of the campus being built on a mountainside with varying elevations. At night, orange lights illuminate the occasionally fogged-in paths.\nThere are a number of natural points of interest throughout the UCSC grounds. The \"Porter Caves\" are a popular site among students on the west side of campus. The entrance is located in the forest between the Porter College meadow and Empire Grade Road. The caves wind through a set of caverns, some of which are challenging, narrow passages. Tree Nine is another popular destination for students. A large Douglas fir spanning approximately tall, Tree Nine is located in the upper campus of UCSC behind College Nine. The tree had been a popular climbing spot for many years but due to environmental corrosion and fear of student injuries, UC ground services sawed off the limbs to make it nearly impossible to climb. Less experienced tree-climbers also used to frequent Sunset Tree located on the east side of the meadow behind the UCSC Music Center, but the lower branches of this tree were also cut off to make climbing the tree difficult.\nThe UCSC campus is also one of the few homes to Mima Mounds in the United States. They are rare in the United States and in the world in general.\nAcademics.\nThe university has 5 academic divisions and 1 School (In parentheses their founding): Arts (2017), Social Sciences (2017), Humanities (2017), Graduate Studies (2017) Physical &amp; Biological Sciences (2017), and Baskin School of Engineering (1997). Together, they offer 66 graduate programs, 74 undergraduate majors, and 43 minors.\nPopular undergraduate majors include Art, Business Management Economics, Chemistry, Molecular and Cell Biology, Physics, and Psychology.\nInterdisciplinary programs, such as Computational Media, Feminist Studies, Environmental Studies, Visual Studies, Digital Arts and New Media, Critical Race &amp; Ethnic Studies, and the History of Consciousness Department are also hosted alongside UCSC's more traditional academic departments.\nA joint program with UC Hastings enables UC Santa Cruz students to earn a bachelor's degree and Juris Doctor degree in six years instead of the usual seven. The \"3+3 BA/JD\" Program between UC Santa Cruz and UC Hastings College of the Law in San Francisco accepted its first applicants in fall 2014. UCSC students who declare their intent in their freshman or early sophomore year will complete three years at UCSC and then move on to UC Hastings to begin the three-year law curriculum. Credits from the first year of law school will count toward a student's bachelor's degree. Students who successfully complete the first-year law course work will receive their bachelor's degree and be able to graduate with their UCSC class, then continue at UC Hastings afterwards for two years.\nResearch.\nAccording to the National Science Foundation, UC Santa Cruz spent $203.883 million on research and development in 2023, ranking it 138th in the nation.\nAlthough designed as a liberal arts-oriented university, UCSC quickly acquired a graduate-level natural science research component with the appointment of plant physiologist Kenneth V. Thimann as the first provost of Crown College. Thimann developed UCSC's early Division of Natural Sciences and recruited other well-known science faculty and graduate students to the fledgling campus. Immediately upon its founding, UCSC was also granted administrative responsibility for the Lick Observatory, which established the campus as a major center for astronomy research. Founding members of the Social Science and Humanities faculty created the unique History of Consciousness graduate program in UCSC's first year of operation.\nUCSC's organic farm and garden program is the oldest in the country, and pioneered organic horticulture techniques internationally.\nAs of 2025, UCSC's faculty include 16 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 29 fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 17 recipients of the 2025 Breakthrough Prize in Fundamental Physics, and 49 fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. The Baskin School of Engineering, founded in 1997 is UCSC's first and only professional school. Baskin Engineering is home to several research centers, including the Center for Biomolecular Science and Engineering and Cyberphysical Systems Research Center, which are gaining recognition, as has the work that UCSC researchers David Haussler and Jim Kent have done on the Human Genome Project, including the widely used UCSC Genome Browser. Also associated with the Baskin School is the off-campus Westside Research Park. UCSC administers the National Science Foundation's Center for Adaptive Optics.\nOff-campus research facilities maintained by UCSC include the Lick and Keck Observatories, the Long Marine Laboratory, and the Westside Research Park. From September 2003 to July 2016, UCSC managed a University Affiliated Research System (UARC) for the NASA Ames Research Center under a task order contract valued at more than $330 million.\nRankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUC Santa Cruz was ranked 129th in the list of Best Global Universities and tied for 82nd in the list of Best National Universities in the United States by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\"'s 2024 rankings. In 2021, UC Santa Cruz was ranked the No. 3 public university in the nation for \"making an impact\" and No. 4 for promoting social mobility. In 2023, the university was ranked No. 5 in game/simulation development and No. 2 among the best public game design colleges in the U.S.\nUC Santa Cruz was ranked top 10 in excellence in undergraduate teaching in 2022 and third in research influence in 2018.\nIn 2017 \"Kiplinger\" ranked UC Santa Cruz 50th out of the top 100 best-value public colleges and universities in the nation, and 3rd in California. \"Money Magazine\" ranked UC Santa Cruz 41st in the country out of the nearly 1500 schools it evaluated for its 2016 Best Colleges ranking. In 2016\u20132017, UC Santa Cruz was rated 146th in the world by \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\". In 2016 it was ranked 83rd in the world by the \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" and 296th worldwide in 2016 by the \"QS World University Rankings\".\nIn 2009, RePEc, an online database of research economics articles, ranked the UCSC Economics Department sixth in the world in the field of international finance. In 2007, \"High Times\" magazine placed UCSC as first among US universities as a \"counterculture college\". In 2009, \"The Princeton Review\" (with \"GamePro\" magazine) ranked UC Santa Cruz's Game Design major among the top 50 in the country. In 2011, \"The Princeton Review\" and \"GamePro Media\" ranked UC Santa Cruz's graduate programs in Game Design as seventh in the nation. In 2012, UCSC was ranked No. 3 in the Most Beautiful Campus list of \"Princeton Review\".\nResidential colleges.\nThe undergraduate program, with only the partial exception of those majors run through the university's Baskin School of Engineering, is still based on the version of the \"residential college system\" outlined by Clark Kerr and Dean McHenry at the inception of their original plans for the campus (see History, above). Upon admission, all undergraduate students have the opportunity to choose one of ten colleges, with which they usually stay affiliated for their entire undergraduate careers.\nThere are cases where some students switch college affiliations as each college holds a different graduation ceremony. Almost all faculty members are affiliated with a college as well. The individual colleges provide housing and dining services, while the university as a whole offers courses and majors to the general student community. Other universities with similar college systems include Rice University and the University of California, San Diego.\nEach of the colleges has its own, distinctive architectural style and a resident faculty provost, who is the nominal head of his or her college. An incoming first-year student will take a mandatory \"core course\" within his or her respective college, with a curriculum and central theme unique to that college. College resident populations vary from about 750 to 1,550 students, with roughly half of undergraduates living on campus within their college community or in smaller, intramural campus communities such as the International Living Center, Redwood Grove, Porter transfer community, and the Village. Coursework, academic majors and general areas of study are not limited by college membership, although colleges host the offices of many other academic departments. Graduate students are not affiliated with a residential college, though a large portion of their offices have historically tended to be based in the colleges. The ten colleges are, in order of establishment:\nAdmissions.\nFor the fall 2024 term, UCSC offered admission to 46,582 freshmen out of 71,700 applicants, an acceptance rate of 65.0%. The entering freshman class had an average high school GPA of 4.01, with the middle 50% range 3.87 to 4.22.\nGrading.\nFor most of its history, UCSC employed a unique student evaluation system. With the exception of the choice of letter grades in science courses the only grades assigned were \"pass\" and \"no record\", supplemented with narrative evaluations. Beginning in 1997, UCSC allowed students the option of selecting letter grade evaluations, but course grades were still optional until 2000, when faculty voted to require students receive letter grades. Students were still given narrative evaluations to complement the letter grades. As of 2010[ [update]], the narrative evaluations were deemed an unnecessary expenditure. Still, some professors write evaluations for all students while some would write evaluations for specific students upon request. Students can still elect to receive a \"pass/no pass\" grade, but many academic programs limit or even forbid pass/no pass grading. A grade of C and above would receive a grade of \"pass\". Overall, students may now earn no more than 25% of their UCSC credits on a \"pass/no pass\" basis. Although the default grading option for almost all courses offered is now \"graded\", most course grades are still accompanied by written evaluations.\nLibrary.\nThe McHenry Library houses UCSC's arts and letters collection, with most of the scientific reading at the newer Science and Engineering Library. The McHenry Library was designed by John Carl Warnecke. In addition, the colleges host smaller libraries, which serve as quiet places to study. The McHenry Special Collections Library includes the archives of Robert A. Heinlein, the papers of Ana\u00efs Nin, the papers and drawings of Beat poet Kenneth Patchen, the largest collection of Edward Weston photographs in the United States, the mycology book collection of composer John Cage, a large collection of works by Satyajit Ray, the Hayden White collection of 16th-century Italian printing, a photography collection with nearly half a million items, and the Mary Lea Shane Archives. The Shane Archives contains an extensive collection of photographs, letters, and other documents related to Lick Observatory dating back to 1870.\nA new addition to the library opened on March 31, 2008, including a \"cyber study\" room and a Global Village caf\u00e9. The original library reopened on June 22, 2011 after seismic upgrades and other renovations. In total, the University Libraries contain over 2.4 million volumes.\nGrateful Dead archive.\nIn 2008, UCSC agreed to house the Grateful Dead archives at the McHenry Library. Exhibits of Grateful Dead Archive materials are on display in the Brittingham Family Foundation's Dead Central Gallery on the 2nd Floor of McHenry Library. The Dead Central exhibit space is open during all library business hours. UCSC plans to devote an entire room at the library, to be called \"Dead Central\", to display the collection and encourage research. The Grateful Dead Archive represents one of the most significant popular culture collections of the 20th Century and documents the band's activity and influence in contemporary music from 1965 to 1995. UCSC beat out petitions from Stanford and UC Berkeley to house the archives. Grateful Dead guitarist Bob Weir said that UCSC is \"a seat of neo-Bohemian culture that we're a facet of. There could not have been a cozier place for this collection to land.\" The archive became open to the public July 29, 2012.\nStudent life.\nMost undergraduates are from California. The following tables show the ethnic and regional breakdown of the student body:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUCSC students are known for political activism. In 2005, a Pentagon surveillance program deemed student opposition to military recruiters on campus a \"credible threat\", the only campus antiwar action to receive the designation. In February 2006, Chancellor Denice Denton got the designation removed. Military recruiters declined to return to UCSC the following year, but returned in 2008 to a more low-keyed student reception and protests using elements of guerrilla theatre, rather than vandalism or physical violence. Thanks to students passing a $3 quarterly tuition increase to support buying renewable energy in 2006, UCSC is the sixth-largest buyer of renewable energy among college campuses nationwide. The Cesar Chavez Convocation is another example of student activism.\nUC Santa Cruz is also well known for its cannabis culture. On April 20, 2007, approximately 2,000 UCSC students gathered at Porter Meadow to celebrate the annual \"420\". Students and others openly smoked marijuana while campus police stood by. The once student-only event has grown since the city of Santa Cruz passed Measure K in 2006, an ordinance making marijuana use a low-priority crime for police. The 2007 event attracted a total of 5,000 participants. The university does not condone the gathering, but has taken steps to regulate the event and ensure security for all participants. On April 20, 2010, the school administration shut down the west entrance to campus and limited the number of buses that could drive through campus.\nOn April 20, 2013, a student by the name of Gennady Tsarinsky was arrested for the possession of more than one ounce. Although a UCSC spokesperson could not confirm the exact weight of the joint possessed by Tsarinsky, it was estimated to be nearly three pounds.\nAnother well known tradition is what is known as \"First Rain\". Students run around campus naked or nearly naked to celebrate the school year's first night of heavy rain. The run begins at Porter and proceeds through all the other colleges, collecting more students in its parade.\nStudent government.\nThe Student Union Assembly was founded in 1985 to better coordinate bargaining positions between students and administration on campus-wide issues. All the residential colleges and six ethnic and gender-based organizations send delegates to SUA.\nStudent organizations.\nUCSC has around 200 recognized student organizations. These cover a wide variety of subjects and are registered to one of 12 focus areas, including religious, service, cultural, general interest, and academic.\nStudent media.\nAll student media organizations are funded by a student council referendum of $3.20 per student per quarter.\nHousing.\n9% of students in 2021 reported that they lack stable housing. UCSC continues to increase enrollment each year despite a lack of campus housing, leading to more students living off-campus and driving up rental prices in Santa Cruz. On February 22, 2022, the city filed a lawsuit against UCSC claiming that the university's Long Range Development Plan and Environmental Impact Report do not account for a situation in which the university increases its student population without fulfilling its promise to double its campus housing capacity.\nGreek life.\nGreek life at UCSC includes, among other fraternities and sororities, Delta Lambda Psi, the nation's first gender-neutral queer Greek organization.\nSustainability.\nStudents established the Student Environmental Center (SEC) in 2001, have held annual Earth Summits, and established a sustainability funding body, the Campus Sustainability Council. In 2004, the UC Policy on Sustainable Practices was released, stating that the University of California Office of the President was committed to minimizing its impact on the environment and reducing its dependence on non-renewable energy. In 2006, a Committee on Sustainability and Stewardship (CSS) was established and a campus-wide Sustainability Assessment was completed. The following year, the pilot Sustainability Office was created to help institutionalize sustainability, coordinate communication and collaboration between the many entities already engaged in campus sustainability activities at UCSC, support policy implementation, and serve as a resource for the campus.\nAthletics.\nUCSC competes in Division III of the NCAA, mainly as a member of the Coast to Coast Athletic Conference (C2C). There are fifteen varsity sports \u2013 men's and women's basketball, tennis, soccer, volleyball, swimming, cross country and diving, and women's golf. UCSC teams have been Division I nationally ranked in tennis, cross country, soccer, men's volleyball, and swimming. The men's water polo team was ranked 18th in the nation in 2006 and won the D3 national Championship, but in 2009 the team was discontinued due to budget cuts. UCSC maintains a number of club teams. It has won several club national championships in men's tennis, three in men's water polo and also a women's Division I championship in club rugby.\nDue to mounting debt resulting from UCSC's athletic program, UCSC polled its students in 2016 on whether they would consider approving a quarterly fee that would support athletic operations. After polling showed support for a potential fee, a measure to introduce a quarterly fee passed in 2017 with 79% of voting students in favor.\nAdministrators.\nList of chancellors.\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotable alumni and faculty.\nNotable alumni of the University of California, Santa Cruz include co-founder of the Black Panther Party Huey P. Newton (BA 1974, PhD 1980), actress and comedian Maya Rudolph (BA 1995), founder of Huffington Post and BuzzFeed Jonah Peretti (BA 1996), filmmaker Cary Fukunaga (BA 1999), marine biologist and MacArthur Fellowship winner Stacy Jupiter (PhD 2006), acclaimed author and cultural theorist bell hooks (PhD 1983), author Geoffrey Dunn; musician Still Woozy (BA 2015), and several Pulitzer Prize-winning journalists. Notable attendees include actor and comedian Andy Samberg and filmmaker Miranda July.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31924", "revid": "19376353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31924", "title": "University of California, Davis", "text": "Public UC in Davis, California, US\nThe University of California, Davis (UC Davis, UCD, or Davis) is a public land-grant research university in Davis, California, United States. It is the northernmost of the ten campuses of the University of California system. The institution was first founded as an agricultural branch of the system in 1905 and became the sixth campus of the University of California in 1959.\nFounded as a primarily agricultural campus, the university has expanded over the past century to include graduate and professional programs in medicine (which includes the UC Davis Medical Center), engineering, science, law, veterinary medicine, education, nursing, and business management, in addition to 90 research programs offered by UC Davis Graduate Studies. The UC Davis School of Veterinary Medicine is the largest veterinary school in the United States. UC Davis also offers certificates and courses, including online classes, for adults and non-traditional learners through its Division of Continuing and Professional Education.\nThe university is considered a Public Ivy. It is classified among \"R1: Doctoral Universities \u2013 Very high research activity\". The UC Davis Aggies athletic teams compete in NCAA Division I, primarily as members of the Big West Conference with additional sports in the Big Sky Conference (football only) and the Mountain Pacific Sports Federation. Athletes from UC Davis have won a total of 10 Olympic medals. University faculty, alumni, and researchers have been the recipients of two Nobel Prizes, one Fields Medal, a Presidential Medal of Freedom, three Pulitzer Prizes, three MacArthur Fellowships, and a National Medal of Science. Of the current faculty, 30 have been elected to the National Academy of Sciences, 36 to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and 13 to the National Academy of Medicine.\nHistory.\nAgriculture and the land-grant university.\nIn 1868, the University of California was established as a land-grant university, and immediately founded a College of Agriculture as its first college as required by the Morrill Land-Grant Acts and the university's own Organic Act. UC operated a small farm at the Berkeley campus for several years after Ezra S. Carr became professor of agriculture, but he managed to alienate both the university faculty and the state's farmers with his attempt to directly integrate practical training in farming with courses on the larger historical, social, and political dimensions of farming and got himself fired in 1874. The faculty could not understand why students should earn credit towards degrees for hoeing or plowing, and the farmers could not understand how learning the social history of farming could make their children into better farmers.\nEugene W. Hilgard, Carr's successor, recognized that Berkeley's soil and climate were terrible for farming; as he himself explained, the campus site was situated \"within the belt of extreme coast climate, accentuated by the direct impact of the cold summer fogs pouring through the Golden Gate\". He switched from \"practical\" to what he called \"rational\" instruction in scientific principles of agriculture at Berkeley. He concentrated on things like soil science and fermentation that could be researched and taught in a university laboratory, supplemented by limited data gathering and experiments (but not hands-on teaching) at agricultural experimental stations in the field. Hilgard was originally disdainful of the idea of a university farm. He felt that for such a farm to teach effectively, it would necessarily have to be a model farm with examples of the best of everything, without any reference to local profitability, climate, or circumstances, and such a thing was clearly infeasible. However, in his last report as dean of the College of Agriculture before his 1905 retirement, Hilgard finally came around to the idea that a university farm \"had become a pressing need\" and was \"much needed for proper and practical instruction in agriculture\".\nFounding of the university farm.\nAround the turn of the 20th century, Peter J. Shields, secretary of the California Agricultural Society, became aware that colleges of agriculture elsewhere had university farms which performed experiments and provided hands-on education in useful agricultural subjects, and that young people were leaving the state to study at such farms. Shields began to champion the cause of a university farm. He was later honored as the \"founder\" of UC Davis in 1962, when the Shields Oak Grove on campus was named after him, and again posthumously in 1972 when the campus library was named after him. However, local farmer and politician George Washington Pierce Jr. also fought aggressively in the California State Assembly for the creation of a university farm. Shields himself credited Pierce with ensuring that the site criteria in the University Farm Bill were so tightly formulated that they could be met only at the Yolo County town of Davisville. Unlike Shields, Pierce did not live long enough to see the promotion of Davis to a general campus and is now largely forgotten.\nOn March 18, 1905, the University Farm Bill was enacted, which called for the establishment of a farm for the University of California. The bill provided that the University Farm would \"be typical and representative of the best general agricultural conditions in California\", and authorized an appropriation of $150,000 to cover the cost of purchasing land and constructing appropriate buildings. A committee appointed by the Regents of the University of California took a year to select a site for the University Farm, a 779-acre portion of the stock farm of Jerome C. Davis, near a tiny town then known as Davisville. The regents officially took control of the property in September 1906 and constructed four buildings in 1907.\nShort courses were first offered at the University Farm in October and November 1908. On January 5, 1909, the University Farm School officially opened for instruction. At its inception, the Farm School was an agricultural high school offering a three-year course for farm boys who were at least 15 years old. The original class in January 1909 consisted of 18 young men, as the original dormitories were not designed to accommodate girls. In 1913, the minimum age of entrance was raised from 15 to 18. As of 1913, the University Farm community was overwhelmingly male and rather immature. The first female students at Davis came from the College of Agriculture at Berkeley to visit the Farm for a few months in 1914. Women began to participate in the farmers' short courses in 1917 and then the Farm School admitted girls for the first time in 1918.\nIn May 1922, the Farm School was formally terminated after graduating its final class of 97 students and was replaced that fall with a non-degree vocational program offering a variety of one- and two-year courses. Students who completed the two-year vocational courses were awarded certificates.\nFrom vocational certificates to bachelor's degrees.\nIn 1916, the Farm's 314 students occupied the original campus. The institution grew at a breakneck pace over the next four decades. By 1951, it had expanded to a size of . Along the way, it was renamed in 1922 to become the Northern Branch of the College of Agriculture, and in 1938, it became the College of Agriculture at Davis. \nInitially, no degrees were awarded at Davis. From the very beginning in January 1909, students in the College of Agriculture at Berkeley enrolled at Davis for a single semester to obtain practical training on an actual farm alongside the Farm School students, but had to return to Berkeley to earn their degrees. Because the non-degree program at Davis was so disconnected from the traditional degree programs on the main Berkeley campus, agricultural interests began to agitate to separate Davis and the entire College of Agriculture from the University of California. This forced the regents in 1922 to silence such proposals by initially authorizing a two-year undergraduate program at Davis. By sharing faculty members between Berkeley and Davis and hiring a few more faculty members, the university was able to provide almost all courses of a \"complete undergraduate program\" at Davis\u2014that is, a four-year program leading to the bachelor's degree. The first class graduated from Davis in 1926.\nUC regularly appointed faculty members to joint positions at both Berkeley and Davis. This was possible because the two campuses are separated by only 53 miles (85\u00a0km), and the opening of a new bridge over the Carquinez Strait in 1927 greatly shortened the drive between them. Sharing faculty meant that the two campuses have always had an amicable relationship, in that Davis gradually developed its own strong identity while remaining proud of its older sibling. Thus, Davis did not suffer from the kind of \"hang-ups\" (i.e., inferiority complexes) which at Los Angeles culminated in a systemwide decentralization process from 1957 to 1960 in which the regents and the UC president delegated most of their powers and responsibilities to chancellors at the campus level. Davis still retains a few traditions from its early era when its identity was much more intertwined with Berkeley, such as the Bossy Cow-Cow cheer, a parody of Berkeley's Oski Yell.\nIn 1941, the state legislature authorized the creation of a school of veterinary medicine at Davis, but the school's launch was severely delayed by the entrance of the United States into World War II and it did not open until 1948. In 1943, the U.S. Army Signal Corps took over Davis to use the campus as a training facility. The Davis campus was not returned to civilian use until the end of 1944.\nFrom 1926 to 1947, all Davis students earning bachelor's degrees had to travel to Berkeley for graduation. In 1948, \"the regents agreed to decentralize graduations\". In a ceremony at Davis that year, UC President Robert Gordon Sproul \"awarded 101 bachelor of science degrees in agriculture\", along with 195 certificates to graduates of the two-year vocational program.\nIn 1949, UC expanded the Davis campus to what is now West Campus by purchasing the 526-acre Straloch Farm to the west from its owner, Harry Hopkins. The farm came with an 86-acre private airport constructed by Hopkins in 1946. The University Airport is still the only one in the UC system.\nMeanwhile, enrollment in the two-year vocational program was falling, as similar options were becoming more widely available elsewhere. In fall 1958, the campus administration announced that the two-year vocational program would be discontinued, and the last certificates were awarded in 1960.\nPromotion to general campus.\nFor much of its early history, Davis was treated as an offsite department of the main campus in Berkeley, and its chief administrative officer was a director who reported to the dean of the College of Agriculture at Berkeley. In 1944, the title became assistant dean and in 1951, the title was upgraded to provost. In May 1952, the university appointed Harry R. Wellman as its first vice-president\u2014agricultural sciences in charge of a new Division of Agriculture, which included the existing statewide College of Agriculture at Berkeley, Davis, Los Angeles, and Riverside; the agricultural extension field stations; and the county farm offices. The provosts at Davis and Riverside reported to the president through this new vice-president (rather than through the College of Agriculture).\nStanley B. Freeborn served as Davis's first provost from 1952 to 1958 and then as its first chancellor from 1958 to 1959 (in anticipation of its promotion to a general campus). However, Freeborn retired in 1959 after only one year as chancellor, then died the next year.\nIn October 1959, Davis was formally designated by the regents as a general campus and its chancellor was vested with the same autonomy as the chancellors at UC Berkeley and UCLA\u2014meaning that like them, Davis's chancellor would now report directly to the university's president. The Board of Regents declared that Davis's College of Agriculture \"will continue to be the University's major center of teaching and research in agriculture, which will remain a dominant emphasis\". The board also suggested that the Davis campus should give \"special attention\" to \"opportunities\" to be of service to the state government due to its proximity to the state capital at Sacramento. Finally, the board set an enrollment target of 6,000 students by 1970.\nMost of Davis's initial development as a UC general campus was supervised by its second chancellor, Emil M. Mrak, who served from 1959 to 1969. Mrak fondly recalled his bicycle-riding days as a child among the orchards of the Santa Clara Valley, and during his chancellorship, he worked hard to make the Davis campus into a bicycle-friendly place. When Mrak retired in 1969, the campus administration building was named Mrak Hall in his honor.\nDavis's Graduate Division was established in 1961. This was followed by the creation of the College of Engineering in 1962. The School of Law opened for classes in fall 1966, and the School of Medicine began instruction in fall 1968. In a period of increasing activism, a Native American studies program was started in 1969, one of the first at a major university; it was later developed into a full department within the university.\n2011 pepper spray incident and aftermath.\nDuring the Occupy movement against economic inequality, students at UC Davis organized the Occupy UC Davis protests in opposition to tuition hikes. On November 18, 2011, a campus police officer, Lieutenant John Pike, used pepper spray on a group of seated peaceful demonstrators when they refused to disperse, and another officer also pepper sprayed demonstrators at Pike's direction. The incident drew international attention and led to further demonstrations, a formal investigation, and Pike's departure in July 2012.\nDocuments released in 2016 through a public records request showed that the university had spent at least $175,000 to attempt to \"scrub the Internet of negative postings\" about the incident, in efforts that started in 2013. California newspaper \"The Sacramento Bee\" obtained a document outlining the public relations strategy, which stated: \"Nevins and Associates is prepared to create and execute an online branding campaign designed to clean up the negative attention the University of California, Davis, and Chancellor Katehi have received related to the events that transpired in November 2011\". The strategy included an \"aggressive and comprehensive online campaign to eliminate the negative search results\" intended to achieve the \"eradication of references to the pepper spray incident in search results on Google for the university and the Chancellor\". The university's strategic communications office, which has worked on the management of the reputation of the university and its chancellor, has had its budget substantially increased since the current chancellor took office \u2013 rising from $2.93 million in 2009 to $5.47 million in 2015. In August 2016 Katehi resigned as chancellor, and under the terms of her contract, will continue to be a full-time faculty member at UCD.\nNew chancellor.\nIn February 2017, Gary S. May was named the seventh chancellor of UCD after a nationwide search. He officially began in the role on August 1. May, the former dean of the College of Engineering at Georgia Tech, is the second African American to be named chancellor at any of the UC campuses (after former UC Irvine chancellor, Ohio State president and former UC system president Michael Drake) and one of only three currently serving African American chancellors/presidents of an AAU institution.\n2022 UAW strike.\nIn fall quarter of 2022, the United Auto Workers (UAW) led teaching assistants at UC Davis and other UC campuses in a strike that lasted several weeks. On December 16, 2022, the UCs reached a tentative agreement with the UAW.\n2023 UC Davis serial stabber.\nIn 2023, three people were stabbed over the course of five days, two of whom died. On Thursday, May 4, 2023, Davis Police arrested a former UC Davis student, Carlos Reales Dominguez, as a suspect for the crimes.\nCampus.\nSize and location.\nAlthough named after the City of Davis, the campus is technically located adjacent to the City of Davis in an unincorporated part of Yolo and Solano counties. The main campus is located west of Sacramento in the Sacramento Valley, part of California's Central Valley, and is adjacent to Interstate 80.\nThe city of Davis is a college town, with the ratio of students to long-term residents estimated at 1:4. Also contributing to the college-town environment is the close proximity of downtown Davis to the campus' main quad\u2014a matter of a few blocks, and 5- to 10-minute walk or bike ride. Davis' 15-minute distance from Sacramento provides it with both the isolation critical to fostering a college-town environment while also providing a lively and large metropolitan area nearby. Although the campus itself is vast, the entire community of Davis is relatively small and is easily traversable on bike utilizing Davis' extensive bicycle trails. The campus is the largest Campus in the UC system.\nCampus Core/Quad.\nTowards the northeast end of campus is the Quad, a large rectangular field, which was the historic geographic center of campus. The Quad remains the center of campus life, anchored to the north by the Memorial Union (student union), to the south by Shields Library and to the west and southeast by Wellman and Olson halls respectively.\nThe northeast side of campus holds more of the core buildings that were built earlier in UC Davis's history, such as Wellman Hall, Shields Library, Mrak Hall, and Hutchison Hall. Also notable in this northeastern corner is the labyrinthine Social Sciences and Humanities building designed by Antoine Predock, known to students as the \"Death Star\" for its angular, metallic design.\nThe central campus is home to notable local cats, including Compost and Cheeto.\nSouth Main Campus and South Campus.\nThe majority of Equestrian Center, and Animal Sciences buildings are located near the Arboretum Waterway, away from the core campus; the West Entry Parking Complex, the Silo Union, and the newly constructed Science Lecture Hall and the Science Laboratory Building are located nearer to the Tercero residence halls and the core of campus. The Mondavi Center, home of the University Symphony Orchestra and other cultural events, is also located near the Tercero complex.\nWest Campus.\nFor most of UC Davis' history, West Campus has served primarily as agricultural research land. Recently, portions were developed through a $300 million public-private partnership to form the largest zero net energy community in the United States, known as UC Davis West Village. West Village plans to provide housing for 3,000 students, faculty and staff.\nThe classes held in this area mainly involve plant sciences, but also include entomology courses as well. Students in the plant sciences maintain gardens as part of the PLS 5 lab while Entomology 156L and 158 students embark on field trips to sample fish for parasites at Putah Creek and conduct projects in forensic entomology at the UC Davis ecosystem, respectively. West Campus is also home to the University Airport, Foundation Plant Services, the California National Primate Research Center, and the Contained Research Facility, a bio-safety level 3 facility.\nArboretum.\nTo the south side of the campus core is the 100-acre UC Davis Arboretum, which includes 3.5 miles of paved paths, 4,000 tree specimens, Putah Creek and Lake Spafford. On March 10, 2017, a multi-year waterway enhancement project began. The first phase of the project was completed in 2018 and a second phase was completed a year ahead of schedule in November 2024.\nArtwork.\nThere are seven public art statues found around campus, collectively called \"The Egghead Series,\" sculpted by the late Robert Arneson, who also taught at Davis from 1962 to 1991.\n\"Bookhead\" is located at the Shields Library plaza, \"Yin &amp; Yang\" is located at the Fine Arts Complex, \"See No Evil/Hear No Evil\" is at the east lawn of King Hall (the main building for UC Davis' School of Law), \"Eye on Mrak (FatalLaff)\" is outside Mrak Hall (housing the registrar office and other administrative offices), and \"Stargazer\" is located between North Hall and Young Hall. The \"Yin &amp; Yang\" egg heads have been recast and duplicated for installation near the Port of San Francisco Ferry Building in San Francisco.\nMuseums on campus include the C.N. Gorman Museum, specializing in indigenous and Native American art; and the Manetti Shrem Museum of Art, with a focus on local artists from the Bay Area Figurative Movement, Pop art and Funk art movements.\nStudent housing.\nUC Davis Student Housing operates 23 residence halls totaling 29 buildings which are organized into three areas: Segundo, Tercero, and Cuarto. UC Davis Student Housing operates and accommodates over 11,000 students.\nIn 2021, The Green at West Village neighborhood was opened and primarily accommodates transfer students from California's Community Colleges. Transfer students are guaranteed housing for two years (junior and senior years). Continuing students are given housing if availability permits (waitlist system). In the Fall of 2023, to replace the aging Solano Park Apartments, the Orchard Park neighborhood built near Cuarto opened. It is primarily designated as family student housing, giving priority to students with children or who are married. Students who do not have children or are not married, such as graduate or continuing students, are given housing if availability permits.\nOrganization and administration.\nThe entire University of California system is governed by the regents, a 26-member board, as established under Article IX, Section 9 of the California Constitution. The board appoints the university's principal officers including the system-wide president and UC Davis Chancellor.\nThe UC Davis Chancellor has overall responsibility for the leadership, management, and administration of the campus and reports to the President of the University of California system, a position currently held by the former chancellor of the University of Texas System, James Milliken (academic administrator), whose predecessor was former president of Ohio State University (and chancellor of UC Irvine), Michael Drake.\nThe Offices of the Chancellor and Provost is headed by the executive vice-chancellor and provost (EVCP). In their capacity as executive vice-chancellor, the EVCP shares with the chancellor in the overall leadership and management of campus administration and operations, whereas as provost, the EVCP is UC Davis' chief academic officer.\nThe senior staff provides executive support to the Offices of the Chancellor and Provost. The Council of Deans and Vice-Chancellor consists of the heads of the university's major academic and administrative units.\nDemographics.\nStudent demographics.\nIn 2014, Chancellor Katehi stated that UC Davis aimed to become a Hispanic-Serving Institution by the 2018\u20132019 school year, with at least 25% of the undergraduate student body consisting of Latinos. As of Fall 2023, women comprised 58.4% of undergraduate students.\nCensus data.\nUniversity of California-Davis was first listed as a census-designated place by the United States Census Bureau in the 2010 U.S. census. The CDP is mostly contiguous with the campus but does include some adjacent private student housing that is not within the Davis city limits. Per the 2020 census, the population was 8,525.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAcademics.\nThe university has 102 undergraduate majors and 101 graduate programs. It has a Department of Viticulture and Enology (concerning the scientific study of grape-growing and winemaking) that has been and continues to be responsible for significant advancements in winemaking utilized by many Californian wineries. The campus claims to be noted for its top-rated Agricultural and Resource Economics programs and the large Department of Animal Science through which students can study at the university's own on-campus dairy, meat-processing plant, equestrian facility, and experimental farm. Students of Environmental Horticulture and other botanical sciences have many acres of campus farmland and the University of California, Davis, Arboretum at their disposal. The Department of Applied Science was founded and formerly chaired by physicist Edward Teller. The arts are also studied extensively on campus with subjects such as studio art, design, music, theater and dance. The Design Department at UC Davis is the only comprehensive academic design unit of the University of California system. There is also the Mondavi Center for the Performing Arts which features artists from all over the globe.\nUC Davis undergraduate majors are divided into four colleges (with their founding in parentheses):\nRankings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nUC Davis is considered to be a \"Public Ivy.\" In its 2023 edition, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" ranked UC Davis tied for the 6th-best public university in the United States, tied for 28th nationally and tied for 73rd globally. \"Washington Monthly\" ranked UC Davis 13th in its 2020 National University ranking, based on its contribution to the public good as measured by social mobility, research, and promoting public service. \"Money\" magazine ranked UC Davis 10th in the country out of 739 schools evaluated for its 2020 \"Best Colleges for Your Money\" edition and 4th in its list of the 50 best public schools in the U.S. \"Forbes\" in 2022 ranked UC Davis 23rd overall out of 650 colleges and universities in the U.S., 22nd among research universities, 4th among public university, and 11th for \"Best Value\".\nThe university has several distinguished graduate programs ranked in the top 10 in their fields by the United States National Research Council; most notable are its programs in agricultural economics, entomology, evolutionary biology, plant biology, and ecology. Additionally, the NRC placed more than a third of UC Davis graduate programs in the top 25% of their respective fields. In 2016, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" rated UC Davis 2nd globally in Agricultural Sciences, 1st in Plant and Animal Science, 4th in Environment/Ecology, and 1st nationally in Veterinary Medicine, 3rd in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, 7th (tie) in Biological and Agricultural Engineering, 9th in U.S. Colonial History, 15th in Comparative Politics, 19th in Biological Sciences, 20th in Earth Sciences and 21st in Psychology. The Economics department of UC Davis was also ranked 6th among public universities and 20th nationally according to the RePec (Research Papers in Economics) Rankings in 2011. In 2013, \"The Economist\" placed UC Davis Graduate School of Management in the top 8% accredited MBA programs in the United States (ranked 37th nationally and 65th globally).\nThe \"Academic Ranking of World Universities\" placed UC Davis 40th nationally and 90th globally for 2019. In its 2019 rankings, \"Times Higher Education World University Rankings\" ranked it tied for 59th in the world. The \"QS World University Rankings\" ranked it tied for 104th globally for its 2020 ratings, with Veterinary Science ranked 2nd in the world.\nIn 2016, \"Sierra Magazine\" ranked UC Davis 8th in its \"Greenest Schools\" in America list for campus sustainability and climate change efforts.\nAdmissions.\nAdmission to UC Davis is rated as \"more selective\" by \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\".\nFor Fall 2019, UC Davis received 78,093 freshmen applications; 30,358 were admitted (39.1%) and 5,957 enrolled. The average high school grade point average (GPA) of the enrolled freshmen was 4.13; the average SAT scores were between 610 and 710 for reading and 630\u2013790 for math, and 28\u201334 for the ACT Composite score.\nFor 2021 incoming freshman class, UC Davis received a record of 105,850 applicants, an 11% increase from last year. The admission rate for incoming freshman for the class of 2021 was 37.5%.\nLibrary.\nUC Davis' libraries include the Peter J. Shields Library, the Physical Sciences &amp; Engineering Library, the Carlson Health Sciences Library, and the Medical Center Library in Sacramento, which collectively contain more than 3 million volumes and offer a number of special collections and services. The Peter J. Shields Library has three different architectural styles due to various construction and extensions being added; it is the main library where students study on-campus, with a 24-hour reading room, open computer labs, and unique furniture.\nArmy ROTC.\nThe university is host to an Army Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC) program, the Forged Gold Battalion, with more than 50 cadets. With more than 60 years in existence, it currently commissions roughly 10 graduating seniors as second lieutenants every year.\nGraduate studies.\nThe University of California Davis Graduate Programs of Study consist of over 90 post-graduate programs, offering masters and doctoral degrees and post-doctoral courses. The programs educate over 4,000 students from around the world.\nUC Davis has the following graduate and professional schools, offering the broadest range of professional programs of all campuses in the UC system (with their founding in parentheses):\nAcross the UC system, Los Angeles and Riverside are the next closest to Davis in terms of the breadth of their professional programs, but both campuses are missing a veterinary school, while Riverside is also missing a nursing school.\nHistory.\nThe University of California, Davis graduate division has a long history. Graduate education has been a major feature of the academic focus for over 80 years. This academic tradition began in the fall of 1925, when 12 students received graduate degrees from the College of Agriculture through a partnership with the graduate division of the University California at Berkeley. Over the years, the programs continued to grow, interact and collaborate. The first graduate degrees were awarded from the UC Davis campus in the fall of 1949.\nIn 1961, autonomous graduate divisions and graduate councils were established on all University of California campuses to provide focused oversight of their graduate programs.\nAcademics.\nA key feature of graduate education at UC Davis is the graduate group. The core elements of a graduate group include an emphasis on \"shared research interests among faculty and students; flexibility to grow and quickly change to reflect emerging areas of interdisciplinary knowledge and technology; and an acceptance that many research questions transcend traditional academic departmental boundaries.\" UC Davis offers more graduate groups than any other campus in the UC system.\nMedical school admissions.\nIn 2016, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" named UC Davis School of Medicine as the 6th most competitive medical school in the United States with an acceptance rate of 2.8%.\nFaculty and research.\nUC Davis is one of 62 members in the Association of American Universities, an organization of leading research universities devoted to maintaining a strong system of academic research and education. It consists of sixty universities in the United States (both public and private) and two universities in Canada.\nBetween 2017 and 2020, UC Davis was paid $1.4 million by Neuralink to use its facilities for experiments with brain implants in monkeys. Some monkeys were euthanized after developing infections. The Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine has filed a public records lawsuit demanding access to the research. The university claims that it complied with the California Public Records act, and that research protocols were thoroughly reviewed and approved by the campus's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC).\nResearch expenditures.\nUC Davis spent $788.8 million on research and development in fiscal year 2018, ranking it 30th in the nation.\nFor fiscal year 2024-25, UC Davis received $961 million in external research awards and funding.\nFaculty honors.\nIts faculty includes 23 members of the National Academy of Sciences, 14 members of the National Academy of Engineering, 30 members of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, 17 members of the American Law Institute, 5 members of the Royal Society, 3 Pulitzer Prize winners, 1 Guggenheim Fellow, and 3 MacArthur Fellows.\nResearch centers and laboratories.\nThe campus supports a number of research centers and laboratories, including:\nThe Crocker Nuclear Laboratory on campus has had a nuclear accelerator since 1966. The laboratory is used by scientists and engineers from private industry, universities and government to research topics including nuclear physics, applied solid state physics, radiation effects, air quality, planetary geology and cosmogenics. UC Davis is the only UC campus, besides Berkeley, that has a nuclear laboratory.\nAgilent Technologies will also work with the university in establishing a Davis Millimeter Wave Research Center to conduct research into millimeter wave and THz systems.\nStudent life.\nThe undergraduate student government of UC Davis is the Associated Students of UC Davis (ASUCD), and has an annual operating budget of $22.2 million, making it one of the largest-funded student governments in the United States. ASUCD includes an Executive, Legislative, and Judicial branch. Other than representing the student body on campus, the task of ASUCD is to lobby student interests to local and state government. Also under the purview of ASUCD are the student-run Coffee House, an ASUCD unit, and Unitrans, the Davis public bus system. ASUCD employs thousands of students annually across its many units.\nPicnic Day, UC Davis's annual Open House, is the largest student-run event in the United States. It attracts thousands of visitors each year with its many attractions. These include a parade, a dance competition by the university club dance groups called \"Dance Dance Revolution\", a magic show performed by the chemistry department, the Doxie Derby (dachshund races), film screenings, and a Battle of the Bands between the UC Davis Marching Band and other college bands including the Cal Band, the Stanford Band, and the Humboldt State University Marching Lumberjacks.\nAnother highlight of UC Davis is its student-run freeform radio station, KDVS. The station began operations on February 1, 1964, from the laundry room of the all-male dormitory Beckett Hall. The station soon gained a reputation by airing interviews with Angela Davis and a live call-in show with then California Governor Ronald Reagan in 1969. The station can now be heard on 90.3 FM and online at its website.\nUC Davis has over 800 registered student organizations, ranging from political clubs to professional societies to language clubs.\nThe academic Graduate Students and management students are represented by the Graduate Student Association (GSA). The Law Students are represented by Law Students Association.\nStudents also participate in intramural sports such as basketball, ultimate frisbee, soccer and many more. The ARC contains a basketball gym, work out room, ping pong tables, squash courts, rock climbing wall, and other studio rooms for group exercise.\nOther student activities and campus jobs:\nTransportation.\nBicyclists are ubiquitous on campus and in the city. Both the university and municipality encourages this with bicycle-only infrastructure such as bike circles, large bike lanes, and traffic signals specifically for bikes. UC Davis has a road and mountain bike team which has won several national championship titles. The campus police department also has some of its officers patrol on bicycles and take bicycling under the influence (\"BUI\") and bicycling without a headlight at night very seriously. Students usually have their bicycles serviced on-campus at the ASUCD Bike Barn or at other bike shops around town. Students who do not own bicycles can rent an electric bicycle or scooter from Spin, which can be found around campus near bike racks.\nUC Davis is also well known for its bus service, Unitrans, and its trademark London double decker buses. It has been in operation since 1968 and is believed to be the only general purpose (non-sightseeing) transit system in the U.S. to operate vintage double deck buses in daily service. The system is operated and managed entirely by students and offers fixed-route transportation throughout the city. Davis is also one of the busiest stations of the Capitol Corridor intercity railroad service operated by Amtrak between the Bay Area and Sacramento.\nThe central campus is bounded by freeways on two sides (Highway 113 and Interstate 80). All other UC campuses are either somewhat distant from the closest freeway or are directly adjacent to only one freeway. Two freeway exits are entirely within UCD's boundaries. One, off Highway 113, is signed \"UC Davis / Hutchison Drive\" and the other, off Interstate 80, is signed exclusively as \"UC Davis.\" Despite the university's extensive bicycle infrastructure and public transportation service, easy freeway access coupled with increasing housing costs in the city of Davis has led to increased numbers of students commuting via automobile. Some students choose to live in the neighboring communities of Sacramento, Dixon or Woodland, and use their own cars or the county-wide Yolobus to get to UC Davis. In addition, a private charter bus that connected the Davis and Sacramento campuses was replaced in 2020 by the Causeway Connection bus service, in partnership with Yolobus and Sacramento Regional Transit. Other students also commute by motorcycle, but are also subject to similar parking rates as their four-wheeled counterparts.\nThere was a shuttle that ferried students between UC Davis and UC Berkeley that ran for decades. The service was discontinued in September 2025 due to rising costs and low ridership.\n\"The California Aggie\".\nUC Davis publishes a weekly student newspaper, \"The California Aggie\". The \"Aggie\" was first published in 1915 as the \"Weekly Agricola\" after its approval by the Associated Student Executive Committee. At this point, UC Davis was considered the University Farm, an extension of UC Berkeley.\nInitially, the \"Weekly Agricola\" was focused on both student news and farming-related topics. Novelist Jack London was one of the first readers of the \"Weekly Agricola\". In 1922, it was renamed to match the school's athletic name. Between March 2014 and October 2016, the Aggie was not in print but was still accessible online. The Aggie is in print and available on campus again as of October\u00a02016[ [update]].\nGreek life.\nSocial fraternities and sororities have been a part of the University of California at Davis since 1913. Approximately 8% of the university's undergraduate students are involved in the school's fraternities and sororities. One sorority, Sigma Alpha Epsilon Pi, was featured during the first season of the MTV reality show \"Sorority Life\".\nThere are currently 13 social fraternities that are a part of the Interfraternity Council (IFC) in Davis. There are currently 11 sororities that are a part of the Panhellenic Council.\nThe Phi chapter of Alpha Gamma Rho was locally established May 1, 1923, at UC Davis, making it the first continuously running national fraternity on campus. They started as the Kappa Tau fraternity, which was the first agricultural fraternity on campus. Many campus buildings are named after alumni of Alpha Gamma Rho such as Emil Mrak (Mrak Hall, Registrar's office), Orville Thompson (Thompson Hall, Segundo student housing), and Dean De Carli (the De Carli room, 2nd floor MU), Mel Olson Scoreboard (Aggie Stadium), and many more. The AGR Hall is an event space located inside the Buehler Alumni / Visitor Center and is commonly rented out as a conference room or banquet hall. There are both national and local fraternities and sororities at UCD with diverse backgrounds and histories.\nAthletics.\nThe UC Davis Aggies (also referred to as Cal Aggies or Ags) compete in NCAA Division I sports league in the Big West Conference. For football, the Aggies compete in Division I FCS (formerly known as Division I-AA), and are members of the Big Sky Conference, granting UC Davis the distinction of being one of only three UC campuses to field a football team (Cal and UCLA being the other two). The Aggies are also members of the Big-12 in lacrosse, Mountain Pacific Sports Federation in gymnastics, the America East Conference in field hockey, the Western Intercollegiate Rowing Association and Davis Men's Crew Club for rowing. Starting July 1, 2026, the Aggies will become members of the Mountain West Conference. This will not include UC Davis Football which will remain part of the Big Sky Conference and will continue to compete in the FCS division.\nThe UC Davis Men's Crew Club is one of the successful clubs both on campus and in the West. In 2008 the JV boat won first in nationals at the ACRA Championships in Tennessee and in 2009 the Varsity boat got second place in nationals at the ACRA Championships. They consistently compete against teams such as Stanford, the University of Washington and UC Berkeley.\nThe Aggies finished first in NCAA Division II six times in 2003 and won the NACDA Directors' Cup 4 years in a row from 1999 to 2003. In 1998, the UC Davis men's basketball team won the NCAA Division II national championship despite being one of the few non-scholarship institutions in Division II at that time. They have also won NCAA Division II championships in Softball (2003), Men's Tennis (1992), and Women's Tennis (1990, 1993). These and other achievements motivated a decision (following a year of heavy discussion by campus administrators, faculty, staff, students, alumni and the local community) in 2003 for the athletics program to re-classify to Division I.\nThe Aggie football team plays Sacramento State in the annual Causeway Classic for the Causeway Carriage. The team also plays Cal Poly San Luis Obispo in the annual Battle for the Golden Horseshoe. UC Davis students gather at sporting events to rally as the Aggie Pack, the largest student-run school spirit organization in the United States. The Aggie Pack cheers on the sports team along with the Spirit Squad to the music of the Cal Aggie Marching Band and its alumni band. Aggie Stadium is the home of the UC Davis football and lacrosse teams.\nBecause of budget pressure, wrestling was cut from the athletic department in April 2010. Other cuts included men's swimming, men's indoor track, and women's rowing. The athletics department had to cut $1.79 million out of the budget. 14 women's teams and 9 men's teams were funded for the 2010\u20132011 school year.\nThe official school colors are blue and gold. The blue is due to the UC's early connection to Yale and as a result is often referred to as \"Yale Blue\" (e.g., see). and UCD's official blue, usually called \"Aggie Blue\", is Pantone 295, which is distinct from Yale Blue (approximately Pantone 289).\nThe official school mascot is the mustang.\nSustainability.\nUC Davis has implemented many environmentally sustainable features on campus. In the Fall of 2010, UCD opened a renovated Dining Commons in the Cuarto living area. The dining hall uses local produce and promotes sustainability. The university operates twenty LEED-certified buildings across three of the five overarching LEED categories. Examples include the Robert Mondavi Institute for Wine and Food Science, the first brewery, winery or food-processing facility in the world to achieve Platinum-level certification and the Tahoe Environmental Research Center (TERC) at Lake Tahoe, one of only five laboratories in the world to achieve Platinum-level certification. It developed UC Davis West Village as a \"zero net energy\" community.\nThe university received two Best Practice Awards at the 2009 annual Sustainability Conference, held by the University of California, California State University and the California Community Colleges, for the campus's lighting retrofit project and sustainable design in new construction.\nUC Davis harvests olives from the old trees on campus to produce olive oil and table olives for use in campus dining rooms. It has designed landscaping with drought-tolerant trees and other plants. The campus operates its own landfill, where it converts landfill (methane) gas to energy. For its efforts in campus sustainability, UC Davis earned an A\u2212 on the 2011 College Sustainability Report Card, one of 27 universities to achieve this, the highest grade awarded.\nIn February 2014, UC Davis and Diamond Developers formed a joint venture to create a sustainable city in Dubai, United Arab Emirates. The draft design for the sustainable city in Dubai called for an \"eco-village\" on 120 acres with enough housing for 1,200 people. The plan called for K-12 education, apartments, single family homes, and retail shops. In May 2015, UC Davis and Diamond expanded the joint venture to include sustainability professional training program.\nUC Davis became the first university to implement requiring payment of a fee for all single-use bags distributed on campus; it is working to become the first university campus to ban plastic bags entirely.\nUC Davis is also home to the Agricultural Sustainability Institute (ASI), which is part of the College of Agricultural and Environmental Sciences (CAES). ASI provides leadership for research, teaching, outreach, and extension efforts in agricultural and food systems sustainability at the Davis campus and throughout the UC system.\nUC Davis hosted the Governors' Global Climate Summit 3 (GGCS3), an international climate forum for the top leaders of local, regional, national and international entities, as well as those from academia, business and nonprofits. The summit worked to broaden national partnerships in continuing to grow a clean, green economy. The summit included more than 1,500 attendees from more than 80 countries.\nAdministration.\nList of chancellors.\nThe following persons had led the UC Davis campus as chancellor since 1958:\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlumni.\nUC Davis currently has over 260,000 living alumni. Notable alumni of UC Davis include two astronauts; scientist Charles Moen Rice, 2020 Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine laureate and Katherine Jungjohann; US Treasurer Anna Escobedo Cabral; Chevron CEO John S. Watson; entrepreneur Jason Lucash; and actor Matthew Moy. Notable faculty include two-time Pulitzer Prize-winning historian Alan Taylor and painter Wayne Thiebaud.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31925", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31925", "title": "UCSD Pascal", "text": "1977 programming language implementation\nUCSD Pascal is a Pascal programming language system that runs on the UCSD p-System, a portable, highly machine-independent operating system. UCSD Pascal was first released in 1977. It was developed at the University of California, San Diego (UCSD).\nThe p-System.\nIn 1977, the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) Institute for Information Systems developed UCSD Pascal to provide students with a common environment that could run on any of the then available microcomputers as well as campus DEC PDP-11 minicomputers. The operating system became known as UCSD p-System.\nThere were three operating systems that IBM offered for its original IBM PC: the UCSD p-System, CP/M-86, and IBM PC DOS. Vendor SofTech Microsystems emphasized p-System's application portability, with virtual machines for 20 CPUs as of the IBM PC's release. It predicted that users would be able to use applications they purchased on future computers running p-System; advertisements called it \"the Universal Operating System\".\n\"PC Magazine\" denounced UCSD p-System on the IBM PC, stating in a review of Context MBA, written in the language, that it \"simply does not produce good code\". The p-System did not sell very well for the IBM PC, because of a lack of applications and because it was more expensive than the other choices. Previously, IBM had offered the UCSD p-System as an option for IBM Displaywriter, an 8086-based dedicated word processing machine. (The Displaywriter's native operating system had been developed completely internally and was not opened for end-user programming.)\nNotable extensions to standard Pascal include separately compilable \"Units\" and a \"String\" type. Some intrinsics were provided to accelerate string processing (e.g. scanning in an array for a particular search pattern); other language extensions were provided to allow the UCSD p-System to be self-compiling and self-hosted.\nUCSD Pascal was based on a p-code machine architecture. Its contribution to these early virtual machines was to extend p-code away from its roots as a compiler intermediate language into a full execution environment. The UCSD Pascal p-Machine was optimized for the new small microcomputers with addressing restricted to 16-bit (only 64 KB of memory). James Gosling cites UCSD Pascal as a key influence (along with the Smalltalk virtual machine) on the design of the Java virtual machine.\nUCSD p-System achieved machine independence by defining a virtual machine, called the \"p-Machine\" (or pseudo-machine, which many users began to call the \"Pascal-machine\" like the OS\u2014although UCSD documentation always used \"pseudo-machine\") with its own instruction set called p-code (or pseudo-code). Urs Ammann, a student of Niklaus Wirth, originally presented a p-code in his PhD thesis, from which the UCSD implementation was derived, the Zurich Pascal-P implementation. The UCSD implementation changed the Zurich implementation to be \"byte oriented\". The UCSD p-code was optimized for execution of the Pascal programming language. Each hardware platform then only needed a p-code interpreter program written for it to port the entire p-System and all the tools to run on it. Later versions also included additional languages that compiled to the p-code base. For example, Apple Computer offered a Fortran Compiler (written by Silicon Valley Software, Sunnyvale California) producing p-code that ran on the Apple version of the p-system. Later, TeleSoft (also located in San Diego) offered an early Ada development environment that used p-code and was therefore able to run on a number of hardware platforms including the Motorola 68000, the System/370, and the Pascal MicroEngine.\nUCSD p-System shares some concepts with the later Java platform. Both use a virtual machine to hide operating system and hardware differences, and both use programs written to that virtual machine to provide cross-platform support. Likewise both systems allow the virtual machine to be used either as the complete operating system of the target computer or to run in a \"box\" under another operating system.\nThe UCSD Pascal compiler was distributed as part of a portable operating system, the p-System.\nHistory.\nUCSD p-System began around 1974 as the idea of UCSD's Kenneth Bowles, who believed that the number of new computing platforms coming out at the time would make it difficult for new programming languages to gain acceptance. He based UCSD Pascal on the Pascal-P2 release of the portable compiler from Zurich. He was particularly interested in Pascal as a language to teach programming. UCSD introduced two features that were important improvements on the original Pascal: variable length strings, and \"units\" of independently compiled code (an idea included into the then-evolving Ada (programming language)). Niklaus Wirth credits the p-System, and UCSD Pascal in particular, with popularizing Pascal. It was not until the release of Turbo Pascal that UCSD's version started to slip from first place among Pascal users.\nThe Pascal dialect of UCSD Pascal came from the subset of Pascal implemented in Pascal-P2, which was not designed to be a full implementation of the language, but rather \"the minimum subset that would self-compile\", to fit its function as a bootstrap kit for Pascal compilers. UCSD added strings from BASIC, and several other implementation dependent features. Although UCSD Pascal later obtained many of the other features of the full Pascal language, the Pascal-P2 subset persisted in other dialects, notably Borland Pascal, which copied much of the UCSD dialect.\nVersions.\nThere were four versions of UCSD p-code engine, each with several revisions of the p-System and UCSD Pascal. A revision of the p-code engine (i.e., the p-Machine) meant a change to the p-code language, and therefore compiled code is not portable between different p-Machine versions. Each revision was represented with a leading Roman Numeral, while operating system revisions were enumerated as the \"dot\" number following the p-code Roman Numeral. For example, II.3 represented the third revision of the p-System running on the second revision of the p-Machine.\nVersion I.\nOriginal version, never officially distributed outside of the University of California, San Diego. However, the Pascal sources for both Versions I.3 and I.5 were freely exchanged between interested users. Specifically, the patch revision I.5a was known to be one of the most stable.\nVersion II.\nWidely distributed, available on many early microcomputers. Numerous versions included Apple II ultimately Apple Pascal, DEC PDP-11, Intel 8080, Zilog Z80, and MOS 6502 based machines, Motorola 68000 and the IBM PC (Version II on the PC was restricted to one 64K code segment and one 64K stack/heap data segment; Version IV removed the code segment limit but cost a lot more).\nProject members from this era include Dr Kenneth L Bowles, Mark Allen, Richard Gleaves, Richard Kaufmann, Pete Lawrence, Joel McCormack, Mark Overgaard, Keith Shillington, Roger Sumner, and John Van Zandt.\nVersion III.\nCustom version written for Western Digital to run on their Pascal MicroEngine microcomputer. Included support for parallel processes for the first time.\nVersion IV.\nCommercial version, developed and sold by SofTech. Based on Version II; did not include changes from Version III. Did not sell well due to combination of their pricing structure, performance problems due to p-code interpreter, and competition with native operating systems (on top of which it often ran). After SofTech dropped the product, it was picked up by Pecan Systems, a relatively small company formed of p-System users and fans. Sales revived somewhat, due mostly to Pecan's reasonable pricing structure, but the p-System and UCSD Pascal gradually lost the market to native operating systems and compilers. Available for the TI-99/4A equipped with p-code card, Commodore CBM 8096, Sage IV, HP 9000, and BBC Micro with 6502 second processor.\nFurther use.\nThe Corvus Systems computer used UCSD Pascal for all its user software. The \"innovative concept\" of the Constellation OS was to run Pascal (interpretively or compiled) and include all common software in the manual, so users could modify as needed.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "31926", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=31926", "title": "UCSD", "text": ""}
