{"id": "30395", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30395", "title": "Tennessee", "text": "U.S. state\nTennessee (, ), officially the State of Tennessee, is a landlocked state in the Southeastern region of the United States. It borders Kentucky to the north, Virginia to the northeast, North Carolina to the east, Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi to the south, Arkansas to the southwest, and Missouri to the northwest. Tennessee is the 36th-largest by area and the 15th-most populous of the 50 states. According to the United States Census Bureau, the state's estimated population as of 2024 is 7.22 million.\nTennessee is geographically, culturally, and legally divided into three Grand Divisions of East, Middle, and West Tennessee. Nashville is the state's capital and largest city, and anchors its largest metropolitan area. Tennessee has diverse terrain and landforms, and from east to west, contains a mix of cultural features characteristic of Appalachia, the Upland South, and the Deep South. The Blue Ridge Mountains along the eastern border reach some of the highest elevations in eastern North America, and the Cumberland Plateau contains many scenic valleys and waterfalls. The central part of the state is marked by cavernous bedrock and irregular rolling hills, and level, fertile plains define West Tennessee. The state is twice bisected by the Tennessee River, and the Mississippi River forms its western border. The Great Smoky Mountains National Park, the nation's most visited national park, is in eastern Tennessee.\nTennessee is rooted in the Watauga Association, a 1772 frontier pact generally regarded as the first constitutional government west of the Appalachian Mountains. Its name derives from (), a Cherokee town preceding the first European American settlement. Tennessee was initially part of North Carolina, and later the Southwest Territory, before its admission to the Union as the 16th state on June 1, 1796. It earned the nickname \"The Volunteer State\" due to a strong tradition of military service. A slave state until the American Civil War, Tennessee was politically divided, with most of its western and middle parts supporting the Confederacy, and most of the eastern region harboring pro-Union sentiment. As a result, Tennessee was the last state to officially secede from the Union and join the Confederacy, and the first former Confederate state readmitted to the Union after the war had ended during the Reconstruction era.\nDuring the 20th century, Tennessee transitioned from a predominantly agrarian society to a more diversified economy. This was aided in part by massive federal investment in the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and the city of Oak Ridge, which was established during World War II to house the Manhattan Project's uranium enrichment facilities for the construction of the world's first atomic bombs. After the war, the Oak Ridge National Laboratory became a key center of scientific research. The state's economy is dominated by the health care, music, finance, automotive, chemical, electronics, and tourism sectors, and cattle, soybeans, poultry, corn, and cotton are its primary agricultural products. Tennessee has played a major role in the development of many forms of popular music, including country, blues, rock and roll, soul, and gospel.\nEtymology.\nTennessee derives its name most directly from the Cherokee town of Tanasi (or \"Tanase\", in syllabary: \u13d4\u13be\u13cf) in present-day Monroe County, Tennessee, on the Tanasi River, now known as the Little Tennessee River. In 1567, Spanish explorer Captain Juan Pardo and his party encountered a Native American village named \"Tanasqui\" in the area while traveling inland from modern-day South Carolina; however, it is unknown if this was the same settlement as Tanasi. The town appeared on British maps as early as 1725. Recent research suggests that the Cherokees adapted the name from the Yuchi word \"Tana-tsee-dgee\", meaning \"brother-waters-place\" or \"where-the-waters-meet\". The modern spelling, \"Tennessee\", is attributed to Governor James Glen of South Carolina, who used this spelling in his official correspondence during the 1750s. In 1788, North Carolina created \"Tennessee County\", and in 1796, a constitutional convention, organizing the new state from the Southwest Territory, adopted \"Tennessee\" as the state's name.\nHistory.\nPre-European era.\nThe first inhabitants of Tennessee were Paleo-Indians who arrived about 12,000 years ago at the end of the Last Glacial Period. Archaeological excavations indicate that the lower Tennessee Valley was heavily populated by Ice Age hunter-gatherers, and Middle Tennessee is believed to have been rich with game animals such as mastodons. The names of the cultural groups who inhabited the area before European contact are unknown, but archaeologists have named several distinct cultural phases, including the Archaic (8000\u20131000 BC), Woodland (1000 BC\u20131000 AD), and Mississippian (1000\u20131600 AD) periods. The Archaic peoples first domesticated dogs, and plants such as squash, corn, gourds, and sunflowers were first grown in Tennessee during the Woodland period. Later generations of Woodland peoples constructed the first mounds. Rapid civilizational development occurred during the Mississippian period, when Indigenous peoples developed organized chiefdoms and constructed numerous ceremonial structures throughout the state.\nSpanish conquistadors who explored the region in the 16th century encountered some of the Mississippian peoples, including the Muscogee Creek, Yuchi, and Shawnee. By the early 18th century, most Natives in Tennessee had disappeared, most likely wiped out by diseases introduced by the Spaniards. The Cherokee began migrating into what is now eastern Tennessee from what is now Virginia in the latter 17th century, possibly to escape expanding European settlement and diseases in the north. They forced the Creek, Yuchi, and Shawnee out of the state in the early 18th century. The Chickasaw remained confined to West Tennessee, and the middle part of the state contained few Native Americans, although both the Cherokee and the Shawnee claimed the region as their hunting ground. Cherokee peoples in Tennessee were known by European settlers as the Overhill Cherokee because they lived west of the Blue Ridge Mountains. Overhill settlements grew along the rivers in East Tennessee in the early 18th century.\nExploration and colonization.\nThe first recorded European expeditions into what is now Tennessee were led by Spanish explorers Hernando de Soto in 1540\u20131541, Tristan de Luna in 1559, and Juan Pardo in 1566\u20131567. In 1673, English fur trader Abraham Wood sent an expedition from the Colony of Virginia into Overhill Cherokee territory in modern-day northeastern Tennessee. That same year, a French expedition led by missionary Jacques Marquette and Louis Jolliet explored the Mississippi River and became the first Europeans to map the Mississippi Valley. In 1682, an expedition led by Ren\u00e9-Robert Cavelier, Sieur de La Salle constructed Fort Prudhomme on the Chickasaw Bluffs in West Tennessee. By the late 17th century, French traders began to explore the Cumberland River valley, and in 1714, under Charles Charleville's command, established French Lick, a fur trading settlement at the present location of Nashville near the Cumberland River. In 1739, the French constructed Fort Assumption under Jean-Baptiste Le Moyne de Bienville on the Mississippi River at the present location of Memphis, which they used as a base against the Chickasaw during the 1739 Campaign of the Chickasaw Wars.\nIn the 1750s and 1760s, longhunters from Virginia explored much of East and Middle Tennessee. Settlers from the Colony of South Carolina built Fort Loudoun on the Little Tennessee River in 1756, the first British settlement in what is now Tennessee and the westernmost British outpost to that date. Hostilities erupted between the British and the Cherokees into an armed conflict, and a siege of the fort ended with its surrender in 1760. After the French and Indian War, Britain issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763, which forbade settlements west of the Appalachian Mountains in an effort to mitigate conflicts with the Natives. But migration across the mountains continued, and the first permanent European settlers began arriving in northeastern Tennessee in the late 1760s. Most of them were English, but nearly 20% were Scotch-Irish. They formed the Watauga Association in 1772, a semi-autonomous representative government, and three years later reorganized themselves into the Washington District to support the cause of the American Revolutionary War. The next year, after an unsuccessful petition to Virginia, North Carolina agreed to annex the Washington District to provide protection from Native American attacks.\nIn 1775, Richard Henderson negotiated a series of treaties with the Cherokee to sell the lands of the Watauga settlements at Sycamore Shoals on the banks of the Watauga River. An agreement to sell land for the Transylvania Colony, which included the territory in Tennessee north of the Cumberland River, was also signed. Later that year, Daniel Boone, under Henderson's employment, blazed a trail from Fort Chiswell in Virginia through the Cumberland Gap, which became part of the Wilderness Road, a major thoroughfare into Tennessee and Kentucky. The Chickamauga, a Cherokee faction loyal to the British led by Dragging Canoe, opposed the settling of the Washington District and Transylvania Colony, and in 1776 attacked Fort Watauga at Sycamore Shoals. The warnings of Dragging Canoe's cousin Nancy Ward spared many settlers' lives from the initial attacks. In 1779, James Robertson and John Donelson led two groups of settlers from the Washington District to the French Lick. These settlers constructed Fort Nashborough, which they named for Francis Nash, a brigadier general of the Continental Army. The next year, the settlers signed the Cumberland Compact, which established a representative government for the colony called the Cumberland Association. This settlement later grew into the city of Nashville. That same year John Sevier led a group of Overmountain Men from Fort Watauga to the Battle of Kings Mountain in South Carolina, where they defeated the British.\nThree counties of the Washington District broke off from North Carolina in 1784 and formed the State of Franklin. Efforts to obtain admission to the Union failed, and the counties, now numbering eight, rejoined North Carolina by 1788. North Carolina ceded the area to the federal government in 1790, after which it was organized into the Southwest Territory on May 26 of that year. The act allowed the territory to petition for statehood once the population reached 60,000. Administration of the territory was divided between the Washington District and the Mero District, the latter of which consisted of the Cumberland Association and was named for Spanish territorial governor Esteban Rodr\u00edguez Mir\u00f3. President George Washington appointed William Blount as territorial governor. The Southwest Territory recorded a population of 35,691 in the first United States census that year, including 3,417 slaves.\nStatehood and antebellum era.\nAs support for statehood grew among the settlers, Governor Blount called for elections, which were held in December 1793. The 13-member territorial House of Representatives first convened in Knoxville on February 24, 1794, to select ten members for the legislature's upper house, the council. The full legislature convened on August 25, 1794. In June 1795, the legislature conducted a census of the territory, which recorded a population of 77,263, including 10,613 slaves, and a poll that showed 6,504 in favor of statehood and 2,562 opposed. Elections for a constitutional convention were held in December 1795, and the delegates convened in Knoxville on January 17, 1796, to begin drafting a state constitution. During this convention, the name Tennessee was chosen for the new state. The constitution was completed on February 6, which authorized elections for the state's new legislature, the Tennessee General Assembly. The legislature convened on March 28, 1796, and the next day, John Sevier was announced as the state's first governor. Tennessee was admitted to the Union on June 1, 1796, as the 16th state and the first created from federal territory.\nTennessee reportedly earned the nickname \"The Volunteer State\" during the War of 1812, when 3,500 Tennesseans answered a recruitment call by the General Assembly for the war effort. These soldiers, under Andrew Jackson's command, played a major role in the American victory at the Battle of New Orleans in 1815, the last major battle of the war. Several Tennesseans took part in the Texas Revolution of 1835\u201336, including Governor Sam Houston and Congressman and frontiersman Davy Crockett, who was killed at the Battle of the Alamo. The state's nickname was solidified during the Mexican\u2013American War when President James K. Polk of Tennessee issued a call for 2,800 soldiers from the state, and more than 30,000 volunteered.\nBetween the 1790s and 1820s, additional land cessions were negotiated with the Cherokee, who had established a national government modeled on the U.S. Constitution. In 1818, Jackson and Kentucky governor Isaac Shelby reached an agreement with the Chickasaw to sell the land between the Mississippi and Tennessee Rivers to the United States, which included all of West Tennessee and became known as the \"Jackson Purchase\". The Cherokee moved their capital from Georgia to the Red Clay Council Grounds in southeastern Tennessee in 1832, due to new laws forcing them from their previous capital at New Echota. In 1838 and 1839, U.S. troops forcibly removed thousands of Cherokees and their black slaves from their homes in southeastern Tennessee and forced them to march to Indian Territory in modern-day Oklahoma. This event is known as the Trail of Tears, and an estimated 4,000 died along the way.\nAs settlers pushed west of the Cumberland Plateau, a slavery-based agrarian economy took hold in these regions. Cotton planters used extensive slave labor on large plantation complexes in West Tennessee's fertile and flat terrain after the Jackson Purchase. Cotton also took hold in the Nashville Basin during this time. Entrepreneurs such as Montgomery Bell used slaves in the production of iron in the Western Highland Rim, and slaves also cultivated such crops as tobacco and corn throughout the Highland Rim. East Tennessee's geography did not allow for large plantations as in the middle and western parts of the state, and as a result, slavery became increasingly rare in the region. A strong abolition movement developed in East Tennessee, beginning as early as 1797, and in 1819, Elihu Embree of Jonesborough began publishing the \"Manumission Intelligencier\" (later \"The Emancipator\"), the nation's first exclusively anti-slavery newspaper.\nCivil War.\nAt the onset of the American Civil War, most Middle and West Tennesseans favored efforts to preserve their slavery-based economies, but many Middle Tennesseans were initially skeptical of secession. In East Tennessee, most people favored remaining in the Union. In 1860, slaves composed about 25% of Tennessee's population, the lowest share among the states that joined the Confederacy. Tennessee provided more Union troops than any other Confederate state, and the second-highest number of Confederate troops, behind Virginia. Due to its central location, Tennessee was a crucial state during the war and saw more military engagements than any state except Virginia.\nAfter Abraham Lincoln was elected president in 1860, secessionists in the state government led by Governor Isham Harris sought voter approval to sever ties with the United States, which was rejected in a referendum by a 54\u201346% margin in February 1861. After the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter in April and Lincoln's call for troops in response, the legislature ratified an agreement to enter a military league with the Confederacy on May 7, 1861. On June 8, with Middle Tennesseans having significantly changed their position, voters approved a second referendum on secession by a 69\u201331% margin, becoming the last state to secede. In response, East Tennessee Unionists organized a convention in Knoxville with the goal of splitting the region to form a new state loyal to the Union. In the fall of 1861, Unionist guerrillas in East Tennessee burned bridges and attacked Confederate sympathizers, leading the Confederacy to invoke martial law in parts of the region. Because of this, many southern unionists were sent fleeing to nearby Union states, particularly the border state of Kentucky. Other southern unionists, who stayed in Tennessee after the state's secession, either resisted the Confederate cause or eventually joined it. In March 1862, Lincoln appointed native Tennessean and War Democrat Andrew Johnson as military governor of the state.\nGeneral Ulysses S. Grant and the U.S. Navy captured the Tennessee and Cumberland rivers in February 1862 at the battles of Fort Henry and Fort Donelson. Grant then proceeded south to Pittsburg Landing and held off a Confederate counterattack at Shiloh in April in what was at the time the bloodiest battle of the war. Memphis fell to the Union in June after a naval battle on the Mississippi River. Union strength in Middle Tennessee was tested in a series of Confederate offensives beginning in the summer of 1862, which culminated in General William Rosecrans's Army of the Cumberland routing General Braxton Bragg's Army of Tennessee at Stones River, another one of the war's costliest engagements. The next summer, Rosecrans's Tullahoma campaign forced Bragg's remaining troops in Middle Tennessee to retreat to Chattanooga with little fighting.\nDuring the Chattanooga campaign, Confederates attempted to besiege the Army of the Cumberland into surrendering, but reinforcements from the Army of the Tennessee under the command of Grant, William Tecumseh Sherman, and Joseph Hooker arrived. The Confederates were driven from the city at the battles of Lookout Mountain and Missionary Ridge in November 1863. Despite Unionist sentiment in East Tennessee, Confederates held the area for most of the war. A few days after the fall of Chattanooga, Confederates led by James Longstreet unsuccessfully campaigned to take control of Knoxville by attacking Union General Ambrose Burnside's Fort Sanders. The capture of Chattanooga allowed Sherman to launch the Atlanta campaign from the city in May 1864. The last major battles in the state came when Army of Tennessee regiments under John Bell Hood invaded Middle Tennessee in the fall of 1864 in an effort to draw Sherman back. They were checked by John Schofield at Franklin in November and completely dispersed by George Thomas at Nashville in December. On April 27, 1865, the worst maritime disaster in American history occurred when the \"Sultana\" steamboat, which was transporting freed Union prisoners, exploded in the Mississippi River north of Memphis, killing 1,168 people.\nWhen the Emancipation Proclamation was announced, Tennessee was largely held by Union forces and thus not among the states enumerated, so it freed no slaves there. Andrew Johnson declared all slaves in Tennessee free on October 24, 1864. On February 22, 1865, the legislature approved an amendment to the state constitution prohibiting slavery, which was approved by voters the following month, and would go into effect later on in the year. This made Tennessee the only Southern state to abolish slavery at the time. Tennessee ratified the Thirteenth Amendment, which outlawed slavery in every state, on April 7, 1865, and the Fourteenth Amendment, which granted citizenship and equal protection under the law to former slaves, on July 18, 1866. Both amendments went into effect after Tennessee's readmission to the union due to the fact that other states had not yet ratified it. Johnson became vice president when Lincoln was reelected, and president after Lincoln's assassination in May 1865. On July 24, 1866, Tennessee became the first Confederate state to have its elected members readmitted to Congress.\nReconstruction and late 19th century.\nThe years after the Civil War were characterized by tension and unrest between blacks and former Confederates, the worst of which occurred in Memphis in 1866. Because Tennessee had ratified the Fourteenth Amendment before its readmission to the Union, it was the only former secessionist state that did not have a military governor during Reconstruction. The Radical Republicans seized control of the state government toward the end of the war, and appointed William G. \"Parson\" Brownlow governor. Under Brownlow's administration from 1865 to 1869, the legislature allowed African American men to vote, disenfranchised former Confederates, and with martial law, took action against the Ku Klux Klan, which was founded in December 1865 in Pulaski as a vigilante group to advance former Confederates' interests. In 1870, Southern Democrats regained control of the state legislature, and over the next two decades, passed Jim Crow laws to enforce racial segregation. A total of 251 lynchings, predominately of Black people, took place in Tennessee.\nA number of epidemics swept through Tennessee in the years after the Civil War, including cholera in 1873, which devastated the Nashville area, and yellow fever in 1878, which killed more than one-tenth of Memphis's residents. Reformers worked to modernize Tennessee into a \"New South\" economy during this time. With the help of Northern investors, Chattanooga became one of the first industrialized cities in the South. Memphis became known as the \"Cotton Capital of the World\" during the late 19th century, and Nashville, Knoxville, and several smaller cities saw modest industrialization. Northerners also began exploiting the coalfields and mineral resources in the Appalachian Mountains. To pay off debts and alleviate overcrowded prisons, the state turned to convict leasing, providing prisoners to mining companies as strikebreakers, which was protested by miners forced to compete with the system. An armed uprising in the Cumberland Mountains known as the Coal Creek War in 1891 and 1892 resulted in the state ending convict leasing.\nDespite New South promoters' efforts, agriculture continued to dominate Tennessee's economy. The majority of freed slaves were forced into sharecropping during the latter 19th century, and many others worked as agricultural wage laborers. In 1897, Tennessee celebrated its statehood centennial one year late with the Tennessee Centennial and International Exposition in Nashville. A full-scale replica of the Parthenon in Athens was designed by architect William Crawford Smith and constructed for the celebration, owing to the city's reputation as the \"Athens of the South\".\nEarly 20th century.\nDue to increasing racial segregation and poor standards of living, many black Tennesseans fled to industrial cities in the Northeast and Midwest as part of the first wave of the Great Migration between 1915 and 1930. Many residents of rural parts of Tennessee relocated to larger cities during this time for more lucrative employment opportunities. As part of the Temperance movement, Tennessee became the first state in the nation to effectively ban the sale, transportation, and production of alcohol in a series of laws passed between 1907 and 1917. During Prohibition, illicit production of moonshine became extremely common in East Tennessee, particularly in the mountains, and continued for many decades afterward.\nSgt. Alvin C. York of Fentress County became one of the most famous and honored American soldiers of World War I. He received the Congressional Medal of Honor for single-handedly capturing an entire German machine gun regiment during the Meuse\u2013Argonne offensive. On July 9, 1918, Tennessee suffered the worst rail accident in U.S. history when two passenger trains collided head on in Nashville, killing 101 and injuring 171. On August 18, 1920, Tennessee became the 36th and final state necessary to ratify the Nineteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, which gave women the right to vote. In 1925, John T. Scopes, a high school teacher in Dayton, was tried and convicted for teaching evolution in violation of the state's recently passed Butler Act. Scopes was prosecuted by former Secretary of State and presidential candidate William Jennings Bryan and defended by attorney Clarence Darrow. The case was intentionally publicized, and highlighted the creationism-evolution controversy among religious groups. In 1926, Congress authorized the establishment of a national park in the Great Smoky Mountains, which was officially established in 1934 and dedicated in 1940.\nWhen the Great Depression struck in 1929, much of Tennessee was severely impoverished even by national standards. As part of President Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) was created in 1933 to provide electricity, jobs, flood control, improved waterway navigation, agricultural development, and economic modernization to the Tennessee River Valley. The TVA built several hydroelectric dams in the state in the 1930s and 1940s, which inundated communities and thousands of farmland acreage, and forcibly displaced families via eminent domain. The agency quickly grew into the country's largest electric utility and initiated a period of dramatic economic growth and transformation that brought many new industries and employment opportunities to the state.\nDuring World War II, East Tennessee was chosen for the production of weapons-grade fissile enriched uranium as part of the Manhattan Project, a research and development undertaking led by the U.S. to produce the world's first atomic bombs. The planned community of Oak Ridge was built to provide accommodations for the facilities and workers; the site was chosen due to the abundance of TVA electric power, its low population density, and its inland geography and topography, which allowed for the natural separation of the facilities and a low vulnerability to attack. The Clinton Engineer Works was established as the production arm of the Manhattan Project in Oak Ridge, which enriched uranium at three major facilities for use in atomic bombs. The first of the bombs was detonated in Alamogordo, New Mexico, in a test code-named Trinity, and the second, nicknamed \"Little Boy\", was dropped on Imperial Japan at the end of World War II. After the war, the Oak Ridge National Laboratory became an institution for scientific and technological research.\nMid-20th century to present.\nAfter the U.S. Supreme Court ruled racial segregation in public schools unconstitutional in \"Brown v. Board of Education\" in 1954, Oak Ridge High School in 1955 became the first school in Tennessee to be integrated. The next year, nearby Clinton High School was integrated, and Tennessee National Guard troops were sent in after pro-segregationists threatened violence. Between February and May 1960, a series of sit-ins at segregated lunch counters in Nashville organized by the Nashville Student Movement resulted in the desegregation of facilities in the city. On April 4, 1968, James Earl Ray assassinated civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. in Memphis. King had traveled there to support striking African American sanitation workers.\nThe 1962 U.S. Supreme Court case \"Baker v. Carr\" arose from a challenge to the longstanding rural bias of apportionment of seats in the Tennessee legislature and established the principle of \"one man, one vote\". The construction of Interstate 40 through Memphis became a national talking point on the issue of eminent domain and grassroots lobbying when the Tennessee Department of Transportation (TDOT) attempted to construct the highway through the city's Overton Park. A local activist group spent many years contesting the project, and in 1971, the U.S. Supreme Court sided with the group and established the framework for judicial review of government agencies in the landmark case of \"Citizens to Preserve Overton Park v. Volpe\". TVA's construction of the Tellico Dam in Loudon County became the subject of national controversy in the 1970s when the endangered snail darter fish was reported to be affected by the project. After lawsuits by environmental groups, the debate was decided by the U.S. Supreme Court case \"Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill\" in 1978, leading to amendments of the Endangered Species Act.\nThe 1982 World's Fair was held in Knoxville. Also known as the Knoxville International Energy Exposition, the fair's theme was \"Energy Turns the World\". The exposition was one of the most successful, and the most recent world's fair to be held in the U.S. In 1986, Tennessee held a yearlong celebration of the state's heritage and culture called \"Homecoming '86\". Tennessee celebrated its bicentennial in 1996 with a yearlong celebration called \"Tennessee 200\". A new state park that traces the state's history, Bicentennial Mall, was opened at the foot of Capitol Hill in Nashville. The same year, the whitewater slalom events at the Atlanta Summer Olympic Games were held on the Ocoee River in Polk County.\nIn 2002, Tennessee amended its constitution to establish a lottery. In 2006, the state constitution was amended to outlaw same-sex marriage. This amendment was invalidated by the 2015 U.S. Supreme Court case \"Obergefell v. Hodges\". On December 23, 2008, the largest industrial waste spill in United States history occurred at TVA's Kingston Fossil Plant when more than 1.1 billion gallons of coal ash slurry was accidentally released into the Emory and Clinch Rivers. The cleanup cost more than $1 billion and lasted until 2015.\nGeography.\nTennessee is in the Southeastern United States. Culturally, most of the state is considered part of the Upland South, and the eastern third is part of Appalachia. Tennessee covers roughly , of which , or 2.2%, is water. It is the 16th smallest state in land area. The state is about long from east to west and wide from north to south. Tennessee is geographically, culturally, economically, and legally divided into three Grand Divisions: East Tennessee, Middle Tennessee, and West Tennessee. It borders eight other states: Kentucky and Virginia to the north, North Carolina to the east, Georgia, Alabama, and Mississippi on the south, and Arkansas and Missouri on the west. It is tied with Missouri as the state bordering the most other states. Tennessee is trisected by the Tennessee River, and its geographical center is in Murfreesboro. Nearly three\u2013fourths of the state is in the Central Time Zone, with most of East Tennessee on Eastern Time. The Tennessee River forms most of the division between Middle and West Tennessee.\nTennessee's eastern boundary roughly follows the highest crests of the Blue Ridge Mountains, and the Mississippi River forms its western boundary. Due to flooding of the Mississippi that has changed its path, the state's western boundary deviates from the river in some places. The northern border was originally defined as 36\u00b030\u2032 north latitude and the Royal Colonial Boundary of 1665, but due to faulty surveys, begins north of this line in the east, and to the west, gradually veers north before shifting south onto the actual 36\u00b030\u2032 parallel at the Tennessee River in West Tennessee. Uncertainties in the latter 19th century over the location of the state's border with Virginia culminated in the U.S. Supreme Court settling the matter in 1893, which resulted in the division of Bristol between the two states. An 1818 survey erroneously placed Tennessee's southern border south of the 35th parallel; Georgia legislators continue to dispute this placement, as it prevents Georgia from accessing the Tennessee River.\nMarked by a diversity of landforms and topographies, Tennessee features six principal physiographic provinces, from east to west, which are part of three larger regions: the Blue Ridge Mountains, Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians, and Cumberland Plateau, part of the Appalachian Mountains; the Highland Rim and Nashville Basin, part of the Interior Low Plateaus of the Interior Plains; and the East Gulf Coastal Plain, part of the Atlantic Plains. Other regions include the southern tip of the Cumberland Mountains, the Western Tennessee Valley, and the Mississippi Alluvial Plain. The state's highest point, which is also the third-highest peak in eastern North America, is Kuwohi (formerly Clingmans Dome), at above sea level. Its lowest point, , is on the Mississippi River at the Mississippi state line in Memphis. Tennessee has the most caves in the United States, with more than 10,000 documented.\nGeological formations in Tennessee largely correspond with the state's topographic features, and, in general, decrease in age from east to west. The state's oldest rocks are igneous strata more than 1 billion years old found in the Blue Ridge Mountains, and the youngest deposits in Tennessee are sands and silts in the Mississippi Alluvial Plain and river valleys that drain into the Mississippi River. Tennessee is considered seismically active and contains two major seismic zones, although destructive earthquakes rarely occur there. The Eastern Tennessee seismic zone spans the entirety of East Tennessee from northwestern Alabama to southwestern Virginia, and is considered one of the most active zones in the Southeastern United States, frequently producing low-magnitude earthquakes. The New Madrid seismic zone in the northwestern part of the state produced a series of devastating earthquakes between December 1811 and February 1812 that formed Reelfoot Lake near Tiptonville.\nTopography.\nThe southwestern Blue Ridge Mountains lie within Tennessee's eastern edge, and are divided into several subranges, namely the Great Smoky Mountains, Bald Mountains, Unicoi Mountains, Unaka Mountains, and Iron Mountains. These mountains, which average above sea level in Tennessee, contain some of the highest elevations in eastern North America. The state's border with North Carolina roughly follows the highest peaks of this range, including Kuwohi. Most of the Blue Ridge area is protected by the Cherokee National Forest, the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, and several federal wilderness areas and state parks. The Appalachian Trail roughly follows the North Carolina state line before shifting westward into Tennessee.\nStretching west from the Blue Ridge Mountains for about are the Ridge-and-Valley Appalachians, also known as the Tennessee Valley or Great Valley of East Tennessee. This area consists of linear parallel ridges separated by valleys that trend northeast to southwest, the general direction of the entire Appalachian range. Most of these ridges are low, but some of the higher ones are commonly called mountains. Numerous tributaries join to form the Tennessee River in the Ridge and Valley region.\nThe Cumberland Plateau rises to the west of the Tennessee Valley, with an average elevation of . This landform is part of the larger Appalachian Plateau and consists mostly of flat-topped tablelands. The plateau's eastern edge is relatively distinct, but the western escarpment is irregular, containing several long, crooked stream valleys separated by rocky cliffs with numerous waterfalls. The Cumberland Mountains, with peaks above , comprise the northeastern part of the Appalachian Plateau in Tennessee, and the southeastern part of the Cumberland Plateau is divided by the Sequatchie Valley. The Cumberland Trail traverses the eastern escarpment of the Cumberland Plateau and Cumberland Mountains.\nWest of the Cumberland Plateau is the Highland Rim, an elevated plain that surrounds the Nashville Basin, a geological dome. Both of these physiographic provinces are part of the Interior Low Plateaus of the larger Interior Plains. The Highland Rim is Tennessee's largest geographic region, and is often split into eastern and western halves. The Eastern Highland Rim is characterized by relatively level plains dotted by rolling hills, and the Western Highland Rim and western Nashville Basin are covered with uneven rounded knobs with steep ravines separated by meandering streams. The Nashville Basin has rich, fertile farmland, and porous limestone bedrock very close to the surface underlies both the Nashville Basin and Eastern Highland Rim. This results in karst that forms numerous caves, sinkholes, depressions, and underground streams.\nWest of the Highland Rim is the Western Tennessee Valley, which consists of about in width of hilly land along the banks of the Tennessee River. West of this is the Gulf Coastal Plain, a broad feature that begins at the Gulf of Mexico and extends northward into southern Illinois. The plain begins in the east with low rolling hills and wide stream valleys, known as the West Tennessee Highlands, and gradually levels out to the west. It ends at steep loess bluffs overlooking the Mississippi embayment, the westernmost physiographic division of Tennessee, which is part of the larger Mississippi Alluvial Plain. This flat wide strip is commonly known as the Mississippi Bottoms, and contains lowlands, floodplains, and swamps.\nHydrology.\nTennessee is drained by three major rivers, the Tennessee, Cumberland, and Mississippi. The Tennessee River begins at the juncture of the Holston and French Broad rivers in Knoxville, flows southwest to Chattanooga, and exits into Alabama before reemerging in the western part of the state and flowing north into Kentucky. Its major tributaries include the Clinch, Little Tennessee, Hiwassee, Sequatchie, Elk, Beech, Buffalo, Duck, and Big Sandy rivers. The Cumberland River flows through the north-central part of the state, emerging in the northeastern Highland Rim, passing through Nashville, turning northwest to Clarksville, and entering Kentucky east of the Tennessee River. Its principal branches in Tennessee are the Obey, Caney Fork, Stones, Harpeth, and Red rivers. The Mississippi River drains nearly all of West Tennessee. Its tributaries are the Obion, Forked Deer, Hatchie, Loosahatchie, and Wolf rivers. The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers operate many hydroelectric dams on the Tennessee and Cumberland rivers and their tributaries, which form large reservoirs throughout the state.\nAbout half the state's land area is in the Tennessee Valley drainage basin of the Tennessee River. The Cumberland River basin covers the northern half of Middle Tennessee and a small portion of East Tennessee. A small part of north-central Tennessee is in the Green River watershed. All three of these basins are tributaries of the Ohio River watershed. Most of West Tennessee is in the Lower Mississippi River watershed. The entirety of the state is in the Mississippi River watershed, except for a small sliver near the southeastern corner traversed by the Conasauga River, which is part of the Mobile Bay watershed.\nEcology.\nTennessee is within a temperate deciduous forest biome commonly known as the Eastern Deciduous Forest. It has eight ecoregions: the Blue Ridge, Ridge and Valley, Central Appalachian, Southwestern Appalachian, Interior Low Plateaus, Southeastern Plains, Mississippi Valley Loess Plains, and Mississippi Alluvial Plain regions. Tennessee is the most biodiverse inland state, the Great Smoky Mountains National Park is the most biodiverse national park, and the Duck River is the most biologically diverse waterway in North America. The Nashville Basin is renowned for its diversity of flora and fauna. Tennessee is home to 340 species of birds, 325 freshwater fish species, 89 mammals, 77 amphibians, and 61 reptiles.\nForests cover about 52% of Tennessee's land area, with oak\u2013hickory the dominant type. Appalachian oak\u2013pine and cove hardwood forests are found in the Blue Ridge Mountains and Cumberland Plateau, and bottomland hardwood forests are common throughout the Gulf Coastal Plain. Pine forests are also found throughout the state. The Southern Appalachian spruce\u2013fir forest in the highest elevations of the Blue Ridge Mountains is considered the second-most endangered ecosystem in the country. Some of the last remaining large American chestnut trees grow in the Nashville Basin and are being used to help breed blight-resistant trees. Middle Tennessee is home to many unusual and rare ecosystems known as cedar glades, which occur in areas with shallow limestone bedrock that is largely barren of overlying soil and contain many endemic plant species.\nCommon mammals found throughout Tennessee include white-tailed deer, red and gray foxes, coyotes, raccoons, opossums, wild turkeys, rabbits, and squirrels. Black bears are found in the Blue Ridge Mountains and on the Cumberland Plateau. Tennessee has the third-highest number of amphibian species, with the Great Smoky Mountains home to the most salamander species in the world. The state ranks second in the nation for the diversity of its freshwater fish species.\nClimate.\nMost of Tennessee has a humid subtropical climate, with the exception of some of the higher elevations in the Appalachians, which are classified as a cooler mountain temperate or humid continental climate. The Gulf of Mexico is the dominant factor in Tennessee's climate, with winds from the south responsible for most of the state's annual precipitation. Generally, the state has hot summers and mild to cool winters with generous precipitation throughout the year. The highest average monthly precipitation usually occurs between December and April. The driest months, on average, are August to October. The state receives an average of of precipitation annually. Snowfall ranges from in West Tennessee to over in East Tennessee's highest mountains.\nSummers are generally hot and humid, with most of the state averaging a high of around . Winters tend to be mild to cool, decreasing in temperature at higher elevations. For areas outside the highest mountains, the average overnight lows are generally near freezing. The highest recorded temperature was at Perryville on August 9, 1930, while the lowest recorded temperature was at Mountain City on December 30, 1917.\nWhile Tennessee is far enough from the coast to avoid any direct impact from a hurricane, its location makes it susceptible to the remnants of tropical cyclones, which weaken over land and can cause significant rainfall. The state annually averages about 50 days of thunderstorms, which can be severe with large hail and damaging winds. Tornadoes are possible throughout the state, with West and Middle Tennessee the most vulnerable. The state averages 15 tornadoes annually. They can be severe, and the state leads the nation in the percentage of total tornadoes that have fatalities. Winter storms such as in 1993 and 2021 occur occasionally, and ice storms are fairly common. Fog is a persistent problem in some areas, especially in East Tennessee.\nCities, towns, and counties.\nTennessee is divided into 95 counties, each of which has a county seat. The state has 340 municipalities in total. The Office of Management and Budget designates ten metropolitan areas in Tennessee, four of which extend into neighboring states.\nNashville is Tennessee's capital and largest city, with nearly 700,000 residents. Its 13-county metropolitan area has been the state's largest since the early 1990s and is one of the nation's fastest-growing metropolitan areas, with about 2 million residents. Memphis, with more than 630,000 inhabitants, was the state's largest city until 2016, when Nashville surpassed it. It is in Shelby County, Tennessee's largest county in both population and land area. Knoxville, with about 190,000 inhabitants, and Chattanooga, with about 180,000 residents, are the third- and fourth-largest cities, respectively. Clarksville is a significant population center, with about 170,000 residents. Murfreesboro is the sixth-largest city and Nashville's largest suburb, with more than 150,000 residents. In addition to the major cities, the Tri-Cities of Kingsport, Bristol, and Johnson City are considered the sixth major population center.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"US Census population/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe 2020 United States census reported Tennessee's population at 6,910,840, an increase of 564,735, or 8.90%, since the 2010 census. Between 2010 and 2019, the state received a natural increase of 143,253 (744,274 births minus 601,021 deaths), and an increase from net migration of 338,428 people into the state. Immigration from outside the U.S. resulted in a net increase of 79,086, and migration within the country produced a net increase of 259,342. Tennessee's center of population is in Murfreesboro in Rutherford County.\nAccording to the 2020 census, 5.7% of Tennessee's population were under age5, 22.1% were under 18, and 17.1% were 65 or older. In recent years, Tennessee has been a top source of domestic migration, receiving an influx of people relocating from places such as California, the Northeast, and the Midwest due to the low cost of living and booming employment opportunities. In 2019, about 5.5% of Tennessee's population was foreign-born. Of the foreign-born population, approximately 42.7% were naturalized citizens and 57.3% non-citizens. The foreign-born population consisted of approximately 49.9% from Latin America, 27.1% from Asia, 11.9% from Europe, 7.7% from Africa, 2.7% from Northern America, and 0.6% from Oceania. In 2018, The top countries of origin for Tennessee's immigrants were Mexico, India, Honduras, China and Egypt.\nWith the exception of a slump in the 1980s, Tennessee has been one of the fastest-growing states in the nation since 1970, benefiting from the larger Sun Belt phenomenon. The state has been a top destination for people relocating from Northeastern and Midwestern states. This time period has seen the birth of new economic sectors in the state and has positioned the Nashville and Clarksville metropolitan areas as two of the fastest-growing regions in the country.\nAccording to HUD's 2022 Annual Homeless Assessment Report, there were an estimated 10,567 homeless people in Tennessee.\nThe top languages spoken in Tennessee after English are Spanish, Arabic, Chinese, Vietnamese, Korean, French, Laotian, Amharic, German, Gujarati, Japanese, Tagalog, Hindi, Russian, and Persian.\nEthnicity.\nIn 2020, 6.9% of the total population was of Hispanic or Latino origin (of any race), up from 4.6% in 2010. Between 2000 and 2010, Tennessee's Hispanic population grew by 134.2%, the third-highest rate of any state. In 2020, Non-Hispanic or Latino Whites were 70.9% of the population, compared to 57.7% of the population nationwide. In 2010, the five most common self-reported ethnic groups in the state were American (26.5%), English (8.2%), Irish (6.6%), German (5.5%), and Scotch-Irish (2.7%). Most Tennesseans who self-identify as having American ancestry are of English and Scotch-Irish ancestry. An estimated 21\u201324% of Tennesseans are of predominantly English ancestry.\nReligion.\nSince colonization, Tennessee has always been predominantly Christian. About 81% of the population identifies as Christian, with Protestants making up 73% of the population. Of the Protestants in the state, Evangelical Protestants compose 52% of the population, Mainline Protestants 13%, and Historically Black Protestants 8%. Roman Catholics make up 6%, Mormons 1%, and Orthodox Christians less than 1%. The largest denominations by number of adherents are the Southern Baptist Convention, the United Methodist Church, the Roman Catholic Church, and the Churches of Christ. Muslims and Jews each make up about 1% of the population, and adherents of other religions make up about 3% of the population. About 14% of Tennesseans are non-religious, with 11% identifying as \"Nothing in particular\", 3% as agnostics, and 1% as atheists.\nTennessee is included in most definitions of the Bible Belt, and is ranked as one of the nation's most religious states. Several Protestant denominations have their headquarters in Tennessee, including the Southern Baptist Convention and National Baptist Convention (in Nashville); the Church of God in Christ and the Cumberland Presbyterian Church (in Memphis); and the Church of God and the Church of God of Prophecy (in Cleveland); and the National Association of Free Will Baptists (in Antioch). Nashville has publishing houses of several denominations.\nEconomy.\nAs of 2021, Tennessee had a gross state product of $418.3 billion. In 2020, the state's per capita personal income was $30,869. The median household income was $54,833. About 13.6% percent of the population was below the poverty line. In 2019, the state reported a total employment of 2,724,545 and a total number of 139,760 employer establishments. Tennessee is a right-to-work state, like most of its Southern neighbors. Unionization has historically been low and continues to decline, as in most of the U.S.\nTaxation.\nTennessee has a reputation as a low-tax state and is usually ranked as one of the five states with the lowest tax burden on residents. Despite being low-tax, it is ranked third among U.S. states for fiscal health. It is one of nine states that do not have a general income tax; the sales tax is the primary means of funding the government. The Hall income tax was imposed on most dividends and interest at a rate of 6% but was completely phased out by 2021. The first $1,250 of individual income and $2,500 of joint income was exempt from this tax. Property taxes are the primary source of revenue for local governments.\nThe state's sales and use tax rate for most items is 7%, the second-highest in the nation, along with Mississippi, Rhode Island, New Jersey, and Indiana. Food is taxed at 4%, but candy, dietary supplements, and prepared foods are taxed at 7%. Local sales taxes are collected in most jurisdictions at rates varying from 1.5% to 2.75%, bringing the total sales tax between 8.5% and 9.75%. The average combined rate is about 9.5%, the nation's highest average sales tax. Intangible property tax is assessed on the shares of stockholders of any loan, investment, insurance, or for-profit cemetery companies. The assessment ratio is 40% of the value times the jurisdiction's tax rate. Since 2016, Tennessee has had no inheritance tax.\nAgriculture.\nTennessee has the eighth-most farms in the nation, which cover more than 40% of its land area and have an average size of about . Cash receipts for crops and livestock have an estimated annual value of $3.5 billion, and the agriculture sector has an estimated annual impact of $81 billion on the state's economy. Beef cattle is the state's largest agricultural commodity, followed by broilers and poultry. Tennessee ranks 12th in the nation for the number of cattle, with more than half of its farmland dedicated to cattle grazing. Soybeans and corn are the state's first and second-most common crops, respectively, and are most heavily grown in West and Middle Tennessee, especially the northwestern corner of the state. Tennessee ranks seventh in the nation in cotton production, most of which is grown in the fertile soils of central West Tennessee.\nThe state ranks fourth nationwide in the production of tobacco, which is predominantly grown in the Ridge-and-Valley region of East Tennessee. Tennessee farmers are also known worldwide for their cultivation of tomatoes and horticultural plants. Other important cash crops in the state include hay, wheat, eggs, and snap beans. The Nashville Basin is a top equestrian region, due to soils that produce grass favored by horses. The Tennessee Walking Horse, first bred in the region in the late 18th century, is one of the world's most recognized horse breeds. Tennessee also ranks second nationwide for mule breeding and the production of goat meat. The state's timber industry is largely concentrated on the Cumberland Plateau and ranks as one of the top producers of hardwood nationwide.\nIndustry.\nUntil World War II, Tennessee, like most Southern states, remained predominantly agrarian. Chattanooga became one of the first industrial cities in the south in the decades after the Civil War, when many factories, including iron foundries, steel mills, and textile mills were constructed there. But most of Tennessee's industrial growth began with the federal investments in the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) and the Manhattan Project in the 1930s and 1940s. The state's industrial and manufacturing sector continued to expand in the succeeding decades, and Tennessee is now home to more than 2,400 advanced manufacturing establishments, which produce a total of more than $29 billion worth of goods annually.\nThe automotive industry is Tennessee's largest manufacturing sector and one of the nation's largest. Nissan's assembly plant in Smyrna is the largest automotive assembly plant in North America. Two other automakers have assembly plants in Tennessee: General Motors in Spring Hill and Volkswagen in Chattanooga. Ford is constructing an assembly plant in Stanton that is expected to be operational in 2025. In addition, the state contains more than 900 automotive suppliers. Nissan and Mitsubishi Motors have their North American corporate headquarters in Franklin. The state is also one of the top producers of food and drink products, its second-largest manufacturing sector. A number of well-known brands originated in Tennessee, and even more are produced there. Tennessee also ranks as one of the largest producers of chemicals. Chemical products manufactured in Tennessee include industrial chemicals, paints, pharmaceuticals, plastic resins, and soaps and hygiene products. Additional important products manufactured in Tennessee include fabricated metal products, electrical equipment, consumer electronics and electrical appliances, and nonelectrical machinery.\nBusiness.\nTennessee's commercial sector is dominated by a wide variety of companies, but its largest service industries include health care, transportation, music and entertainment, banking, and finance. Large corporations with headquarters in Tennessee include FedEx, AutoZone, International Paper, and First Horizon Corporation, all based in Memphis; Pilot Corporation and Regal Entertainment Group in Knoxville; Hospital Corporation of America based in Nashville; Unum in Chattanooga; Acadia Senior Living and Community Health Systems in Franklin; Eastman Chemical headquartered in Kingsport; Dollar General in Goodlettsville, and LifePoint Health, Tractor Supply Company, and Delek US in Brentwood.\nSince the 1990s, the geographical area between Oak Ridge and Knoxville has been known as the Tennessee Technology Corridor, with more than 500 high-tech firms in the region. The research and development industry in Tennessee is also one of the largest employment sectors, mainly due to the prominence of Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL) and the Y-12 National Security Complex in the city of Oak Ridge. ORNL conducts scientific research in materials science, nuclear physics, energy, high-performance computing, systems biology, and national security, and is the largest national laboratory in the Department of Energy (DOE) system by size. The technology sector is also a rapidly growing industry in Middle Tennessee, particularly in the Nashville metropolitan area.\nEnergy and mineral production.\nTennessee's electric utilities are regulated monopolies, as in many other states. The Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) owns over 90% of the state's generating capacity. Nuclear power is Tennessee's largest source of electricity generation, producing about 43.4% of its power in 2021. The same year, 22.4% of the power was produced from coal, 17.8% from natural gas, 15.8% from hydroelectricity, and 1.3% from other renewables. About 59.7% of the electricity generated in Tennessee produces no greenhouse gas emissions. Tennessee is home to the first nuclear power reactor in the U.S. to begin operation in the 21st century, which is at the Watts Bar Nuclear Plant in Rhea County. Tennessee was also an early leader in hydroelectric power, and today is the third-largest hydroelectric power-producing state east of the Rocky Mountains. Tennessee is a net consumer of electricity, receiving power from other TVA facilities in neighboring states.\nTennessee has very little petroleum and natural gas reserves, but is home to one oil refinery, in Memphis. Bituminous coal is mined in small quantities in the Cumberland Plateau and Cumberland Mountains. There are sizable reserves of lignite coal in West Tennessee that remain untapped. Coal production in Tennessee peaked in 1972, and today less than 0.1% of coal in the U.S. comes from Tennessee. Tennessee is the nation's leading producer of ball clay. Other major mineral products produced in Tennessee include sand, gravel, crushed stone, Portland cement, marble, sandstone, common clay, lime, and zinc. The Copper Basin, in Tennessee's southeastern corner in Polk County, was one of the nation's most productive copper mining districts between the 1840s and 1980s, and supplied about 90% of the copper the Confederacy used during the Civil War. Mining activities in the basin resulted in a major environmental disaster, which left the surrounding landscape barren for more than a century. Iron ore was another major mineral mined in Tennessee until the early 20th century. Tennessee was also a top producer of phosphate until the early 1990s.\nTourism.\nTennessee is the 11th-most visited state in the nation, receiving a record of 126 million tourists in 2019. Its top tourist attraction is the Great Smoky Mountains National Park, the most visited national park in the U.S., with more than 14 million visitors annually. The park anchors a large tourism industry based primarily in nearby Gatlinburg and Pigeon Forge, which includes Dollywood, the most visited ticketed attraction in Tennessee. Attractions related to Tennessee's musical heritage are spread throughout the state. Other top attractions include the Tennessee State Museum and Parthenon in Nashville; the National Civil Rights Museum and Graceland in Memphis; Lookout Mountain, the Chattanooga Choo-Choo Hotel, Ruby Falls, and the Tennessee Aquarium in Chattanooga; the American Museum of Science and Energy in Oak Ridge, the Bristol Motor Speedway, Jack Daniel's Distillery in Lynchburg, and the Hiwassee and Ocoee rivers in Polk County.\nThe National Park Service preserves four Civil War battlefields in Tennessee: Chickamauga and Chattanooga National Military Park, Stones River National Battlefield, Shiloh National Military Park, and Fort Donelson National Battlefield. The NPS also operates Big South Fork National River and Recreation Area, Cumberland Gap National Historical Park, Overmountain Victory National Historic Trail, Trail of Tears National Historic Trail, Andrew Johnson National Historic Site, and the Manhattan Project National Historical Park. Tennessee is home to eight National Scenic Byways, including the Natchez Trace Parkway, the East Tennessee Crossing Byway, the Great River Road, the Norris Freeway, Cumberland National Scenic Byway, Sequatchie Valley Scenic Byway, The Trace, and the Cherohala Skyway. Tennessee maintains 56 state parks, covering . Many reservoirs created by TVA dams have also generated water-based tourist attractions.\nCulture.\nTennessee blends southern Appalachian and Southern flavors, which originate from its English, Scotch-Irish, and African roots, and has evolved as it has grown. Its Grand Divisions also manifest into distinct cultural regions, with East Tennessee commonly associated with Southern Appalachia, and Middle and West Tennessee commonly associated with Upland Southern culture and sometimes even Deep Southern culture. Parts of West Tennessee, especially Memphis, are sometimes considered part of the Deep South. The Tennessee State Museum in Nashville chronicles the state's history and culture.\nTennessee is perhaps best known culturally for its musical heritage and contributions to the development of many forms of popular music, particularly in the country genre. Notable authors with ties to Tennessee include Cormac McCarthy, Peter Taylor, James Agee, Francis Hodgson Burnett, Thomas S. Stribling, Ida B. Wells, Nikki Giovanni, Shelby Foote, Ann Patchett, Ishmael Reed, and Randall Jarrell. The state's well-known contributions to Southern cuisine include Memphis-style barbecue, Nashville hot chicken, and Tennessee whiskey.\nMusic.\nTennessee has played a critical role in the development of many forms of American popular music, including blues, country, rock and roll, rockabilly, soul, bluegrass, Contemporary Christian, and gospel. Many consider Memphis's Beale Street the epicenter of the blues, with musicians such as W. C. Handy performing in its clubs as early as 1909. Memphis was historically home to Sun Records, where musicians such as Elvis Presley, Johnny Cash, Carl Perkins, Jerry Lee Lewis, Roy Orbison, and Charlie Rich began their recording careers, and where rock and roll took shape in the 1950s. Stax Records in Memphis became one of the most important labels for soul artists in the late 1950s and 1960s, and a subgenre known as Memphis soul emerged. The 1927 Victor recording sessions in Bristol generally mark the beginning of the country music genre and the rise of the \"Grand Ole Opry\" in the 1930s helped make Nashville the center of the country music recording industry. Nashville became known as \"Music City\", and the \"Grand Ole Opry\" remains the nation's longest-running radio show.\nMany museums and historic sites recognize Tennessee's role in nurturing various forms of popular music, including Sun Studio, Memphis Rock N' Soul Museum, Stax Museum of American Soul Music, and Blues Hall of Fame in Memphis, the Ryman Auditorium, Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum, Musicians Hall of Fame and Museum, National Museum of African American Music, and Music Row in Nashville, the International Rock-A-Billy Museum in Jackson, the Mountain Music Museum in Kingsport, and the Birthplace of Country Music Museum in Bristol. The Rockabilly Hall of Fame, an online site recognizing the development of rockabilly, is also based in Nashville. Several annual music festivals take place throughout the state, the largest of which are the Beale Street Music Festival in Memphis, the CMA Music Festival in Nashville, Bonnaroo in Manchester, and Riverbend in Chattanooga.\nEducation.\nEducation in Tennessee is administered by the Tennessee Department of Education. The state Board of Education has 11 members: one from each Congressional district, a student member, and the executive director of the Tennessee Higher Education Commission (THEC), who serves as ex-officio nonvoting member. Public primary and secondary education systems are operated by county, city, or special school districts to provide education at the local level, and operate under the direction of the Tennessee Department of Education. The state also has many private schools.\nThe state enrolls approximately 1 million K\u201312 students in 137 districts. In 2021, the four-year high school graduation rate was 88.7%, a decrease of 1.2% from the previous year. According to the most recent data, Tennessee spends $9,544 per student, the 8th lowest in the nation.\nColleges and universities.\nPublic higher education is overseen by the Tennessee Higher Education Commission (THEC), which provides guidance to the state's two public university systems. The University of Tennessee system operates four primary campuses in Knoxville, Chattanooga, Martin, and Pulaski; a Health Sciences Center in Memphis; and an aerospace research facility in Tullahoma. The Tennessee Board of Regents (TBR), also known as The College System of Tennessee, operates 13 community colleges and 27 campuses of the Tennessee Colleges of Applied Technology (TCAT). Until 2017, the TBR also operated six public universities in the state; it now only gives them administrative support.\nIn 2014, the Tennessee General Assembly created the Tennessee Promise, which allows in-state high school graduates to enroll in two-year post-secondary education programs such as associate degrees and certificates at community colleges and trade schools in Tennessee tuition-free, funded by the state lottery, if they meet certain requirements. The Tennessee Promise was created as part of then-governor Bill Haslam's \"Drive to 55\" program, which set a goal of increasing the number of college-educated residents to at least 55% of the state's population. The program has also received national attention, with multiple states having since created similar programs modeled on the Tennessee Promise.\nTennessee has 107 private institutions. Vanderbilt University in Nashville is consistently ranked as one of the nation's leading research institutions. Nashville is often called the \"Athens of the South\" due to its many colleges and universities. Tennessee is also home to six historically Black colleges and universities (HBCUs).\nMedia.\nTennessee is home to more than 120 newspapers. The most-circulated paid newspapers in the state include \"The Tennessean\" in Nashville, \"The Commercial Appeal\" in Memphis, the \"Knoxville News Sentinel\", the \"Chattanooga Times Free Press\", and \"The Leaf-Chronicle\" in Clarksville, \"The Jackson Sun\", and \"The Daily News Journal\" in Murfreesboro. All of these except the \"Times Free Press\" are owned by Gannett.\nSix television media markets\u2014Nashville, Memphis, Knoxville, Chattanooga, Tri-Cities, and Jackson\u2014are based in Tennessee. The Nashville market is the third-largest in the Upland South and the ninth-largest in the southeastern United States, according to Nielsen Media Research. Small sections of the Huntsville, Alabama and Paducah, Kentucky-Cape Girardeau, Missouri-Harrisburg, Illinois markets also extend into the state. Tennessee has 43 full-power and 41 low-power television stations and more than 450 Federal Communications Commission (FCC)-licensed radio stations. The \"Grand Ole Opry\", based in Nashville, is the longest-running radio show in the country, having broadcast continuously since 1925.\nTransportation.\nThe Tennessee Department of Transportation (TDOT) is the primary agency that is tasked with regulating and maintaining Tennessee's transportation infrastructure. Tennessee is currently one of five states with no transportation-related debts.\nRoads.\nTennessee has of roads, of which are maintained by the state. Of the state's highways, are part of the Interstate Highway System. Tennessee has no tolled roads or bridges but has the sixth-highest mileage of high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes, which are utilized on freeways in the congestion-prone Nashville and Memphis metropolitan areas.\nInterstate 40 (I-40) is the longest Interstate Highway in Tennessee, traversing the state for . Known as \"Tennessee's Main Street\", I-40 serves the major cities of Memphis, Nashville, and Knoxville, and throughout its entire length in Tennessee, one can observe the diversity of the state's geography and landforms. I-40's branch interstates include I-240 in Memphis; I-440 in Nashville; I-840 around Nashville; I-140 from Knoxville to Maryville; and I-640 in Knoxville. In a north\u2013south orientation, from west to east, are interstates 55, which serves Memphis; 65, which passes through Nashville; 75, which serves Chattanooga and Knoxville; and 81, which begins east of Knoxville, and serves Bristol to the northeast. I-24 is an east\u2013west interstate that enters the state in Clarksville, passes through Nashville, and terminates in Chattanooga. I-26, although technically an east\u2013west interstate, begins in Kingsport and runs southwardly through Johnson City before exiting into North Carolina. I-155 is a branch route of I-55 that serves the northwestern part of the state. I-275 is a short spur route in Knoxville. I-269 runs from Millington to Collierville, serving as an outer bypass of Memphis.\nAirports.\nMajor airports in Tennessee include Nashville International Airport (BNA), Memphis International Airport (MEM), McGhee Tyson Airport (TYS) outside of Knoxville, Chattanooga Metropolitan Airport (CHA), Tri-Cities Regional Airport (TRI) in Blountville, and McKellar-Sipes Regional Airport (MKL) in Jackson. Because Memphis International Airport is the hub of FedEx Corporation, it is the world's second-busiest cargo airport. The state also has 74 general aviation airports and 148 heliports.\nRailroads.\nFor passenger rail service, Memphis and Newbern are served by the Amtrak City of New Orleans line on its run between Chicago and New Orleans. Nashville is served by the WeGo Star commuter rail service. Tennessee currently has of freight trackage in operation, most of which are owned by CSX Transportation. Norfolk Southern Railway also operates lines in East and southwestern Tennessee. BNSF operates a major intermodal facility in Memphis.\nWaterways.\nTennessee has a total of of navigable waterways, the 11th highest in the nation. These include the Mississippi, Tennessee, and Cumberland rivers. Five inland ports are located in the state, including the Port of Memphis, which is the fifth-largest in the United States and the second largest on the Mississippi River.\nLaw and government.\nThe Constitution of Tennessee was adopted in 1870. The state had two previous constitutions. The first was adopted in 1796, the year Tennessee was admitted to the union, and the second in 1834. Since 1826, Nashville has been the capital of Tennessee. The capital was previously in three other cities. Knoxville was the capital from statehood in 1796 until 1812, except for September 21, 1807, when the legislature met in Kingston for a day. The capital was relocated to Nashville in 1812, where it remained until it was relocated back to Knoxville in 1817. The next year, the capital was moved to Murfreesboro, where it remained until 1826. Nashville was officially named Tennessee's permanent capital in 1843.\nExecutive and legislative branches.\nLike the federal government, Tennessee's government has three branches. The executive branch is led by the governor, who holds office for a four-year term and may serve a maximum of two consecutive terms. The governor is the only official elected statewide. The current governor is Bill Lee, a Republican. The governor is supported by 22 cabinet-level departments, most headed by a commissioner the governor appoints. The executive branch also includes several agencies, boards, and commissions, some of which are under the auspices of one of the cabinet-level departments.\nThe bicameral legislative branch, the Tennessee General Assembly, consists of the 33-member Senate and the 99-member House of Representatives. Senators serve four-year terms and House members serve two-year terms. Each chamber chooses a Speaker, who is elected by a joint session of the legislature. The Speaker of the Senate also serves as the lieutenant governor, a practice found only in one other state, and the House Speaker is third in line for the governorship. The legislature can override a veto by a simple majority, and the state has no \"pocket veto\". The legislature convenes at noon on the second Tuesday in January and meets for a total of 90 days over two sessions, usually adjourning in late April or early May. Special sessions may be called by the governor or by two-thirds of the members of both chambers.\nJudicial system.\nTennessee's highest court is the state Supreme Court. It has a chief justice and four associate justices. No more than two justices can be from the same Grand Division. The Supreme Court of Tennessee appoints the state's Attorney General, a practice only found in Tennessee. Both the Court of Appeals and the Court of Criminal Appeals have 12 judges, who are evenly from each Grand Division. Under the Tennessee Plan, the governor appoints justices on all three courts to eight-year terms; they must be retained by the voters during the first general election after appointment and at the end of their term. Tennessee is divided into 31 judicial districts, each with a circuit and chancery court, and a district attorney and judges elected to eight-year terms. Separate criminal courts serve 13 of the 31 judicial districts; circuit courts handle criminal cases in the remaining districts. Local courts include general sessions, juvenile and domestic, and municipal courts.\nTennessee maintains four dedicated law enforcement agencies: the Tennessee Highway Patrol (THP), the Tennessee Wildlife Resources Agency (TWRA), the Tennessee Bureau of Investigation (TBI), and the Tennessee Department of Environment and Conservation (TDEC). The Highway Patrol is the primary entity that enforces highway safety regulations and general non-wildlife state laws. It is under the jurisdiction of the Department of Safety. The TWRA is an independent agency tasked with enforcing all wildlife, boating, and fishery regulations outside of state parks. TDEC enforces state environmental laws and regulations. The TBI is the primary state-level criminal investigative department. State park rangers are responsible for all activities and law enforcement inside the Tennessee State Parks system. Tennessee, like many other southern states, has a strong reputation for harsh criminal punishment. Capital punishment is legal in Tennessee and has existed at various times since statehood. Lethal injection is the primary means of execution, but electrocution is also allowed.\nIn 2026, Tennessee will be set to execute Christa Gail Pike, the first female to be executed in over 200 years. \nLocal.\nTennessee is divided into 95 counties, with 92 county governments that use a county commission legislative body and a separately elected county executive. The governments of Davidson (Nashville), Moore (Lynchburg), and Trousdale (Hartsville) are consolidated with their county seats. Each county elects a sheriff, property assessor, trustee, register of deeds, and county clerk. Tennessee has more than 340 municipalities. Most cities and towns use the weak mayor-council (mayor-aldermen), strong-mayor council, city commission, or council\u2013manager forms of government. Local law enforcement is divided between county sheriff's offices and municipal police departments. In every county except Davidson, the sheriff is the chief law enforcement officer.\nFederal.\nTennessee sends nine representatives to the United States House of Representatives. The current delegation consists of eight Republicans and one Democrat. Its U.S. senators are Marsha Blackburn and Bill Hagerty, both Republicans. Tennessee is under the jurisdiction of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals, which has jurisdiction over three district courts in the state: the Eastern, Middle, and Western districts.\nTribal.\nThe Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians is Tennessee's only federally recognized Native American tribe. It owns in Henning, which the tribe placed into federal trust in 2012. This is governed directly by the tribe.\nPolitics.\nThe politics of Tennessee is dominated by the Republican Party. Republicans currently hold both of the state's U.S. Senate seats, eight out of nine Congressional seats, 75 of 99 state House seats, and 27 of 33 state Senate seats. Democratic strength is largely concentrated in Nashville, Memphis, and parts of Knoxville, Chattanooga, and Clarksville. Several suburban areas of Nashville and Memphis also contain significant Democratic minorities. Tennessee is one of thirteen states which holds its presidential primaries on Super Tuesday. Tennessee does not require voters to declare a party affiliation when registering. The state is one of eight states which require voters to present a form of photo identification. Tennessee has one of the highest rates of felony disenfranchisement, with nearly 10% of its voting-age population ineligible to vote. The state also has the highest rate of Black and Latino felony disenfranchisement.\nBetween the end of the Civil War and the mid-20th century, Tennessee was part of the Democratic Solid South, but had the largest Republican minority of any former Confederate state. During Reconstruction, freedmen and former free blacks were granted the right to vote; most joined the Republican Party. Numerous African Americans were elected to local offices, and some to state office. However, the Democratic Party regained control of the state in the late 1860s and early 1870s. Following Reconstruction, Tennessee continued to have competitive party politics, but in the 1880s, the White-dominated state government passed Jim Crow laws, one of which imposed a poll tax requirement for voter registration. These served to disenfranchise most African Americans, and their power in state and local politics was markedly reduced. After the disenfranchisement of blacks, the Republican Party became a primarily white sectional party supported mostly in East Tennessee. In the early 1900s, the state legislature approved legislation allowing cities to adopt a commission form of government based on at-large voting as a means to limit African American political participation. Not until after passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 were African Americans able to regain their full voting rights.\nBetween the end of Reconstruction and the mid-20th century, Tennessee voted consistently Democratic in Presidential elections, except in two nationwide Republican landslides in the 1920s. Tennesseans narrowly supported Warren G. Harding over Ohio Governor James Cox in 1920, and more decisively voted for Herbert Hoover over New York Governor Al Smith in 1928. During the first half of the 20th century, state politics were dominated by the Democratic Crump machine in Memphis. For most of the second half of the 20th century, Tennessee was a swing state in presidential elections. During this time, Democratic presidential nominees from Southern states, including Lyndon B. Johnson, Jimmy Carter, and Bill Clinton, tended to fare better in Tennessee than their Northern counterparts, especially among split-ticket voters outside the metropolitan areas. In the 1950s, Tennessee twice voted for Republican Dwight D. Eisenhower, former Allied Commander of the Armed Forces during World War II. Howard Baker, first elected in 1966, became the first Republican U.S. Senator from Tennessee since Reconstruction. The Republican Southern strategy did not have as much of an effect in Tennessee as in most Southern states, but the elections of Winfield Dunn as governor and Bill Brock to the U.S. Senate in 1970 further helped make the GOP competitive among Whites in statewide elections. In the 2000 presidential election, Vice President Al Gore, who had previously served as a Democratic U.S. Senator from Tennessee, failed to carry his home state, an unusual occurrence but indicative of strengthening Republican support.\nBeginning in the early 21st century, Tennessee transitioned into a solid Republican state, primarily due to rural white voters who have rejected the increasing liberalism of the Democratic Party. Republican President George W. Bush increased his margin of victory in the state from 4% in 2000 to 14% margin in 2004. In 2007, Ron Ramsey became the first Republican Speaker of the State Senate since Reconstruction, and the following year the Republicans gained control of both houses of the state legislature for the first time since Reconstruction. Voters, however, continued to elect moderate Republicans, such as centrists Bill Haslam and Lamar Alexander, until the late 2010s with the rise of Trumpism in the GOP at a nationwide scale. Since 2016, Tennessee has been the most populous state to vote Republican by more than 60% in presidential elections, and in 2020 voted Republican by the largest margin of any state in terms of number of votes.\nSports.\nTennessee is home to four major professional sports franchises: the Tennessee Titans have played in the National Football League (NFL) since 1997, the Nashville Predators have played in the National Hockey League (NHL) since 1998, the Memphis Grizzlies have played in the National Basketball Association (NBA) since 2001, and Nashville SC has played in Major League Soccer (MLS) since 2020.\nThe state is also home to eight minor league teams. Four of these are Minor League Baseball clubs. The Nashville Sounds, which began play in 1978, and Memphis Redbirds, which began in 1998, each compete in the International League at the Triple-A level, the highest before Major League Baseball. The Knoxville Smokies, which have played continuously since 1972, and Chattanooga Lookouts, which have played continuously since 1976, are members of the Double-A classification Southern League. \nTennessee has three minor league soccer teams. Chattanooga Red Wolves SC has been a member of the third-tier USL League One since 2019. One Knoxville SC, founded in 2021, are also members of USL League One since 2023. Founded in 2009, Chattanooga FC began playing in the third-tier MLS Next Pro in 2024. The state also has one minor league ice hockey team: the Knoxville Ice Bears, which began play in 2002 and are members of the Southern Professional Hockey League.\nThe state is home to 12 NCAA Division I programs. Four of these participate in the top level of college football, the Football Bowl Subdivision. In Knoxville, the Tennessee Volunteers college teams play in the Southeastern Conference (SEC) of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA). In Nashville, the Vanderbilt Commodores are also members of the SEC. The Memphis Tigers are members of the American Athletic Conference, and Murfreesboro's Middle Tennessee Blue Raiders play in Conference USA. Nashville is also home to the Belmont Bruins, members of the Ohio Valley Conference (OVC) but moving to the Missouri Valley Conference (MVC) in July 2022; Tennessee State Tigers, OVC members with no plans to change conferences; and the Lipscomb Bisons, members of the ASUN Conference. Tennessee State plays football in Division I's second level, the Football Championship Subdivision, while Belmont and Lipscomb do not have football teams. Through the 2021\u201322 school year, the OVC also includes the Austin Peay Governors from Clarksville, the UT Martin Skyhawks from Martin, and the Tennessee Tech Golden Eagles from Cookeville. UT Martin and Tennessee Tech will remain in the OVC, while Peay will move to the ASUN. The Chattanooga Mocs and Johnson City's East Tennessee State Buccaneers are full members, including football, of the Southern Conference.\nTennessee is also home to the Bristol Motor Speedway, which features NASCAR Cup Series racing two weekends a year, routinely selling out more than 160,000 seats on each date. The Nashville Superspeedway in Lebanon, which previously held Nationwide and IndyCar races until it was shut down in 2011, reopened to host the NASCAR Cup Series in 2021. Tennessee's only graded stakes horserace, the Iroquois Steeplechase, is held in Nashville each May. The WGC Invitational is a PGA Tour golf tournament that has been held in Memphis since 1958.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30396", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30396", "title": "Trigonometric Function/Trigonometric Identities", "text": ""}
{"id": "30400", "revid": "3125232", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30400", "title": "Torque", "text": "Turning force around an axis\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn physics and mechanics, torque is the rotational correspondent of linear force. It is also referred to as the moment of force, or simply the moment. The symbol for torque is typically formula_1, the lowercase Greek letter \"tau\". When being referred to as moment of force, it is commonly denoted by M. Just as a linear force is a push or a pull applied to a body, a torque can be thought of as a twist applied to an object with respect to a chosen point; for example, driving a screw uses torque to force it into an object, which is applied by the screwdriver rotating around its axis to the drives on the head.\nTorque is generally referred to using different vocabulary depending on geographical location and field of study, with \"torque\" generally being associated with physics and \"moment\" being associated with engineering. This article follows the definition used in US physics in its usage of the word \"torque\".\nHistorical terminology.\nThe term \"torque\" (from Latin , 'to twist') is said to have been suggested by James Thomson and appeared in print in April, 1884. Usage is attested the same year by Silvanus P. Thompson in the first edition of \"Dynamo-Electric Machinery\". Thompson describes his usage of the term as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Just as the Newtonian definition of \"force\" is that which produces or tends to produce motion (along a line), so \"torque\" may be defined as that which produces or tends to produce \"torsion\" (around an axis). It is better to use a term which treats this action as a single definite entity than to use terms like \"couple\" and \"moment\", which suggest more complex ideas. The single notion of a twist applied to turn a shaft is better than the more complex notion of applying a linear force (or a pair of forces) with a certain leverage.\nIn mechanical engineering in the UK and the US, torque is generally referred to as \"moment of force\", usually shortened to \"moment\". This terminology can be traced back to at least 1811 in Sim\u00e9on Denis Poisson's . An English translation of Poisson's work appeared in 1842.\nDefinition and relation to other physical quantities.\nTorque as a Cross Product Between Linear Force and the Radius about the Rotational Axis.\nThe torque about an axis can be calculated by multiplying the linear force applied perpendicularly to a lever multiplied by its distance from the lever's fulcrum (the length of the lever arm). \nTherefore, torque is defined as the product of the magnitude of the perpendicular component of the force and the distance of the line of action of a force from the point around which it is being determined. \nIn three dimensions, the torque is a pseudovector; for point particles, it is given by the cross product of the displacement vector and the force vector. The direction of the torque can be determined by using the right-hand grip rule: if the fingers of the right hand are curled from the direction of the lever arm to the direction of the force, then the thumb points in the direction of the torque. It follows that the torque vector is perpendicular to both the \"position\" and \"force\" vectors, and defines the plane in which the two vectors lie. The resulting torque vector direction is determined by the right-hand rule. Therefore any force directed parallel to the particle's position vector does not produce a torque. The magnitude of torque applied to a rigid body depends on three quantities: the force applied, the lever arm vector connecting the point about which the torque is being measured to the point of force application, and the angle between the force and lever arm vectors. In symbols:\nformula_2\nwhere\nThe SI unit for torque is the newton-metre (N\u22c5m). For more on the units of torque, see \"\".\nRelationship with the angular momentum.\nThe net torque on a body determines the rate of change of the body's angular momentum,\nformula_9\nwhere formula_10 is the angular momentum vector and formula_11 is time. For the motion of a point particle,\nformula_12\nwhere formula_13 is the moment of inertia and formula_14 is the orbital angular velocity pseudovector. It follows that\nformula_15\nusing the derivative of a vector is\nformula_16\nThis equation is the rotational analogue of Newton's second law for point particles, and is valid for any type of trajectory. In some simple cases like a rotating disc, where only the moment of inertia on rotating axis is, the rotational Newton's second law can beformula_17where formula_18.\nProof of the equivalence of definitions.\nThe definition of angular momentum for a single point particle is:\nformula_19\nwhere p is the particle's linear momentum and r is the position vector from the origin. The time-derivative of this is:\nformula_20\nThis result can easily be proven by splitting the vectors into components and applying the product rule. But because the rate of change of linear momentum is force formula_21 and the rate of change of position is velocity formula_22,\nformula_23\nThe cross product of momentum formula_24 with its associated velocity formula_25 is zero because velocity and momentum are parallel, so the second term vanishes. Therefore, torque on a particle is \"equal\" to the first derivative of its angular momentum with respect to time. If multiple forces are applied, according Newton's second law it follows thatformula_26\nThis is a general proof for point particles, but it can be generalized to a system of point particles by applying the above proof to each of the point particles and then summing over all the point particles. Similarly, the proof can be generalized to a continuous mass by applying the above proof to each point within the mass, and then integrating over the entire mass.\nDerivatives of torque.\nIn physics, rotatum is the derivative of torque with respect to timeformula_27where \u03c4 is torque.\nThis word is derived from the Latin word meaning 'to rotate'. The term \"rotatum\" is not universally recognized but is commonly used. There is not a universally accepted lexicon to indicate the successive derivatives of rotatum, even if sometimes various proposals have been made.\nUsing the cross product definition of torque, an alternative expression for rotatum is:\nformula_28\nBecause the rate of change of force is yank formula_29 and the rate of change of position is velocity formula_22, the expression can be further simplified to:\nformula_31\nRelationship with power and energy.\nThe law of conservation of energy can also be used to understand torque. If a force is allowed to act through a distance, it is doing mechanical work. Similarly, if torque is allowed to act through an angular displacement, it is doing work. Mathematically, for rotation about a fixed axis through the center of mass, the work \"W\" can be expressed as\nformula_32\nwhere \"\u03c4\" is torque, and \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2 represent (respectively) the initial and final angular positions of the body.\nIt follows from the work\u2013energy principle that \"W\" also represents the change in the rotational kinetic energy \"E\"r of the body, given by\nformula_33\nwhere \"I\" is the moment of inertia of the body and \"\u03c9\" is its angular speed.\nPower is the work per unit time, given by\nformula_34\nwhere \"P\" is power, \u03c4 is torque, \u03c9 is the angular velocity, and formula_35 represents the scalar product.\nAlgebraically, the equation may be rearranged to compute torque for a given angular speed and power output. The power injected by the torque depends only on the instantaneous angular speed \u2013 not on whether the angular speed increases, decreases, or remains constant while the torque is being applied (this is equivalent to the linear case where the power injected by a force depends only on the instantaneous speed \u2013 not on the resulting acceleration, if any).\nProof.\nThe work done by a variable force acting over a finite linear displacement formula_36 is given by integrating the force with respect to an elemental linear displacement formula_37\nformula_38\nHowever, the infinitesimal linear displacement formula_37 is related to a corresponding angular displacement formula_40 and the radius vector formula_41 as\nformula_42\nSubstitution in the above expression for work, , gives\nformula_43\nThe expression inside the integral is a scalar triple product formula_44, but as per the definition of torque, and since the parameter of integration has been changed from linear displacement to angular displacement, the equation becomes\nformula_45\nIf the torque and the angular displacement are in the same direction, then the scalar product reduces to a product of magnitudes; i.e., formula_46 giving\nformula_47\nPrinciple of moments.\nThe principle of moments, also known as Varignon's theorem (not to be confused with the geometrical theorem of the same name) states that the resultant torques due to several forces applied to about a point is equal to the sum of the contributing torques:\nformula_48\nFrom this it follows that the torques resulting from N number of forces acting around a pivot on an object are balanced when\nformula_49\nUnits.\nTorque has the dimension of force times distance, symbolically and those fundamental dimensions are the same as that for energy or work. Official SI literature indicates \"newton-metre\", is properly denoted N\u22c5m, as the unit for torque; although this is dimensionally equivalent to the joule, which is not used for torque. In the case of torque, the unit is assigned to a vector, whereas for energy, it is assigned to a scalar. This means that the dimensional equivalence of the newton-metre and the joule may be applied in the former but not in the latter case. This problem is addressed in , which treats the radian as a base unit rather than as a dimensionless unit.\nThe traditional imperial units for torque are the pound foot (lbf-ft), or, for small values, the pound inch (lbf-in). In the US, torque is most commonly referred to as the foot-pound (denoted as either lb-ft or ft-lb) and the inch-pound (denoted as in-lb). Practitioners depend on context and the hyphen in the abbreviation to know that these refer to torque and not to energy or moment of mass (as the symbolism ft-lb would properly imply).\nConversion to other units.\nA conversion factor may be necessary when using different units of power or torque. For example, if rotational speed (unit: revolution per minute or second) is used in place of angular speed (unit: radian per second), we must multiply by 2\u03c0 radians per revolution. In the following formulas, \"P\" is power, \"\u03c4\" is torque, and \"\u03bd\" (Greek letter nu) is rotational speed.\nformula_50\nShowing units:\nformula_51\nDividing by 60 seconds per minute gives us the following.\nformula_52\nwhere rotational speed is in revolutions per minute (rpm, rev/min).\nSome people (e.g., American automotive engineers) use horsepower (mechanical) for power, foot-pounds (lbf\u22c5ft) for torque and rpm for rotational speed. This results in the formula changing to:\nformula_53\nThe constant below (in foot-pounds per minute) changes with the definition of the horsepower; for example, using metric horsepower, it becomes approximately 32,550.\nThe use of other units (e.g., BTU per hour for power) would require a different custom conversion factor.\nDerivation.\nFor a rotating object, the \"linear distance\" covered at the circumference of rotation is the product of the radius with the angle covered. That is: linear distance = radius \u00d7 angular distance. And by definition, linear distance = linear speed \u00d7 time = radius \u00d7 angular speed \u00d7 time.\nBy the definition of torque: torque = radius \u00d7 force. We can rearrange this to determine force = torque \u00f7 radius. These two values can be substituted into the definition of power:\nformula_54\nThe radius \"r\" and time \"t\" have dropped out of the equation. However, angular speed must be in radians per unit of time, by the assumed direct relationship between linear speed and angular speed at the beginning of the derivation. If the rotational speed is measured in revolutions per unit of time, the linear speed and distance are increased proportionately by 2\u03c0 in the above derivation to give:\nformula_55\nIf torque is in newton-metres and rotational speed in revolutions per second, the above equation gives power in newton-metres per second or watts. If Imperial units are used, and if torque is in pounds-force feet and rotational speed in revolutions per minute, the above equation gives power in foot pounds-force per minute. The horsepower form of the equation is then derived by applying the conversion factor 33,000\u00a0ft\u22c5lbf/min per horsepower:\nformula_56\nbecause formula_57\nSpecial cases and other facts.\nMoment arm formula.\nA very useful special case, often given as the definition of torque in fields other than physics, is as follows:\nformula_58\nThe construction of the \"moment arm\" is shown in the figure to the right, along with the vectors r and F mentioned above. The problem with this definition is that it does not give the direction of the torque but only the magnitude, and hence it is difficult to use in three-dimensional cases. If the force is perpendicular to the displacement vector r, the moment arm will be equal to the distance to the centre, and torque will be a maximum for the given force. The equation for the magnitude of a torque, arising from a perpendicular force:\nformula_59\nFor example, if a person places a force of 10\u00a0N at the terminal end of a wrench that is 0.5\u00a0m long (or a force of 10\u00a0N acting 0.5\u00a0m from the twist point of a wrench of any length), the torque will be 5\u00a0N\u22c5m \u2013 assuming that the person moves the wrench by applying force in the plane of movement and perpendicular to the wrench.\nStatic equilibrium.\nFor an object to be in static equilibrium, not only must the sum of the forces be zero, but also the sum of the torques (moments) about any point. For a two-dimensional situation with horizontal and vertical forces, the sum of the forces requirement is two equations: \u03a3\"H\" = 0 and \u03a3\"V\" = 0, and the torque a third equation: \u03a3\"\u03c4\" = 0. That is, to solve statically determinate equilibrium problems in two-dimensions, three equations are used.\nNet force versus torque.\nWhen the net force on the system is zero, the torque measured from any point in space is the same. For example, the torque on a current-carrying loop in a uniform magnetic field is the same regardless of the point of reference. If the net force formula_60 is not zero, and formula_61 is the torque measured from formula_62, then the torque measured from formula_63 is\nformula_64\nMachine torque.\nTorque forms part of the basic specification of an engine: the power output of an engine is expressed as its torque multiplied by the angular speed of the drive shaft. Internal-combustion engines produce useful torque only over a limited range of rotational speeds (typically from around 1,000\u20136,000\u00a0rpm for a small car). One can measure the varying torque output over that range with a dynamometer, and show it as a torque curve. Steam engines and electric motors tend to produce maximum torque close to zero rpm, with the torque diminishing as rotational speed rises (due to increasing friction and other constraints). Reciprocating steam-engines and electric motors can start heavy loads from zero rpm without a clutch.\nIn practice, the relationship between power and torque can be observed in bicycles: Bicycles are typically composed of two road wheels, front and rear gears (referred to as sprockets) meshing with a chain, and a derailleur mechanism if the bicycle's transmission system allows multiple gear ratios to be used (i.e. multi-speed bicycle), all of which attached to the frame. A cyclist, the person who rides the bicycle, provides the input power by turning pedals, thereby cranking the front sprocket (commonly referred to as chainring). The input power provided by the cyclist is equal to the product of angular speed (i.e. the number of pedal revolutions per minute times 2\"\u03c0\") and the torque at the spindle of the bicycle's crankset. The bicycle's drivetrain transmits the input power to the road wheel, which in turn conveys the received power to the road as the output power of the bicycle. Depending on the gear ratio of the bicycle, a (torque, angular speed)input pair is converted to a (torque, angular speed)output pair. By using a larger rear gear, or by switching to a lower gear in multi-speed bicycles, angular speed of the road wheels is decreased while the torque is increased, product of which (i.e. power) does not change.\nTorque multiplier.\nTorque can be multiplied via three methods: by locating the fulcrum such that the length of a lever is increased; by using a longer lever; or by the use of a speed-reducing gearset or gear box. Such a mechanism multiplies torque, as rotation rate is reduced.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30402", "revid": "1316784596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30402", "title": "Theory of computation", "text": "Academic subfield of computer science\nIn theoretical computer science and mathematics, the theory of computation is the branch that deals with what problems can be solved on a model of computation using an algorithm, how efficiently they can be solved and to what degree (e.g., approximate solutions versus precise ones). The field is divided into three major branches: automata theory and formal languages, computability theory, and computational complexity theory, which are linked by the question: \"\"What are the fundamental capabilities and limitations of computers?\".\"\nIn order to perform a rigorous study of computation, computer scientists work with a mathematical abstraction of computers called a model of computation. There are several models in use, but the most commonly examined is the Turing machine. Computer scientists study the Turing machine because it is simple to formulate, can be analyzed and used to prove results, and because it represents what many consider the most powerful possible \"reasonable\" model of computation (see Church\u2013Turing thesis). It might seem that the potentially infinite memory capacity is an unrealizable attribute, but any decidable problem solved by a Turing machine will always require only a finite amount of memory. So in principle, any problem that can be solved (decided) by a Turing machine can be solved by a computer that has a finite amount of memory.\nHistory.\nThe theory of computation can be considered the creation of models of all kinds in the field of computer science. Therefore, mathematics and logic are used. In the last century, it separated from mathematics and became an independent academic discipline with its own conferences such as FOCS in 1960 and STOC in 1969, and its own awards such as the IMU Abacus Medal (established in 1981 as the Rolf Nevanlinna Prize), the G\u00f6del Prize, established in 1993, and the Knuth Prize, established in 1996.\nSome pioneers of the theory of computation were Ramon Llull, Alonzo Church, Kurt G\u00f6del, Alan Turing, Stephen Kleene, R\u00f3zsa P\u00e9ter, John von Neumann and Claude Shannon.\nBranches.\nAutomata theory.\nAutomata theory is the study of abstract machines (or more appropriately, abstract 'mathematical' machines or systems) and the computational problems that can be solved using these machines. These abstract machines are called automata. Automata comes from the Greek word (\u0391\u03c5\u03c4\u03cc\u03bc\u03b1\u03c4\u03b1) which means that something is doing something by itself.\nAutomata theory is also closely related to formal language theory, as the automata are often classified by the class of formal languages they are able to recognize. An automaton can be a finite representation of a formal language that may be an infinite set. Automata are used as theoretical models for computing machines, and are used for proofs about computability.\nFormal language theory.\nFormal language theory is a branch of mathematics concerned with describing languages as a set of operations over an alphabet. It is closely linked with automata theory, as automata are used to generate and recognize formal languages. There are several classes of formal languages, each allowing more complex language specification than the one before it, i.e. Chomsky hierarchy, and each corresponding to a class of automata which recognizes it. Because automata are used as models for computation, formal languages are the preferred mode of specification for any problem that must be computed.\nComputability theory.\nComputability theory deals primarily with the question of the extent to which a problem is solvable on a computer. The statement that the halting problem cannot be solved by a Turing machine is one of the most important results in computability theory, as it is an example of a concrete problem that is both easy to formulate and impossible to solve using a Turing machine. Much of computability theory builds on the halting problem result.\nAnother important step in computability theory was Rice's theorem, which states that for all non-trivial properties of partial functions, it is undecidable whether a Turing machine computes a partial function with that property.\nComputability theory is closely related to the branch of mathematical logic called recursion theory, which removes the restriction of studying only models of computation which are reducible to the Turing model. Many mathematicians and computational theorists who study recursion theory will refer to it as computability theory.\nComputational complexity theory.\nComputational complexity theory considers not only whether a problem can be solved at all on a computer, but also how efficiently the problem can be solved. Two major aspects are considered: time complexity and space complexity, which are respectively how many steps it takes to perform a computation, and how much memory is required to perform that computation.\nIn order to analyze how much time and space a given algorithm requires, computer scientists express the time or space required to solve the problem as a function of the size of the input problem. For example, finding a particular number in a long list of numbers becomes harder as the list of numbers grows larger. If we say there are \"n\" numbers in the list, then if the list is not sorted or indexed in any way we may have to look at every number in order to find the number we're seeking. We thus say that in order to solve this problem, the computer needs to perform a number of steps that grow linearly in the size of the problem.\nTo simplify this problem, computer scientists have adopted big \"O\" notation, which allows functions to be compared in a way that ensures that particular aspects of a machine's construction do not need to be considered, but rather only the asymptotic behavior as problems become large. So in our previous example, we might say that the problem requires formula_1 steps to solve.\nPerhaps the most important open problem in all of computer science is the question of whether a certain broad class of problems denoted NP can be solved efficiently. This is discussed further at Complexity classes P and NP, and P versus NP problem is one of the seven Millennium Prize Problems stated by the Clay Mathematics Institute in 2000. The Official Problem Description was given by Turing Award winner Stephen Cook.\nModels of computation.\nAside from a Turing machine, other equivalent (see Church\u2013Turing thesis) models of computation are in use.\nis a concept which has many similarities to formula_2-calculus, but also important differences exist (e.g. fixed point combinator Y has normal form in combinatory logic but not in formula_2-calculus). Combinatory logic was developed with great ambitions: understanding the nature of paradoxes, making foundations of mathematics more economic (conceptually), eliminating the notion of variables (thus clarifying their role in mathematics).\nis a theoretically interesting idealization of a computer. There are several variants. In most of them, each register can hold a natural number (of unlimited size), and the instructions are simple (and few in number), e.g. only decrementation (combined with conditional jump) and incrementation exist (and halting). The lack of the infinite (or dynamically growing) external store (seen at Turing machines) can be understood by replacing its role with G\u00f6del numbering techniques: the fact that each register holds a natural number allows the possibility of representing a complicated thing (e.g. a sequence, or a matrix etc.) by an appropriately huge natural number \u2014 unambiguity of both representation and interpretation can be established by number theoretical foundations of these techniques.\nIn addition to the general computational models, some simpler computational models are useful for special, restricted applications. Regular expressions, for example, specify string patterns in many contexts, from office productivity software to programming languages. Another formalism mathematically equivalent to regular expressions, finite automata are used in circuit design and in some kinds of problem-solving. Context-free grammars specify programming language syntax. Non-deterministic pushdown automata are another formalism equivalent to context-free grammars. Primitive recursive functions are a defined subclass of the recursive functions.\nDifferent models of computation have the ability to do different tasks. One way to measure the power of a computational model is to study the class of formal languages that the model can generate; in such a way to the Chomsky hierarchy of languages is obtained.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30403", "revid": "50511380", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30403", "title": "Turing machine", "text": "Computation model defining an abstract machine\n&lt;imagemap&gt;\nFile:Automata theory.svg Classes of automata text to hide from printing but not mirroring\nA Turing machine is a mathematical model of computation describing an abstract machine that manipulates symbols on a strip of tape according to a table of rules. Despite the model's simplicity, it is capable of implementing any computer algorithm.\nThe machine operates on an infinite memory tape divided into discrete cells, each of which can hold a single symbol drawn from a finite set of symbols called the alphabet of the machine. It has a \"head\" that, at any point in the machine's operation, is positioned over one of these cells, and a \"state\" selected from a finite set of states. At each step of its operation, the head reads the symbol in its cell. Then, based on the symbol and the machine's own present state, the machine writes a symbol into the same cell, and moves the head one step to the left or the right, or halts the computation. The choice of which replacement symbol to write, which direction to move the head, and whether to halt is based on a finite table that specifies what to do for each combination of the current state and the symbol that is read. \nAs with a real computer program, it is possible for a Turing machine to go into an infinite loop which will never halt.\nThe Turing machine was invented in 1936 by Alan Turing, who called it an \"a-machine\" (automatic machine). It was Turing's doctoral advisor, Alonzo Church, who later coined the term \"Turing machine\" in a review. With this model, Turing was able to answer two questions in the negative:\nThus by providing a mathematical description of a very simple device capable of arbitrary computations, he was able to prove properties of computation in general\u2014and in particular, the uncomputability of the \"Entscheidungsproblem\", or 'decision problem' (whether every mathematical statement is provable or disprovable).\nTuring machines proved the existence of fundamental limitations on the power of mechanical computation. \nWhile they can express arbitrary computations, their minimalist design makes them too slow for computation in practice: real-world computers are based on different designs that, unlike Turing machines, use random-access memory.\nTuring completeness is the ability for a model of computation or a system of instructions to simulate a Turing machine. A programming language that is Turing complete is theoretically capable of expressing all tasks accomplishable by computers; nearly all programming languages are Turing complete if the limitations of finite memory are ignored.\nOverview.\nA Turing machine is an idealised model of a central processing unit (CPU) that controls all data manipulation done by a computer, with the canonical machine using sequential memory to store data. Typically, the sequential memory is represented as a tape of infinite length on which the machine can perform read and write operations.\nIn the context of formal language theory, a Turing machine (automaton) is capable of enumerating some arbitrary subset of valid strings of an alphabet. A set of strings which can be enumerated in this manner is called a recursively enumerable language. The Turing machine can equivalently be defined as a model that recognises valid input strings, rather than enumerating output strings.\nGiven a Turing machine \"M\" and an arbitrary string \"s\", it is generally not possible to decide whether \"M\" will eventually produce \"s\". This is due to the fact that the halting problem is unsolvable, which has major implications for the theoretical limits of computing.\nA Turing machine that is able to simulate any other Turing machine is called a universal Turing machine (UTM, or simply a universal machine). Another mathematical formalism, lambda calculus, with a similar \"universal\" nature was introduced by Alonzo Church. Church's work intertwined with Turing's to form the basis for the Church\u2013Turing thesis. This thesis states that Turing machines, lambda calculus, and other similar formalisms of computation do indeed capture the informal notion of effective methods in logic and mathematics and thus provide a model through which one can reason about an algorithm or \"mechanical procedure\" in a mathematically precise way without being tied to any particular formalism. Studying the abstract properties of Turing machines has yielded many insights into computer science, computability theory, and complexity theory.\nPhysical description.\nIn his 1948 essay, \"Intelligent Machinery\", Turing wrote that his machine consists of:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...an unlimited memory capacity obtained in the form of an infinite tape marked out into squares, on each of which a symbol could be printed. At any moment there is one symbol in the machine; it is called the scanned symbol. The machine can alter the scanned symbol, and its behavior is in part determined by that symbol, but the symbols on the tape elsewhere do not affect the behavior of the machine. However, the tape can be moved back and forth through the machine, this being one of the elementary operations of the machine. Any symbol on the tape may therefore eventually have an innings.\u2014\u200a\nDescription.\nThe Turing machine mathematically models a machine that mechanically operates on a tape. On this tape are symbols, which the machine can read and write, one at a time, using a tape head. Operation is fully determined by a finite set of elementary instructions such as \"in state 42, if the symbol seen is 0, write a 1; if the symbol seen is 1, change into state 17; in state 17, if the symbol seen is 0, write a 1 and change to state 6;\" etc. In the original article (\"On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem\", see also ), Turing imagines not a mechanism, but a person whom he calls the \"computer\", who executes these deterministic mechanical rules slavishly (or as Turing puts it, \"in a desultory manner\").\nMore explicitly, a Turing machine consists of:\nIn the 4-tuple models, erasing or writing a symbol (aj1) and moving the head left or right (dk) are specified as separate instructions. The table tells the machine to (ia) erase or write a symbol \"or\" (ib) move the head left or right, \"and then\" (ii) assume the same or a new state as prescribed, but not both actions (ia) and (ib) in the same instruction. In some models, if there is no entry in the table for the current combination of symbol and state, then the machine will halt; other models require all entries to be filled.\nEvery part of the machine (i.e. its state, symbol-collections, and used tape at any given time) and its actions (such as printing, erasing and tape motion) is \"finite\", \"discrete\" and \"distinguishable\"; it is the unlimited amount of tape and runtime that gives it an unbounded amount of storage space.\nFormal definition.\nFollowing , a (one-tape) Turing machine can be formally defined as a 7-tuple formula_1 where\nA variant allows \"no shift\", say N, as a third element of the set of directions formula_12.\nThe 7-tuple for the 3-state busy beaver looks like this (see more about this busy beaver at Turing machine examples):\nInitially all tape cells are marked with formula_20.\nAdditional details required to visualise or implement Turing machines.\nIn the words of van Emde Boas (1990), p.\u00a06: \"The set-theoretical object [his formal seven-tuple description similar to the above] provides only partial information on how the machine will behave and what its computations will look like.\"\nFor instance,\nAlternative definitions.\nDefinitions in literature sometimes differ slightly, to make arguments or proofs easier or clearer, but this is always done in such a way that the resulting machine has the same computational power. For example, the set could be changed from formula_12 to formula_22, where \"N\" (\"None\" or \"No-operation\") would allow the machine to stay on the same tape cell instead of moving left or right. This would not increase the machine's computational power.\nThe most common convention represents each \"Turing instruction\" in a \"Turing table\" by one of nine 5-tuples, per the convention of Turing/Davis (Turing (1936) in \"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0126\u2013127 and Davis (2000) p.\u00a0152):\n (definition 1): (qi, Sj, Sk/E/N, L/R/N, qm)\n ( current state qi , symbol scanned Sj , print symbol Sk/erase E/none N , move_tape_one_square left L/right R/none N , new state qm )\nOther authors (Minsky (1967) p.\u00a0119, Hopcroft and Ullman (1979) p.\u00a0158, Stone (1972) p.\u00a09) adopt a different convention, with new state qm listed immediately after the scanned symbol Sj:\n (definition 2): (qi, Sj, qm, Sk/E/N, L/R/N)\n ( current state qi , symbol scanned Sj , new state qm , print symbol Sk/erase E/none N , move_tape_one_square left L/right R/none N )\nFor the remainder of this article \"definition 1\" (the Turing/Davis convention) will be used.\nIn the following table, Turing's original model allowed only the first three lines that he called N1, N2, N3 (cf. Turing in \"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0126). He allowed for erasure of the \"scanned square\" by naming a 0th symbol S0 = \"erase\" or \"blank\", etc. However, he did not allow for non-printing, so every instruction-line includes \"print symbol Sk\" or \"erase\" (cf. footnote 12 in Post (1947), \"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0300). The abbreviations are Turing's (\"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0119). Subsequent to Turing's original paper in 1936\u20131937, machine-models have allowed all nine possible types of five-tuples:\nAny Turing table (list of instructions) can be constructed from the above nine 5-tuples. For technical reasons, the three non-printing or \"N\" instructions (4, 5, 6) can usually be dispensed with. For examples see Turing machine examples.\nLess frequently the use of 4-tuples are encountered: these represent a further atomization of the Turing instructions (cf. Post (1947), Boolos &amp; Jeffrey (1974, 1999), Davis-Sigal-Weyuker (1994)); also see more at Post\u2013Turing machine.\nThe \"state\".\nThe word \"state\" used in context of Turing machines can be a source of confusion, as it can mean two things. Most commentators after Turing have used \"state\" to mean the name/designator of the current instruction to be performed\u2014i.e. the contents of the state register. But Turing (1936) made a strong distinction between a record of what he called the machine's \"m-configuration\", and the machine's (or person's) \"state of progress\" through the computation\u2014the current state of the total system. What Turing called \"the state formula\" includes both the current instruction and \"all\" the symbols on the tape:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Thus the state of progress of the computation at any stage is completely determined by the note of instructions and the symbols on the tape. That is, the \"state of the system\" may be described by a single expression (sequence of symbols) consisting of the symbols on the tape followed by \u0394 (which is supposed to not to appear elsewhere) and then by the note of instructions. This expression is called the \"state formula\".\u2014\u200a\nEarlier in his paper Turing carried this even further: he gives an example where he placed a symbol of the current \"m-configuration\"\u2014the instruction's label\u2014beneath the scanned square, together with all the symbols on the tape (\"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0121); this he calls \"the \"complete configuration\"\" (\"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0118). To print the \"complete configuration\" on one line, he places the state-label/m-configuration to the \"left\" of the scanned symbol.\nA variant of this is seen in Kleene (1952) where Kleene shows how to write the G\u00f6del number of a machine's \"situation\": he places the \"m-configuration\" symbol q4 over the scanned square in roughly the center of the 6 non-blank squares on the tape (see the Turing-tape figure in this article) and puts it to the \"right\" of the scanned square. But Kleene refers to \"q4\" itself as \"the machine state\" (Kleene, p.\u00a0374\u2013375). Hopcroft and Ullman call this composite the \"instantaneous description\" and follow the Turing convention of putting the \"current state\" (instruction-label, m-configuration) to the \"left\" of the scanned symbol (p.\u00a0149), that is, the instantaneous description is the composite of non-blank symbols to the left, state of the machine, the current symbol scanned by the head, and the non-blank symbols to the right.\n\"Example: total state of 3-state 2-symbol busy beaver after 3 \"moves\"\" (taken from example \"run\" in the figure below):\n 1A1\nThis means: after three moves the tape has ... 000110000 ... on it, the head is scanning the right-most 1, and the state is \"A\". Blanks (in this case represented by \"0\"s) can be part of the total state as shown here: \"B\"01; the tape has a single 1 on it, but the head is scanning the 0 (\"blank\") to its left and the state is \"B\".\n\"State\" in the context of Turing machines should be clarified as to which is being described: the current instruction, or the list of symbols on the tape together with the current instruction, or the list of symbols on the tape together with the current instruction placed to the left of the scanned symbol or to the right of the scanned symbol.\nTuring's biographer Andrew Hodges (1983: 107) has noted and discussed this confusion.\n\"State\" diagrams.\nTo the right: the above table as expressed as a \"state transition\" diagram.\nUsually large tables are better left as tables (Booth, p.\u00a074). They are more readily simulated by computer in tabular form (Booth, p.\u00a074). However, certain concepts\u2014e.g. machines with \"reset\" states and machines with repeating patterns (cf. Hill and Peterson p.\u00a0244ff)\u2014can be more readily seen when viewed as a drawing.\nWhether a drawing represents an improvement on its table must be decided by the reader for the particular context.\nThe reader should again be cautioned that such diagrams represent a snapshot of their table frozen in time, \"not\" the course (\"trajectory\") of a computation \"through\" time and space. While every time the busy beaver machine \"runs\" it will always follow the same state-trajectory, this is not true for the \"copy\" machine that can be provided with variable input \"parameters\".\nThe diagram \"progress of the computation\" shows the three-state busy beaver's \"state\" (instruction) progress through its computation from start to finish. On the far right is the Turing \"complete configuration\" (Kleene \"situation\", Hopcroft\u2013Ullman \"instantaneous description\") at each step. If the machine were to be stopped and cleared to blank both the \"state register\" and entire tape, these \"configurations\" could be used to rekindle a computation anywhere in its progress (cf. Turing (1936) \"The Undecidable\", pp.\u00a0139\u2013140).\nEquivalent models.\nMany machines that might be thought to have more computational capability than a simple universal Turing machine can be shown to have no more power (Hopcroft and Ullman p.\u00a0159, cf. Minsky (1967)). They might compute faster, perhaps, or use less memory, or their instruction set might be smaller, but they cannot compute more powerfully (i.e. more mathematical functions). (The Church\u2013Turing thesis \"hypothesises\" this to be true for any kind of machine: that anything that can be \"computed\" can be computed by some Turing machine.)\nA Turing machine is equivalent to a single-stack pushdown automaton (PDA) that has been made more flexible and concise by relaxing the last-in-first-out (LIFO) requirement of its stack. In addition, a Turing machine is also equivalent to a two-stack PDA with standard LIFO semantics, by using one stack to model the tape left of the head and the other stack for the tape to the right.\nAt the other extreme, some very simple models turn out to be Turing-equivalent, i.e. to have the same computational power as the Turing machine model.\nCommon equivalent models are the multi-tape Turing machine, multi-track Turing machine, machines with input and output, and the \"non-deterministic\" Turing machine (NDTM) as opposed to the \"deterministic\" Turing machine (DTM) for which the action table has at most one entry for each combination of symbol and state.\nRead-only, right-moving Turing machines are equivalent to DFAs (as well as NFAs by conversion using the NFA to DFA conversion algorithm).\nFor practical and didactic intentions, the equivalent register machine can be used as a usual assembly programming language.\nA relevant question is whether or not the computation model represented by concrete programming languages is Turing equivalent. While the computation of a real computer is based on finite states and thus not capable to simulate a Turing machine, programming languages themselves do not necessarily have this limitation. Kirner et al., 2009 have shown that among the general-purpose programming languages some are Turing complete while others are not. For example, ANSI C is not Turing complete, as all instantiations of ANSI C (different instantiations are possible as the standard deliberately leaves certain behaviour undefined for legacy reasons) imply a finite-space memory. This is because the size of memory reference data types, called \"pointers\", is accessible inside the language. However, other programming languages like Pascal do not have this feature, which allows them to be Turing complete in principle.\nIt is just Turing complete in principle, as memory allocation in a programming language is allowed to fail, which means the programming language can be Turing complete when ignoring failed memory allocations, but the compiled programs executable on a real computer cannot.\nChoice c-machines, oracle o-machines.\nEarly in his paper (1936) Turing makes a distinction between an \"automatic machine\"\u2014its \"motion ... completely determined by the configuration\" and a \"choice machine\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...whose motion is only partially determined by the configuration ... When such a machine reaches one of these ambiguous configurations, it cannot go on until some arbitrary choice has been made by an external operator. This would be the case if we were using machines to deal with axiomatic systems.\u2014\u200a\nTuring (1936) does not elaborate further except in a footnote in which he describes how to use an a-machine to \"find all the provable formulae of the [Hilbert] calculus\" rather than use a choice machine. He \"suppose[s] that the choices are always between two possibilities 0 and 1. Each proof will then be determined by a sequence of choices i1, i2, ..., in (i1 = 0 or 1, i2 = 0 or 1, ..., in = 0 or 1), and hence the number 2n + i12n-1 + i22n-2 + ... +in completely determines the proof. The automatic machine carries out successively proof 1, proof 2, proof 3, ...\" (Footnote \u2021, \"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0138)\nThis is indeed the technique by which a deterministic (i.e., a-) Turing machine can be used to mimic the action of a nondeterministic Turing machine; Turing solved the matter in a footnote and appears to dismiss it from further consideration.\nAn oracle machine or o-machine is a Turing a-machine that pauses its computation at state \"o\" while, to complete its calculation, it \"awaits the decision\" of \"the oracle\"\u2014an entity unspecified by Turing \"apart from saying that it cannot be a machine\" (Turing (1939), \"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0166\u2013168).\nUniversal Turing machines.\nAs Turing wrote in \"The Undecidable\", p.\u00a0128 (italics added):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is possible to invent a \"single machine\" which can be used to compute \"any\" computable sequence. If this machine U is supplied with the tape on the beginning of which is written the string of quintuples separated by semicolons of some computing machine M, then U will compute the same sequence as M.\nThis finding is now taken for granted, but at the time (1936) it was considered astonishing. The model of computation that Turing called his \"universal machine\"\u2014\"U\" for short\u2014is considered by some (cf. Davis (2000)) to have been the fundamental theoretical breakthrough that led to the notion of the stored-program computer.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Turing's paper ... contains, in essence, the invention of the modern computer and some of the programming techniques that accompanied it.\u2014\u200a\nIn terms of computational complexity, a multi-tape universal Turing machine need only be slower by logarithmic factor compared to the machines it simulates. This result was obtained in 1966 by F. C. Hennie and R. E. Stearns. (Arora and Barak, 2009, theorem 1.9)\nComparison with real machines.\nTuring machines are more powerful than some other kinds of automata, such as finite-state machines and pushdown automata. According to the Church\u2013Turing thesis, they are as powerful as real machines, and are able to execute any operation that a real program can. What is neglected in this statement is that, because a real machine can only have a finite number of \"configurations\", it is nothing but a finite-state machine, whereas a Turing machine has an unlimited amount of storage space available for its computations.\nThere are a number of ways to explain why Turing machines are useful models of real computers:\nLimitations.\nComputational complexity theory.\nA limitation of Turing machines is that they do not model the strengths of a particular arrangement well. For instance, modern stored-program computers are actually instances of a more specific form of abstract machine known as the random-access stored-program machine or RASP machine model. Like the universal Turing machine, the RASP stores its \"program\" in \"memory\" external to its finite-state machine's \"instructions\". Unlike the universal Turing machine, the RASP has an infinite number of distinguishable, numbered but unbounded \"registers\"\u2014memory \"cells\" that can contain any integer (cf. Elgot and Robinson (1964), Hartmanis (1971), and in particular Cook-Rechow (1973); references at random-access machine). The RASP's finite-state machine is equipped with the capability for indirect addressing (e.g., the contents of one register can be used as an address to specify another register); thus the RASP's \"program\" can address any register in the register-sequence. The upshot of this distinction is that there are computational optimizations that can be performed based on the memory indices, which are not possible in a general Turing machine; thus when Turing machines are used as the basis for bounding running times, a \"false lower bound\" can be proven on certain algorithms' running times (due to the false simplifying assumption of a Turing machine). An example of this is binary search, an algorithm that can be shown to perform more quickly when using the RASP model of computation rather than the Turing machine model.\nInteraction.\nIn the early days of computing, computer use was typically limited to batch processing, i.e., non-interactive tasks, each producing output data from given input data. Computability theory, which studies computability of functions from inputs to outputs, and for which Turing machines were invented, reflects this practice.\nSince the 1970s, interactive use of computers became much more common. In principle, it is possible to model this by having an external agent read from the tape and write to it at the same time as a Turing machine, but this rarely matches how interaction actually happens; therefore, when describing interactivity, alternatives such as I/O automata are usually preferred.\nComparison with the arithmetic model of computation.\nThe arithmetic model of computation differs from the Turing model in two aspects:32\nSome algorithms run in polynomial time in one model but not in the other one. For example:\nHowever, if an algorithm runs in polynomial time in the arithmetic model, and in addition, the binary length of all involved numbers is polynomial in the length of the input, then it is always polynomial-time in the Turing model. Such an algorithm is said to run in strongly polynomial time.\nHistory.\nHistorical background: computational machinery.\nRobin Gandy (1919\u20131995)\u2014a student of Alan Turing (1912\u20131954), and his lifelong friend\u2014traces the lineage of the notion of \"calculating machine\" back to Charles Babbage (circa 1834) and actually proposes \"Babbage's Thesis\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"That the whole of development and operations of analysis are now capable of being executed by machinery\".\u2014\u200a\nGandy's analysis of Babbage's analytical engine describes the following five operations (cf. p.\u00a052\u201353):\n 0 if \"y\" \u2265 \"x\".\nGandy states that \"the functions which can be calculated by (1), (2), and (4) are precisely those which are Turing computable.\" (p.\u00a053). He cites other proposals for \"universal calculating machines\" including those of Percy Ludgate (1909), Leonardo Torres Quevedo (1914), Maurice d'Ocagne (1922), Louis Couffignal (1933), Vannevar Bush (1936), Howard Aiken (1937). However:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026 the emphasis is on programming a fixed iterable sequence of arithmetical operations. The fundamental importance of conditional iteration and conditional transfer for a general theory of calculating machines is not recognized\u2026\u2014\u200a\nThe Entscheidungsproblem (the \"decision problem\"): Hilbert's tenth question of 1900.\nWith regard to Hilbert's problems posed by the famous mathematician David Hilbert in 1900, an aspect of problem #10 had been floating about for almost 30 years before it was framed precisely. Hilbert's original expression for No. 10 is as follows:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"10. Determination of the solvability of a Diophantine equation\". Given a Diophantine equation with any number of unknown quantities and with rational integral coefficients: To devise a process according to which it can be determined in a finite number of operations whether the equation is solvable in rational integers.\nThe Entscheidungsproblem [decision problem for first-order logic] is solved when we know a procedure that allows for any given logical expression to decide by finitely many operations its validity or satisfiability ... The Entscheidungsproblem must be considered the main problem of mathematical logic.\u2014\u200a\nBy 1922, this notion of \"Entscheidungsproblem\" had developed a bit, and H. Behmann stated that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;...\u00a0most general form of the Entscheidungsproblem [is] as follows:\nA quite definite generally applicable prescription is required which will allow one to decide in a finite number of steps the truth or falsity of a given purely logical assertion ...\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Behmann remarks that ... the general problem is equivalent to the problem of deciding which mathematical propositions are true.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If one were able to solve the Entscheidungsproblem then one would have a \"procedure for solving many (or even all) mathematical problems\".\u2014\u200a\nBy the 1928 international congress of mathematicians, Hilbert \"made his questions quite precise. First, was mathematics \"complete\" ... Second, was mathematics \"consistent\" ... And thirdly, was mathematics \"decidable\"?\" (Hodges p.\u00a091, Hawking p.\u00a01121). The first two questions were answered in 1930 by Kurt G\u00f6del at the very same meeting where Hilbert delivered his retirement speech (much to the chagrin of Hilbert); the third\u2014the Entscheidungsproblem\u2014had to wait until the mid-1930s.\nThe problem was that an answer first required a precise definition of \"definite general applicable prescription\", which Princeton professor Alonzo Church would come to call \"effective calculability\", and in 1928 no such definition existed. But over the next 6\u20137 years Emil Post developed his definition of a worker moving from room to room writing and erasing marks per a list of instructions (Post 1936), as did Church and his two students Stephen Kleene and J. B. Rosser by use of Church's lambda-calculus and G\u00f6del's recursion theory (1934). Church's paper (published 15 April 1936) showed that the Entscheidungsproblem was indeed \"undecidable\" and beat Turing to the punch by almost a year (Turing's paper submitted 28 May 1936, published January 1937). In the meantime, Emil Post submitted a brief paper in the fall of 1936, so Turing at least had priority over Post. While Church refereed Turing's paper, Turing had time to study Church's paper and add an Appendix where he sketched a proof that Church's lambda-calculus and his machines would compute the same functions.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But what Church had done was something rather different, and in a certain sense weaker. ... the Turing construction was more direct, and provided an argument from first principles, closing the gap in Church's demonstration.\u2014\u200a\nAnd Post had only proposed a definition of calculability and criticised Church's \"definition\", but had proved nothing.\nAlan Turing's a-machine.\nIn the spring of 1935, Turing as a young Master's student at King's College, Cambridge, took on the challenge; he had been stimulated by the lectures of the logician M. H. A. Newman \"and learned from them of G\u00f6del's work and the Entscheidungsproblem ... Newman used the word 'mechanical' ... In his obituary of Turing 1955 Newman writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;To the question 'what is a \"mechanical\" process?' Turing returned the characteristic answer 'Something that can be done by a machine' and he embarked on the highly congenial task of analysing the general notion of a computing machine.\u2014\u200a\nGandy states that:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I suppose, but do not know, that Turing, right from the start of his work, had as his goal a proof of the undecidability of the Entscheidungsproblem. He told me that the 'main idea' of the paper came to him when he was lying in Grantchester meadows in the summer of 1935. The 'main idea' might have either been his analysis of computation or his realization that there was a universal machine, and so a diagonal argument to prove unsolvability.\u2014\u200a\nWhile Gandy believed that Newman's statement above is \"misleading\", this opinion is not shared by all. Turing had a lifelong interest in machines: \"Alan had dreamt of inventing typewriters as a boy; [his mother] Mrs. Turing had a typewriter; and he could well have begun by asking himself what was meant by calling a typewriter 'mechanical'\" (Hodges p.\u00a096). While at Princeton pursuing his PhD, Turing built a Boolean-logic multiplier (see below). His PhD thesis, titled \"Systems of Logic Based on Ordinals\", contains the following definition of \"a computable function\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It was stated above that 'a function is effectively calculable if its values can be found by some purely mechanical process'. We may take this statement literally, understanding by a purely mechanical process one which could be carried out by a machine. It is possible to give a mathematical description, in a certain normal form, of the structures of these machines. The development of these ideas leads to the author's definition of a computable function, and to an identification of computability with effective calculability. It is not difficult, though somewhat laborious, to prove that these three definitions [the 3rd is the \u03bb-calculus] are equivalent.\u2014\u200a\nAlan Turing invented the \"a-machine\" (automatic machine) in 1936. Turing submitted his paper on 31 May 1936 to the London Mathematical Society for its \"Proceedings\" (cf. Hodges 1983:112), but it was published in early 1937 and offprints were available in February 1937 (cf. Hodges 1983:129) It was Turing's doctoral advisor, Alonzo Church, who later coined the term \"Turing machine\" in a review. With this model, Turing was able to answer two questions in the negative:\nThus by providing a mathematical description of a very simple device capable of arbitrary computations, he was able to prove properties of computation in general\u2014and in particular, the uncomputability of the \"Entscheidungsproblem\" ('decision problem').\nWhen Turing returned to the UK he ultimately became jointly responsible for breaking the German secret codes created by encryption machines called \"The Enigma\"; he also became involved in the design of the ACE (Automatic Computing Engine), \"[Turing's] ACE proposal was effectively self-contained, and its roots lay not in the EDVAC [the USA's initiative], but in his own universal machine\" (Hodges p.\u00a0318). Arguments still continue concerning the origin and nature of what has been named by Kleene (1952) Turing's Thesis. But what Turing \"did prove\" with his computational-machine model appears in his paper \"On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem\" (1937):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[that] the Hilbert Entscheidungsproblem can have no solution ... I propose, therefore to show that there can be no general process for determining whether a given formula U of the functional calculus K is provable, i.e. that there can be no machine which, supplied with any one U of these formulae, will eventually say whether U is provable.\u2014\u200a\nTuring's example (his second proof): If one is to ask for a general procedure to tell us: \"Does this machine ever print 0\", the question is \"undecidable\".\n1937\u20131970: The \"digital computer\", the birth of \"computer science\".\nIn 1937, while at Princeton working on his PhD thesis, Turing built a digital (Boolean-logic) multiplier from scratch, making his own electromechanical relays (Hodges p.\u00a0138). \"Alan's task was to embody the logical design of a Turing machine in a network of relay-operated switches ...\" (Hodges p.\u00a0138). While Turing might have been just initially curious and experimenting, quite-earnest work in the same direction was going in Germany (Konrad Zuse (1938)), and in the United States (Howard Aiken) and George Stibitz (1937); the fruits of their labors were used by both the Axis and Allied militaries in World War II (cf. Hodges p.\u00a0298\u2013299). In the early to mid-1950s Hao Wang and Marvin Minsky reduced the Turing machine to a simpler form (a precursor to the Post\u2013Turing machine of Martin Davis); simultaneously European researchers were reducing the new-fangled electronic computer to a computer-like theoretical object equivalent to what is now being called a \"Turing machine\". In the late 1950s and early 1960s, the coincidentally parallel developments of Melzak and Lambek (1961), Minsky (1961), and Shepherdson and Sturgis (1961) carried the European work further and reduced the Turing machine to a more friendly, computer-like abstract model called the counter machine; Elgot and Robinson (1964), Hartmanis (1971), Cook and Reckhow (1973) carried this work even further with the register machine and random-access machine models\u2014but basically all are just multi-tape Turing machines with an arithmetic-like instruction set.\n1970\u2013present: as a model of computation.\nToday, the counter, register and random-access machines and their sire the Turing machine continue to be the models of choice for theorists investigating questions in the theory of computation. In particular, computational complexity theory makes use of the Turing machine:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Depending on the objects one likes to manipulate in the computations (numbers like nonnegative integers or alphanumeric strings), two models have obtained a dominant position in machine-based complexity theory:\n\"the off-line multitape Turing machine\"..., which represents the standard model for string-oriented computation, and\nthe \"random access machine (RAM)\" as introduced by Cook and Reckhow ..., which models the idealised Von Neumann-style computer.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Only in the related area of analysis of algorithms this role is taken over by the RAM model.\u2014\u200a\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30404", "revid": "32", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30404", "title": "Trail riding", "text": "Traveling on trails and forest roads by horse, bicycle, motorcycle, or all-terrain vehicle\nTrail riding is riding outdoors on trails, bridle paths, and forest roads, but not on roads regularly used by motorised traffic. A trail ride can be of any length, including a long distance, multi-day trip. It originated with horse riding, and in North America, the equestrian form is usually called \"trail riding\", or, less often \"hacking\". In the UK and Europe, the practice is usually called horse, pony or donkey trekking.\nThe modern term also encompasses mountain biking, mixed terrain cycle touring, and the use of motorcycles and other motorized all-terrain vehicles. It may be informal activities of an individual or small group, or larger events organized by a club. Some equestrian trail rides in the USA are directed by professional guides or outfitters, particularly at guest ranches, while many equestrians who own horses trail ride on their own in local, state, and national trail systems. In some parts of the world, trail riding (of whatever kind) is limited by law to recognized, and sometimes function-specific, trails that are waymarked. in other towns, trails may be less maintained and more natural. Certain trails are limited by trail use types. Trail riding can be combined with other activities, such as camping, hunting, fishing, orienteering and backpacking.\nTypes and uses of trails.\nOften, horses under saddle are subject to the same regulations as pedestrians or hikers where those requirements differ from those for cyclists. In most states, are not classified livestock and thus restricted from areas such as the right of way of the interstate highway system, though generally permitted to travel along the side of other roadways, especially in rural areas.\nRail trails, which are redeveloped disused railways converted into multi-use trails, often provide invaluable trail riding areas in many parts of the world. A bridle path, also called a bridleway, equestrian trail, horse riding path, bridle road, or horse trail, is a trail or a thoroughfare that is used by people riding on horses, though such trails often now serve a wider range of users, including equestrians, hikers, and cyclists. Such paths are either impassable for motorized vehicles, or vehicles are banned. The laws relating to allowable uses vary from country to country.\nIn England and Wales a bridle path now refers to a route which can be legally used by horse riders in addition to walkers, and since 1968, by cyclists but not motor-cyclists. In the US, the term bridle path is used colloquially for trails or paths used primarily for people making day treks on horses, and used primarily on the east coast, whereas out west the equivalent term is simply trail. The United States has few if any formal designations for bridle paths, though horses are generally allowed on most state and federal trails, roads and public routes except where specifically restricted, although rules differ among locations.\nThere is some criticism of trail riding when excess or improper use of trails may lead to erosion, the spread of invasive plants, conflict with hikers, or harassment of wildlife. Off-road or trail activity is usually not permitted, as such activity may also raise the risk of soil erosion, spread weeds, and cause other damage. However, many responsible equestrians, mountain bikers, and off-road motorcyclists, especially those who get involved in these sports by joining an organized club, perform hours of trail maintenance every year. Many organizations also sponsor educational events to teach newcomers about safety, responsible land stewardship and how to improve riding techniques.\nEquestrian use.\nMany long-distance trails throughout the world have sections suitable for horse riding, some suitable throughout their length, and some have been developed primarily for horse riding. Within the United States National Trail Classification System, equestrian trails include simple day-use bridle paths and others built to accommodate long strings of pack animals on journeys lasting many days. Some trails managed by the U. S. Forest Service and other governmental entities may restrict access of horses, or restrict access during certain times of the year. Access to trails and pathways on private land is generally left to the discretion of the landowner, subject to the general trespass laws of each of the 50 states.\nPleasure riding.\nThe term pleasure riding may encompass trail riding. This refers to a form of equestrianism that encompasses many forms of recreational riding for personal enjoyment, without any element of competition. Pleasure riding is called \"hacking\" in United Kingdom, and in parts of the eastern United States and Canada. In other parts of the United States, particularly the Western United States, the term trail riding is used interchangeably with pleasure riding when on natural trails or public lands. African American communities in some rural parts of the Southern United States and South Central United States have a tradition of Black trail rides that often involve music, dancing, and shared meals along with horse riding.\nMany horses are suitable for pleasure riding, including grade horses and other animals of ordinary quality and good disposition. Such horses are sometimes called hacks, particularly in those areas where pleasure riding is known as hacking. In recreational trail riding, having fun and enjoying time spent in natures rather than speed and form are the goals.\nEquestrian competition.\nThere are competitive events that occur on natural trails to test the endurance or trail riding ability of a horse. The level of difficulty varies by distance, trail, and terrain. Endurance riding encompasses races of varying lengths, usually from to , where the first horse to cross the finish line and be deemed \"fit to continue\" by passing a veterinary examination is the winner. Competitive trail riding is another distance competition that differs from endurance races, as the first horse to cross the line does not necessarily win, but rather the competitors are required to finish within a minimum and a maximum time with their horse in the best condition and with additional scoring for horsemanship and care of the animal.\nThere are competitive events at horse shows, called trail classes, which test the horse and rider's ability to handle obstacles resembling those commonly found on trails, such as opening and closing gates, crossing logs, and navigating forward, backward and to the side. There are also judged trail rides, which occur on a natural trail, but assess trail-class-style points based on the ability of the horse and rider to navigate specific natural and man-made obstacles encountered along the trail.\nMountain biking.\nMountain bikes are typically ridden on mountain trails, fire roads, logging roads, and other unpaved trails. These types of terrain commonly include rocks, washouts, ruts, loose sand, loose gravel, roots, and steep slopes. Mountain bikes are built to handle this terrain and the obstacles that are found in it, like logs, vertical drop offs, and small boulders. Mountain bikes, therefore, are more sturdily constructed than regular bicycles, have larger knobby tires, more powerful brakes, and the lower gear ratios needed for steep grades with poor traction.\nTrail riding on a mountain bike can be: \nOff-road bicycle trails are generally function-specific and most commonly waymarked along their route. They may take the form of single routes or form part of larger complexes, known as trail centres. Off-road trails often incorporate a mix of challenging terrain, singletrack, smooth fireroads, and even paved paths. Trails with an easy or moderate technical complexity are generally deemed cross-country trails, while trails difficult even to experienced riders are more often dubbed all-mountain, freeride, or downhill. Downhilling is particularly popular at ski resorts such as Mammoth Mountain in California, USA or Whistler Blackcomb in British Columbia, Canada, where ski lifts are used to get bikes and riders to the top of the mountain.\nLong rides on hiking and mountain paths have some resemblance to cycle touring but the latter usually take place on tarmac. However, Mixed Terrain Cycle-Touring, nicknamed \"rough riding\" in Canada and the US and \"rough stuff\" in Europe, is a form of trail riding, because it involves cycling over a variety of surfaces and topography, on a single route, either using a mountain bike or hybrid bike. A new style of travel called adventure cycle-touring or expedition touring involves exploring remote regions of the world on sturdy bicycles carrying lightweight gear. This type of trail riding is in fact a form of backpacking.\nMount Tamalpais, California, USA, and the surrounding areas in Marin County, California are recognized as the birthplace of mountain biking. In the 1970s, mountain biking pioneers such as Gary Fisher, Otis Guy, Charlie Kelly and Joe Breeze were active. The 2006 film chronicled their story, solidifying Mount Tamalpais' legendary status as a trail riding destination.\nThere has been considerable controversy around trail access for mountain bikes, both in terms of environmental impact and the safety of other trail users. As a result, bicycles are generally restricted from narrow, single-track trails, though bicycles are allowed on most fire roads. However, mountain bikers in the United States generally have access to multi-use trails.\nIn England and Wales, bridle paths and some other rights of way, such as byways and 'Roads used as paths' (RUPP), are open to cyclists, but footpaths are not. However, in Scotland there is no legal distinction between footpaths and bridleways, and it is generally accepted that cyclists and horseriders may follow rights of way with suitable surfaces. Public rights of way are somewhat limited in Northern Ireland.\nThere are long-distance routes throughout Europe, including some through the Swiss Alps that involve crossing high Alpine passes. There are also extensive routes through France that include both steep, rocky, alpine terrain and minor country roads or off-road on a variety of surfaces, from wide forest roads to narrow, muddy woodland tracks.\nExtreme trail riding, such as Megavalanche are mountainbike downhill marathon style events combining gravity-assisted sections with those that emphasize the riders' levels of fitness, endurance, and nerve.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30408", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30408", "title": "Tin Kau", "text": ""}
{"id": "30410", "revid": "18623023", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30410", "title": "Terry Gilliam", "text": "American-British filmmaker (born 1940)\nTerrence Vance Gilliam ( ; born 22 November 1940) is an American-British filmmaker, comedian, collage animator, and actor. He gained stardom as a member of the Monty Python comedy troupe alongside John Cleese, Eric Idle, Michael Palin, Terry Jones, and Graham Chapman. Together they collaborated on the sketch series \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" (1969\u20131974) and the films \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" (1975, also co-directed), \"Life of Brian\" (1979) and \"The Meaning of Life\" (1983). In 1988, they received the BAFTA Award for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema. In 2009, Gilliam received the BAFTA Fellowship for lifetime achievement.\nGilliam transitioned to directing serious films with themes exploring imagination and oppositions to bureaucracy and authoritarianism. His films are sometimes set in dystopian worlds and involve black comedy and tragicomedic elements. He has directed thirteen feature films, gaining acclaim for \"Time Bandits\" (1981), \"Brazil\" (1985), \"The Adventures of Baron Munchausen\" (1988), \"The Fisher King\" (1991), and \"12 Monkeys\" (1995). Other directing credits include \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" (1998), \"The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus\" (2009), and \"The Man Who Killed Don Quixote\" (2018). \nGilliam started his career as an animator and strip cartoonist. He joined Monty Python as the animator of their works, but eventually became a full member and was given acting roles. The only Monty Python member not born in Britain, Gilliam became a naturalised British citizen in 1968 and formally renounced his American citizenship in 2006.\nEarly life and education.\nTerrence Vance Gilliam was born on 22 November 1940 in Minneapolis, Minnesota, the son of Beatrice (n\u00e9e Vance) and James Hall Gilliam. His father was a travelling salesman for Folgers before becoming a carpenter. Soon after, they moved to nearby Medicine Lake, Minnesota. In 1952, the family moved to the Los Angeles neighborhood of Panorama City. Gilliam attended Birmingham High School. During high school, he began to avidly read \"Mad\" magazine, then edited by Harvey Kurtzman, which would later influence Gilliam's work.\nGilliam graduated from Occidental College in 1962 with a Bachelor of Arts in political science.\nCareer.\n1965\u20131969: Animation and move to England.\nGilliam began his career as an animator and strip cartoonist. One of his early photographic strips for the US magazine \"Help!\" featured future Python cast member John Cleese. When \"Help!\" folded, Gilliam went to Europe. Moving to England, he animated sequences for the children's series \"Do Not Adjust Your Set\" which he worked on from 1968 to 1969, and which also featured Eric Idle, Terry Jones, and Michael Palin.\n1969\u20131974: Monty Python's Flying Circus.\nGilliam was a member of \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\" from its outset, credited at first as an animator (his name was listed separately after the other five in the closing credits) and later as a full member. His cartoons linked the show's sketches together and defined the group's visual language in other media, such as LP and book covers and the title sequences of their films. His animations mix his own art, characterised by soft gradients and odd, bulbous shapes, with backgrounds and moving cutouts from antique photographs, mostly from the Victorian era.\nHe also appeared in several sketches, though he rarely had main roles and did considerably less acting in the sketches. Gilliam did, however, have some notable sketch roles, such as Cardinal Fang of the Spanish Inquisition; the bespectacled commenter who said, \"I can't add anything to that!\" in the sketch \"Election Night Special\"; Kevin Garibaldi, the brat on the couch shouting \"I want more beans!\" in the sketch \"Most Awful Family in Britain 1974\" (episode 45); the Screaming Queen in a cape and mask in \"The Visitors\"; and Percy Bysshe Shelley in \"Ant Poetry Reading\". More frequently, he played parts that no one else wanted to play, generally because they required a lot of makeup or uncomfortable costumes, such as a recurring knight in armour who ended sketches by walking on and hitting one of the other characters over the head with a plucked chicken. He also designed the covers of most of the Monty Python albums, including \"Another Monty Python Record\", \"The Monty Python Matching Tie and Handkerchief\", \"Monty Python Live at Drury Lane\", and all of their later film soundtrack albums.\n1975\u20131983: Transitional years.\nIn 1975, Gilliam began his career as a director by co-directing \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" with Terry Jones. Gilliam was responsible for photography and also appeared as both Patsy and the Old Man from Scene 24, while Jones guided the actors' performances. It was the only Python film directed by Gilliam, though he continued to act in their subsequent projects.\nAs Python started to take longer breaks between projects following \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\", Gilliam became a solo filmmaker, building upon the experience he had acquired. In 1977, he directed his first film outside the group, \"Jabberwocky\", also a comedy set in the Middle Ages. It featured Python member Michael Palin in the lead role, and was based on the poem of the same name. In 1978, he published \"Animations of Mortality\", an illustrated, tongue-in-cheek, semi-autobiographical how-to guide to his animation techniques and the visual language in them.\nGilliam served as art director on \"Monty Python's Life of Brian\", Terry Jones having taken on sole directing duties. Gilliam made \"Time Bandits\" in 1981. Following directing the short film \"The Crimson Permanent Assurance\", which opened showings of \"Monty Python's The Meaning of Life\", Python effectively ceased working together, and Gilliam pursued his career as a filmmaker.\n1984\u20131998: Trilogies and critical success.\nThe \"Trilogy of Imagination\", written by Gilliam, about \"the ages of man\", consisted of \"Time Bandits\" (1981), \"Brazil\" (1985), and \"The Adventures of Baron Munchausen\" (1988). All are about the \"craziness of our awkwardly ordered society and the desire to escape it through whatever means possible.\" All three films focus on these struggles and attempts to escape them through imagination: \"Time Bandits\" through the eyes of a child, \"Brazil\" through the eyes of a man in his thirties, and \"Munchausen\" through the eyes of an elderly man. In the summer of 1986, he cut ties with Arnon Milchan and 20th Century Fox and started directing \"Munchausen\" through his own new Prominent Films banner independently.\nIn the 1990s, Gilliam directed a trilogy of Americana: \"The Fisher King\" (1991), \"12 Monkeys\" (1995), and \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" (1998), which took place on North American soil and, while still surreal, had fewer fantastical plots than his previous trilogy.\n1999\u20132009.\nIn 1999, Gilliam attempted to film \"The Man Who Killed Don Quixote\", which was budgeted at US$32.1\u00a0million, making it among the highest-budgeted films to use only European financing; but in the first week of shooting, the actor playing Don Quixote (Jean Rochefort) suffered a herniated disc, and a flood severely damaged the set. The film was cancelled, resulting in an insurance claim of US$15\u00a0million. Despite the cancellation, the aborted project did yield the 2002 documentary \"Lost in La Mancha\", produced from film from a second crew that had been hired by Gilliam to document the making of \"Quixote\". After the cancellation, both Gilliam and the film's co-lead, Johnny Depp, wanted to revive the project. The insurance company involved in the failed first attempt withheld the rights to the screenplay for several years with the production on hold until 2008.\nFollowing the failure of \"The Man Who Killed Don Quixote\", J. K. Rowling, the author of the \"Harry Potter\" series and a fan of Gilliam's work, advocated for him to direct \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" in 2000, but Warner Bros. ultimately chose Chris Columbus for the job.\nIn 2002, Gilliam directed a series of television advertisements called \"Secret Tournament\". Part of Nike's 2002 FIFA World Cup campaign, the advertisements feature a secret three-on-three tournament between the world's best football players, including Ronaldo, Ronaldinho and Thierry Henry, who are inside a huge tanker ship. The advertisements are accompanied with a remixed version of the Elvis Presley song \"A Little Less Conversation\".\nIn 2005, Gilliam released \"The Brothers Grimm\", followed later in the year by \"Tideland\". In 2006, Gilliam made his debut as theatre director by directing the stage show \"Slava's Diabolo\", created and staged by the Russian clown artist Slava Polunin. The show combined Polunin's clown style, characterised by deep nonverbal expression and interaction with the audience, with Gilliam's rich visuals and surrealistic imagery. The show premiered at the Noga Hall of the Gesher Theatre in Jaffa, Tel Aviv, Israel.\nIn January 2007, Gilliam announced that he had been working on a new project with his writing partner Charles McKeown. One day later, the fansite \"Dreams\" reported that the new project was titled \"The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus\"; the following October, \"Dreams\" confirmed that this would be Gilliam's next project and was slated to star Christopher Plummer and Tom Waits. Production began in December 2007 in London. On 22 January 2008, production of the film was disrupted following the death of Heath Ledger in New York City. \"Variety\" reported that Ledger's involvement had been a \"key factor\" in the film's financing. Production was suspended indefinitely by 24 January, but in February the actors Johnny Depp, Jude Law, and Colin Farrell signed on to continue Ledger's role, transforming into multiple incarnations of his character in the \"magical\" world of the film. Thanks to this arrangement the principal photography was completed on 15 April 2008, on schedule. During the filming, Gilliam was accidentally hit by a bus and suffered a broken back. The film had successful screenings including a premiere at the 62nd Cannes Film Festival. The UK release for the film was scheduled for 6 June 2009, but was pushed back to 16 October 2009. The USA release was on 25 December 2009. Eventually, this $30\u00a0million-budgeted film had grossed more than $60\u00a0million in worldwide theatrical release and received two Academy Award nominations. The film's end credit states that the film is dedicated to the memories of Ledger and William Vince. Depp, Farrell, and Law donated their proceeds from the film to Ledger's daughter.\n2010\u20132019.\nGilliam made his opera debut at London's English National Opera (ENO) in May 2011, directing \"The Damnation of Faust\", by Hector Berlioz. On 16 September 2012, the production opened at the Vlaamse Opera in Ghent, Belgium, in the opera's original French-language version and received praise from critics and audiences alike. After a number of performances in Ghent, the production moved to the opera house in Antwerp for a sold-out run of performances.\nIn July 2012, Gilliam revealed plans for a film which would be shot in Bucharest, Romania. He denied that it would be \"Don Quixote\" but refused to give any further details. On 13 August 2012, this project was announced to be \"The Zero Theorem\", set to start shooting in Bucharest on 22 October, produced by Dean Zanuck (son of the late Richard D. Zanuck, who was originally to produce the film in 2009), with worldwide sales handled by Voltage Pictures, Toronto, and starring the Academy Award\u2013winner Christoph Waltz in the lead (replacing Billy Bob Thornton, who had been attached to the project in 2009). \"The Zero Theorem\" premiered at the 70th Venice International Film Festival on 2 September 2013.\nIn June 2014, Gilliam followed up on his success with \"Faust\" with a new ENO production of another opera by Berlioz, the rarely performed \"Benvenuto Cellini\".\nAfter regaining the rights to the screenplay of \"The Man Who Killed Don Quixote\", Gilliam restarted preproduction in 2008, with Johnny Depp still attached to the project. The film was to be reshot completely, with Rochefort's role recast. Michael Palin reportedly entered into talks with Gilliam about stepping in for Rochefort and playing Don Quixote. However, Gilliam revealed on the Canadian talk show \"The Hour\" on 17 December 2009 that Robert Duvall had been cast to play Quixote, before the film was postponed once again. In January 2014, Gilliam wrote on Facebook that \"Dreams of Don Quixote have begun again\". At the Cannes Film Festival in 2016, it was confirmed that \"The Man Who Killed Don Quixote\" was going to be made, with Michael Palin and Adam Driver in starring roles. In March 2017, filming finally began, with Driver and Jonathan Pryce starring. On 4 June 2017, Gilliam announced that the shooting of the film was complete. The film premiered on 19 May 2018, as the closing film of the 2018 Cannes Film Festival (where it received a standing ovation), and was released in French theatres the same day.\n2020\u2013present.\nHis production of \"Into the Woods\", which he co-directed with Leah Hausman, premiered at the Theatre Royal, Bath in August 2022 to positive reviews.\nIn June 2024, Gilliam announced the making of a new film called \"Carnival: At the End of Days\". It was to star Depp, reuniting with Gilliam, along with Bridges, Driver, and Jason Momoa. Production was reported to begin in April 2025 according to Gilliam. Johnny Depp was to play Satan, and Jeff Bridges was to play God in the film. In an interview in July of 2025 Gilliam stated that if the film was ever to be made it would require an extensive rewrite, as it no longer fit with the current world. In an October 2025 interview at the 58th Sitges Film Festival, Gilliam announced that he has shifted his focus away from \"Carnival: At the End of Days\" to resurrect his long dormant project \"The Defective Detective\", as he is \"more interested in a script I wrote thirty years ago for Paramount. There are new people at the studio now, and I have a new agent in Hollywood, and I'm trying to move the project forward. I'd like to direct it before I die. It's called \"The Defective Detective\" and it should be my last film.\"\nOther projects.\nIn addition to film projects as director, Gilliam has been involved with developing projects for other artists and mediums. On 16 December 2010, \"Variety\" reported that Gilliam was to \"godfather\" a film called \"1884\", described as an animated steampunk parody of George Orwell's \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", with several former Pythons lending their voices to the project; Gilliam was to be credited as \"creative advisor\". On 15 May 2013, Gilliam was signed on to executive produce \"The White Circus\", a \"dark fairy tale\" adventure-romance that was to star Chlo\u00eb Grace Moretz, Asa Butterfield, Andrea Riseborough and Christian Friedel.\nFifteen years after the publication of Gilliam's \"Animations of Mortality\", between the release of the CD-ROM game \"Monty Python's Complete Waste of Time\" in 1994, which used many of Gilliam's animation templates, and the making of Gilliam's film \"Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas\" (1998), Gilliam was in negotiations with Enteractive, a software company, to tentatively release in the autumn of 1996 a CD-ROM under the same title as his 1978 book, containing all of his thousands of 1970s animation templates as licence-free clip arts for people to create their own flash animations, but the project hovered in limbo for years, probably because Enteractive was about to downsize greatly in mid-1996 and changed its focus from CD-ROM multimedia presentations to internet business solutions and web hosting in 1997 (in the introduction to their 2004 book \"Terry Gilliam: Interviews\", David Sterrit and Lucille Rhodes claimed that the internet had overwhelmed the \"computer-communications market\" and gave this as the reason that the \"Animations of Mortality\" CD-ROM never materialised). Around the time of Gilliam's film \"The Imaginarium of Doctor Parnassus\" (2009), the project had changed into the idea of releasing his 1970s animation templates as a licence-free download of Adobe After Effects or similar files.\nPersonal life.\nGilliam has been married to British makeup artist Maggie Weston since 1973. She worked on \"Monty Python's Flying Circus\", many of the Python films, and Gilliam's films up to \"The Adventures of Baron Munchausen\". They have three children: Amy Rainbow (born 1978), Holly Dubois (born October 1980), and Harry Thunder (born 3 April 1988), all of whom have also appeared in or worked on several of his films.\nIn 1968, Gilliam obtained British citizenship. He held dual American and British citizenship for the next 38 years, until he renounced his American citizenship in January 2006. In an interview with \"Der Tagesspiegel\", he described the action as a protest against then-President George W. Bush, and in an earlier interview with \"The A.V. Club\", he also indicated that it was related to concerns about future tax liability for his wife and children. As a result of renouncing his citizenship, Gilliam was permitted to spend 30 days each year in the United States over the next ten years, \"less than any European\". Holly followed suit, renouncing her American citizenship in 2017.\nHe maintains a residence in Italy near the Umbria\u2013Tuscany border. He has been instrumental in establishing the annual Umbria Film Festival, held in the nearby town of Montone. Gilliam also resides in Highgate, London.\nControversy.\nGilliam has been covered several times for his views on transgender people and cancel culture. He also called #MeToo a \"witch hunt\". He also said, \"There are many victims in Harvey's life, and I feel sympathy for them, but then, Hollywood is full of very ambitious people who are adults and they make choices.\"\nGilliam has said multiple times that he \"identifies\" as a black person. He also states he is a \"black lesbian in transition\". His views on whether or not this is a joke or sincere belief are ambiguous, sometimes even in the same interview. He said \"When I do interviews I'm playing around, talking, joking. I'm not on a soapbox, I'm not trying to proclaim a truth, just throwing out ideas. You say something and it's a headline and then... boom! How do we bring back context and nuance into the discussion?\" Reacting to the concept of diversity in comedy, he said \"... this is bullshit. I no longer want to be a white male, I don't want to be blamed for everything wrong in the world: I tell the world now I'm a black lesbian... My name is Loretta and I'm a BLT, a black lesbian in transition.\" He later said \"That all comes from \"Life of Brian,\" when Eric [Idle's character], whose name is Stan, says \"I want you to call me Loretta. I want to be a woman.\" People now might take offense at that. And when offense becomes so easy, it takes the fun out of offending!\"\nHe blames the group Stonewall for his view which was reported by \"The Times\" as \"organisations and politicians feeling under pressure to put trans inclusivity above concerns for women.\" Describing the BBC and government departments cutting some ties with Stonewall, he said \"Maybe common sense is rising again.\"\nGilliam expressed support when a UK ex-police officer won a legal challenge regarding alleged transphobic tweets the officer made. He stated \"if you don't agree with [activists], you're then a transphobe, a homophobe... No! I'm a phobe-phobe! I hate hate!\"\nIn 2021, his production of \"Into the Woods\" was set to play at The Old Vic. The production was cancelled and moved to an unrelated theater, the Theatre Royal. This was reportedly due to \"staff unrest at ... Gilliam's involvement\". Gilliam was reportedly asked to apologize for his #MeToo comments, but \"further offended staff\" with his online recommendation of Dave Chappelle's Netflix special. The Old Vic said in a statement \"Ahead of any season announcement, senior management at the Old Vic would meet with the directors who are programmed to work in the season as a matter of course to discuss our culture and values. This happened with the co-directors of \"Into the Woods\", Terry Gilliam and Leah Hausman.\"\nGilliam stated on Facebook \"The Old Vic allowed itself to be intimidated into cancelling our production ... by a small group of closed-minded, humour-averse ideologues on their staff ... as if they are victims of some cruel injustice desperately fighting for their freedom! My unspeakable crime was recommending my Facebook followers to watch a Netflix special by a brilliant and provocative American comedian\". Gilliam later specified that Chappelle was the \"comedian\" he recommended.\nCharitable activities.\nGilliam has been involved with a number of charitable and humanitarian causes. In 2009, he became a board member of Videre Est Credere (Latin for \"to see is to believe\"), a UK human rights charity. Videre describes itself as giving \"local activists the equipment, training and support needed to safely capture compelling video evidence of human rights violations. This captured footage is verified, analysed and then distributed to those who can create change.\" He participates alongside movie producer Uri Fruchtmann, music producer Brian Eno and executive director of Greenpeace UK John Sauven.\nHonours and accolades.\nDirected Academy Award performances.\nUnder Gilliam's direction, these actors have received Academy Award nominations (and one win) for their performances in their respective roles.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30411", "revid": "2051880", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30411", "title": "Tetromino", "text": "Four squares connected edge-to-edge\nA tetromino is a geometric shape composed of four squares, connected orthogonally (i.e. at the edges and not the corners). Tetrominoes, like dominoes and pentominoes, are a particular type of polyomino. The corresponding polycube, called a tetracube, is a geometric shape composed of four cubes connected orthogonally.\nA popular use of tetrominoes is in the video game \"Tetris\" created by the Soviet game designer Alexey Pajitnov, which refers to them as tetriminos. The tetrominoes used in the game are specifically the one-sided tetrominoes.\nTypes of tetrominoes.\nFree tetrominoes.\nPolyominos are formed by joining unit squares along their edges. A free polyomino is a polyomino considered up to congruence. That is, two free polyominos are the same if there is a combination of translations, rotations, and reflections that turns one into the other. A free tetromino is a free polyomino made from four squares. There are five free tetrominoes.\nThe free tetrominoes have the following symmetry:\nOne-sided tetrominoes.\nOne-sided tetrominoes are tetrominoes that may be translated and rotated but not reflected. They are used by, and are overwhelmingly associated with, \"Tetris\". There are seven distinct one-sided tetrominoes. These tetrominoes are named by the letter of the alphabet they most closely resemble. The \"I\", \"O\", and \"T\" tetrominoes have reflectional symmetry, so it does not matter whether they are considered as free tetrominoes or one-sided tetrominoes. The remaining four tetrominoes, \"J\", \"L\", \"S\", and \"Z\", exhibit a phenomenon called chirality. J and L are reflections of each other, and S and Z are reflections of each other.\nAs free tetrominoes, J is equivalent to L, and S is equivalent to Z, but in two dimensions and without reflections, it is not possible to transform J into L or S into Z.\nFixed tetrominoes.\nThe fixed tetrominoes allow only translation, not rotation or reflection. There are two distinct fixed I-tetrominoes, four J, four L, one O, two S, four T, and two Z, for a total of 19 fixed tetrominoes.\nTiling a rectangle.\nFilling a rectangle with one set of tetrominoes.\nA single set of free tetrominoes or one-sided tetrominoes cannot fit in a rectangle. This can be shown with a proof similar to the mutilated chessboard argument. A 5\u00d74 rectangle with a checkerboard pattern has 20 squares, containing 10 light squares and 10 dark squares, but a complete set of free tetrominoes has either 11 dark squares and 9 light squares, or 11 light squares and 9 dark squares. This is due to the T tetromino having either 3 dark squares and one light square, or 3 light squares and one dark square, while all other tetrominoes each have 2 dark squares and 2 light squares. Similarly, a 7\u00d74 rectangle has 28 squares, containing 14 squares of each shade, but the set of one-sided tetrominoes has either 15 dark squares and 13 light squares, or 15 light squares and 13 dark squares. By extension, any odd number of sets for either type cannot fit in a rectangle. Additionally, the 19 fixed tetrominoes cannot fit in a 4\u00d719 rectangle. This was discovered by exhausting all possibilities in a computer search.\nParity.\nA further consequence of the T tetromino having 3 squares of one colour and 1 square of the other is that any rectangle containing an even number of squares must contain an even number of T tetrominoes. Conversely, any rectangles containing an odd number of squares must contain an odd number of T tetrominoes.\nFilling a modified rectangle with one set of tetrominoes.\nAll three sets of tetrominoes can fit rectangles with holes: \nFilling a rectangle with two sets of tetrominoes.\nTwo sets of free or one-sided tetrominoes can fit into a rectangle in different ways, as shown below:\nEtymology.\nThe name \"tetromino\" is a combination of the prefix \"tetra-\" 'four' (from Ancient Greek ), and \"domino\". The name was introduced by Solomon W. Golomb in 1953 along with other nomenclature related to polyominos.\nFilling a box with tetracubes.\nEach of the five free tetrominoes has a corresponding tetracube, which is the tetromino extruded by one unit.\nJ and L are the same tetracube, as are S and Z, because one may be rotated around an axis parallel to the tetromino's plane to form the other. Three more tetracubes are possible, all created by placing a unit cube on the bent tricube:\nThe tetracubes can be packed into two-layer 3D boxes in several different ways, based on the dimensions of the box and criteria for inclusion. They are shown in both a pictorial diagram and a text diagram. For boxes using two sets of the same pieces, the pictorial diagram depicts each set as a lighter or darker shade of the same color. The text diagram depicts each set as having a capital or lower-case letter. In the text diagram, the top layer is on the left, and the bottom layer is on the right.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30417", "revid": "3241634", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30417", "title": "List of highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada", "text": "The following is a list of the highest-grossing films in the United States and Canada, a market known as the North American box office or, in the United States film industry, the domestic box office.\nNot adjusted for inflation.\nThis is a list of the highest-grossing films in the U.S. and Canada in US dollars, ranked by lifetime gross. This ranking does not adjust for inflation. \nThe list also includes the initial gross without adjustments.\nThe list also includes the lifetime gross with adjustment for inflation based on the U.S. Consumer Price Index.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 \"Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing in theaters around the world\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;* These films fall outside the top 100 when considering only initial gross, and would be replaced by ' ($316.83m) and ' ($315.05m).\nAdjusted for ticket-price inflation.\nThis is a list of films ranked by ticket sales with adjustments for changes in ticket prices and/or inflation\nFor movies released 2019 and earlier: Box Office Mojo tracks average ticket prices at theaters from 1910 to 2020. The list here starts with their \"Adj. Lifetime Gross\" based on 2020 ticket prices, and then applies to further adjust to the equivalent in 2024.\nFor movies released 2020 and later: This list starts with the film's lifetime gross, and then applies as if the entire lifetime gross was earned in the year of release, to further adjust to the equivalent in 2024.\nMany of the films on this list were released prior to the availability of home video and have had multiple releases.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 \"Background shading indicates films playing in the week commencing in theaters around the world\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;TExcluding figures from the 2025 re-release. \nFactors in determining \"adjusted gross\".\nNo one yet has calculated a truly precise and definite referential adjusted gross for a film, since doing so would have to take into account most (or all) of the following:\nFurther explanation of issues with calculating an adjusted gross can be found in the article for List of highest-grossing films.\nFranchises and film series not adjusted for inflation.\nThis is a list of highest-grossing franchises and film series in the U.S. and Canada.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 \"Background shading indicates that at least one film in the series is playing in the week commencing in theaters around the world\".\nFranchises and film series adjusted for inflation.\nThis chart ranks films by gross adjusted for ticket price inflation up to 2020 levels, based on data from Box Office Mojo, and applying the for the following years up to 2024 levels, due to the lack of updates on the original source.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\u00a0\u2020 \"Background shading indicates that at least one film in the series is playing in the week commencing in theaters around the world\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30418", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30418", "title": "The Marriage of Figaro", "text": "1786 opera by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart\nThe Marriage of Figaro (, ), K.\u00a0492, is a \"commedia per musica\" (opera buffa) in four acts composed in 1786 by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, with an Italian libretto written by Lorenzo Da Ponte. It premiered at the Burgtheater in Vienna on 1 May 1786. The opera's libretto is based on the 1784 stage comedy by Beaumarchais, \"La folle journ\u00e9e, ou le Mariage de Figaro\" (\"The Mad Day, or The Marriage of Figaro\"). It tells how the servants Figaro and Susanna succeed in getting married, foiling the efforts of their philandering employer Count Almaviva to seduce Susanna and teaching him a lesson in fidelity.\nConsidered one of the greatest operas ever written, it is a cornerstone of the repertoire and appears consistently among the top ten in the Operabase list of most frequently performed operas. In 2017, BBC News Magazine asked 172 opera singers to vote for the best operas ever written. \"The Marriage of Figaro\" came in first out of the 20 operas featured, with the magazine describing it as being \"one of the supreme masterpieces of operatic comedy, whose rich sense of humanity shines out of Mozart's miraculous score\".\nComposition history.\nBeaumarchais's earlier play \"The Barber of Seville\" had already made a successful transition to opera in a version by Paisiello. Beaumarchais's \"Mariage de Figaro\", with its frank treatment of class conflict, was at first banned in Vienna: Emperor Joseph II stated that \"since the piece contains much that is objectionable, I therefore expect that the Censor shall either reject it altogether, or at any rate have such alterations made in it that he shall be responsible for the performance of this play and for the impression it may make\", after which the Austrian Censor duly forbade performing the German version of the play. Mozart's librettist Lorenzo Da Ponte managed to get official approval from the emperor for an operatic version, which eventually achieved great success.\nThe opera was the first of three collaborations between Mozart and Da Ponte, followed by \"Don Giovanni\" and \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\". It was Mozart who originally selected Beaumarchais's play and brought it to Da Ponte, who turned it into a libretto in six weeks, rewriting it in poetic Italian and removing all of the original's political references. In particular, Da Ponte replaced Figaro's climactic speech against inherited nobility with an equally angry aria against unfaithful wives. The libretto was approved by the Emperor before any music was written by Mozart.\nThe Imperial Italian opera company paid Mozart 450 florins for the work; this was three times his meagre yearly salary when he had worked as a court musician in Salzburg. Da Ponte was paid 200 florins.\nRoles.\nThe voice types that appear in this table are those listed in the critical edition published in the \"Neue Mozart-Ausgabe\". In modern performance practice, Cherubino and Marcellina are usually assigned to mezzo-sopranos, and Figaro to a bass-baritone.\nInstrumentation.\n\"The Marriage of Figaro\" is scored for two flutes, two oboes, two clarinets, two bassoons, two horns, two clarini, timpani, and strings; the \"recitativi secchi\" are accompanied by a keyboard instrument, usually a fortepiano or a harpsichord, often joined by a cello. The instrumentation of the \"recitativi secchi\" is not given in the score, so it is up to the conductor and the performers. A typical performance lasts around three hours.\nSynopsis.\n\"The Marriage of Figaro\" continues the plot of \"The Barber of Seville\" several years later, and recounts a single \"day of madness\" () in the palace of Count Almaviva near Seville, Spain. Rosina is now the countess. Dr. Bartolo is seeking revenge against Figaro for thwarting his plans to marry Rosina himself, and Count Almaviva has degenerated from the romantic youth of \"Barber\", (a tenor in Paisiello's 1782 opera), into a scheming, bullying, skirt-chasing baritone. Having gratefully given Figaro a job as head of his servant-staff, he is now persistently trying to exercise his \"droit du seigneur\" \u2013 his right to bed a servant girl on her wedding night \u2013 with Figaro's bride-to-be, Susanna, who is the countess's maid. He keeps finding excuses to delay the civil part of the wedding of his two servants, which is arranged for this very day. Figaro, Susanna, and the countess conspire to embarrass the count and expose his scheming. He retaliates by trying to compel Figaro legally to marry a woman old enough to be his mother, but it turns out at the last minute that she really is his mother. Through the clever manipulations of Susanna and the countess, Figaro and Susanna are finally able to marry.\nPlace: Count Almaviva's estate, Aguas-Frescas, three leagues outside Seville, Spain.\nOverture.\nThe overture is in the key of D major; the tempo marking is \"presto\"; i.e. quick. The work is well known and often played independently as a concert piece.\nAct 1.\n\"A partly furnished room, with a chair in the centre.\"\nFigaro happily measures the space where the bridal bed will fit while Susanna tries on her wedding bonnet (which she has sewn herself) in front of a mirror. (Duet: \"\" \u2013 \"Five, ten, twenty\"). Figaro is quite pleased with their new room; Susanna far less so (Duettino: \"\" \u2013 \"If the countess should call you during the night\"). She is bothered by its proximity to the count's chambers: it seems he has been making advances toward her and plans on exercising his \"droit du seigneur\", the feudal right of a lord to bed a servant girl on her wedding night before her husband can sleep with her. The count had the right abolished when he married Rosina, but he now wants to reinstate it. The countess rings for Susanna and she rushes off to answer. Figaro, confident in his own resourcefulness, resolves to outwit the count (Cavatina: \"Se vuol ballare, signor contino\" \u2013 \"If you want to dance, Sir Count\").\nFigaro departs, and Dr. Bartolo arrives with Marcellina, his old housekeeper. Figaro had previously borrowed a large sum of money from her, and in lieu of collateral, had promised to marry her if unable to repay at the appointed time; she now intends to enforce that promise by suing him. Bartolo, seeking revenge against Figaro for having facilitated the union of the count and Rosina (in \"The Barber of Seville\"), agrees to represent Marcellina \"pro bono\", and assures her, in comical lawyer-speak, that he can win the case for her (aria: \"\" \u2013 \"Vengeance\").\nBartolo departs, Susanna returns, and Marcellina and Susanna exchange very politely delivered sarcastic insults (duet: \"\" \u2013 \"After you, brilliant madam\"). Susanna triumphs in the exchange by congratulating her rival on her impressive age. The older woman departs in a fury.\nCherubino then arrives and after describing his emerging infatuation with all women, particularly with his \"beautiful godmother\" the countess, (aria: \"\" \u2013 \"I don't know anymore what I am\") asks for Susanna's aid with the count. It seems the count is angry with Cherubino's amorous ways, having discovered him with the gardener's daughter, Barbarina, and plans to punish him. Cherubino wants Susanna to ask the countess to intercede on his behalf. When the count appears, Cherubino hides behind a chair, not wanting to be seen alone with Susanna. The count uses the opportunity of finding Susanna alone to step up his demands for favours from her, and offers to pay money if she will submit to him. As Basilio, the music teacher, arrives, the count, not wanting to be caught alone with Susanna, hides behind the chair. Cherubino leaves that hiding place just in time, and jumps onto the chair while Susanna scrambles to cover him with a dress.\nWhen Basilio starts to gossip about Cherubino's obvious attraction to the countess, the count angrily leaps from his hiding place (terzetto: \"\" \u2013 \"What do I hear!\"). He disparages the \"absent\" page's incessant flirting and describes how he caught him with Barbarina under the kitchen table. As he lifts the dress from the chair to illustrate how he had lifted the tablecloth to find Cherubino with Barbarina, he finds the very same Cherubino in the hiding spot. The count is furious, but is reminded that the page overheard the count's advances on Susanna, information that the count wants to keep from the countess. The young man is ultimately saved from punishment by the entrance of the peasants of the count's estate, a preemptive attempt by Figaro to make the count commit to a formal gesture symbolising his promise that Susanna would enter into the marriage unsullied. The count evades Figaro's plan by postponing the gesture. The count says that he forgives Cherubino, but he dispatches him to his own regiment in Seville for army duty, effective immediately. Figaro gives Cherubino mocking advice about his new, harsh, military life from which all luxury, and especially women, will be totally excluded (aria: \"Non pi\u00f9 andrai\" \u2013 \"No more gallivanting\").\nAct 2.\n\"A handsome room with an alcove, a dressing room on the left, a door in the background (leading to the servants' quarters) and a window at the side.\"\nThe countess laments her husband's infidelity (aria: \"Porgi, amor, qualche ristoro\" \u2013 \"Grant, love, some comfort\"). Susanna comes in to prepare the countess for the day. She responds to the countess's questions by telling her that the count is not trying to seduce her; he is merely offering her a monetary contract in return for her affection. Figaro enters and explains his plan to distract the count with anonymous letters warning him of adulterers. He has already sent one to the count (via Basilio) indicating that the countess has a rendezvous of her own that evening. They hope that the count will be too busy looking for imaginary adulterers to interfere with Figaro and Susanna's wedding. Figaro additionally advises the countess to keep Cherubino around. She should dress him up as a girl and lure the count into an illicit rendezvous where he can be caught and embarrassed. Figaro leaves.\nCherubino arrives, sent in by Figaro. Susanna urges him to sing the song he wrote for the countess (aria: \"Voi che sapete che cosa \u00e8 amor\" \u2013 \"You ladies who know what love is, is it what I'm suffering from?\"). After the song, the countess, seeing Cherubino's military commission, notices that the count was in such a hurry that he forgot to seal it with his signet ring (thus omitting to make it an official document).\nSusanna and the countess then begin with their plan. Susanna takes off Cherubino's cloak, and she begins to comb his hair and teach him to behave and walk like a woman (aria of Susanna: \"Venite, inginocchiatevi\" \u2013 \"Come, kneel down before me\"). Then she leaves the room through a door at the back to get the dress for Cherubino, taking his cloak with her.\nWhile the countess and Cherubino are waiting for Susanna to come back, they suddenly hear the count arriving. Cherubino quickly hides in the closet and locks the door. The countess reluctantly lets the count into her room. The count hears a noise from the closet. The countess tells him that Susanna is in the closet and that she cannot come out because she is trying on her wedding dress. At this moment, Susanna re-enters from another room, quickly realises what is going on, and hides before anyone can see her (Trio: \"Susanna, or via, sortite\" \u2013 \"Susanna, come out!\"). The count shouts through the closet door for her to identify herself by her voice, but the countess orders her to be silent. Furious and suspicious, the count leaves with the countess, in search of tools to force the closet door open. As they leave, he locks all the bedroom doors to prevent the intruder from escaping. Cherubino and Susanna emerge from their hiding places, and Cherubino escapes by jumping through the window into the garden. Susanna then takes Cherubino's place in the closet, vowing to make the count look foolish (duet: \"Aprite, presto, aprite\" \u2013 \"Open the door, quickly!\").\nThe count and countess return. The countess, thinking herself trapped, desperately admits that Cherubino is hidden in the closet. The enraged count draws his sword, promising to kill Cherubino on the spot, but when the closet door is opened, to their astonishment, they find only Susanna (Finale: \"Esci omai, garzon malnato\" \u2013 \"Come out of there, you ill-born boy!\"). The count demands an explanation; the countess tells him it is a practical joke to test his trust in her. Shamed by his own jealousy, the count pleads for forgiveness. When the count presses about the anonymous letter, Susanna and the countess reveal that the letter was written by Figaro, and then delivered by Basilio. Figaro then arrives and tries to start the wedding festivities, but the count berates him with questions about the anonymous note. Just as the count is starting to run out of questions, Antonio the gardener arrives, complaining that a man has jumped out of the window and damaged his carnations while running away. Antonio adds that he tentatively identified the running man as Cherubino, but Figaro claims it was he himself who jumped out of the window, and pretends to have injured his foot while landing. Figaro, Susanna, and the countess attempt to discredit Antonio as a chronic drunkard whose constant inebriation makes him unreliable and prone to fantasy, but Antonio brings forward a paper, which, he says, was dropped by the escaping man. The count orders Figaro to prove he was the jumper by identifying the paper (which is, in fact, Cherubino's appointment to the army). Figaro is at a loss, but Susanna and the countess manage to signal the correct answers, and Figaro triumphantly identifies the document. His victory is, however, short-lived: Marcellina, Bartolo, and Basilio enter, bringing charges against Figaro and demanding that he honour his contract to marry Marcellina, since he cannot repay her loan. The count happily postpones the wedding in order to investigate the charge.\nAct 3.\n\"A rich hall, with two thrones, prepared for the wedding ceremony.\"\nThe count mulls over the confusing situation. At the urging of the countess, Susanna enters and gives a false promise to meet the count later that night in the garden (duet: \"Crudel! perch\u00e8 finora\" \u2013 \"Cruel girl, why did you make me wait so long\"). As Susanna leaves, the count overhears her telling Figaro that he has already won the case. Realising that he is being tricked (recitative and aria: \"Hai gi\u00e0 vinta la causa! ... Vedr\u00f2, mentr'io sospiro\" \u2013 \"You've already won the case!\" ... \"Shall I, while sighing, see\"), he resolves to punish Figaro by forcing him to marry Marcellina.\nFigaro's hearing follows, and the count's judgement is that Figaro must marry Marcellina. Figaro argues that he cannot get married without his parents' permission, and that he does not know who his parents are, because he was stolen from them when he was a baby. The ensuing discussion reveals that Figaro is Raffaello, the long-lost illegitimate son of Bartolo and Marcellina. A touching scene of reconciliation occurs. During the celebrations, Susanna enters with a payment to release Figaro from his debt to Marcellina. Seeing Figaro and Marcellina in celebration together, Susanna mistakenly believes that Figaro now prefers Marcellina to her. She has a tantrum and slaps Figaro's face. Marcellina explains, and Susanna, realising her mistake, joins the celebration. Bartolo, overcome with emotion, agrees to marry Marcellina that evening in a double wedding (sextet: \"Riconosci in questo amplesso\" \u2013 \"Recognise in this embrace\").\nAll leave before Barbarina, Antonio's daughter, invites Cherubino back to her house so they can disguise him as a girl. The countess, alone, ponders the loss of her happiness (aria: \"Dove sono i bei momenti\" \u2013 \"Where are they, the beautiful moments\"). Meanwhile, Antonio informs the count that Cherubino is not in Seville, but in fact at his house. Susanna enters and explains to her mistress the plan to trap the count. The countess dictates a love letter for Susanna to send to the count, which suggests that he meet her (Susanna) that night, \"under the pines\". The letter instructs the count to return the pin that fastens the letter (duet: \"Sull'aria ... che soave zeffiretto\" \u2013 \"On the breeze... What a gentle little zephyr\").\nA chorus of young peasants, among them Cherubino disguised as a girl, arrives to serenade the countess. The count arrives with Antonio and discovering the page, is enraged. His anger is quickly dispelled by Barbarina, who publicly recalls that he had once offered to give her anything she wanted in exchange for certain favours, and asks for Cherubino's hand in marriage. Thoroughly embarrassed, the count allows Cherubino to stay.\nThe act closes with the double wedding, during the course of which Susanna delivers her letter to the count (Finale: \"Ecco la marcia\" \u2013 \"Here is the procession\"). Figaro watches the count prick his finger on the pin, and laughs, unaware that the love-note is an invitation for the count to tryst with Figaro's own bride Susanna. As the curtain drops, the two newlywed couples rejoice.\nAct 4.\n\"The garden, with two pavilions. Night.\"\nFollowing the directions in the letter, the count has sent the pin back to Susanna, giving it to Barbarina. However, Barbarina has lost it (aria: \"L'ho perduta, me meschina\" \u2013 \"I have lost it, poor me\"). Figaro and Marcellina see Barbarina, and Figaro asks her what she is doing. When he hears the pin is Susanna's, he is overcome with jealousy, especially as he recognises the pin as the one that fastened the letter to the count. Thinking that Susanna is meeting the count behind his back, Figaro complains to his mother, and swears to be avenged on the count and Susanna, and on all unfaithful wives. Marcellina urges caution, but Figaro will not listen. Figaro rushes off, and Marcellina resolves to inform Susanna of Figaro's intentions. Marcellina sings an aria lamenting that male and female wild beasts get along with each other, but rational humans cannot (aria: \"Il capro e la capretta\" \u2013 \"The billy-goat and the she-goat\"). (This aria and the subsequent aria of Basilio are mostly not performed; however, some recordings include them.)\nMotivated by jealousy, Figaro tells Bartolo and Basilio to come to his aid when he gives the signal. Basilio comments on Figaro's foolishness and claims he was once as frivolous as Figaro was. He tells a tale of how he was given common sense by \"Donna Flemma\" (\"Dame Prudence\") and learned the importance of not crossing powerful people, (aria: \"In quegli anni\" \u2013 \"In those years\"). They exit, leaving Figaro alone. Figaro muses bitterly on the inconstancy of women (recitative and aria: \"Tutto \u00e8 disposto ... Aprite un po' quegli occhi\" \u2013 \"Everything is ready ... Open those eyes a little\"). Susanna and the countess arrive, each dressed in the other's clothes. Marcellina is with them, having informed Susanna of Figaro's suspicions and plans. After they discuss the plan, Marcellina and the countess leave, and Susanna teases Figaro by singing a love song to her beloved within Figaro's hearing (aria: \"Deh vieni non tardar\" \u2013 \"Oh come, don't delay\"). Figaro is hiding behind a bush and, thinking the song is for the count, becomes increasingly jealous.\nThe countess arrives in Susanna's dress. Cherubino shows up and starts teasing \"Susanna\" (really the countess), endangering the plan. (Finale: \"Pian pianin le andr\u00f2 pi\u00f9 presso\" \u2013 \"Softly, softly I'll approach her\"). The count strikes out in the dark at Cherubino, but his punch hits Figaro and Cherubino runs off.\nThe count now begins making earnest love to \"Susanna\" (really the countess), and gives her a jewelled ring. They go offstage together, where the countess dodges him, hiding in the dark. Onstage, meanwhile, the real Susanna enters, wearing the countess's clothes. Figaro mistakes her for the real countess, and starts to tell her of the count's intentions, but suddenly he recognises his bride in disguise. He plays along with the joke by pretending to be in love with \"my lady\", and inviting her to make love right then and there. Susanna, fooled, loses her temper and slaps him many times. Figaro finally lets on that he has recognised Susanna's voice, and they make peace, resolving to conclude the comedy together (\"Pace, pace, mio dolce tesoro\" \u2013 \"Peace, peace, my sweet treasure\").\nThe count, unable to find \"Susanna\", enters frustrated. Figaro gets his attention by loudly declaring his love for \"the countess\" (really Susanna). The enraged count calls for his people and for weapons: his servant is seducing his wife. (Ultima scena: \"Gente, gente, all'armi, all'armi\" \u2013 \"Gentlemen, to arms!\") Bartolo, Basilio and Antonio enter with torches as, one by one, the count drags out Cherubino, Barbarina, Marcellina and the \"Countess\" from behind the pavilion.\nAll beg him to forgive Figaro and the \"Countess\", but he loudly refuses, repeating \"no\" at the top of his voice, until finally the real countess re-enters and reveals her true identity. The count, seeing the ring he had given her, realises that the supposed Susanna he was trying to seduce was actually his wife. He kneels and pleads for forgiveness, (\"Contessa perdono!\" \u2013 \"Countess, forgive me!\"). The countess replies that she does forgive him (\"Pi\u00f9 docile io sono e dico di s\u00ec\" \u2013 \"I am kinder [than you], and I say yes\"). Everyone declares that they will be happy with this (\"A tutti contenti saremo cosi\"), and set out to celebrate.\nMusical numbers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFrequently omitted numbers.\nTwo arias from act 4 are often omitted: one in which Marcellina regrets that people (unlike goats, sheep, or wild beasts) abuse their mates (); and one in which Don Basilio tells how he saved himself from several dangers in his youth by using the skin of a donkey for shelter and camouflage ().\nMozart wrote two replacement arias for Susanna when the role was taken over by Adriana Ferrarese in the 1789 revival. The replacement arias, \"Un moto di gioia\" (replacing \"Venite, inginocchiatevi\" in act 2) and \"Al desio di chi t'adora\" (replacing \"Deh vieni non tardar\" in act 4), in which the two clarinets are replaced with basset horns, are normally not used in modern performances. A notable exception was a series of performances at the Metropolitan Opera in 1998 with Cecilia Bartoli as Susanna.\nPerformance history.\n\"Figaro\" premiered at the Burgtheater in Vienna on 1 May 1786, with a cast listed in the \"Roles\" section below. Mozart himself conducted the first two performances, conducting seated at the keyboard, the custom of the day. Later performances were conducted by Joseph Weigl. The first production was given eight further performances, all in 1786.\nAlthough the total of nine performances was nothing like the frequency of performance of Mozart's later success, \"The Magic Flute\", which for months was performed roughly every other day, the premiere is generally judged to have been a success. The applause of the audience on the first night resulted in five numbers being encored, seven on 8 May. Emperor Joseph, in charge of the Burgtheater, was concerned by the length of the performance and directed his aide Count Orsini\u2013Rosenberg as follows:\nTo prevent the excessive duration of operas, without however prejudicing the fame often sought by opera singers from the repetition of vocal pieces, I deem the enclosed notice to the public (that no piece for more than a single voice is to be repeated) to be the most reasonable expedient. You will therefore cause some posters to this effect to be printed.\nThe requested posters were printed up and posted in the Burgtheater in time for the third performance on 24 May.\nThe newspaper \"Wiener Realzeitung\" carried a review of the opera in its issue of 11 July 1786. It alludes to interference probably produced by paid hecklers, but praises the work warmly:\nMozart's music was generally admired by connoisseurs already at the first performance, if I except only those whose self-love and conceit will not allow them to find merit in anything not written by themselves.\nThe \"public\", however ... did not really know on the first day where it stood. It heard many a \"bravo\" from unbiased connoisseurs, but obstreperous louts in the uppermost storey exerted their hired lungs with all their might to deafen singers and audience alike with their \"St!\" and \"Pst\"; and consequently opinions were divided at the end of the piece.\nApart from that, it is true that the first performance was none of the best, owing to the difficulties of the composition.\nBut now, after several performances, one would be subscribing either to the \"cabal\" or to \"tastelessness\" if one were to maintain that Herr \"Mozart's\" music is anything but a masterpiece of art.\nIt contains so many beauties, and such a wealth of ideas, as can be drawn only from the source of innate genius.\nThe Hungarian poet Ferenc Kazinczy was in the audience for a May performance, and later remembered the powerful impression the work made on him:\n[Nancy] Storace [see below], the beautiful singer, enchanted eye, ear, and soul. \u2013 Mozart conducted the orchestra, playing his fortepiano; but the joy which this music causes is so far removed from all sensuality that one cannot speak of it. Where could words be found that are worthy to describe such joy?\nJoseph Haydn appreciated the opera greatly, writing to a friend that he heard it in his dreams. In summer 1790 Haydn attempted to produce the work with his own company at Eszterh\u00e1za, but was prevented from doing so by the death of his patron, Nikolaus Esterh\u00e1zy.\nOther early performances.\nThe Emperor requested a special performance at his palace theatre in Laxenburg, which took place in June 1786.\nThe opera was produced in Prague starting in December 1786 by the Pasquale Bondini company. This production was a tremendous success; the newspaper \"Prager Oberpostamtszeitung\" called the work \"a masterpiece\", and said \"no piece (for everyone here asserts) has ever caused such a sensation.\" Local music lovers paid for Mozart to visit Prague and hear the production; he listened on 17 January 1787, and conducted it himself on the 22nd. The success of the Prague production led to the commissioning of the next Mozart/Da Ponte opera, \"Don Giovanni\", premiered in Prague in 1787 (see Mozart and Prague).\nThe work was not performed in Vienna during 1787 or 1788, but starting in 1789 there was a revival production. For this occasion Mozart replaced both arias of Susanna with new compositions, better suited to the voice of Adriana Ferrarese del Bene who took the role. To replace \" he wrote \" \u2013 \"[come and fly] To the desire of [the one] who adores you\" (K.\u00a0577) in July 1789, and to replace \" he wrote \" \u2013 \"A joyous emotion\", (K.\u00a0579), probably in mid-1790.\nCritical discussion.\nLorenzo Da Ponte wrote a preface to the first published version of the libretto, in which he boldly claimed that he and Mozart had created a new form of music drama:\nIn spite ... of every effort ... to be brief, the opera will not be one of the shortest to have appeared on our stage, for which we hope sufficient excuse will be found in the variety of threads from which the action of this play \"[i.e. Beaumarchais's]\" is woven, the vastness and grandeur of the same, the multiplicity of the musical numbers that had to be made in order not to leave the actors too long unemployed, to diminish the vexation and monotony of long recitatives, and to express with varied colours the various emotions that occur, but above all in our desire to offer as it were a new kind of spectacle to a public of so refined a taste and understanding.\nCharles Rosen, in \"The Classical Style\", proposes to take Da Ponte's words quite seriously, noting the \"richness of the ensemble writing\", which carries forward the action in a far more dramatic way than recitatives would. Rosen also suggests that the musical language of the classical style was adapted by Mozart to convey the drama; many sections of the opera resemble sonata form. By movement through a sequence of keys, they build up and resolve musical tension, providing a natural musical reflection of the drama. As Rosen writes:\nThe synthesis of accelerating complexity and symmetrical resolution which was at the heart of Mozart's style enabled him to find a musical equivalent for the great stage works which were his dramatic models. \"The Marriage of Figaro\" in Mozart's version is the dramatic equal, and in many respects the superior, of Beaumarchais's work.\nThis is demonstrated in the closing numbers of all four acts: as the drama escalates, Mozart eschews \"recitativi\" altogether and opts for increasingly sophisticated writing, bringing his characters on stage, revelling in a complex weave of solo and ensemble singing in multiple combinations, and climaxing in seven- and eight-voice tutti for acts 2 and 4. The finale of act 2, lasting 20 minutes, is one of the longest uninterrupted pieces of music Mozart ever wrote. Eight of the opera's 11 characters appear on stage in its more than 900 bars of continuous music.\nMozart uses the sound of two horns playing together to represent cuckoldry in the act 4 aria \"\". Verdi later used the same device in Ford's aria in \"Falstaff\".\nJohannes Brahms said \"In my opinion, each number in \"Figaro\" is a miracle; it is totally beyond me how anyone could create anything so perfect; nothing like it was ever done again, not even by Beethoven.\"\nOther uses of the melodies.\nA musical phrase from the act 1 trio of \"The Marriage of Figaro\" (where Basilio sings \"\") was later reused by Mozart in the overture to his opera \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\". Mozart also quotes Figaro's aria \"Non pi\u00f9 andrai\" in the second act of his opera \"Don Giovanni\". Further, Mozart used it in 1791 in his Five Contredanses, K.\u00a0609, No.\u00a01. Mozart reused the music of the \"Agnus Dei\" of his earlier (\"Coronation Mass\") for the countess's \"\", in C major instead of the original F major. Mozart also reused the motif that begins his early bassoon concerto in another aria sung by the countess, \"Porgi, amor\". Beethoven wrote , WoO 40, for violin and piano on Figaro's cavatina. Ferdinand Ries used music from the opera in his , Op. 77. Moscheles used the duettino \"Crudel! perch\u00e8 finora\" in his for piano, Op. 72/4. Johann Nepomuk Hummel quoted it in his , Op. 124. Franz Liszt quoted the opera in his \"Fantasy on Themes from Mozart's Figaro and Don Giovanni\" S. 697.\nIn 1819, Henry R. Bishop wrote an adaptation of the opera in English, translating from Beaumarchais's play and re-using some of Mozart's music, while adding some of his own.\nIn his 1991 opera, \"The Ghosts of Versailles\", which includes elements of Beaumarchais's third \"Figaro\" play (\"La M\u00e8re coupable\") and in which the main characters of \"The Marriage of Figaro\" also appear, John Corigliano quotes Mozart's opera, especially the overture, several times.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "30423", "revid": "46085058", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30423", "title": "The Clash", "text": "English punk rock band\nThe Clash were an English rock band formed in London in 1976. Billed as \"The Only Band That Matters\", they are considered one of the most influential acts in the original wave of British punk rock, with their music fusing elements of reggae, dub, funk, ska, and rockabilly. The band also contributed to the post-punk and new wave movements that followed. For most of their recording career, the Clash consisted of lead vocalist and rhythm guitarist Joe Strummer, lead guitarist and vocalist Mick Jones, bassist Paul Simonon, and drummer Nicky \"Topper\" Headon.\nThe Clash achieved critical and commercial success in the United Kingdom with the release of their debut album \"The Clash\" (1977) and their second album \"Give 'Em Enough Rope\" (1978). Their experimental third album \"London Calling\", which was released in the UK in December 1979, earned them popularity in the United States, where it was released the following month. A decade later, \"Rolling Stone\" named \"London Calling\" the best album of the 1980s. Following continued musical experimentation on their fourth album \"Sandinista!\" (1980), the band achieved further commercial success with the release of \"Combat Rock\" (1982), which includes the US top-10 hit \"Rock the Casbah\", helping the album to achieve a 2\u00d7 platinum certification there.\nIn 1982, Headon left the band due to internal friction surrounding his increasing heroin addiction, and Jones departed the following year. With a new lineup, the band released their final album \"Cut the Crap\" in 1985 before disbanding a few weeks later.\nIn January 2003, shortly after the death of Joe Strummer, the band, including original drummer Terry Chimes, were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked the Clash number 28 on its list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\".\nHistory.\nOrigins: 1974\u20131976.\nBefore the Clash's founding, the band's future members were active in different parts of the London music scene. Joe Strummer, whose real name was John Graham Mellor, sang and played rhythm guitar in the pub rock band The 101ers, which he had formed in 1974 with Alvaro Pe\u00f1a-Rojas. Mellor later abandoned his original stage name \"Woody\" Mellor in favour of \"Joe Strummer\", a reference to his rudimentary strumming skills on the ukulele while he was a busker in the London Underground.\nMick Jones played guitar in protopunk band London SS and rehearsed for much of 1975, but never played a live show and recorded only one demo. London SS were managed by Bernard Rhodes, an associate of impresario Malcolm McLaren and a friend of the members of the Sex Pistols, whom McLaren managed. Jones and his bandmates became friendly with Sex Pistols members Glen Matlock and Steve Jones, who helped them as they auditioned potential new members. Bassist Paul Simonon and drummer Terry Chimes auditioned for London SS but were rejected, and Nicky Headon drummed with the band for a week then quit.\nAfter London SS broke up in early 1976, Rhodes continued as Jones' manager. In February, Jones saw the Sex Pistols perform for the first time and commented: \"You knew straight away that was it, and this was what it was going to be like from now on. It was a new scene, new values\u2014so different from what had happened before. A bit dangerous.\" In March of that year, at the instigation of Rhodes, Jones contacted Simonon and suggested he learn an instrument so he could join the new band Jones was organising. Soon Jones, Simonon on bass, Keith Levene on guitar and \"whoever we could find really to play the drums\" were rehearsing. Chimes was asked to audition for the new band and was accepted but quit soon after.\nThe band were still searching for a lead singer. According to Chimes, Billy Watts, who \"seemed to be, like, nineteen or eighteen then, as we all were\", handled the duties for a time. Rhodes was watching Strummer, with whom he made exploratory contact; both Jones and Levene had seen Strummer perform and were impressed. In April, Strummer saw the Sex Pistols open for one of his band's gigs. Strummer later said:\nI knew something was up, so I went out in the crowd which was fairly sparse. And I saw the future\u2014with a snotty handkerchief\u2014right in front of me. It was immediately clear. Pub rock was, \"Hello, you bunch of drunks, I'm gonna play these boogies and I hope you like them.\" The Pistols came out that Tuesday evening and their attitude was, \"Here's our tunes, and we couldn't give a flying fuck whether you like them or not. In fact, we're gonna play them even if you fucking hate them.\"\nOn 30 May, Rhodes and Levene approached Strummer after a 101ers gig and invited him to meet up at the band's rehearsal location on Davis Road. After Strummer turned up, Levene played \"Keys to Your Heart\", one of Strummer's own tunes. Rhodes gave Strummer 48 hours to decide whether to join the new band that would \"rival the Pistols\". Within 24 hours, he agreed. Simonon later said: \"Once we had Joe on board it all started to come together\". Strummer introduced the band to his school friend Pablo LaBritain, who sat in on drums during Strummer's first few rehearsals with the band. LaBritain left the band shortly after and joined 999. Terry Chimes, whom Jones later referred to as \"one of the best drummers\" in their circle, became the band's regular drummer.\nIn \"Westway to the World\", Jones said: \"I don't think Terry was officially hired or anything. He had just been playing with us.\" Chimes did not like Strummer at first, saying: \"He was like twenty-two or twenty-three or something that seemed 'old' to me then. And he had these retro clothes and this croaky voice.\" Simonon thought of the band's name; they had briefly named themselves the Weak Heartdrops and the Psychotic Negatives. According to Simonon: \"It really came to my head when I started reading the newspapers and a word that kept recurring was the word 'clash', so I thought 'the Clash, what about that' to the others. And they and Bernard, they went for it.\"\nEarly gigs and the growing scene: 1976.\nAfter rehearsing with Strummer for less than a month, the Clash made their debut performance on 4 July 1976, supporting the Sex Pistols at the Black Swan nightclub in Sheffield. The Clash wanted to appear on stage before their rivals The Damned, another London SS spinoff, made their own scheduled debut two days later. The Clash did not play in front of another audience for five weeks. Levene was becoming disaffected with his position in the group. At the Black Swan, he approached the Sex Pistols' lead singer John Lydon, whose stage name was Johnny Rotten, and suggested they form a band together if the Pistols broke up.\nHours after their debut, the Clash, most of the Sex Pistols and much of London's \"inner circle\" of punks attended a performance by New York City's leading punk rock band the Ramones at Dingwalls; according to Strummer: \"It can't be stressed how great the first Ramones album was to the scene\u00a0... It was the first word of Punk, a fantastic record\". Afterwards \"came the first example of the rivalry-induced squabbling that was to dog the punk scene and undermine any attempts to promote a spirit of unity among the bands involved\". Simonon fought with J.J. Burnel, the bass player of The Stranglers, a slightly older band who were publicly identified with the punk scene but were not part of the \"inner circle\", which centered on the Sex Pistols.\nRhodes insisted the Clash should not perform live again until they were much tighter so they intensely rehearsed the following month. According to Strummer, the band devoted themselves to creating a distinct identity, saying:The day I joined The Clash was very much back to square one, year zero. Part of Punk was that you had to shed all of what you knew before. We were almost Stalinist in the way that you had to shed all your friends, or everything that you'd known, or every way that you'd played before.\nStrummer and Jones shared most of the writing duties; according to Jones: \"Joe would give me the words and I would make a song out of them\". The band sometimes met in the office over their Camden Town rehearsal studio. According to Strummer: \"Bernie [Rhodes] would say, 'An issue, an issue. Don't write about love, write about what's affecting you, what's important.\" Jones later said: \"Bernie had a hand in everything. Not the lyrics\u2014he didn't help with the lyrics. He didn't tell us not to write love songs, as the myth goes\u2014that's kind of simplified version of it. He told us to write what we knew about\".\nStrummer performed lead vocals on the majority of songs but he and Jones sometimes shared the lead. Once the band began recording, Jones rarely had a solo lead on more than one song per album, though he was responsible for two of the group's biggest hits. On 13 August 1976, the Clash, wearing paint-spattered \"Jackson Pollock\" outfits, played in their Camden studio before a small, invitation-only audience, which included \"Sounds\" magazine critic Giovanni Dadamo, whose review described the band as a \"runaway train\u00a0... so powerful, they're the first new group to come along who can really scare the Sex Pistols shitless\".\nOn 29 August, the Clash and Manchester's Buzzcocks opened for the Sex Pistols at The Screen on the Green; it was the Clash's first public performance since 4 July. The triple-bill show is seen as pivotal to the consolidation of the British punk scene into a movement; \"New Musical Express\" reviewer Charles Shaar Murray wrote: \"The Clash are the sort of garage band that should be speedily returned to the garage, preferably with the motor still running\". Strummer later credited Murray's comments with inspiring the Clash's song \"Garageland\".\nIn early September, Levene was fired from the Clash. According to Strummer, Levene's dwindling interest in the band was due to his use of speed, a point Levene denied. On 21 September 1976, the Clash performed publicly for the first time without Levene at the 100 Club Punk Special, sharing the bill with the Sex Pistols, Siouxsie and the Banshees and Subway Sect. Chimes left in late November; he was briefly replaced by Rob Harper as the Clash toured in support of the Sex Pistols during December's Anarchy Tour.\nThe Clash promoted a left-wing message in their songs and interviews, and sang about social problems, such as career opportunities, unemployment, and the need for a backlash against racism and oppression. Joe Strummer said in 1976: \"We're anti-fascist, we're anti-violence, we're anti-racist and we're pro-creative\". Strummer also said: \"I don't believe in all that anarchy bollocks!\" According to the Clash guitarist Mick Jones: \"The important thing is to encourage people to do things for themselves, think for themselves and stand up for what their rights are\".\nA confrontation between Black youth and police at the 1976 Notting Hill Carnival was important in the development of the Clash's political stance and inspired Joe Strummer to write \"White Riot\". Images of the riots were used as The Clash's stage backdrop and as the back cover of their first album, and was reprinted on badges and Clash t-shirts.\nPunk breakthrough and UK fame: 1977\u20131979.\nBy January 1977, punk had become a major media phenomenon in the UK; according to \"New Musical Express\" (NME): \"1977 is the year of The Clash\". On 25 January, the band signed to CBS Records for \u00a3100,000, a remarkable amount for a band who had played about thirty gigs and very few headlining shows. Clash historian Marcus Gray said: \"the band members found themselves having to justify [the deal] to both the music press and to fans who picked up on the critics' muttered asides about the Clash having 'sold out' to the establishment\". Mark Perry, founder of the leading London punk periodical \"Sniffin' Glue\" wrote: \"Punk died the day the Clash signed to CBS\", but recanted when he first heard the single \"White Riot\", saying: \"They're the most important group in the world at the moment. I believe in them completely. All I said about them is crap.\" According to one of the band's associates the deal \"was later used as a classic example of the kind of contract that no group should ever sign\u2014the group had to pay for their own tours, recordings, remixes, artwork, expenses\u00a0...\" According to Strummer in March 1977:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Signing that contract did bother me a lot. I've been turning it over in my mind, but now I've come to terms with it. I've realised that all it boils down to is perhaps two-year's security\u00a0... Before, all I could think about was my stomach\u00a0... Now I feel free to think\u2014and free to write down what I'm thinking about\u00a0... And look\u2014I've been fucked about for so long I'm not going to suddenly turn into Rod Stewart just because I get \u00a325.00 a week. I'm much too far gone for that, I tell you.\nMickey Foote, who worked as a technician at the band's concerts, was hired to produce their debut album, and Terry Chimes was drafted back for the recording. The band's first single \"White Riot\" was released in March and peaked at number 34 in the UK Singles Chart. The album \"The Clash\" was released the following month and peaked at number 12 on the UK Albums Chart; with lyrics criticising the ruling establishment, bosses and the police and addressing themes such as alienation and boredom.\n\"The Clash\" presaged the band's future works with their cover of the reggae song \"Police and Thieves\". The band had been influenced by the subject matter, slogans and lyrics of reggae, which they often played in rehearsals but recording \"Police and Thieves\" was an important step that was only taken after a lot of discussion within the group.\nAccording to music journalist and former punk musician John Robb: \"Amidst the Sex Pistols' inertia in the first half of 1977, the Clash found themselves as the flag-wavers of the punk rock consciousness\". Though \"The Clash\" quickly rose to number 12 in the UK, CBS refused to give it a US release, believing that its raw, barely produced sound would make it unmarketable there. A North American version of the album with a modified track listing was released in the US in 1979 after the UK release had become the US's best-selling import album of the year.\nChimes, whose career aspirations owed little to the punk ethos, left the band again soon after the recording sessions. He later said: \"The point was I wanted one kind of life and they wanted another and, like, why are we working together, if we want completely different things?\" As a result, only Simonon, Jones and Strummer are featured on the album's cover, and Chimes was credited as \"Tory Crimes\". Strummer later said: \"We must have tried every drummer that then had a kit. I mean every drummer in London. I think we counted 205. And that's why we were lost until we found Topper Headon.\" Simonon nicknamed Headon, who had briefly played with Jones's band London SS, \"Topper\" because he felt Headon resembled Mickey the Monkey, a character in the comic \"Topper\". Headon could also play piano, bass and guitar. The day after he signed to the band, Headon said: \"I really wanted to join the Clash. I want to give them even more energy than they've got\u2014if that's possible\"; in an interview over twenty years later, he said his original plan was to stay briefly, gain a name for himself, and then move on to a better gig. Strummer later said: \"Finding someone who not only had the chops, but the strength and the stamina to do it was just the breakthrough for us\".\nIn May, the Clash set out on the White Riot Tour, headlining a punk package that included Buzzcocks, the Jam, Subway Sect, the Slits and the Prefects. The day after a Newcastle gig, Strummer and Headon were arrested for stealing pillowcases from their hotel room. The highlight of the tour was the Rainbow Theatre in London on 9 May; it was the first time The Clash had played a major music venue. The audience began ripping up seats and the gig turned into a riot. \"The Sun\" reported the violence with the front-page headline \"Punk Wreck\". \"New Musical Express\", while expressing serious concerns over the violence, said: \"The Clash are probably the best band in the country right now\". Strummer commented: \"That was the night punk broke\u00a0... we were in the right place doing the right thing at the right time\".\nThat same month, CBS released \"Remote Control\" as \"The Clash\"'s second single, defying the wishes of the band, who saw it as one of the album's weakest tracks. Headon's first recording with the band was the single \"Complete Control\", which addresses the band's anger at their record label's behaviour. It was co-produced by reggae artist Lee \"Scratch\" Perry, though Foote was summoned to \"ground things\". The single was released in September 1977 and \"NME\" commented that CBS had allowed the group to \"bait their masters\". The single peaked at number 28 on the UK chart and has been cited as one of punk's greatest singles.\nIn October 1977, the Clash set out on the \"Out of Control\" UK tour. The tour was due to open at the Ulster Hall, Belfast but the insurance was pulled and the gig was cancelled at the last moment. This led to punks blocking the road outside the venue and a confrontation between the punks and the police, which became known as the \"Battle of Bedford Street\".\nIn February 1978, the Clash released the single \"Clash City Rockers\"; and played the song live, along with \"Tommy Gun\", on BBC television's youth show \"Something Else\". On 30 April, the Clash played at Rock Against Racism in Victoria Park, London. Late 1970s England had seen an increase in racist attacks and a growth in support for the far-right political party The National Front. Also on the bill were X-Ray Spex, Steel Pulse, Misty in Roots, and headliners Tom Robinson Band; they played to 100,000 people, who marched through London and attended the RAR Carnival.\nIn June, the band released \"(White Man) In Hammersmith Palais\" as a single, which peaked at number 32 in the UK Singles chart; it quickly became a favourite with Clash fans and was voted single of the year in the 1978 \"NME\" Readers' Poll.\nBefore the Clash began recording their second album, CBS requested they adopt a cleaner sound than its predecessor to reach American audiences. Sandy Pearlman, who is known for his work with Blue \u00d6yster Cult, was hired to produce the record. Simonon later said: \"[R]ecording that album was just the most boring situation ever. It was just so nitpicking, such a contrast to the first album\u00a0... it ruined any spontaneity.\" Strummer said: \"it wasn't our easiest session\". The band dismissed their manager Bernie Rhodes and hired journalist Caroline Coon to replace him.\nThe album \"Give 'Em Enough Rope\" was released in early November 1978, and received mixed reviews in the UK music press, where some reviewers complained about its relatively mainstream production style. The album reached number 2 in the UK album chart. \"NME\" readers voted \"Give 'Em Enough Rope\" the second-best album of 1978 and the Clash were voted the best group in the same end-of-year poll. In the US, the album peaked at number 128 on the \"Billboard\" chart.\n\"Tommy Gun\", the album's first UK single, peaked at number 19, the highest chart position for a Clash single to date. To accompany the single, the band produced their first official music video, in which Joe Strummer wears an H Block T-shirt in support of the campaign for political status for Irish Republican prisoners. The band embarked on a North American tour, culminating in a performance at the Palladium in New York City.\n\"English Civil War\", which warned against the rise of the far-right in the UK, was released as the album's second single in February 1979, reaching number 25 in the UK Singles Chart. The B-side is a cover of the Toots and the Maytals' song \"Pressure Drop\", once again illustrating the group's reggae influences.\nIn support of the album, the Clash toured the UK supported by the Slits and the Innocents. The tour, which consisted of more than thirty shows, was promoted as the Sort It Out Tour. The band later undertook their first, largely successful tour of North America in February 1979.\nIn June 1979, the band released the Extended Play (EP) \"The Cost of Living\", which includes a cover of Bobby Fuller's song \"I Fought the Law\", two original songs and a re-recording of \"Capital Radio\". The EP reached 22 in the UK charts and the band dismissed Coon as their manager. They then embarked on a second tour of the US, adding Mick Gallagher on keyboards.\nChanging style and US breakthrough: 1979\u20131982.\nIn August and September 1979, The Clash recorded the double album \"London Calling\", which Guy Stevens, a former A&amp;R executive who had worked with Mott the Hoople and Traffic, produced. The double album was a mix of punk rock, reggae, ska, rockabilly and traditional rock and roll. It is regarded as one of the greatest rock albums ever recorded. In the US, the single \"Train in Vain\" became their first top-40 hit, peaking at number 23 on the \"Billboard\" chart. In the UK, the title track was released as a single and peaked at number 11\u2014the highest position any Clash single reached in the UK before the band's break-up.\n\"London Calling\" was released in December 1979; it peaked at number 9 on the British album chart and at number 27 in the United States, where it was issued in January 1980. The album's cover photograph by Pennie Smith became one of the most-recognisable images and \"Q\" magazine later cited it as the \"best rock 'n roll photograph of all time\". During this period, The Clash began to be regularly billed as \"The Only Band That Matters\". Musician Gary Lucas, who was employed by CBS Records' creative services department, has said he coined the tagline. Fans and journalists soon widely adopted the epithet.\nAt the end of 1979, the band members attended a private screening of a new film called \"Rude Boy\", which is part fiction and tells the story of a Clash fan who leaves his job in a Soho sex shop to become a roadie for the group. The movie, which was named after the rude boy subculture, includes footage of the band on tour, at a London Rock Against Racism concert, and in the studio recording \"Give 'Em Enough Rope\". The band were disenchanted with the film so they had Better Badges make badges that said: \"I don't want RUDE BOY Clash Film\". On 27 February 1980, the film premiered at the 30th Berlin International Film Festival, where it won an honourable mention.\nThe Clash had planned to record and release a single every month in 1980. CBS dismissed this idea and the band released only one single\u2014an original reggae song called \"Bankrobber\", in August. It featured Mikey Dread and reached number 12 in the UK Singles Chart. In October, the band's US record company released a B-side compilation EP called \"Black Market Clash\", which was later re-released in expanded form as a full-length album.\nIn December 1980, The Clash released the 36-song triple album \"Sandinista!\", which again reflected a broad range of musical styles. It was produced by the band members with further participation of Mikey Dread. \"Sandinista!\" proved to be controversial, both politically and musically. Critical opinions were divided; \"Trouser Press\" writer Ira Robbins described half of the album as \"great\" and the other half as \"nonsense\" and worse, while \"New Rolling Stone Record Guide\" critic Dave Marsh said: \"\"Sandinista!\" is nonsensically cluttered. Or rather \"seems\" nonsensically cluttered. One of the Clash's principal concerns\u00a0... is to avoid being stereotyped.\" The album sold reasonably well in the US, where it charted at number 24. In the UK, the album peaked at number 19 and the single \"The Call Up\" charted at number 40. In January 1980, Rhodes was reinstated as the band's manager and the single \"Hitsville UK\" reached number 54 in the UK Singles Chart while \"The Magnificent Seven\" charted at number 34, and the band spent most of the year touring.\nIn December 1981, the Clash released \"This Is Radio Clash\" as a single; it charted at number 47 in the UK Singles Chart. In September 1981, the band began work on their fifth album \"Combat Rock\", which Glyn Johns produced and was released in May 1982. In the UK, the first single \"Know Your Rights\" reached number 43. The lead single in the US was \"Should I Stay or Should I Go\", which was released in June 1982 and received significant airplay on Album-oriented rock (AOR) stations. The follow-up single \"Rock the Casbah\" was composed by Headon, who performed the percussion, piano and bass on the track. It became the band's biggest US hit, charting at number eight while the album reached number two in the UK and number seven in the US.\nDisintegration and break up: 1982\u20131986.\nAfter the release of \"Combat Rock\", the Clash began to disintegrate. In May 1982, Headon was asked to leave the band because his addiction caused reliability problems. Chimes was brought back to drum for the next few months. The band opened for The Who on a leg of their final US tour that included a show at New York's Shea Stadium.\nChimes left the band after the Combat Rock Tour and was replaced with Pete Howard in May 1983. The Clash co-headlined the US Festival in San Bernardino, California, on 28 May in front of a crowd of 140,000. After the show, members of the band brawled with security staff. The festival was Jones' last appearance with the band; Strummer and Simonon dismissed him in September that year. Nick Sheppard, formerly of the Bristol-based band The Cortinas, and Vince White were recruited as the Clash's new guitarists. The band's new lineup played their first shows in January 1984 with a batch of new material and embarked on the self-financed Out of Control Tour, travelling widely over the winter and into early summer. The band also headlined a benefit show for striking miners.\nIn November 1985, they released the album \"Cut the Crap\"; it includes the single \"This Is England\", which charted at number 24 in the UK Singles Chart. Strummer later noted: \"CBS had paid an advance for it so they had to put it out\". Dave Marsh later listed \"This Is England\" as one of the top 1001 rock singles of all time. The album peaked at number 16 in the UK Albums Chart and at number 88 in the US. Strummer largely disowned the album but later said: \"I really like 'This Is England' and [album track] 'North and South' is a vibe\".\nIn January 1986, it was announced that the Clash had disbanded. Strummer later said: \"When the Clash collapsed, we were tired. There had been a lot of intense activity in five years. Secondly, I felt we'd run out of idea gasoline. And thirdly, I wanted to shut up and let someone else have a go at it.\"\nCollaborations, reunions and Strummer's death: 1986\u2013present.\nAfter his dismissal, Jones formed Big Audio Dynamite (B.A.D.), who released their debut album \"This Is Big Audio Dynamite\" late in 1985. Jones and Strummer worked together on their respective 1986 projects; Jones helped with the two songs Strummer wrote and performed for the soundtrack to the film \"Sid and Nancy\" (1986), and Strummer co-wrote a number of the tracks for the second B.A.D. album \"No.\u00a010, Upping St.\", which he also co-produced. With Jones committed to B.A.D., Strummer moved on to solo projects and screen acting. Simonon formed a band called Havana 3am. Headon recorded a solo album \"Waking Up\" but was imprisoned in 1987 for drug-related offences.\nIn 1988, the compilation album \"The Story of the Clash, Volume 1\" was released and the single \"I Fought The Law\" was reissued and reached number 29 in the UK Singles Chart. On 2 March 1991, a reissue of \"Should I Stay or Should I Go\" gave the Clash their first and only number-one UK single. The same year, \"Rock the Casbah\" featured on a broadcast of Armed Forces Radio during the Gulf War.\nIn 1999, Strummer, Jones and Simonon cooperated in compiling the live album \"\" and the video documentary \"Westway to the World\". On 7 November 2002, the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame announced the Clash would be inducted the following March. On 15 November, Jones and Strummer shared the stage, performing three Clash songs during a London benefit show by Joe Strummer and the Mescaleros. Strummer, Jones and Headon wanted to play a reunion show to coincide with their induction into the Hall of Fame; Simonon did not want to participate because he believed playing at the high-priced event would not have been in the spirit of the Clash. \nStrummer died from a congenital heart defect on 22 December 2002, ending any possibility of a full reunion. In March 2003, Strummer, Jones, Simonon, Chimes and Headon were inducted into the Hall of Fame.\nIn early 2008, Carbon/Silicon, a new band founded by Mick Jones and his former London SS bandmate Tony James, entered into a six-week residency at London's Inn on the Green. On opening night, 11 January, Headon joined the band for the Clash's song \"Train in Vain\". An encore followed with Headon playing drums on \"Should I Stay or Should I Go\". This was the first time since 1982 that Headon and Jones had performed together on stage.\nIn September 2009, Jones and Headon reunited to re-record the 1970s Clash B-side \"Jail Guitar Doors\" with Billy Bragg, who founded an eponymous charity that gives musical instruments and lessons to prison inmates. Simonon and Jones are featured on the title track of the Gorillaz album \"Plastic Beach\" (2010), marking the first time they had worked together in over twenty years. They later joined Gorillaz on their Escape to Plastic Beach Tour for the remainder of 2010.\nIn July 2012, Strummer's daughters Jazz and Lola gave a rare interview to discuss the tenth anniversary of Strummer's death, his legacy and the possibility of a Clash reunion had their father lived. Jazz said: There was talk about the Clash reforming before he died. But there had been talk for years and years about them reforming. They had been offered stupid amounts of money to do it, but they were very good at keeping the moral high ground and saying no. But I think if Dad hadn't died, it would have happened. It felt like it was in the air.\nIn the UK on 9 September 2013, and a day later in the US, the Clash released a 12-disc box set called \"Sound System\", which includes their re-mastered studio albums on eight discs and three discs featuring demos, non-album singles, rarities and B-sides; a DVD with previously unseen footage by Don Letts and Julien Temple and other film footage; and merchandising ephemera, including an exclusive the Clash poster. Mick Jones and Paul Simonon oversaw the project, including the re-masters. The box set was accompanied by \"5 Album Studio Set\", which contains the first five studio albums (excluding \"Cut the Crap\"), and \"The Clash Hits Back\", a 33-track, two-CD best-of collection.\nIn a 3 September 2013 interview with \"Rolling Stone\", Mick Jones discussed the band reuniting, saying it likely would not have occurred. Jones said: There were a few moments at the time I was up for it (Hall of Fame reunion in 2003), Joe was up for it. Paul wasn't. And neither, probably, was Topper, who didn't wind up even coming in the end. It didn't look like a performance was going to happen anyway. I mean, you usually play at that ceremony when you get in. Joe had passed by that point, so we didn't. We were never in agreement. It was never at a point where all of us wanted to do it at the same time. Most importantly for us, we became friends again after the group broke up, and continued that way for the rest of the time. That was more important to us than the band.\nJones also stated the \"Sound System\" box set was the last time he would be involved in the band's releases: \"I'm not even thinking about any more Clash releases. This is it for me, and I say that with an exclamation mark\".\nOn 6 September 2013, Mick Jones, Paul Simonon and Topper Headon reunited for an exclusive BBC Radio 6 Music show to promote their legacy and the release of \"Sound System\".\nIn an October 2013 interview with BBC 6 Music, Jones said Strummer did have intentions of a Clash reunion and that new music was being written for a possible album. In the months before Strummer's death, Jones and Strummer began working on new music for what he thought would be the next Mescaleros album. Jones said: We wrote a batch\u00a0\u2013 we didn't used to write one, we used to write a batch at a time\u00a0\u2013 like gumbo. The idea was he was going to go into the studio with the Mescaleros during the day and then send them all home. I'd come in all night and we'd all work all night.\nAccording to Jones, months after their work together, he ran into Strummer at an event; Strummer informed him the songs were going to be used for the next Clash album. On 6 April 2022, the Clash announced the re-release of \"Combat Rock\", including demos with Ranking Roger's vocals, titled 'Combat Rock / The People's Hall'. \"Rock the Casbah (Ranking Roger)\" and \"Red Angel Dragnet (Ranking Roger)\" were released as supporting singles. The re-release occurred on 20 May 2022 to mixed reviews.\nOn 11 November 2022, a month before the 20th anniversary of Strummer's death, founding member Keith Levene died in Norfolk, England.\nPolitics.\nThe Clash's music often expresses left-wing ideological sentiments. Strummer was a committed socialist. The Clash are credited with pioneering the advocacy of radical politics in punk rock; \"NME\" dubbed them \"Thinking Man's Yobs\". Like many early punk bands, the Clash protested against monarchy and aristocracy but unlike many of their peers, they rejected nihilism. Instead, they found solidarity with a number of liberation movements and were involved with groups such as the Anti-Nazi League. At their performance on 30 April 1978 at the Rock Against Racism concert in London's Victoria Park for a crowd of between 50,000 and 100,000 people, Strummer wore a T-shirt identifying two far-left armed militant groups: Italy's Red Brigades (\"Brigate Rosse\", misspelt as \"Brigade Rosse\" on the T-shirt) and West Germany's Red Army Faction.\nAccording to rock historian Mikal Gilmore:\nThe moment that best exemplifies the Clash\u00a0... took place in August 1977, at a music festival in Liege, Belgium. The band was playing before 20,000 people and had been under fire from a crowd that was throwing bottles at the stage. But that wasn't what bothered lead singer Joe Strummer. What enraged him was a 10-foot-high barbed-wire fence strung between concrete posts and forming a barrier between the group and the audience\u00a0... [He] jumped from the stage and attacked the fence, trying to pull it down\u00a0... The Clash were the only performers at the show who tried to do anything about the obstacle. They were more willing to run the risk of the crowd than to tolerate barbed wire that was meant to fend off that crowd. This is more or less what the Clash were about: fighting the good fight that few others would fight.\nThe band made their politics explicit in the lyrics of early recordings including \"White Riot\", which encourages disaffected white youths to riot like their black counterparts; \"Career Opportunities\", which addressed the alienation of low-paid, routine jobs and discontent over the lack of alternatives; and \"London's Burning\" is about the bleakness and boredom of life in the inner city. Artist Caroline Coon, who was associated with the punk scene, said: \"[t]hose tough, militaristic songs were what we needed as we went into Thatcherism\".\nThe title of \"Sandinista!\" refers to the Sandinista National Liberation Front, a group of left-wing rebels who had recently overthrown Nicaraguan President Anastasio Somoza Debayle; the album includes songs that were inspired by other political issues; \"Washington Bullets\" addresses covert military operations around the globe and \"The Call-Up\" is a meditation on US draft policies. Scholars Simon Reynolds and Joy Press described \"Combat Rock\"'s track \"Straight to Hell\" as an \"around-the-world-at-war-in-five-verses guided tour of hell-zones where boy-soldiers had languished\".\nThe band's political sentiments are reflected in their resistance to the music industry's profit motivations; even at their peak, tickets to shows and souvenirs were reasonably priced. The group insisted CBS sell their double and triple albums \"London Calling\" and \"Sandinista!\" for the price of a single album (then \u00a35), succeeding with the former and compromising with the latter by agreeing to sell it for \u00a35.99 and forfeit their performance royalties on the first 200,000 sales. These \"value for money\" (VFM) principles meant they were constantly in debt to CBS and only started to break even around 1982.\nMusical style and influences.\nThe Clash are mainly described as a punk rock band. According to Stephen Thomas Erlewine of AllMusic, \"Sex Pistols may have been the first British punk rock band, but the Clash were the definitive British punk rockers\". Later in their career, the Clash used elements of a variety of musical genres, including reggae, rockabilly, dub and R&amp;B. With their double album \"London Calling\", the band expanded the breadth of their musical styles. Consequently, the band's music has also been described as experimental rock and new wave. Since their beginnings, the band has covered and composed songs in the reggae genre, and incorporated lovers' rock into \"London Calling\".\nLegacy and influence.\nIn 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked the Clash number 28 on its list of the 100 Greatest Artists of All Time, and in 2010, the band was ranked 22nd on VH1's 100 Greatest Artists of All Time. According to \"The Times\", the Clash's debut, alongside \"Never Mind the Bollocks, Here's the Sex Pistols\", is \"punk's definitive statement\" and \"London Calling\" \"remains one of the most influential rock albums\". \"London Calling\" was ranked eighth In \"Rolling Stone\"'s 2003 list of the 500 greatest albums of all time, which is the highest entry by a punk band; in the same list, \"The Clash\" was ranked 77th and \"Sandinista!\" was ranked 404th. In the magazine's 2004 list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time, \"London Calling\" was ranked number 15, again the highest entry for any song by a punk band. Four other Clash songs made the list: \"Should I Stay Or Should I Go\" (228), \"Train in Vain\" (292), \"Complete Control\" (361), and \"(White Man) in Hammersmith Palais\" (430). \"London Calling\" ranked number 48 in the magazine's 2008 list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Songs of All Time. In 2010, the cover art of \"London Calling\" was one of ten albums by British music acts whose albums were commemorated on a UK postage stamp issued by Royal Mail.\nJake Burns of Stiff Little Fingers, the first major punk band from Northern Ireland, said of their debut album's impact:\n[T]he big watershed was the Clash album\u2014that was go out, cut your hair, stop mucking about time, y'know. Up to that point we'd still been singing about bowling down California highways. I mean, it meant nothing to me. Although the Damned and the Pistols were great, they were only exciting musically; lyrically, I couldn't really make out a lot of it\u00a0... [T]o realise that [The Clash] were actually singing about their own lives in West London was like a bolt out of the blue.\nThe Clash inspired many musicians who were only loosely associated, if at all, with punk. The band's embrace of ska and reggae, and England's Jamaican subculture helped provide impetus for the 2 Tone movement that emerged after the punk explosion. Other musicians who began performing while the Clash were active and acknowledged their debt to the band include Billy Bragg and Aztec Camera. U2's The Edge has compared the Clash's inspirational effect to that of Ramones, both of which gave young rock musicians a \"sense that the door of possibility had swung open\". He wrote: \"The Clash, more than any other group, kick-started a thousand garage bands across Ireland and the UK\u00a0... [S]eeing them perform was a life-changing experience\". Bono described the Clash as \"the greatest rock band. They wrote the rule book for U2.\"\nWhile Sex Pistols' June and July 1976 debut gig at Manchester's Lesser Free Trade Hall has been acknowledged as the starting point of that city's punk scene, the Clash's first performance at Eric's, where they were supported by the Specials, had a similar effect in Liverpool. The gig was witnessed by Jayne Casey, Julian Cope, Pete Wylie, Pete Burns, Bill Drummond, Holly Johnson, Will Sergeant, Budgie and Ian McCulloch. Jon Langford of The Mekons said:\nYou can't overestimate how important The Clash were back in 1977. We loved the Pistols' self-aware nihilism, but we didn't want to be the Pistols, and if The Clash were cartoon-heroic and occasionally a bit silly we still loved them and recognised the risks they were taking.\nThe Clash's influence can be heard in the works of American political punk bands such as the Offspring, Rancid, Anti-Flag, Bad Religion, NOFX, Green Day, and Rise Against, and in the political hard rock of early Manic Street Preachers. California band Rancid are known as \"incurable Clash zealots\". The title track of Rancid's album \"Indestructible\" says: \"I'll keep listening to that great Joe Strummer!\" Outside rock music, Chuck D has credited The Clash as an inspiration for Public Enemy, in particular for their use of socially and politically conscious lyrics, which gained them attention from the music press: \"They talked about important subjects, so therefore journalists printed what they said, which was very pointed\u00a0... We took that from the Clash, because we were very similar in that regard. Public Enemy just did it 10 years later\". In 2019, Chuck D narrated \"Stay Free: The Story of The Clash\", an eight-part podcast series produced by Spotify and BBC Studios.\nAccording to biographer Antonio Ambrosio, the Clash's involvement with Jamaican musical and production styles inspired similar cross-cultural efforts by bands such as Bad Brains, Massive Attack, 311, Sublime and No Doubt. Jakob Dylan of the Wallflowers lists \"London Calling\" as the record that \"changed his life\". Bands identified with the garage rock revival of the late 1990s and 2000s such as Sweden's the Hives, Australia's the Vines, Britain's the Libertines, and America's the White Stripes and the Strokes, show the Clash's influence. Among the many late-20th-century British acts identified as having been inspired by the Clash are Babyshambles, The Futureheads, The Charlatans and Arctic Monkeys.\nUse in film and television.\nThe band's 1982 hit \"Should I Stay or Should I Go\" appears in multiple episodes of the 2016 Netflix science-fiction drama series \"Stranger Things\", which is set in 1983. \"London Town\", a film that tells the story of a Clash-obsessed teenager who in 1979 meets Joe Strummer by chance and finds his life changing as a result, was released in 2016.\nNotable covers of the Clash songs.\nBefore M.I.A. had an international hit in 2008 with \"Paper Planes\", which is built around a sample from \"Straight to Hell\", she referenced \"London Calling\" on 2003's \"Galang\". A cover of \"The Guns of Brixton\" by German punk band Die Toten Hosen was released as a single in 2006. A version by reggae singer Jimmy Cliff with Tim Armstrong from Rancid was scheduled for release in November 2011. American-Irish punk band Dropkick Murphys released a cover of \"The Guns of Brixton\" on \"Anti Heroes vs Dropkick Murphys\" (1997).\nIn June 2009, Bruce Springsteen &amp; the E Street Band opened their concert in Hyde Park, London, with \"London Calling\". The concert was later released on DVD as \"\". Bruce Springsteen, Little Steven, Dave Grohl and Elvis Costello performed the same song at the 2003 Grammys as a tribute to Joe Strummer, who died the year before. In 2009, Springsteen &amp; the E Street Band covered Strummer's song \"Coma Girl\" and in 2014, along with Tom Morello, they opened some of their shows on the High Hopes Tour with \"Clampdown\". Ben Folds covered The Clash's \"Lost in the Supermarket\" for the soundtrack to the 2006 animated film Over the Hedge.\nThe band has also had a notable impact on music in the Spanish-speaking world. In 1997, a Clash tribute album featuring performances by Buenos Aires punk bands was released. Many \"rock en espa\u00f1ol\" bands such as Todos Tus Muertos, Caf\u00e9 Tacuba, Maldita Vecindad, Los Prisioneros, Tijuana No, and Attaque 77, are indebted to the Clash. Argentina's Los Fabulosos Cadillacs covered \"Should I Stay or Should I Go\", \"London Calling\"'s \"Revolution Rock\" and \"The Guns of Brixton\", and invited Mick Jones to sing on their song \"Mal Bicho\". The Clash's influence is similarly reflected in Paris-founded band Mano Negra's politicised lyrics and fusion of musical styles.\nIn March 2022, following Russia's invasion of Ukraine, surviving members of the Clash gave permission to Ukrainian punk band Beton to rewrite the lyrics of \"London Calling\". The song was mixed in Los Angeles by music producer Danny Saber and proceeds from its sales were designated to help fund war efforts.\nBand members.\nClassic lineup (1977\u20131982)\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30425", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30425", "title": "Tuner", "text": "Tuner may refer to someone or something which adjusts or configures a mechanical, electronic, or musical device.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30426", "revid": "42526506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30426", "title": "Total internal reflection", "text": "Complete reflection of a wave\nIn physics, total internal reflection (TIR) is the phenomenon in which waves arriving at the interface (boundary) from one medium to another (e.g., from water to air) are not refracted into the second (\"external\") medium, but completely reflected back into the first (\"internal\") medium. It occurs when the second medium has a higher wave speed (i.e., lower refractive index) than the first, and the waves are incident at a sufficiently oblique angle on the interface. For example, the water-to-air surface in a typical fish tank, when viewed obliquely from below, reflects the underwater scene like a mirror with no loss of brightness (Fig.\u202f1). \nA scenario opposite to TIR, referred to as total external reflection, occurs in the extreme ultraviolet and X-ray regimes. \nTIR occurs not only with electromagnetic waves such as light and microwaves, but also with other types of waves, including sound and water waves. If the waves are capable of forming a narrow beam (Fig.\u202f2), the reflection tends to be described in terms of \"rays\" rather than waves; in a medium whose properties are independent of direction, such as air, water or glass, the \"rays\" are perpendicular to associated wavefronts. The total internal reflection occurs when critical angle is exceeded.\nRefraction is generally accompanied by \"partial\" reflection. When waves are refracted from a medium of lower propagation speed (higher refractive index) to a medium of higher propagation speed (lower refractive index)\u2014e.g., from water to air\u2014the \"angle of refraction\" (between the outgoing ray and the surface normal) is greater than the \"angle of incidence\" (between the incoming ray and the normal). As the angle of incidence approaches a certain threshold, called the \"critical angle\", the angle of refraction approaches 90\u00b0, at which the refracted ray becomes parallel to the boundary surface. As the angle of incidence increases beyond the critical angle, the conditions of refraction can no longer be satisfied, so there is no refracted ray, and the partial reflection becomes total. For visible light, the critical angle is about 49\u00b0 for incidence from water to air, and about 42\u00b0 for incidence from common glass to air.\nDetails of the mechanism of TIR give rise to more subtle phenomena. While total reflection, by definition, involves no continuing flow of power \"across\" the interface between the two media, the external medium carries a so-called \"evanescent wave\", which travels \"along\" the interface with an amplitude that falls off exponentially with distance from the interface. The \"total\" reflection is indeed total if the external medium is lossless (perfectly transparent), continuous, and of infinite extent, but can be conspicuously \"less\" than total if the evanescent wave is absorbed by a lossy external medium (\"attenuated total reflectance\"), or diverted by the outer boundary of the external medium or by objects embedded in that medium (\"frustrated\"\u00a0TIR). Unlike \"partial\" reflection between transparent media, total internal reflection is accompanied by a non-trivial phase shift (not just zero or 180\u00b0) for each component of polarization (perpendicular or parallel to the plane of incidence), and the shifts vary with the angle of incidence. The explanation of this effect by Augustin-Jean Fresnel, in 1823, added to the evidence in favor of the wave theory of light.\nThe phase shifts are used by Fresnel's invention, the Fresnel rhomb, to modify polarization. The efficiency of the total internal reflection is exploited by optical fibers (used in telecommunications cables and in image-forming fiberscopes), and by reflective prisms, such as image-erecting Porro/roof prisms for monoculars and binoculars.\nOptical description.\nAlthough total internal reflection can occur with any kind of wave that can be said to have oblique incidence, including (e.g.) microwaves and sound waves,\u2009 it is most familiar in the case of light waves.\nTotal internal reflection of light can be demonstrated using a semicircular-cylindrical block of common glass or acrylic glass. In\u00a0Fig.\u202f3, a \"ray box\" projects a narrow beam of light (a\u00a0\"ray\") radially inward. The semicircular cross-section of the glass allows the incoming ray to remain perpendicular to the curved portion of the air/glass surface, and then hence to continue in a straight line towards the flat part of the surface, although its angle with the flat part varies.\nWhere the ray meets the flat glass-to-air interface, the angle between the ray and the normal (perpendicular) to the interface is called the \"angle of incidence\". If this angle is sufficiently small, the ray is \"partly\" reflected but mostly transmitted, and the transmitted portion is refracted away from the normal, so that the \"angle of refraction\" (between the refracted ray and the normal to the interface) is greater than the angle of incidence. For the moment, let us call the angle of incidence \"\u03b8\"i and the angle of refraction \"\u03b8\"t (where \"t\" is for \"transmitted\", reserving \"r\" for \"reflected\"). As \"\u03b8\"i increases and approaches a certain \"critical angle\", denoted by \"\u03b8\"c (or sometimes \"\u03b8\"cr), the angle of refraction approaches 90\u00b0 (that is, the refracted ray approaches a tangent to the interface), and the refracted ray becomes fainter while the reflected ray becomes brighter. As \"\u03b8\"i increases beyond \"\u03b8\"c, the refracted ray disappears and only the reflected ray remains, so that all of the energy of the incident ray is reflected; this is total internal reflection (TIR). In\u00a0brief:\nCritical angle.\nThe critical angle is the smallest angle of incidence that yields total reflection, or equivalently the largest angle for which a refracted ray exists. For light waves incident from an \"internal\" medium with a single refractive index \"n\"1, to an \"external\" medium with a single refractive index \"n\"2, the critical angle is given by formula_1 and is defined if \"n\"2 \u2264 \"n\"1. For some other types of waves, it is more convenient to think in terms of propagation velocities rather than refractive indices. The explanation of the critical angle in terms of velocities is more general and will therefore be discussed first.\nWhen a wavefront is refracted from one medium to another, the incident (incoming) and refracted (outgoing) portions of the wavefront meet at a common line on the refracting surface (interface). Let this line, denoted by \"L\", move at velocity u across the surface, where u is measured normal to\u00a0\"L\" (Fig.4). Let the incident and refracted wavefronts propagate with normal velocities formula_2 and formula_3 respectively, and let them make the dihedral angles \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2 respectively with the interface. From the geometry, formula_2 is the component of u in the direction normal to the incident wave, so that formula_5 Similarly, formula_6 Solving each equation for 1/\"u\" and equating the results, we obtain the general law of refraction for waves:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBut the dihedral angle between two planes is also the angle between their normals. So \"\u03b8\"1 is the angle between the normal to the incident wavefront and the normal to the interface, while \"\u03b8\"2 is the angle between the normal to the refracted wavefront and the normal to the interface; and Eq.(1) tells us that the sines of these angles are in the same ratio as the respective velocities.\nThis result has the form of \"Snell's law\", except that we have not yet said that the ratio of velocities is constant, nor identified \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2 with the angles of incidence and refraction (called \"\u03b8\"i and \"\u03b8\"t above). However, if we now suppose that the properties of the media are \"isotropic\" (independent of direction), two further conclusions follow: first, the two velocities, and hence their ratio, are independent of their directions; and second, the wave-normal directions coincide with the \"ray\" directions, so that \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2 coincide with the angles of incidence and refraction as defined above.\nObviously the angle of refraction cannot exceed 90\u00b0. In the limiting case, we put \"\u03b8\"2 \n 90\u00b0 and \"\u03b8\"1 \n \"\u03b8\"c in Eq.(1), and solve for the critical angle:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn deriving this result, we retain the assumption of isotropic media in order to identify \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2 with the angles of incidence and refraction.\nFor electromagnetic waves, and especially for light, it is customary to express the above results in terms of \"refractive indices\". The refractive index of a medium with normal velocity formula_2 is defined as formula_8 where \"c\" is the speed of light in vacuum. Hence formula_9 Similarly, formula_10 Making these substitutions in Eqs.(1) and (2), we obtain\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nand\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEq.(3) is the law of refraction for general media, in terms of refractive indices, provided that \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2 are taken as the dihedral angles; but if the media are \"isotropic\", then \"n\"1 and \"n\"2 become independent of direction, while \"\u03b8\"1 and \"\u03b8\"2 may be taken as the angles of incidence and refraction for the rays, and Eq.(4) follows. So, for isotropic media, Eqs.(3) and (4) together describe the behavior in Fig.5.\nAccording to Eq.(4), for incidence from water (\"n\"1 \u2248 1.333) to air (\"n\"2 \u2248 1), we have \"\u03b8\"c \u2248 48.6\u00b0, whereas for incidence from common or acrylic glass (\"n\"1 \u2248 1.50) to air (\"n\"2 \u2248 1), we have \"\u03b8\"c \u2248 41.8\u00b0.\nThe arcsin function yielding \"\u03b8\"c is defined only if \"n\"2 \u2264 \"n\"1 formula_11 Hence, for isotropic media, total internal reflection cannot occur if the second medium has a higher refractive index (lower normal velocity) than the first. For example, there cannot be TIR for incidence from air to water; rather, the critical angle for incidence from water to air is the angle of refraction at grazing incidence from air to water (Fig.6).\nThe medium with the higher refractive index is commonly described as optically \"denser\", and the one with the lower refractive index as optically \"rarer\". Hence it is said that total internal reflection is possible for \"dense-to-rare\" incidence, but not for \"rare-to-dense\" incidence.\nEveryday examples.\nWhen standing beside an aquarium with one's eyes below the water level, one is likely to see fish or submerged objects reflected in the water-air surface (Fig.\u202f1). The brightness of the reflected image \u2013 just as bright as the \"direct\" view \u2013 can be startling.\nA similar effect can be observed by opening one's eyes while swimming just below the water's surface. If the water is calm, the surface outside the critical angle (measured from the vertical) appears mirror-like, reflecting objects below. The region above the water cannot be seen except overhead, where the hemispherical field of view is compressed into a conical field known as \"Snell's\u00a0window\", whose angular diameter is twice the critical angle (cf.\u00a0Fig.\u202f6).\u2009 The field of view above the water is theoretically 180\u00b0 across, but seems less because as we look closer to the horizon, the vertical dimension is more strongly compressed by the refraction; e.g., by Eq.\u202f(3), for air-to-water incident angles of 90\u00b0, 80\u00b0, and 70\u00b0, the corresponding angles of refraction are 48.6\u00b0 (\"\u03b8cr\" in Fig.\u202f6), 47.6\u00b0, and 44.8\u00b0, indicating that the image of a point 20\u00b0 above the horizon is 3.8\u00b0 from the edge of Snell's window\u200d while the image of a point 10\u00b0 above the horizon is only 1\u00b0 from the edge.\nFig.\u202f7, for example, is a photograph taken near the bottom of the shallow end of a swimming pool. What looks like a broad horizontal stripe on the right-hand wall\u200d consists of the lower edges of a row of orange tiles, and their reflections; this marks the water level, which can then be traced across the other wall. The swimmer has disturbed the surface above her, scrambling the lower half of her reflection, and distorting the reflection of the ladder (to the right). But most of the surface is still calm, giving a clear reflection of the tiled bottom of the pool. The space above the water is not visible except at the top of the frame, where the handles of the ladder are just discernible above the edge of Snell's window \u2013 within which the reflection of the bottom of the pool is only partial, but still noticeable in the photograph. One can even discern the color-fringing of the edge of Snell's window, due to variation of the refractive index, hence of the critical angle, with wavelength (see \"Dispersion\").\nThe critical angle influences the angles at which gemstones are cut. The round \"brilliant\" cut, for example, is designed to refract light incident on the front facets, reflect it twice by TIR off the back facets, and transmit it out again through the front facets, so that the stone looks bright. Diamond (Fig.\u202f8) is especially suitable for this treatment, because its high refractive index (about 2.42) and consequently small critical angle (about 24.5\u00b0) yield the desired behavior over a wide range of viewing angles. Cheaper materials that are similarly amenable to this treatment include cubic\u00a0zirconia (index\u202f\u2248\u202f2.15) and moissanite (non-isotropic, hence doubly\u00a0refractive, with an index ranging from about 2.65 to 2.69, depending on direction and polarization); both of these are therefore popular as diamond\u00a0simulants.\nEvanescent wave.\nMathematically, waves are described in terms of time-varying fields, a \"field\" being a function of location in space. A propagating wave requires an \"effort\" field and a \"flow\" field, the latter being a vector (if we are working in two or three dimensions). The product of effort and flow is related to power (see \"System equivalence\"). For example, for sound waves in a non-viscous fluid, we might take the effort field as the pressure (a\u00a0scalar), and the flow field as the fluid velocity (a\u00a0vector). The product of these two is intensity (power per unit area). For electromagnetic waves, we shall take the effort field as the electric\u00a0field\u200a E\u200a, and the flow field as the magnetizing field\u200a H. Both of these are vectors, and their vector\u00a0product is again the intensity (see \"Poynting\u00a0vector\").\nWhen a wave in (say) medium\u00a01 is reflected off the interface between medium\u00a01 and medium\u00a02, the flow field in medium\u00a01 is the vector sum of the flow fields due to the incident and reflected waves.\u2009 If the reflection is oblique, the incident and reflected fields are not in opposite directions and therefore cannot cancel out at the interface; even if the reflection is total, either the normal component or the tangential component of the combined field (as a function of location and time) must be non-zero adjacent to the interface. Furthermore, the physical laws governing the fields will generally imply that one of the two components is \"continuous\" across the interface (that is, it does not suddenly change as we cross the interface); for example, for electromagnetic waves, one of the interface conditions is that the tangential component of H is continuous if there is no surface current. Hence, even if the reflection is total, there must be some penetration of the flow field into medium\u00a02; and this, in combination with the laws relating the effort and flow fields, implies that there will also be some penetration of the effort field. The same continuity condition implies that the variation (\"waviness\") of the field in medium\u00a02 will be synchronized with that of the incident and reflected waves in medium\u00a01.\nBut, if the reflection is total, the spatial penetration of the fields into medium\u00a02 must be limited somehow, or else the total extent and hence the total energy of those fields would continue to increase, draining power from medium\u00a01. Total reflection of a continuing wavetrain permits some energy to be stored in medium\u00a02, but does not permit a \"continuing\" transfer of power from medium\u00a01 to medium\u00a02.\nThus, using mostly qualitative reasoning, we can conclude that total internal reflection must be accompanied by a wavelike field in the \"external\" medium, traveling along the interface in synchronism with the incident and reflected waves, but with some sort of limited spatial penetration into the \"external\" medium; such a field may be called an \"evanescent\u00a0wave\".\nFig.\u202f9 shows the basic idea. The incident wave is assumed to be plane and sinusoidal. The reflected wave, for simplicity, is not shown. The evanescent wave travels to the right in lock-step with the incident and reflected waves, but its amplitude falls off with increasing distance from the interface.\nFrustrated total internal reflection (FTIR).\nIf the internal reflection is to be total, there must be no diversion of the evanescent wave. Suppose, for example, that electromagnetic waves incident from glass (with a higher refractive index) to air (with a lower refractive index) at a certain angle of incidence are subject to TIR. And suppose that we have a third medium (often identical to the first) whose refractive index is sufficiently high that, if the third medium were to replace the second, we would get a standard transmitted wavetrain for the same angle of incidence. Then, if the third medium is brought within a distance of a few wavelengths from the surface of the first medium, where the evanescent wave has significant amplitude in the second medium, then the evanescent wave is effectively refracted into the third medium, giving non-zero transmission into the third medium, and therefore less than total reflection back into the first medium. As the amplitude of the evanescent wave decays across the air gap, the transmitted waves are attenuated, so that there is less transmission, and therefore more reflection, than there would be with no gap; but as long as there is \"some\" transmission, the reflection is less than total. This phenomenon is called \"frustrated total internal reflection\" (where \"frustrated\" negates \"total\"), abbreviated \"frustrated TIR\" or \"FTIR\".\nFrustrated TIR can be observed by looking into the top of a glass of water held in one's hand (Fig.\u202f10). If\u00a0the glass is held loosely, contact may not be sufficiently close and widespread to produce a noticeable effect. But if it is held more tightly, the ridges of one's fingerprints interact strongly with the evanescent waves, allowing the ridges to be seen through the otherwise totally reflecting glass-air surface.\nThe same effect can be demonstrated with microwaves, using paraffin\u00a0wax as the \"internal\" medium (where the incident and reflected waves exist). In this case the permitted gap width might be (e.g.) 1\u202fcm or several cm, which is easily observable and adjustable.\nThe term \"frustrated TIR\" also applies to the case in which the evanescent wave is scattered by an object sufficiently close to the reflecting interface. This effect, together with the strong dependence of the amount of scattered light on the distance from the interface, is exploited in \"total internal reflection microscopy\".\nThe mechanism of FTIR is called \"evanescent-wave coupling\", and is a good analog to visualize quantum tunneling. Due to the wave nature of matter, an electron has a non-zero probability of \"tunneling\" through a barrier, even if classical mechanics would say that its energy is insufficient. Similarly, due to the wave nature of light, a photon has a non-zero probability of crossing a gap, even if ray\u00a0optics would say that its approach is too oblique.\nAnother reason why internal reflection may be less than total, even beyond the critical angle, is that the external medium may be \"lossy\" (less than perfectly transparent), in which case the external medium will absorb energy from the evanescent wave, so that the maintenance of the evanescent wave will draw power from the incident wave. The consequent less-than-total reflection is called \"attenuated total reflectance\" (ATR). This effect, and especially the frequency-dependence of the absorption, can be used to study the composition of an unknown external medium.\nDerivation of evanescent wave.\nIn a uniform plane sinusoidal electromagnetic wave, the electric field E has the form\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere Ek is the (constant) complex amplitude vector, \"i\" is the imaginary unit, k is the wave vector (whose magnitude \"k\" is the angular wavenumber), r is the position vector, \"\u03c9\" is the angular frequency, \"t\" is time, and it is understood that the \"real part\" of the expression is the physical field. The magnetizing field H has the same form with the same k and \"\u03c9\". The value of the expression is unchanged if the position r varies in a direction normal to k; hence k \"is normal to the wavefronts\".\nIf \"\u2113\" is the component of r in the direction of k, the field (5) can be written formula_12 If the argument of formula_13 is to be constant, \"\u2113\" must increase at the velocity formula_14 known as the \"phase velocity\". This in turn is equal to formula_15 where \"c\" is the phase velocity in the reference medium (taken as vacuum), and \"n\" is the local refractive index w.r.t. the reference medium. Solving for \"k\" gives formula_16 i.e.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere formula_17 is the wavenumber in vacuum.\nFrom (5), the electric field in the \"external\" medium has the form\nwhere kt is the wave vector for the transmitted wave (we assume isotropic media, but the transmitted wave is not \"yet\" assumed to be evanescent).\nIn Cartesian coordinates (\"x\", \"y\", \"z\"), let the region \"y\" &lt; 0 have refractive index \"n\"1, and let the region \"y\" &gt; 0 have refractive index \"n\"2. Then the \"xz\" plane is the interface, and the \"y\" axis is normal to the interface (Fig.11). Let i and j be the unit vectors in the \"x\" and \"y\" directions respectively. Let the plane of incidence (containing the incident wave-normal and the normal to the interface) be the \"xy\" plane (the plane of the page), with the angle of incidence \"\u03b8\"i measured from j towards i. Let the angle of refraction, measured in the same sense, be \"\u03b8\"t (\"t\" for \"transmitted\", reserving \"r\" for \"reflected\").\nFrom (6), the transmitted wave vector kt has magnitude \"n\"2\"k\"0. Hence, from the geometry,\nformula_18\nwhere the last step uses Snell's law. Taking the dot product with the position vector, we get\nformula_19\nso that Eq.(7) becomes\nIn the case of TIR, the angle \"\u03b8\"t does not exist in the usual sense. But we can still interpret (8) for the transmitted (evanescent) wave by allowing to be \"complex\". This becomes necessary when we write in terms of and thence in terms of using Snell's law:\nformula_20\nFor \"\u03b8\"i greater than the critical angle, the value under the square-root symbol is negative, so that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTo determine which sign is applicable, we substitute (9) into (8), obtaining\nwhere the undetermined sign is the opposite of that in (9). For an \"evanescent\" transmitted wave\u00a0\u2013 that is, one whose amplitude decays as \"y\" increases\u00a0\u2013 the undetermined sign in (10) must be \"minus\", so the undetermined sign in (9) must be \"plus\".\nWith the correct sign, the result (10) can be abbreviated\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhere\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nand \"k\"0 is the wavenumber in vacuum, i.e.\u00a0formula_21\nSo the evanescent wave is a plane sinewave traveling in the x direction, with an amplitude that decays exponentially in the y direction (Fig.9). It is evident that the energy stored in this wave likewise travels in the x direction and does not cross the interface. Hence the Poynting vector generally has a component in the x direction, but its y component averages to zero (although its instantaneous y component is not \"identically\" zero).\nEq.(11) indicates that the amplitude of the evanescent wave falls off by a factor e as the coordinate y (measured from the interface) increases by the distance formula_22 commonly called the \"penetration depth\" of the evanescent wave. Taking reciprocals of the first equation of (12), we find that the penetration depth is\nformula_23\nwhere \"\u03bb\"0 is the wavelength in vacuum, i.e. formula_24 Dividing the numerator and denominator by \"n\"2 yields\nformula_25\nwhere formula_26 is the wavelength in the second (external) medium. Hence we can plot d in units of \"\u03bb\"2 as a function of the angle of incidence for various values of formula_27 (Fig.12). As\u00a0\"\u03b8\"i decreases towards the critical angle, the denominator approaches zero, so that d increases without limit\u00a0\u2013 as is to be expected, because as soon as \"\u03b8\"i is \"less\" than critical, uniform plane waves are permitted in the external medium. As \"\u03b8\"i approaches 90\u00b0 (grazing incidence), d approaches a minimum\nformula_28\nFor incidence from water to air, or common glass to air, \"d\"min is not much different from \"\u03bb\"2/(2\"\u03c0\"). But d is larger at smaller angles of incidence (Fig.12), and the amplitude may still be significant at distances of several times d; for example, because e\u22124.6 is just greater than 0.01, the evanescent wave amplitude within a distance of the interface is at least 1% of its value at the interface. Hence, speaking loosely, we tend to say that the evanescent wave amplitude is significant within \"a few wavelengths\" of the interface.\nPhase shifts.\nBetween 1817 and 1823, Augustin-Jean Fresnel discovered that total internal reflection is accompanied by a non-trivial phase shift (that is, a phase shift that is not restricted to 0\u00b0 or 180\u00b0), as the Fresnel reflection coefficient acquires a non-zero imaginary part. We shall now explain this effect for electromagnetic waves in the case of linear, homogeneous, isotropic, non-magnetic media. The phase shift turns out to be an \"advance\", which grows as the incidence angle increases beyond the critical angle, but which depends on the polarization of the incident wave.\nIn equations (5), (7), (8), (10), and (11), we advance the phase by the angle \"\u03d5\" if we replace \"\u03c9t\" by \"\u03c9t\"\u00a0+\u00a0\"\u03d5\" (that is, if we replace \u2212\"\u03c9t\" by \u2212\"\u03c9t\"\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"\u03d5\"), with the result that the (complex) field is multiplied by \"e\"\u2212\"i\u03d5\". So a phase \"advance\" is equivalent to multiplication by a complex constant with a \"negative\" argument. This becomes more obvious when (e.g.) the field (5) is factored as formula_29 where the last factor contains the time dependence.\nTo represent the polarization of the incident, reflected, or transmitted wave, the electric field adjacent to an interface can be resolved into two perpendicular components, known as the \"s\" and \"p\" components, which are parallel to the \"surface\" and the \"plane\" of incidence respectively; in other words, the \"s\" and \"p\" components are respectively \"square\" and \"parallel\" to the plane of incidence.\nFor each component of polarization, the incident, reflected, or transmitted electric field (E in Eq.(5)) has a certain direction and can be represented by its (complex) scalar component in that direction. The reflection or transmission coefficient can then be defined as a \"ratio\" of complex components at the same point, or at infinitesimally separated points on opposite sides of the interface. But, in order to fix the \"signs\" of the coefficients, we must choose positive senses for the \"directions\". For the \"s\" components, the obvious choice is to say that the positive directions of the incident, reflected, and transmitted fields are all the same (e.g., the z direction in Fig.11). For the \"p\" components, this article adopts the convention that the positive directions of the incident, reflected, and transmitted fields are inclined towards the same medium (that is, towards the same side of the interface, e.g. like the red arrows in Fig.11). But the reader should be warned that some books use a different convention for the \"p\" components, causing a different sign in the resulting formula for the reflection coefficient.\nFor the \"s\" polarization, let the reflection and transmission coefficients be rs and ts respectively. For the \"p\" polarization, let the corresponding coefficients be rp and tp\u200a. Then, for \"linear, homogeneous, isotropic, non-magnetic\" media, the coefficients are given by\nNow we suppose that the transmitted wave is evanescent. With the correct sign (+), substituting (9) into (13) gives\nformula_30\nwhere\nformula_31\nthat is, n is the index of the \"internal\" medium relative to the \"external\" one, or the index of the internal medium if the external one is vacuum. So the magnitude of rs is 1, and the \"argument\" of rs is\nformula_32\nwhich gives a phase \"advance\" of\nMaking the same substitution in (14), we find that ts has the same denominator as rs with a positive real numerator (instead of a complex conjugate numerator) and therefore has \"half\" the argument of \"rs\", so that \"the phase advance of the evanescent wave is half that of the reflected wave\".\nWith the same choice of sign, substituting (9) into (15) gives\nformula_33\nwhose magnitude is 1, and whose argument is\nformula_34\nwhich gives a phase \"advance\" of\nMaking the same substitution in (16), we again find that the phase advance of the evanescent wave is \"half\" that of the reflected wave.\nEquations (17) and (18) apply when \"\u03b8\"c \u2264 \"\u03b8\"i &lt; 90\u00b0, where \"\u03b8\"i is the angle of incidence, and \"\u03b8\"c is the critical angle . These equations show that\nFor \"\u03b8\"i \u2264 \"\u03b8\"c, the reflection coefficients are given by equations (13) and (15) and are \"real\", so that the phase shift is either 0\u00b0 (if the coefficient is positive) or 180\u00b0 (if the coefficient is negative).\nIn (13), if we put formula_35 (Snell's law) and multiply the numerator and denominator by , we obtain\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich is positive for all angles of incidence with a transmitted ray (since \"\u03b8\"t &gt; \"\u03b8\"i), giving a phase shift \u03b4s of zero.\nIf we do likewise with (15), the result is easily shown to be equivalent to\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Numbered block/styles.css\" /&gt;\nwhich is negative for small angles (that is, near normal incidence), but changes sign at \"Brewster's angle\", where \"\u03b8\"i and \"\u03b8\"t are complementary. Thus the phase shift \u03b4p is 180\u00b0 for small \"\u03b8\"i but switches to 0\u00b0 at Brewster's angle. Combining the complementarity with Snell's law yields \"\u03b8\"i \n arctan\u2009(1/\"n\") as Brewster's angle for dense-to-rare incidence.\nThat completes the information needed to plot \u03b4s and \u03b4p for all angles of incidence. This is done in Fig.13, with \u03b4p in red and \u03b4s in blue, for three refractive indices. On the angle-of-incidence scale (horizontal axis), Brewster's angle is where \u03b4p (red) falls from 180\u00b0 to 0\u00b0, and the critical angle is where both \u03b4p and \u03b4s (red and blue) start to rise again. To the left of the critical angle is the region of \"partial\" reflection, where both reflection coefficients are real (phase 0\u00b0 or 180\u00b0) with magnitudes less than\u00a01. To the right of the critical angle is the region of \"total\" reflection, where both reflection coefficients are complex with magnitudes equal to\u00a01. In that region, the black curves show the phase advance of the \"p\"\u00a0component relative to the \"s\"\u00a0component:\nformula_36\nIt can be seen that a refractive index of 1.45 is not enough to give a 45\u00b0 phase difference, whereas a refractive index of 1.5 is enough (by a slim margin) to give a 45\u00b0 phase difference at two angles of incidence: about 50.2\u00b0 and 53.3\u00b0.\nThis 45\u00b0 relative shift is employed in Fresnel's invention, now known as the Fresnel rhomb, in which the angles of incidence are chosen such that the two internal reflections cause a total relative phase shift of 90\u00b0 between the two polarizations of an incident wave. This device performs the same function as a birefringent quarter-wave plate, but is more achromatic (that is, the phase shift of the rhomb is less sensitive to wavelength). Either device may be used, for instance, to transform linear polarization to circular polarization (which Fresnel also discovered) and conversely.\nIn Fig.13, \u03b4 is computed by a final subtraction; but there are other ways of expressing it. Fresnel himself, in 1823, gave a formula for . Born and Wolf (1970, p.50) derive an expression for tan\u200a(\"\u03b4\"/2) and find its maximum analytically.\nFor TIR of a beam with finite width, the variation in the phase shift with the angle of incidence gives rise to the \"Goos\u2013H\u00e4nchen effect\", which is a lateral shift of the reflected beam within the plane of incidence. This effect applies to linear polarization in the \"s\" or \"p\" direction. The \"Imbert\u2013Fedorov effect\" is an analogous effect for circular or elliptical polarization and produces a shift perpendicular to the plane of incidence.\nApplications.\nOptical\u00a0fibers exploit total internal reflection to carry signals over long distances with little attenuation. They are used in telecommunication cables, and in image-forming fiberscopes such as colonoscopes.\nIn the catadioptric Fresnel lens, invented by Augustin-Jean Fresnel for use in lighthouses, the outer prisms use TIR to deflect light from the lamp through a greater angle than would be possible with purely refractive prisms, but with less absorption of light (and less risk of tarnishing) than with conventional mirrors.\nOther reflecting prisms that use TIR include the following (with some overlap between the categories):\nPolarizing prisms: Although the Fresnel rhomb, which converts between linear and elliptical polarization, is not birefringent (doubly refractive), there are other kinds of prisms that combine birefringence with TIR in such a way that light of a particular polarization is totally reflected while light of the orthogonal polarization is at least partly transmitted. Examples include the Nicol prism, Glan\u2013Thompson prism, Glan\u2013Foucault prism (or \"Foucault prism\"), and Glan\u2013Taylor prism.\nRefractometers, which measure refractive indices, often use the critical angle.\nRain sensors for automatic windscreen/windshield wipers have been implemented using the principle that total internal reflection will guide an infrared beam from a source to a detector if the outer surface of the windshield is dry, but any water drops on the surface will divert some of the light.\nEdge-lit LED panels, used (e.g.) for backlighting of LCD computer monitors, exploit TIR to confine the LED light to the acrylic glass pane, except that some of the light is scattered by etchings on one side of the pane, giving an approximately uniform luminous emittance.\nTotal internal reflection microscopy (TIRM) uses the evanescent wave to illuminate small objects close to the reflecting interface. The consequent scattering of the evanescent wave (a\u00a0form of frustrated TIR), makes the objects appear bright when viewed from the \"external\" side. In the \"total internal reflection fluorescence microscope\" (TIRFM), instead of relying on simple scattering, we choose an evanescent wavelength short enough to cause fluorescence (Fig.\u202f15). The high sensitivity of the illumination to the distance from the interface allows measurement of extremely small displacements and forces.\nA beam-splitter cube uses frustrated TIR to divide the power of the incoming beam between the transmitted and reflected beams. The width of the air gap (or low-refractive-index gap) between the two prisms can be made adjustable, giving higher transmission and lower reflection for a narrower gap, or higher reflection and lower transmission for a wider gap.\nOptical modulation can be accomplished by means of frustrated TIR with a rapidly variable gap. As the transmission coefficient is highly sensitive to the gap width (the function being approximately exponential until the gap is almost closed), this technique can achieve a large dynamic range.\nOptical fingerprinting devices have used frustrated TIR to record images of persons' fingerprints without the use of ink (cf.\u00a0Fig.\u202f11).\nGait analysis can be performed by using frustrated TIR with a high-speed camera, to capture and analyze footprints.\nA gonioscope, used in optometry and ophthalmology for the diagnosis of glaucoma, \"suppresses\" TIR in order to look into the angle between the iris and the cornea. This view is usually blocked by TIR at the cornea-air interface. The gonioscope replaces the air with a higher-index medium, allowing transmission at oblique incidence, typically followed by reflection in a \"mirror\", which itself may be implemented using TIR.\nSome multi-touch interactive tables and whiteboards utilise FTIR to detect fingers touching the screen. An infrared camera is placed behind the screen surface, which is edge-lit by infrared LEDs; when touching the surface FTIR causes some of the infrared light to escape the screen plane, and the camera sees this as bright areas. Computer vision software is then used to translate this into a series of coordinates and gestures.\nHistory.\nDiscovery.\nThe surprisingly comprehensive and largely correct explanations of the rainbow by Theodoric of Freiberg (written between 1304 and 1310) and Kam\u0101l al-D\u012bn al-F\u0101ris\u012b (completed by 1309), although sometimes mentioned in connection with total internal reflection (TIR), are of dubious relevance because the internal reflection of sunlight in a spherical raindrop is \"not\" total. But, according to Carl Benjamin Boyer, Theodoric's treatise on the rainbow also classified optical phenomena under five causes, the last of which was \"a total reflection at the boundary of two transparent media\". Theodoric's work was forgotten until it was rediscovered by Giovanni Battista Venturi in 1814.\nTheodoric having fallen into obscurity, the discovery of TIR was generally attributed to Johannes Kepler, who published his findings in his \"Dioptrice\" in 1611. Although Kepler failed to find the true law of refraction, he showed by experiment that for air-to-glass incidence, the incident and refracted rays rotated in the same sense about the point of incidence, and that as the angle of incidence varied through \u00b190\u00b0, the angle of refraction (as we now call it) varied through \u00b142\u00b0. He was also aware that the incident and refracted rays were interchangeable. But these observations did not cover the case of a ray incident from glass to air at an angle beyond 42\u00b0, and Kepler promptly concluded that such a ray could only be \"reflected\".\nRen\u00e9 Descartes rediscovered the law of refraction and published it in his \"La Dioptrique\" of 1637. In the same work he mentioned the senses of rotation of the incident and refracted rays and the condition of TIR. But he neglected to discuss the limiting case, and consequently failed to give an expression for the critical angle, although he could easily have done so.\nHuygens and Newton: Rival explanations.\nChristiaan Huygens, in his \"Treatise on Light\" (1690), paid much attention to the threshold at which the incident ray is \"unable to penetrate into the other transparent substance\". Although he gave neither a name nor an algebraic expression for the critical angle, he gave numerical examples for glass-to-air and water-to-air incidence, noted the large change in the angle of refraction for a small change in the angle of incidence near the critical angle, and cited this as the cause of the rapid increase in brightness of the reflected ray as the refracted ray approaches the tangent to the interface. Huygens' insight is confirmed by modern theory: in Eqs.(13) and (15) above, there is nothing to say that the reflection coefficients increase exceptionally steeply as \"\u03b8\"t approaches 90\u00b0, except that, according to Snell's law, \"\u03b8\"t\u00a0itself is an increasingly steep function of \"\u03b8\"i.\nHuygens offered an explanation of TIR within the same framework as his explanations of the laws of rectilinear propagation, reflection, ordinary refraction, and even the extraordinary refraction of \"Iceland crystal\" (calcite). That framework rested on two premises: first, every point crossed by a propagating wavefront becomes a source of secondary wavefronts (\"Huygens' principle\"); and second, given an initial wavefront, any subsequent position of the wavefront is the envelope (common tangent surface) of all the secondary wavefronts emitted from the initial position. All cases of reflection or refraction by a surface are then explained simply by considering the secondary waves emitted from that surface. In the case of refraction from a medium of slower propagation to a medium of faster propagation, there is a certain obliquity of incidence beyond which it is impossible for the secondary wavefronts to form a common tangent in the second medium; this is what we now call the critical angle. As the incident wavefront approaches this critical obliquity, the refracted wavefront becomes concentrated against the refracting surface, augmenting the secondary waves that produce the reflection back into the first medium.\nHuygens' system even accommodated \"partial\" reflection at the interface between different media, albeit vaguely, by analogy with the laws of collisions between particles of different sizes. However, as long as the wave theory continued to assume longitudinal waves, it had no chance of accommodating polarization, hence no chance of explaining the polarization-dependence of extraordinary refraction, or of the partial reflection coefficient, or of the phase shift in TIR.\nIsaac Newton rejected the wave explanation of rectilinear propagation, believing that if light consisted of waves, it would \"bend and spread every way\" into the shadows. His corpuscular theory of light explained rectilinear propagation more simply, and it accounted for the ordinary laws of refraction and reflection, including TIR, on the hypothesis that the corpuscles of light were subject to a force acting perpendicular to the interface. In this model, for dense-to-rare incidence, the force was an attraction back towards the denser medium, and the critical angle was the angle of incidence at which the normal velocity of the approaching corpuscle was just enough to reach the far side of the force field; at more oblique incidence, the corpuscle would be turned back. Newton gave what amounts to a formula for the critical angle, albeit in words: \"as the Sines are which measure the Refraction, so is the Sine of Incidence at which the total Reflexion begins, to the Radius of the Circle\".\nNewton went beyond Huygens in two ways. First, not surprisingly, Newton pointed out the relationship between TIR and \"dispersion\": when a beam of white light approaches a glass-to-air interface at increasing obliquity, the most strongly-refracted rays (violet) are the first to be \"taken out\" by \"total Reflexion\", followed by the less-refracted rays. Second, he observed that total reflection could be \"frustrated\" (as we now say) by laying together two prisms, one plane and the other slightly convex; and he explained this simply by noting that the corpuscles would be attracted not only to the first prism, but also to the second.\nIn two other ways, however, Newton's system was less coherent. First, his explanation of \"partial\" reflection depended not only on the supposed forces of attraction between corpuscles and media, but also on the more nebulous hypothesis of \"Fits of easy Reflexion\" and \"Fits of easy Transmission\". Second, although his corpuscles could conceivably have \"sides\" or \"poles\", whose orientations could conceivably determine whether the corpuscles suffered ordinary or extraordinary refraction in \"Island-Crystal\", his geometric description of the extraordinary refraction was theoretically unsupported and empirically inaccurate.\nLaplace, Malus, and attenuated total reflectance (ATR).\nWilliam Hyde Wollaston, in the first of a pair of papers read to the Royal Society of London in 1802, reported his invention of a refractometer based on the critical angle of incidence from an internal medium of known \"refractive power\" (refractive index) to an external medium whose index was to be measured. With this device, Wollaston measured the \"refractive powers\" of numerous materials, some of which were too opaque to permit direct measurement of an angle of refraction. Translations of his papers were published in France in 1803, and apparently came to the attention of Pierre-Simon Laplace.\nAccording to Laplace's elaboration of Newton's theory of refraction, a corpuscle incident on a plane interface between two homogeneous isotropic media was subject to a force field that was symmetrical about the interface. If both media were transparent, total reflection would occur if the corpuscle were turned back before it exited the field in the second medium. But if the second medium were opaque, reflection would not be total unless the corpuscle were turned back before it left the \"first\" medium; this required a larger critical angle than the one given by Snell's law, and consequently impugned the validity of Wollaston's method for opaque media. Laplace combined the two cases into a single formula for the relative refractive index in terms of the critical angle (minimum angle of incidence for TIR). The formula contained a parameter which took one value for a transparent external medium and another value for an opaque external medium. Laplace's theory further predicted a relationship between refractive index and density for a given substance.\nIn 1807, Laplace's theory was tested experimentally by his prot\u00e9g\u00e9, \u00c9tienne-Louis Malus. Taking Laplace's formula for the refractive index as given, and using it to measure the refractive index of beeswax in the liquid (transparent) state and the solid (opaque) state at various temperatures (hence various densities), Malus verified Laplace's relationship between refractive index and density.\nBut Laplace's theory implied that if the angle of incidence exceeded his modified critical angle, the reflection would be total even if the external medium was absorbent. Clearly this was wrong: in Eqs.(12) above, there is no threshold value of the angle \"\u03b8\"i beyond which \"\u03ba\" becomes infinite; so the penetration depth of the evanescent wave (1/\"\u03ba\") is always non-zero, and the external medium, if it is at all lossy, will attenuate the reflection. As to why Malus apparently observed such an angle for opaque wax, we must infer that there was a certain angle beyond which the attenuation of the reflection was so small that ATR was visually indistinguishable from TIR.\nFresnel and the phase shift.\nFresnel came to the study of total internal reflection through his research on polarization. In 1811, Fran\u00e7ois Arago discovered that polarized light was apparently \"depolarized\" in an orientation-dependent and color-dependent manner when passed through a slice of doubly-refractive crystal: the emerging light showed colors when viewed through an analyzer (second polarizer). \"Chromatic polarization\", as this phenomenon came to be called, was more thoroughly investigated in 1812 by Jean-Baptiste Biot. In 1813, Biot established that one case studied by Arago, namely quartz cut perpendicular to its optic axis, was actually a gradual rotation of the plane of polarization with distance.\nIn 1816, Fresnel offered his first attempt at a \"wave-based\" theory of chromatic polarization. Without (yet) explicitly invoking transverse waves, his theory treated the light as consisting of two perpendicularly polarized components. In 1817 he noticed that plane-polarized light seemed to be partly depolarized by total internal reflection, if initially polarized at an acute angle to the plane of incidence. By including total internal reflection in a chromatic-polarization experiment, he found that the apparently depolarized light was a mixture of components polarized parallel and perpendicular to the plane of incidence, and that the total reflection introduced a phase difference between them. Choosing an appropriate angle of incidence (not yet exactly specified) gave a phase difference of 1/8 of a cycle. Two such reflections from the \"parallel faces\" of \"two coupled prisms\" gave a phase difference of 1/4 of a cycle. In that case, if the light was initially polarized at 45\u00b0 to the plane of incidence and reflection, it appeared to be \"completely\" depolarized after the two reflections. These findings were reported in a memoir submitted and read to the French Academy of Sciences in November 1817.\nIn 1821, Fresnel derived formulae equivalent to his sine and tangent laws (Eqs.(19) and (20), above) by modeling light waves as transverse elastic waves with vibrations perpendicular to what had previously been called the plane of polarization. Using old experimental data, he promptly confirmed that the equations correctly predicted the direction of polarization of the reflected beam when the incident beam was polarized at 45\u00b0 to the plane of incidence, for light incident from air onto glass or water. The experimental confirmation was reported in a \"postscript\" to the work in which Fresnel expounded his mature theory of chromatic polarization, introducing transverse waves. Details of the derivation were given later, in a memoir read to the academy in January 1823. The derivation combined conservation of energy with continuity of the \"tangential\" vibration at the interface, but failed to allow for any condition on the \"normal\" component of vibration.\nMeanwhile, in a memoir submitted in December 1822, Fresnel coined the terms \"linear polarization\", \"circular polarization\", and \"elliptical polarization\". For \"circular\" polarization, the two perpendicular components were a quarter-cycle (\u00b190\u00b0) out of phase.\nThe new terminology was useful in the memoir of January 1823, containing the detailed derivations of the sine and tangent laws: in that same memoir, Fresnel found that for angles of incidence greater than the critical angle, the resulting reflection coefficients were complex with unit magnitude. Noting that the magnitude represented the amplitude ratio as usual, he guessed that the argument represented the phase shift, and verified the hypothesis by experiment. The verification involved\nThis procedure was necessary because, with the technology of the time, one could not measure the \"s\" and \"p\" phase-shifts directly, and one could not measure an arbitrary degree of ellipticality of polarization, such as might be caused by the difference between the phase shifts. But one could verify that the polarization was \"circular\", because the brightness of the light was then insensitive to the orientation of the analyzer.\nFor glass with a refractive index of 1.51, Fresnel calculated that a 45\u00b0 phase difference between the two reflection coefficients (hence a 90\u00b0 difference after two reflections) required an angle of incidence of 48\u00b037' or 54\u00b037'. He cut a rhomb to the latter angle and found that it performed as expected. Thus the specification of the Fresnel rhomb was completed. Similarly, Fresnel calculated and verified the angle of incidence that would give a 90\u00b0 phase difference after \"three\" reflections at the same angle, and \"four\" reflections at the same angle. In each case there were two solutions, and in each case he reported that the larger angle of incidence gave an accurate circular polarization (for an initial linear polarization at 45\u00b0 to the plane of reflection). For the case of three reflections he also tested the smaller angle, but found that it gave some coloration due to the proximity of the critical angle and its slight dependence on wavelength. (Compare Fig.\u202f13 above, which shows that the phase difference \u03b4 is more sensitive to the refractive index for smaller angles of incidence.)\nFor added confidence, Fresnel predicted and verified that four total internal reflections at 68\u00b027' would give an accurate circular polarization if two of the reflections had water as the external medium while the other two had air, but not if the reflecting surfaces were all wet or all dry.\nFresnel's deduction of the phase shift in TIR is thought to have been the first occasion on which a physical meaning was attached to the argument of a complex number. Although this reasoning was applied without the benefit of knowing that light waves were electromagnetic, it passed the test of experiment, and survived remarkably intact after James Clerk Maxwell changed the presumed nature of the waves. Meanwhile, Fresnel's success inspired James MacCullagh and Augustin-Louis Cauchy, beginning in 1836, to analyze reflection from metals by using the Fresnel equations with a complex refractive index. The imaginary part of the complex index represents absorption.\nThe term \"critical angle\", used for convenience in the above narrative, is anachronistic: it apparently dates from 1873.\nIn the 20th century, quantum electrodynamics reinterpreted the amplitude of an electromagnetic wave in terms of the probability of finding a photon. In this framework, partial transmission and frustrated TIR concern the probability of a photon crossing a boundary, and attenuated total reflectance concerns the probability of a photon being absorbed on the other side.\nResearch into the more subtle aspects of the phase shift in TIR, including the Goos\u2013H\u00e4nchen and Imbert\u2013Fedorov effects and their quantum interpretations, has continued into the 21st century.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30428", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30428", "title": "Inklings", "text": "Informal literary discussion group associated with the University of Oxford, England\nThe Inklings were an informal literary discussion group associated with J. R. R. Tolkien and C. S. Lewis at the University of Oxford for nearly two decades between the early 1930s and late 1949. The Inklings were literary enthusiasts who praised the value of narrative in fiction and encouraged the writing of fantasy. The best-known, apart from Tolkien and Lewis, were Charles Williams, and (although a Londoner) Owen Barfield.\nMembers.\nThe more regular members of the Inklings, many of them academics at the University, included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nLess frequent visitors included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGuests included: \nMeetings.\n\"Properly speaking,\" wrote Warren Lewis, \"the Inklings was neither a club nor a literary society, though it partook of the nature of both. There were no rules, officers, agendas, or formal elections.\" As was typical for university groups in their time and place, the Inklings were all male. Readings and discussions of the members' unfinished works were the principal purposes of meetings. Tolkien's \"The Lord of the Rings\", Lewis's \"Out of the Silent Planet\", and Williams's \"All Hallows' Eve\" were among the novels first read to the Inklings. Tolkien's fictional Notion Club (see \"Sauron Defeated\") was based on the Inklings. Meetings were not all serious; the Inklings amused themselves by having competitions to see who could read the notoriously bad prose of Amanda McKittrick Ros for the longest without laughing.\nThe name was associated originally with a society of Oxford University's University College, initiated by the then undergraduate Edward Tangye Lean around 1931, for the purpose of reading aloud unfinished compositions. The society consisted of students and dons, among them Tolkien and Lewis. When Lean left Oxford in 1933, the society ended, and Tolkien and Lewis transferred its name to their group at Magdalen College. On the association between the two 'Inklings' societies, Tolkien later said \"although our habit was to read aloud compositions of various kinds (and lengths!), this association and its habit would in fact have come into being at that time, whether the original short-lived club had ever existed or not.\"\nUntil late 1949, Inklings readings and discussions were usually held on Thursday evenings in C. S. Lewis's rooms at Magdalen. The Inklings and friends also gathered informally on Tuesdays at midday at a local public house, The Eagle and Child, familiarly and alliteratively known in the Oxford community as The Bird and Baby, or simply The Bird. The publican, Charlie Blagrove, let Lewis and friends use his private parlour for privacy; the wall and door separating it from the public bar were removed in 1962. During the war years, beer shortages occasionally rendered the Eagle and Child unable to open and the group instead met at other pubs, including the White Horse and the Kings Arms.\nLegacy.\nThe Marion E. Wade Center, at Wheaton College, Illinois, has holdings on the Inklings Owen Barfield, C. S. Lewis, J. R. R. Tolkien and Charles Williams. These include letters, manuscripts, audio and video tapes, artwork, dissertations, periodicals, photographs, and related materials. \nThe Mythopoeic Society, with its journal \"Mythlore\", is a literary organization devoted to the study of mythopoeic literature, particularly the works of J. R. R. Tolkien, C. S. Lewis, and Charles Williams, founded by Glen GoodKnight in 1967 and incorporated as a non-profit organization in 1971.\nAnother journal that focuses on \"The Inklings\" is \"Journal of Inklings Studies\" (founded in 2011).\nThe Inklings in fiction.\nThree of the best-known members of the Inklings \u2013 Tolkien, Lewis, and Williams \u2013 are the main characters of James A. Owen's fantasy series, \"The Chronicles of the Imaginarium Geographica\", while Warren Lewis and Hugo Dyson are recurring minor characters throughout the series. The existence and founding of the organization are also alluded to in the third novel, \"The Indigo King\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30429", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30429", "title": "The liquid drop model", "text": ""}
{"id": "30430", "revid": "21253570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30430", "title": "Tv", "text": ""}
{"id": "30431", "revid": "454221", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30431", "title": "TV (disambiguation)", "text": "TV or television is a telecommunication medium for transmitting and receiving moving images and sound.\nTV may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "30432", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30432", "title": "Treaty", "text": "Express agreement between nations under international law\nA treaty is a recorded international agreement between sovereign states or other subjects of international law (including international organizations) that is governed by international law. A treaty may also be known as an international agreement, protocol, covenant, convention, pact, or exchange of letters, among other terms; however, only documents that are legally binding on the parties are considered treaties under international law. Treaties may be bilateral (between two countries) or multilateral (involving more than two countries). \nInternational agreements were used in some form by most major civilizations and became increasingly common and more sophisticated during the early modern era. The early 19th century saw developments in diplomacy, foreign policy, and international law reflected by the widespread use of treaties. The 1969 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (VCLT) codified these practices and established rules and guidelines for creating, amending, interpreting, and terminating treaties, and for resolving disputes and alleged breaches. \nThey vary in their obligations (the extent to which states are bound to the rules), precision (the extent to which the rules are unambiguous), and delegation (the extent to which third parties have authority to interpret, apply and make rules). Treaties can take many forms and govern a wide range of subject matters, such as security, trade, environment, and human rights; they may also be used to establish international institutions, such as the International Criminal Court and the United Nations, for which they often provide a governing framework. Treaties serve as primary sources of international law and have codified or established most international legal principles since the early 20th century. In contrast with other sources of international law, such as customary international law, treaties are only binding on the parties that have signed and ratified them.\nNotwithstanding the VCLT and customary international law, treaties are not required to follow any standard form, and differ widely in substance and complexity. Nevertheless, all valid treaties must comply with the legal principle of \"pacta sunt servanda\" (Latin: \"agreements must be kept\"), under which parties are committed to perform their duties and honor their agreements in good faith. A treaty may also be invalidated, and thus rendered unenforceable, if it violates a preemptory norm (\"jus cogens\"), such as permitting a war of aggression or crimes against humanity.\nModern usage and form.\nA treaty is an official, express written agreement that states use to legally bind themselves. It is also the objective outcome of a ceremonial occasion that acknowledges the parties and their defined relationships. There is no prerequisite of academic accreditation or cross-professional contextual knowledge required to publish a treaty.\nHowever, since the late 19th century, most treaties have followed a fairly consistent format. A treaty typically begins with a preamble describing the \"High Contracting Parties\" and their shared objectives in executing the treaty, as well as summarizing any underlying events (such as the aftermath of a war in the case of a peace treaty). Modern preambles are sometimes structured as a single very long sentence formatted into multiple paragraphs for readability, in which each of the paragraphs begins with a gerund (desiring, recognizing, having, etc.).\nThe High Contracting Parties\u2014referred to as either the official title of the head of state (but not including the personal name), e.g. \"His Majesty The King of X\" or \"His Excellency The President of Y\", or alternatively in the form of \" Government of Z\"\u2014are enumerated, along with the full names and titles of their plenipotentiary representatives; a boilerplate clause describes how each party's representatives have communicated (or exchanged) their \"full powers\" (i.e., the official documents appointing them to act on behalf of their respective high contracting party) and found them in good or proper form. However, under the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties if the representative is the head of state, head of government or minister of foreign affairs, no special document is needed, as holding such high office is sufficient.\nThe end of the preamble and the start of the actual agreement is often signaled by the words \"have agreed as follows\".\nAfter the preamble comes numbered articles, which contain the substance of the parties' actual agreement. Each article heading usually encompasses a paragraph. A long treaty may further group articles under chapter headings.\nModern treaties, regardless of subject matter, usually contain articles governing where the final authentic copies of the treaty will be deposited and how any subsequent disputes as to their interpretation will be peacefully resolved.\nThe end of a treaty, the eschatocol (or closing protocol), is often signaled by language such as \"in witness whereof\" or \"in faith whereof\", followed by the words \"DONE at\", then the site(s) of the treaty's execution and the date(s) of its execution. The date is typically written in its most formal, non-numerical form; for example, the Charter of the United Nations reads \"DONE at the city of San Francisco the twenty-sixth day of June, one thousand nine hundred and forty-five\". If applicable, a treaty will note that it is executed in multiple copies in different languages, with a stipulation that the versions in different languages are equally authentic.\nThe signatures of the parties' representatives follow at the very end. When the text of a treaty is later reprinted, such as in a collection of treaties currently in effect, an editor will often append the dates on which the respective parties ratified the treaty and on which it came into effect for each party.\nBilateral and multilateral treaties.\nBilateral treaties are concluded between two states or entities. It is possible for a bilateral treaty to have more than two parties; for example, each of the bilateral treaties between Switzerland and the European Union (EU) has seventeen parties: The parties are divided into two groups, the Swiss (\"on the one part\") and the EU and its member states (\"on the other part\"). The treaty establishes rights and obligations between the Swiss and the EU and the member states severally\u2014it does not establish any rights and obligations amongst the EU and its member states.\nA multilateral treaty is concluded among several countries, establishing rights and obligations between each party and every other party. Multilateral treaties may be regional or may involve states across the world. Treaties of \"mutual guarantee\" are international compacts, e.g., the Treaty of Locarno which guarantees each signatory against attack from another.\nRole of the United Nations.\nThe United Nations has extensive power to convene states to enact large-scale multilateral treaties and has experience doing so. Under the United Nations Charter, which is itself a treaty, treaties must be registered with the UN to be invoked before it, or enforced in its judiciary organ, the International Court of Justice. This was done to prevent the practice of secret treaties, which proliferated in the 19th and 20th centuries and often precipitated or exacerbated conflict. Article 103 of the Charter also states that its members' obligations under the Charter outweigh any competing obligations under other treaties.\nAfter their adoption, treaties, as well as their amendments, must follow the official legal procedures of the United Nations, as applied by the Office of Legal Affairs, including signature, ratification and entry into force.\nIn function and effectiveness, the UN has been compared to the United States federal government under the Articles of Confederation.\nAdding and amending treaty obligations.\nReservations.\nCecelia Snyder of Troy ny 12180 copyrights\nReservations are essentially caveats to a state's acceptance of a treaty. Reservations are unilateral statements purporting to exclude or to modify the legal obligation and its effects on the reserving state. These must be included at the time of signing or ratification, i.e., \"a party cannot add a reservation after it has already joined a treaty\". Article 19 of the Vienna Convention on the law of Treaties in 1969.\nOriginally, international law was unaccepting of treaty reservations, rejecting them unless all parties to the treaty accepted the same reservations. However, in the interest of encouraging the largest number of states to join treaties, a more permissive rule regarding reservations has emerged. While some treaties still expressly forbid any reservations, they are now generally permitted to the extent that they are not inconsistent with the goals and purposes of the treaty.\nWhen a state limits its treaty obligations through reservations, other states party to that treaty have the option to accept those reservations, object to them, or object and oppose them. If the state accepts them (or fails to act at all), both the reserving state and the accepting state are relieved of the reserved legal obligation as concerns their legal obligations to each other (accepting the reservation does not change the accepting state's legal obligations as concerns other parties to the treaty). If the state opposes, the parts of the treaty affected by the reservation drop out completely and no longer create any legal obligations on the reserving and accepting state, again only as concerns each other. Finally, if the state objects and opposes, there are no legal obligations under that treaty between those two state parties whatsoever. The objecting and opposing state essentially refuses to acknowledge the reserving state is a party to the treaty at all.\nAmendments.\nThere are three ways an existing treaty can be amended. First, a formal amendment requires State parties to the treaty to go through the ratification process all over again. The re-negotiation of treaty provisions can be long and protracted, and often some parties to the original treaty will not become parties to the amended treaty. When determining the legal obligations of states, one party to the original treaty and one party to the amended treaty, the states will only be bound by the terms they both agreed upon. Treaties can also be amended informally by the treaty executive council when the changes are only procedural, technical change in customary international law can also amend a treaty, where state behavior evinces a new interpretation of the legal obligations under the treaty. Minor corrections to a treaty may be adopted by a proc\u00e8s-verbal; but a proc\u00e8s-verbal is generally reserved for changes to rectify obvious errors in the text adopted, i.e., where the text adopted does not correctly reflect the intention of the parties adopting it.\nProtocols.\nIn international law and international relations, a protocol is generally a treaty or international agreement that supplements a previous treaty or international agreement. A protocol can amend the previous treaty or add additional provisions. Parties to the earlier agreement are not required to adopt the protocol, and this is sometimes made explicit, especially where many parties to the first agreement do not support the protocol.\nA notable example is the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), which established a general framework for the development of binding greenhouse gas emission limits, followed by the Kyoto Protocol contained the specific provisions and regulations later agreed upon.\nExecution and implementation.\nTreaties may be seen as \"self-executing\", in that merely becoming a party puts the treaty and all its obligations in action. Other treaties may be non-self-executing and require \"implementing legislation\"\u2014a change in the domestic law of a state party that will direct or enable it to fulfill treaty obligations. An example of a treaty requiring such legislation would be one mandating local prosecution by a party for particular crimes.\nThe division between the two is often unclear and subject to disagreements within a government, since a non-self-executing treaty cannot be acted on without the proper change in domestic law; if a treaty requires implementing legislation, a state may default on its obligations due to its legislature failing to pass the necessary domestic laws.\nInterpretation.\nThe language of treaties, like that of any law or contract, must be interpreted when the wording does not seem clear, or it is not immediately apparent how it should be applied in a perhaps unforeseen circumstance. The Vienna Convention states that treaties are to be interpreted \"in good faith\" according to the \"ordinary meaning given to the terms of the treaty in their context and in the light of its object and purpose\". International legal experts also often invoke the \"principle of maximum effectiveness\", which interprets treaty language as having the fullest force and effect possible to establish obligations between the parties.\nNo one party to a treaty can impose its particular interpretation of the treaty upon the other parties. Consent may be implied, however, if the other parties fail to explicitly disavow that initially unilateral interpretation, particularly if that state has acted upon its view of the treaty without complaint. Consent by all parties to the treaty to a particular interpretation has the legal effect of adding another clause to the treaty \u2013 this is commonly called an \"authentic interpretation\".\nInternational tribunals and arbiters are often called upon to resolve substantial disputes over treaty interpretations. To establish the meaning in context, these judicial bodies may review the preparatory work from the negotiation and drafting of the treaty as well as the final, signed treaty itself.\nConsequences of terminology.\nOne significant part of treaty-making is that signing a treaty implies a recognition that the other side is a sovereign state and that the agreement being considered is enforceable under international law. Hence, nations can be very careful about terming an agreement to be a treaty. For example, within the United States, agreements between states are compacts and agreements between states and the federal government or between agencies of the government are memoranda of understanding.\nAnother situation can occur when one party wishes to create an obligation under international law, but the other party does not. This factor has been at work with respect to discussions between North Korea and the United States over security guarantees and nuclear proliferation.\nThe definition of the English word \"treaty\" varies depending on the legal and political context; in some jurisdictions, such as the United States, a treaty is specifically an international agreement that has been ratified, and thus made binding, per the procedures established under domestic law.\nEnforcement.\nWhile the Vienna Convention provides a general dispute resolution mechanism, many treaties specify a process outside the convention for arbitrating disputes and alleged breaches. This may by a specially convened panel, by reference to an existing court or panel established for the purpose such as the International Court of Justice, the European Court of Justice or processes such as the Dispute Settlement Understanding of the World Trade Organization. Depending on the treaty, such a process may result in financial penalties or other enforcement action.\nEnding treaty obligations.\nWithdrawal.\nTreaties are not necessarily permanently binding upon the signatory parties. As obligations in international law are traditionally viewed as arising only from the consent of states, many treaties expressly allow a state to withdraw as long as it follows certain procedures of notification (\"denunciation\"). For example, the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs provides that the treaty will terminate if, as a result of denunciations, the number of parties falls below 40. Many treaties expressly forbid withdrawal. Article 56 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties provides that where a treaty is silent over whether or not it can be denounced there is a rebuttable presumption that it cannot be unilaterally denounced unless:\nThe possibility of withdrawal depends on the terms of the treaty and its \"travaux preparatory. \"It has, for example, been held that it is not possible to withdraw from the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. When North Korea declared its intention to do this the Secretary-General of the United Nations, acting as registrar, said that original signatories of the ICCPR had not overlooked the possibility of explicitly providing for withdrawal, but rather had deliberately intended not to provide for it. Consequently, withdrawal was not possible.\nThe Organization of American States (OAS) offers the ability of member states to withdraw from its framework by allowing states to officially inform the General Secretariat of the OAS of such intended withdrawal and being subject to a two-year long sunset period in accordance with Article 143 of the body's charter.\nIn practice, state legislatures or other officials where so structured sometimes use their sovereignty or provisions of supreme law to declare their withdrawal from and stop following the terms of a treaty even if this violates the terms of the treaty. Other parties may accept this outcome, may consider the state to be untrustworthy in future dealings, or may retaliate with sanctions or military action. Withdrawal by one party from a bilateral treaty is typically considered to terminate the treaty. Multilateral treaties typically continue even after the withdrawal of one member, unless the terms of the treaty or mutual agreement causes its termination.\nSuspension and termination.\nIf a party has materially violated or breached its treaty obligations, the other parties may invoke this breach as grounds for temporarily suspending their obligations to that party under the treaty. A material breach may also be invoked as grounds for permanently terminating the treaty itself.\nA treaty breach does not automatically suspend or terminate treaty relations, however. It depends on how the other parties regard the breach and how they resolve to respond to it. Sometimes treaties will provide for the seriousness of a breach to be determined by a tribunal or other independent arbiter. An advantage of such an arbiter is that it prevents a party from prematurely and perhaps wrongfully suspending or terminating its own obligations due to another's an alleged material breach.\nTreaties sometimes include provisions for self-termination, meaning that the treaty is automatically terminated if certain defined conditions are met. Some treaties are intended by the parties to be only temporarily binding and are set to expire on a given date. Other treaties may self-terminate if the treaty is meant to exist only under certain conditions.\nA party may claim that a treaty should be terminated, even absent an express provision, if there has been a fundamental change in circumstances. Such a change is sufficient if unforeseen, if it undermined the \"essential basis\" of consent by a party if it radically transforms the extent of obligations between the parties, and if the obligations are still to be performed. A party cannot base this claim on change brought about by its own breach of the treaty. This claim also cannot be used to invalidate treaties that established or redrew political boundaries.\nCartels.\nCartels (\"Cartells\", \"Cartelle\" or \"Kartell-Konventionen\" in other languages) were a special kind of treaty within the international law of the 17th to 19th centuries. Their purpose was to regulate specific activities of common interest among contracting states that otherwise remained rivals in other areas. They were typically implemented on an administrative level. Similar to the \"cartels\" for duels and tournaments, these intergovernmental accords represented fairness agreements or gentlemen's agreements between states.\nIn the United States, cartels governed humanitarian actions typically carried out by cartel ships were dispatched for missions, such as to carry communications or prisoners between belligerents.\nFrom the European history, a broader range of purposes is known. These \"cartels\" often reflected the cohesion of authoritarian ruling classes against their own unruly citizens. Generally, the European governments concluded - while curbing their mutual rivalries partially - cooperation agreements, which should apply generally or only in case of war:\nThe measures against criminals and unruly citizens were to be conducted regardless of the nationality and origin of the relevant persons. If necessary, national borders could be crossed by police forces of the respective neighboring country for capture and arrest. In the course of the 19th century, the term \"cartel\" (or \"Cartell\") gradually disappeared for intergovernmental agreements under international law. Instead, the term \"convention\" was used.\nInvalid treaties.\nAn otherwise valid and agreed upon treaty may be rejected as a binding international agreement on several grounds. For example, the Japan\u2013Korea treaties of 1905, 1907, and 1910 were protested by several governments as having been essentially forced upon Korea by Japan; they were confirmed as \"already null and void\" in the 1965 Treaty on Basic Relations between Japan and the Republic of Korea.\n\"Ultra vires\" treaties.\nIf an act or lack thereof is condemned under international law, the act will not assume international legality even if approved by internal law. This means that in case of a conflict with domestic law, international law will always prevail.\nA party's consent to a treaty is invalid if it had been given by an agent or body without power to do so under that state's domestic laws. States are reluctant to inquire into the internal affairs and processes of other states, and so a \"manifest violation\" is required such that it would be \"objectively evident to any State dealing with the matter\". A strong presumption exists internationally that a head of state has acted within his proper authority. It seems that no treaty has ever actually been invalidated on this provision.\nConsent is also invalid if it was given by a representative acting outside their restricted powers during the negotiations, if the other parties to the treaty were notified of those restrictions prior to his or her signing.\nMisunderstanding, fraud, corruption, coercion.\nArticles 46\u201353 of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties set out the only ways that treaties can be invalidated\u2014considered unenforceable and void under international law. A treaty will be invalidated due to either the circumstances by which a state party joined the treaty or due to the content of the treaty itself. Invalidation is separate from withdrawal, suspension, or termination (addressed above), which all involve an alteration in the consent of the parties of a previously valid treaty rather than the invalidation of that consent in the first place.\nA governmental leader's consent may be invalidated if there was an erroneous understanding of a fact or situation at the time of conclusion, which formed the \"essential basis\" of the state's consent. Consent will not be invalidated if the misunderstanding was due to the state's own conduct, or if the truth should have been evident.\nConsent will also be invalidated if it was induced by the fraudulent conduct of another party, or by the direct or indirect \"corruption\" of its representative by another party to the treaty. Coercion of either a representative or the state itself through the threat or use of force, if used to obtain the consent of that state to a treaty, will invalidate that consent.\nContrary to peremptory norms.\nA treaty is null and void if it is in violation of a peremptory norm. These norms, unlike other principles of customary law, are recognized as permitting no violations and so cannot be altered through treaty obligations. These are limited to such universally accepted prohibitions as those against the aggressive use of force, genocide and other crimes against humanity, piracy, hostilities directed at civilian population, racial discrimination and apartheid, slavery and torture, meaning that no state can legally assume an obligation to commit or permit such acts.\nTreaties under domestic national law.\nAustralia.\nThe constitution of Australia allows the executive government to enter into treaties, but the practice is for treaties to be tabled in both houses of parliament at least 15 days before signing. Treaties are considered a source of Australian law but sometimes require an act of parliament to be passed depending on their nature. Treaties are administered and maintained by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, which advised that the \"general position under Australian law is that treaties which Australia has joined, apart from those terminating a state of war, are not directly and automatically incorporated into Australian law. Signature and ratification do not, of themselves, make treaties operate domestically. In the absence of legislation, treaties cannot impose obligations on individuals nor create rights in domestic law. Nevertheless, international law, including treaty law, is a legitimate and important influence on the development of the common law and may be used in the interpretation of statutes.\" Treaties can be implemented by executive action, and often, existing laws are sufficient to ensure a treaty is honored.\nAustralian treaties generally fall under the following categories: extradition, postal agreements and money orders, trade and international conventions.\nBrazil.\nThe federal constitution of Brazil states that the power to enter into treaties is vested in the president of Brazil and that such treaties must be approved by the Congress of Brazil (Articles 84, Clause VIII, and 49, Clause I). In practice, that has been interpreted as meaning that the executive branch is free to negotiate and sign a treaty but that its ratification by the president requires the prior approval of Congress. Additionally, the Supreme Federal Court has ruled that after ratification and entry into force, a treaty must be incorporated into domestic law by means of a presidential decree published in the federal register for it to be valid in Brazil and applicable by the Brazilian authorities.\nThe court has established that treaties are subject to constitutional review and enjoy the same hierarchical position as ordinary legislation (\"leis ordin\u00e1rias\", or \"ordinary laws\", in Portuguese). A more recent ruling by the Supreme Court of Brazil in 2008 has altered that somewhat by stating that treaties containing human rights provisions enjoy a status above that of ordinary legislation, subject to only the constitution itself. Additionally, the 45th Amendment to the constitution makes human rights treaties approved by Congress by a special procedure enjoy the same hierarchical position as a constitutional amendment. The hierarchical position of treaties in relation to domestic legislation is of relevance to the discussion on whether and how the latter can abrogate the former and vice versa.\nThe constitution does not have an equivalent to the supremacy clause in U.S. Constitution, which is of interest to the discussion on the relation between treaties and legislation of the states of Brazil.\nIndia.\nIn India, subjects are divided into three lists: union, state and concurrent. In the normal legislation process, the subjects on the union list must be legislated by the Parliament of India. For subjects on the state list, only the respective state legislature can legislate. For subjects on the concurrent list, both governments can make laws. However, to implement international treaties, Parliament can legislate on any subject and even override the general division of subject lists.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the term \"treaty\" has a distinct and more restricted legal definition than in international law. U.S. law distinguishes between \"treaties\", as defined in the U.S. Constitution, and \"executive agreements\", which are either \"congressional-executive agreements\" or \"sole executive agreements\"; although all three classes are equally treaties under international law, they are subject to different political and legal requirements and implications in the U.S.\nThe distinctions primarily concern the method of approval: Treaties require the \"advice and consent\" by two-thirds of the Senators present, whereas sole executive agreements are executed by the President acting alone and congressional-executive agreements require majority approval by both the House and the Senate. The three classifications are not mutually exclusive: A treaty may require a simple majority in Congress before or after it is signed by the President or may grant the President authority to fill in the gaps with executive agreements, rather than additional treaties or protocols.\nCurrently, international agreements are ten times more likely to be executed by executive agreement, due to their relative ease. Nevertheless, the President still often chooses to pursue the formal treaty process over an executive agreement to gain congressional support on matters that require Congress to pass implementing legislation or appropriate funds as well as for agreements that impose long-term, complex legal obligations on the U.S. For example, the agreement by the United States, Iran, and other countries is not a treaty under U.S. law, but rather a \"political commitment\" that does not bind the parties by law.\nThe nuances and ambiguity of how international agreements are effectuated or implemented in U.S. law has been subject to multiple legal cases. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the \"Head Money Cases\" (1884) that \"treaties\" do not have a privileged position over acts of Congress and can be repealed or modified by legislative action just like any other regular law. In a similar vein, the court's decision in \"Reid v. Covert\" (1957) held that treaty provisions that conflict with the U.S. Constitution are null and void under U.S. law. However, the U.S. Supreme Court has also recognized the \"supremacy\" of treaties in the U.S. Constitution, such as in \"Ware v. Hylton\" (1796) and \"Missouri v. Holland\" (1920).\nThe relative ease by which certain international agreements could be entered into by the President has often prompted congressional pushback, most notably in the proposed Bricker Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which explicitly sought to reign in executive treatymaking powers.\nTreaties and indigenous peoples.\nTreaties formed an important part of European colonization; in many parts of the world, Europeans attempted to legitimize their sovereignty by signing treaties with indigenous peoples. In most cases, these treaties were in extremely disadvantageous terms to the native people, who often did not comprehend the implications of what they were signing.\nIn some rare cases, such as with Ethiopia and Qing China, local governments were able to use the treaties to at least mitigate the impact of European colonization. This involved learning the intricacies of European diplomatic customs and then using the treaties to prevent power from overstepping their agreement or by playing different powers against each other.\nIn other cases, such as New Zealand with the M\u0101ori and Canada with its First Nations people, treaties allowed native peoples to maintain a minimum amount of autonomy. Such treaties between colonizers and indigenous peoples are an important part of political discourse in the late 20th and early 21st century, the treaties being discussed have international standing as has been stated in a treaty study by the UN.\nAustralia.\nIn the case of Indigenous Australians, no treaty was ever entered into with the Indigenous peoples entitling the Europeans to land ownership, mostly adopting the doctrine of \"terra nullius\" (with the exception of South Australia). This concept was later overturned by \"Mabo v Queensland\", which established the concept of native title in Australia well after colonization was already a \"fait accompli\".\nVictoria.\nOn 10 December 2019, the Victorian First Peoples' Assembly met for the first time in the Upper House of the Parliament of Victoria in Melbourne. The main aim of the Assembly is to work out the rules by which individual treaties would be negotiated between the Victorian Government and individual Aboriginal Victorian peoples. It will also establish an independent Treaty Authority, which will oversee the negotiations between the Aboriginal groups and the Victorian Government and ensure fairness.\nUnited States.\nPrior to 1871, the government of the United States regularly entered into treaties with Native Americans but the Indian Appropriations Act of 3 March 1871 had a rider attached that effectively ended the President's treaty-making by providing that no Indian nation or tribe shall be acknowledged as an independent nation, tribe, or power with whom the United States may contract by treaty. The federal government continued to provide similar contractual relations with the Indian tribes after 1871 by agreements, statutes, and executive orders.\nCanada.\nColonization in Canada saw a number of treaties signed between European settlers and Indigenous First Nations peoples. Historic Canadian treaties tend to fall into three broad categories: commercial, alliance, and territorial. Commercial treaties first emerged in the 17th century and were agreements made between the European fur trading companies and the local First Nations. The Hudson's Bay Company, a British trading company located in what is now Northern Ontario, signed numerous commercial treaties during this period. Alliance treaties, commonly referred to as \"treaties of peace, friendship and alliance\" emerged in the late 17th to early 18th century. Finally, territorial treaties dictating land rights were signed between 1760 and 1923. The Royal Proclamation of 1763 accelerated the treaty-making process and provided the Crown with access to large amounts of land occupied by the First Nations. The Crown and 364 First Nations signed 70 treaties that are recognized by the Government of Canada and represent over 600,000 First Nation individuals. The treaties are as follows:\nTreaty perceptions.\nThere is evidence that \"although both Indigenous and European Nations engaged in treaty-making before contact with each other, the traditions, beliefs, and worldviews that defined concepts such as \"treaties\" were extremely different\". The Indigenous understanding of treaties is based on traditional culture and values. Maintaining healthy and equitable relationships with other nations, as well as the environment, is paramount. Gdoo-naaganinaa, a historic treaty between the Nishnaabeg nation and the Haudenosaunee Confederacy is an example of how First Nations approach treaties. Under Gdoo-naaganinaa, also referred-to in English as \"Our Dish\", the neighbouring nations acknowledged that while they were separate nations they shared the same ecosystem or \"Dish\". It was agreed that the nations would respectably share the land, not interfering with the other nation's sovereignty while also not monopolizing environmental resources. First Nations agreements, such as the Gdoo-naaganigaa, are considered \"living treaties\" that must be upheld continually and renewed over time. European settlers in Canada had a different perception of treaties. Treaties were not a living, equitable agreement but rather a legal contract over which the future creation of Canadian law would later rely on. As time passed, the settlers did not think it necessary to abide by all treaty agreements. A review of historic treaties reveals that the European settler understanding is the dominant view portrayed in Canadian treaties.\nTreaties today.\nCanada today recognizes 25 additional treaties called Modern Treaties. These treaties represent the relationships between 97 Indigenous groups which includes over 89,000 people. The treaties have been instrumental in strengthening Indigenous stronghold in Canada by providing the following (as organized by the Government of Canada) :\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30433", "revid": "1126265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30433", "title": "Transaction Processing Facility", "text": "IBM real-time operating system\nTransaction Processing Facility (TPF) is an IBM real-time operating system for mainframe computers descended from the IBM System/360 family, including zSeries and System z9.\nTPF delivers fast, high-volume, high-throughput transaction processing, handling large, continuous loads of essentially simple transactions across large, geographically dispersed networks.\nWhile there are other industrial-strength transaction processing systems, notably IBM's own CICS and IMS, TPF's specialty is extreme volume, large numbers of concurrent users, and very fast response times. For example, it handles VISA credit card transaction processing during the peak holiday shopping season.\nThe TPF passenger reservation application PARS, or its international version IPARS, is used by many airlines. \"PARS\" is an \"application program\"; TPF is an operating system.\nOne of TPF's major optional components is a high performance, specialized database facility called \"TPF Database Facility\" (TPFDF).\nA close cousin of TPF, the transaction monitor ALCS, was developed by IBM to integrate TPF services into the more common mainframe operating system MVS, now z/OS.\nHistory.\nTPF evolved from the Airline Control Program (ACP), a free package developed in the mid-1960s by IBM in association with major North American and European airlines. In 1979, IBM introduced TPF as a replacement for ACP\u00a0\u2014 and as a priced software product. The new name suggests its greater scope and evolution into non-airline related entities.\nTPF was traditionally an IBM System/370 assembly language environment for performance reasons, and many TPF assembler applications persist. However, more recent versions of TPF encourage the use of C. Another programming language called SabreTalk was born and died on TPF.\nIBM announced the delivery of the current release of TPF, dubbed z/TPF V1.1, in September 2005. Most significantly, z/TPF adds 64-bit addressing and mandates use of the 64-bit GNU development tools.\nThe GCC compiler and the DIGNUS Systems/C++ and Systems/C are the only supported compilers for z/TPF. The Dignus compilers offer reduced source code changes when moving from TPF 4.1 to z/TPF.\nUsers.\nCurrent users include Sabre (reservations), VISA Inc. (authorizations), American Airlines, American Express (authorizations), DXC Technology SHARES (reservations), Amtrak, Marriott International, Travelport (Galileo, Apollo, Worldspan), Citibank, Trenitalia (reservations), Delta Air Lines (reservations and operations) and Japan Airlines.\nOperating environment.\nTightly coupled.\nAlthough IBM's 3083 was aimed at running TPF on a \"fast... uniprocessor\", TPF is capable of running on a multiprocessor, that is, on systems in which there is more than one CPU. Within the LPAR, the CPUs are referred to as \"instruction streams\" or simply I-streams. When running on a LPAR with more than one I-stream, TPF is said to be running tightly coupled. TPF adheres to SMP concepts; no concept of NUMA-based distinctions between memory addresses exist.\nThe depth of the \"CPU ready list\" is measured as any incoming transaction is received, and queued for the I-stream with the lowest demand, thus maintaining continuous load balancing among available processors. In cases where loosely coupled configurations are populated by multiprocessor CPCs (\"Central Processing Complex\", i.e. the physical machine packaged in one \"system cabinet\"), SMP takes place within the CPC as described here, whereas sharing of inter-CPC resources takes place as described under Loosely coupled, below.\nIn the TPF architecture, all memory (except for a 4KB-sized \"prefix area\") is shared among all I-streams. In instances where memory-resident data must or should be kept separated by I-stream, the programmer typically allocates a storage area into a number of \"subsections\" equal to the number of I-streams, then accesses the desired I-stream associated area by taking the base address of the allocated area, and adding to it the product of the I-stream relative number times the size of each subsection.\nLoosely coupled.\nTPF is capable of supporting multiple mainframes (of any size themselves\u00a0\u2014 be it single I-stream to multiple I-stream) connecting to and operating on a common database. Currently, 32 IBM mainframes may share the TPF database; if such a system were in operation, it would be called 32-way loosely coupled. The simplest loosely coupled system would be two IBM mainframes sharing one DASD (Direct Access Storage Device). In this case, the control program would be equally loaded into memory and each program or record on DASD could be potentially accessed by either mainframe.\nIn order to serialize accesses between data records on a loosely coupled system, a practice known as record locking must be used. This means that when one mainframe processor obtains a hold on a record, the mechanism must prevent all other processors from obtaining the same hold and communicate to the requesting processors that they are waiting. Within any tightly coupled system, this is easy to manage between I-streams via the use of the Record Hold Table. However, when the lock is obtained offboard of the TPF processor in the DASD control unit, an external process must be used. Historically, the record locking was accomplished in the DASD control unit via an RPQ known as LLF (Limited Locking Facility) and later ELLF (extended). LLF and ELLF were both replaced by the Multipathing Lock Facility (MPLF). To run clustered (loosely coupled) z/TPF requires either MPLF in all disk control units or an alternative locking device called a Coupling Facility.\nProcessor shared records.\nRecords that absolutely must be managed by a record locking process are those which are processor shared. In TPF, most record accesses are done by using record type and ordinal. Given a record type in the TPF system of 'FRED' with 100 records or ordinals, in a processor shared scheme, record type 'FRED' ordinal '5' would resolve to exactly the same file address on DASD\u00a0\u2014 necessitating the use of a record locking mechanism.\nAll processor shared records on a TPF system will be accessed via the same file address which will resolve to the same location.\nProcessor unique records.\nA processor unique record is one that is defined such that each processor expected to be in the loosely coupled complex has a record type of 'FRED' and perhaps 100 ordinals. However, if a user on any 2 or more processors examines the file address that record type 'FRED', ordinal '5' resolves to, they will note a different physical address is used.\nTPF attributes.\nWhat TPF is not.\nTPF is not a general-purpose operating system. TPF's specialized role is to process transaction input messages, then return output messages on a 1:1 basis at extremely high volume with short maximum elapsed time limits.\nTPF has no built-in graphical user interface functionality, and TPF has never offered direct graphical display facilities: to implement it on the host would be considered an unnecessary and potentially harmful diversion of real-time system resources. TPF's user interface is command-line driven with simple text display terminals that scroll upward, and there are no mouse-driven cursors, windows, or icons on a TPF \"Prime CRAS\" (\"Computer room agent set\" \u2014 which is best thought of as the \"operator's console\"). Character messages are intended to be the mode of communications with human users. All work is accomplished via the use of the command line, similar to UNIX without X. There are several products available which connect to Prime CRAS and provide graphical interface functions to the TPF operator, such as \"TPF Operations Server\". Graphical interfaces for end users, if desired, must be provided by external systems. Such systems perform analysis on character content (see Screen scrape) and convert the message to/from the desired graphical form, depending on its context.\nBeing a specialized purpose operating system, TPF does not host a compiler/assembler, text editor, nor implement the concept of a desktop as one might expect to find in a general-purpose operating system. TPF application source code is commonly stored in external systems, and likewise built \"offline\". Starting with z/TPF 1.1, Linux is the supported build platform; executable programs intended for z/TPF operation must observe the ELF format for s390x-ibm-linux.\nUsing TPF requires a knowledge of its \"Command Guide\" since there is no support for an online command \"directory\" or \"man\"/help facility to which users might be accustomed. Commands created and shipped by IBM for the system administration of TPF are called \"functional messages\"\u2014commonly referred to as \"Z-messages\", as they are all prefixed with the letter \"Z\". Other letters are reserved so that customers may write their own commands.\nTPF implements debugging in a distributed client-server mode, which is necessary because of the system's headless, multi-processing nature: pausing the entire system in order to trap a single task would be highly counterproductive. Debugger packages have been developed by third party vendors who took very different approaches to the \"break/continue\" operations required at the TPF host, implementing unique communications protocols used in traffic between the human developer running the debugger client and the server-side debug controller, as well as the form and function of debugger program operations at the client side. Two examples of third party debugger packages are \"Step by Step Trace\" from Bedford Associates and \"CMSTPF\", \"TPF/GI\", and \"zTPFGI\", all from TPF Software, Inc. Neither package is wholly compatible with the other, nor with IBM's own offering. IBM's debugging client offering is packaged in an IDE called \"IBM TPF Toolkit\".\nWhat TPF is.\nTPF is highly optimized to permit messages from the supported network to either be switched out to another location, routed to an application (specific set of programs) or to permit extremely efficient accesses to database records.\nData records.\nHistorically, all data on the TPF system had to fit in fixed record (and memory block) sizes of 381, 1055 and 4K bytes. This was due in part to the physical record sizes of blocks located on DASD. Much overhead was saved by freeing up any part of the operating system from breaking large data entities into smaller ones during file operations, and reassembling the same during read operations. Since IBM hardware does I/O via the use of channels and channel programs, TPF would generate very small and efficient channel programs to do its I/O\u00a0\u2014 all in the name of speed. Since the early days also placed a premium on the size of storage media\u00a0\u2014 be it memory or disk, TPF applications evolved into doing very powerful things while using very little resource.\nToday, much of these limitations are removed. In fact, only because of legacy support are smaller-than-4K DASD records still used. With the advances made in DASD technology, a read/write of a 4K record is just as efficient as a 1055 byte record. The same advances have increased the capacity of each device so that there is no longer a premium placed on the ability to pack data into the smallest model as possible.\nPrograms and residency.\nTPF also had its program segments allocated as 381, 1055 and 4K byte-sized records at different points in its history. Each segment consisted of a single record; with a typically comprehensive application requiring perhaps tens or even hundreds of segments. For the first forty years of TPF's history, these segments were never link-edited. Instead, the relocatable object code (direct output from the assembler) was laid out in memory, had its \"internally\" (self-referential) relocatable symbols resolved, then the entire image was written to file for later loading into the system. This created a challenging programming environment in which \"segments related to one another could not directly address each other\", with control transfer between them implemented as the ENTER/BACK \"system service\".\nIn ACP/TPF's earliest days (circa 1965), memory space was severely limited, which gave rise to a distinction between file-resident and core-resident programs\u2014only the most frequently used application programs were written into memory and never removed (core-residency); the rest were stored on file and read in on demand, with their backing memory buffers released post-execution.\nThe introduction of C language to TPF at version 3.0 was first implemented conformant to segment conventions, including the absence of linkage editing. This scheme quickly demonstrated itself to be impractical for anything other than the simplest of C programs. At TPF 4.1, truly and fully linked load modules were introduced to TPF. These were compiled with the z/OS C/C++ compiler using TPF-specific header files and linked with IEWL, resulting in a z/OS-conformant load module, which in no manner could be considered a traditional TPF segment. The TPF loader was extended to read the z/OS-unique \"load module\" file format, then lay out file-resident load modules' sections into memory; meanwhile, assembly language programs remained confined to TPF's \"segment\" model, creating an obvious disparity between applications written in assembler and those written in higher level languages (HLL).\nAt z/TPF 1.1, all source language types were conceptually unified and fully link-edited to conform to the ELF specification. The \"segment\" concept became obsolete, meaning that \"any\" program written in \"any\" source language\u2014including Assembler\u2014may now be of any size. Furthermore, external references became possible, and separate source code programs that had once been \"segments\" could now be directly linked together into a shared object. A value point is that critical legacy applications can benefit from improved efficiency through simple \"repackaging\"\u2014calls made between members of a single shared object module now have a much shorter pathlength at run time as compared to calling the system's \"ENTER/BACK\" service. Members of the same shared object may now share writeable data regions directly thanks to copy-on-write functionality also introduced at z/TPF 1.1; which coincidentally reinforces TPF's reentrancy requirements.\nThe concepts of file- and memory- residency were also made obsolete, due to a z/TPF design point which sought to have all programs resident in memory at all times.\nSince z/TPF had to maintain a call stack for high-level language programs, which gave HLL programs the ability to benefit from stack-based memory allocation, it was deemed beneficial to extend the call stack to assembly language programs on an optional basis, which can ease memory pressure and ease recursive programming.\nAll z/TPF executable programs are now packaged as ELF shared objects.\nMemory usage.\nHistorically and in step with the previous, core blocks\u2014 memory\u2014 were also 381, 1055 and 4\u00a0K bytes in size. Since ALL memory blocks had to be of this size, most of the overhead for obtaining memory found in other systems was discarded. The programmer merely needed to decide what size block would fit the need and ask for it. TPF would maintain a list of blocks in use and simply hand out the first block on the available list.\nPhysical memory was divided into sections reserved for each size so a 1055 byte block always came from a section and returned there, the only overhead needed was to add its address to the appropriate physical block table's list. No compaction or data collection was required.\nAs applications got more advanced demands for memory increased, and once C became available memory chunks of indeterminate or large size were required. This gave rise to the use of heap storage and some memory management routines. To ease the overhead, TPF memory was broken into frames\u2014 4\u00a0KB in size (1\u00a0MB with z/TPF). If an application needs a certain number of bytes, the number of contiguous frames required to fill that need are granted.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30435", "revid": "38664462", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30435", "title": "Thunderbird (mythology)", "text": "Legendary indigenous North American creature\nThe thunderbird is a mythological bird-like spirit in North American indigenous peoples' history and culture. It is considered a supernatural being of power and strength.\nIt is frequently depicted in the art, songs, and oral histories of many Pacific Northwest Coast cultures, but is also found in various forms among some peoples of the American Southwest, US East Coast, Great Lakes, and Great Plains.\nDescription.\nThe thunderbird is said to create thunder by flapping its wings (Algonquian), and lightning by flashing its eyes (Algonquian, Iroquois). Across cultures, thunderbirds are generally depicted as birds of prey, or hybrids of humans and birds. Thunderbirds are often viewed as protectors, sometimes intervening on people's behalf, but expecting veneration, prayers, and gifts.\nArchaeologically, sites containing depictions of thunderbirds have been found dating to the past 4000 years.\nPetroglyphs of thunderbirds are found near Twin Bluffs, Wisconsin. They are in a shelter that was probably used c. 250 BCE to 1500.\nBy people.\nStories about the struggle between the Thunderbird and Whale (q.v.) have been traditionally by various Pacific coast tribal groups. Studies have scrutinized the possible connection with Cascadia subduction zone earthquake in the year 1700 that sent tsunami to Japan.\nAlgonquian.\nThe thunderbird myth and motif is prevalent among Algonquian peoples in the Northeast, i.e., Eastern Canada (Ontario, Quebec, and eastward) and Northeastern United States, and the Iroquois peoples (surrounding the Great Lakes). The discussion of the Northeast region has included Algonquian-speaking people in the Lakes-bordering U.S. Midwest states (e.g., Ojibwe in Minnesota).\nIn Algonquian mythology, the thunderbird controls the upper world while the underworld is governed by the underwater panther or Great Horned Serpent. The thunderbird creates not just thunder (with its wing-flapping) but lightning bolts, which it casts at the underworld creatures.\nThunderbird in this tradition may be depicted as a spreadeagled bird (wings horizontal head in profile), but also quite common with the head facing forward, thus presenting an X-shaped appearance overall (see under \u00a7Iconography below).\nOjibwe.\nThe Ojibwe version of the myth states that the thunderbirds were created by Nanabozho to fight the underwater spirits. Thunderbirds also punished humans who broke moral rules. The thunderbirds lived in the four directions and arrived with the other birds in the springtime. In the fall, they migrated south after the end of the underwater spirits' most dangerous season.\nMenominee.\nThe Menominee of Northern Wisconsin tell of a great mountain that floats in the western sky on which dwell the thunderbirds. They control the rain and hail, and delight in fighting and deeds of greatness. They are the enemies of the great horned snakes (the Misikinubik) and have prevented these from overrunning the earth and devouring humankind. They are messengers of the Great Sun himself.\nSiouan.\nThe thunderbird motif is also seen in Siouan-speaking peoples, which include tribes traditionally occupying areas around the Great Lakes.\nHo-Chunk.\nHo-Chunk tradition states that a man who has a vision of a thunderbird during a solitary fast will become a war chief of the people.\nArikara.\nEthnographer George Amos Dorsey transcribed a tale from the Arikaras with the title \"The Boy who befriended the Thunderbirds and the Serpent\": a boy named Antelope-Carrier finds a nest with four young thunderbirds; their mother comes and tells the human boy that a two-headed Serpent comes out of the lake to eat the young.\nIconography.\nX-shapes.\nIn Algonquian images, an X-shaped thunderbird is often used to depict the thunderbird with its wings alongside its body and the head facing forwards instead of in profile.\nThe depiction may be stylized and simplified. A headless X-shaped thunderbird was found on an Ojibwe \"midewiwin\" disc dating to 1250\u20131400 CE. In an 18th-century manuscript (a \"daybook\" ledger) written by the namesake grandson of Governor Matthew Mayhew, the thunderbird pictograms varies from \"recognizable birds to simply an incised X\".\nScientific interpretations.\nAmerican science historian and folklorist Adrienne Mayor and British historian Tom Holland have both suggested that indigenous thunderbird stories are based on discoveries of pterosaur fossils by Native Americans.\nOutside North America.\nSimilar beings appear in mythologies the world over. Examples include the Chinese thunder-god Leigong, the Hindu Garuda and the African lightning bird.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30436", "revid": "50901822", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30436", "title": "Theory of everything", "text": "Hypothetical physical concept\nA theory of everything (TOE) or final theory is a hypothetical coherent theoretical framework of physics containing all physical principles. The scope of the concept of a \"theory of everything\" varies. The original technical concept referred to unification of the four fundamental interactions: electromagnetism, strong and weak nuclear forces, and gravity.\nFinding such a theory of everything is one of the major unsolved problems in physics. Numerous popular books apply the words \"theory of everything\" to more expansive concepts such as predicting everything in the universe from logic alone, complete with discussions on how this is not possible.\nStarting with Isaac Newton's unification of terrestrial gravity, responsible for weight, with celestial gravity, responsible for planetary orbits, concepts in fundamental physics have been successively unified. The phenomena of electricity and magnetism were combined by James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism and Albert Einstein's theory of relativity explained how they are connected. By the 1930s, Paul Dirac combined relativity and quantum mechanics and, working with other physicists, developed quantum electrodynamics that combines quantum mechanics and electromagnetism.\nWork on nuclear and particle physics lead to the discovery of the strong nuclear and weak nuclear forces which were combined in the quantum field theory to implemented the Standard Model of physics, a unification of all forces except gravity. The lone fundamental force not built into the Standard Model is gravity. General relativity provides a theoretical framework for understanding gravity across scales from the laboratory to planets to the complete universe, but it has not been successfully unified with quantum mechanics.\nGeneral relativity and quantum mechanics have been repeatedly validated in their separate fields of relevance. Since the usual domains of applicability of general relativity and quantum mechanics are so different, most situations require that only one of the two theories be used. The two theories are considered incompatible in regions of extremely small scale \u2013 the Planck scale \u2013 such as those that exist within a black hole or during the beginning stages of the universe (i.e., the moment immediately following the Big Bang). To resolve the incompatibility, a theoretical framework revealing a deeper underlying reality, unifying gravity with the other three interactions, must be discovered to harmoniously integrate the realms of general relativity and quantum mechanics into a seamless whole: a theory of everything may be defined as a comprehensive theory that, in principle, would be capable of describing all physical phenomena in the universe.\nIn pursuit of this goal, quantum gravity has become one area of active research. One example is string theory, which evolved into a candidate for the theory of everything, but not without drawbacks (most notably, its apparent lack of currently testable predictions) and controversy. String theory posits that at the beginning of the universe (up to 10\u221243 seconds after the Big Bang), the four fundamental forces were once a single fundamental force. According to string theory, every particle in the universe, at its most ultramicroscopic level (Planck length), consists of varying combinations of vibrating strings (or strands) with preferred patterns of vibration. String theory further claims that it is through these specific oscillatory patterns of strings that a particle of unique mass and force charge is created (that is to say, the electron is a type of string that vibrates one way, while the up quark is a type of string vibrating another way, and so forth). String theory/M-theory proposes six or seven dimensions of spacetime in addition to the four common dimensions for a ten- or eleven-dimensional spacetime.\nName.\nThe scientific use of the term \"theory of everything\" occurred in the title of an article by physicist John Ellis in 1986 but it was mentioned by John Henry Schwarz in a conference proceedings in 1985.\nHistorical antecedents.\nAntiquity to 19th century.\nArchimedes was possibly the first philosopher to have described nature with axioms (or principles) and then deduce new results from them. Once Isaac Newton proposed his universal law of gravitation, mathematician Pierre-Simon Laplace suggested that such laws could in principle allow deterministic prediction of the future state of the universe. Any \"theory of everything\" is similarly expected to be based on axioms and to deduce all observable phenomena from them.\nIn the late 17th century, Isaac Newton's description of the long-distance force of gravity implied that not all forces in nature result from things coming into contact. Newton's work in his \"Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy\" dealt with this in a further example of unification, in this case unifying Galileo's work on terrestrial gravity, Kepler's laws of planetary motion and the phenomenon of tides by explaining these apparent actions at a distance under one single law: the law of universal gravitation. Newton achieved the first great unification in physics, and he further is credited with laying the foundations of future endeavors for a grand unified theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An intellect which at a certain moment would know all forces that set nature in motion, and all positions of all items of which nature is composed, if this intellect were also vast enough to submit these data to analysis, it would embrace in a single formula the movements of the greatest bodies of the universe and those of the tiniest atom; for such an intellect nothing would be uncertain and the future just like the past would be present before its eyes.\u2014\u200a\nModern quantum mechanics implies that uncertainty is inescapable, and thus that Laplace's vision has to be amended: a theory of everything must include gravitation and quantum mechanics. Even ignoring quantum mechanics, chaos theory is sufficient to guarantee that the future of any sufficiently complex mechanical or astronomical system is unpredictable.\nIn 1820, Hans Christian \u00d8rsted discovered a connection between electricity and magnetism, triggering decades of work that culminated in 1865, in James Clerk Maxwell's theory of electromagnetism, which achieved the second great unification in physics. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, it gradually became apparent that many common examples of forces \u2013 contact forces, elasticity, viscosity, friction, and pressure \u2013 result from electrical interactions between the smallest particles of matter.\nIn his experiments of 1849\u20131850, Michael Faraday was the first to search for a unification of gravity with electricity and magnetism. However, he found no connection.\nEarly 20th century.\nIn the late 1920s, the then new quantum mechanics showed that the chemical bonds between atoms were examples of (quantum) electrical forces, justifying Dirac's boast that \"the underlying physical laws necessary for the mathematical theory of a large part of physics and the whole of chemistry are thus completely known\".\nAfter 1915, when Albert Einstein published the theory of gravity (general relativity), the search for a unified field theory combining gravity with electromagnetism began with a renewed interest. In Einstein's day, the strong and the weak forces had not yet been discovered, yet he found the potential existence of two other distinct forces, gravity and electromagnetism, far more alluring. This launched his 40-year voyage in search of the so-called \"unified field theory\" that he hoped would show that these two forces are really manifestations of one grand, underlying principle. During the last few decades of his life, this ambition alienated Einstein from the rest of mainstream of physics, as the mainstream was instead far more excited about the emerging framework of quantum mechanics. Einstein wrote to a friend in the early 1940s, \"I have become a lonely old chap who is mainly known because he doesn't wear socks and who is exhibited as a curiosity on special occasions.\" Prominent contributors were Gunnar Nordstr\u00f6m, Hermann Weyl, Arthur Eddington, David Hilbert, Theodor Kaluza, Oskar Klein (see Kaluza\u2013Klein theory), and most notably, Albert Einstein and his collaborators. Einstein searched in earnest for, but ultimately failed to find, a unifying theory (see Einstein\u2013Maxwell\u2013Dirac equations).\nLate 20th century and the nuclear interactions.\nIn the 20th century, the search for a unifying theory was interrupted by the discovery of the strong and weak nuclear forces, which differ both from gravity and from electromagnetism. A further hurdle was the acceptance that in a theory of everything, quantum mechanics had to be incorporated from the outset, rather than emerging as a consequence of a deterministic unified theory, as Einstein had hoped.\nGravity and electromagnetism are able to coexist as entries in a list of classical forces, but for many years it seemed that gravity could not be incorporated into the quantum framework, let alone unified with the other fundamental forces. For this reason, work on unification, for much of the 20th century, focused on understanding the three forces described by quantum mechanics: electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. The first two were combined in 1967\u20131968 by Sheldon Glashow, Steven Weinberg, and Abdus Salam into the electroweak force.\nElectroweak unification is a broken symmetry: the electromagnetic and weak forces appear distinct at low energies because the particles carrying the weak force, the W and Z bosons, have non-zero masses ( and , respectively), whereas the photon, which carries the electromagnetic force, is massless. At higher energies W bosons and Z bosons can be created easily and the unified nature of the force becomes apparent.\nWhile the strong and electroweak forces coexist under the Standard Model of particle physics, they remain distinct. Thus, the pursuit of a theory of everything remained unsuccessful: neither a unification of the strong and electroweak forces\u00a0\u2013 which Laplace would have called 'contact forces'\u00a0\u2013 nor a unification of these forces with gravitation had been achieved.\nModern physics.\nConventional sequence of theories.\nA theory of everything would unify all the fundamental interactions of nature: gravitation, the strong interaction, the weak interaction, and electromagnetism. Because the weak interaction can transform elementary particles from one kind into another, the theory of everything should also predict all the different kinds of particles possible. The usual assumed path of theories is given in the following graph, where each unification step leads one level up on the graph.\nIn this graph, electroweak unification occurs at around 100 GeV, grand unification is predicted to occur at 1016 GeV, and unification of the GUT force with gravity is expected at the Planck energy, roughly 1019 GeV.\nSeveral Grand Unified Theories (GUTs) have been proposed to unify electromagnetism and the weak and strong forces. Grand unification would imply the existence of an electronuclear force; it is expected to set in at energies of the order of 1016 GeV, far greater than could be reached by any currently feasible particle accelerator. Although the simplest grand unified theories have been experimentally ruled out, the idea of a grand unified theory, especially when linked with supersymmetry, remains a favorite candidate in the theoretical physics community. Supersymmetric grand unified theories seem plausible not only for their theoretical \"beauty\", but because they naturally produce large quantities of dark matter, and because the inflationary force may be related to grand unified theory physics (although it does not seem to form an inevitable part of the theory). Yet grand unified theories are clearly not the final answer; both the current Standard Model and all proposed GUTs are quantum field theories which require the problematic technique of renormalization to yield sensible answers. This is usually regarded as a sign that these are only effective field theories, omitting crucial phenomena relevant only at very high energies.\nThe final step in the graph requires resolving the separation between quantum mechanics and gravitation, often equated with general relativity. Numerous researchers concentrate their efforts on this specific step; nevertheless, no accepted theory of quantum gravity, and thus no accepted theory of everything, has emerged with observational evidence. It is usually assumed that the theory of everything will also solve the remaining problems of grand unified theories.\nIn addition to explaining the forces listed in the graph, a theory of everything may also explain the status of at least two candidate forces suggested by modern cosmology: an inflationary force and dark energy. Furthermore, cosmological experiments also suggest the existence of dark matter, supposedly composed of fundamental particles outside the scheme of the Standard Model. However, the existence of these forces and particles has not been proven.\nString theory and M-theory.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Unsolved/styles.css\" /&gt;\nUnsolved problem in physics\nIs string theory, superstring theory, or M-theory, or some other variant on this theme, a step on the road to a \"theory of everything\", or just a blind alley?\nMore unsolved problems in physics\nSince the 1990s, some physicists such as Edward Witten believe that 11-dimensional M-theory, which is described in some limits by one of the five perturbative superstring theories, and in another by the maximally-supersymmetric eleven-dimensional supergravity, is the theory of everything. There is no widespread consensus on this issue.\nOne remarkable property of string/M-theory is that seven extra dimensions are required for the theory's consistency, on top of the four dimensions in our universe. In this regard, string theory can be seen as building on the insights of the Kaluza\u2013Klein theory, in which it was realized that applying general relativity to a 5-dimensional universe, with one space dimension small and curled up, looks from the 4-dimensional perspective like the usual general relativity together with Maxwell's electrodynamics. This lent credence to the idea of unifying gauge and gravity interactions, and to extra dimensions, but did not address the detailed experimental requirements. Another important property of string theory is its supersymmetry, which together with extra dimensions are the two main proposals for resolving the hierarchy problem of the Standard Model, which is (roughly) the question of why gravity is so much weaker than any other force. The extra-dimensional solution involves allowing gravity to propagate into the other dimensions while keeping other forces confined to a 4-dimensional spacetime, an idea that has been realized with explicit stringy mechanisms.\nResearch into string theory has been encouraged by a variety of theoretical and experimental factors. On the experimental side, the particle content of the Standard Model supplemented with neutrino masses fits into a spinor representation of SO(10), a subgroup of E8 that routinely emerges in string theory, such as in heterotic string theory or (sometimes equivalently) in F-theory. String theory has mechanisms that may explain why fermions come in three hierarchical generations, and explain the mixing rates between quark generations. On the theoretical side, it has begun to address some of the key questions in quantum gravity, such as resolving the black hole information paradox, counting the correct entropy of black holes and allowing for topology-changing processes. It has also led to many insights in pure mathematics and in ordinary, strongly-coupled gauge theory due to the Gauge/String duality.\nIn the late 1990s, it was noted that one major hurdle in this endeavor is that the number of possible 4-dimensional universes is incredibly large. The small, \"curled up\" extra dimensions can be compactified in an enormous number of different ways (one estimate is 10500) each of which leads to different properties for the low-energy particles and forces. This array of models is known as the string theory landscape.\nOne proposed solution is that many or all of these possibilities are realized in one or another of a huge number of universes, but that only a small number of them are habitable. Hence what we normally conceive as the fundamental constants of the universe are ultimately the result of the anthropic principle rather than dictated by theory. This has led to criticism of string theory, arguing that it cannot make useful (i.e., original, falsifiable, and verifiable) predictions and regarding it as a pseudoscience/philosophy. Others disagree, and string theory remains an active topic of investigation in theoretical physics.\nLoop quantum gravity.\nCurrent research on loop quantum gravity may eventually play a fundamental role in a theory of everything, but that is not its primary aim. Loop quantum gravity also introduces a lower bound on the possible length scales.\nThere have been recent claims that loop quantum gravity may be able to reproduce features resembling the Standard Model. So far only the first generation of fermions (leptons and quarks) with correct parity properties have been modelled by Sundance Bilson-Thompson using preons constituted of braids of spacetime as the building blocks. However, there is no derivation of the Lagrangian that would describe the interactions of such particles, nor is it possible to show that such particles are fermions, nor that the gauge groups or interactions of the Standard Model are realised. Use of quantum computing concepts made it possible to demonstrate that the particles are able to survive quantum fluctuations.\nThis model leads to an interpretation of electric and color charge as topological quantities (electric as number and chirality of twists carried on the individual ribbons and colour as variants of such twisting for fixed electric charge).\nBilson-Thompson's original paper suggested that the higher-generation fermions could be represented by more complicated braidings, although explicit constructions of these structures were not given. The electric charge, color, and parity properties of such fermions would arise in the same way as for the first generation. The model was expressly generalized for an infinite number of generations and for the weak force bosons (but not for photons or gluons) in a 2008 paper by Bilson-Thompson, Hackett, Kauffman and Smolin.\nPresent status.\nAt present, there is no candidate theory of everything that includes the Standard Model of particle physics and general relativity and that, at the same time, is able to calculate the fine-structure constant or the mass of the electron. Most particle physicists expect that the outcome of ongoing experiments \u2013 the search for new particles at the large particle accelerators and for dark matter \u2013 are needed in order to provide further input for a theory of everything.\nOther proposals.\nThe search for a Theory of Everything is hindered by fundamental incompatibility between the noncommutative and discrete operator algebra structures underlying quantum mechanics and the commutative continuous geometric nature of classical spacetime in general relativity. Reconciling the background-independent, diffeomorphism-invariant formulation of gravity with the fixed-background, time-ordered framework of quantum theory raises profound conceptual issues such as the problem of time and quantum measurement. While a fully successful and experimentally confirmed unified field theory remains elusive, several recent proposals have been advanced, each employing distinct mathematical structures and physical assumptions.\nTwistor theory, developed by Roger Penrose, reinterprets the structure of spacetime and fundamental particles through complex geometric objects called twistors. Instead of treating spacetime points as fundamental, twistor theory encodes physical fields and particles into complex projective spaces, aiming to unify quantum theory and general relativity in a geometric framework. Twistors provide potential descriptions of massless fields and scattering amplitudes and have influenced modern approaches in mathematical physics and quantum field theory, including advances in scattering amplitude calculations. Twistor theory has not yet yielded a complete unified field theory.\nAlain Connes developed a geometric framework known as noncommutative geometry in which spacetime is extended via noncommutative operator algebras. When combined with spectral triples, this approach can reproduce features of the Standard Model, including the Higgs field, from purely geometric data.\nAsymptotic safety, a concept developed by Steven Weinberg in 1976 and also known as Quantum Einstein Gravity and nonperturbative renormalizability, suggests that gravity could find a role in quantum theory if its behavior at very high energies becomes stabilized into a nontrivial ultraviolet (UV) fixed point. This form has been studied through functional renormalization group methods and on the lattice, and applied in cosmology, particle physics, black hole physics, and quantum gravity. Whereas overwhelming numerical evidence does exist that such a fixed point does occur in lower-dimensional constructions and in the numerics, a rigorous proof even for four-dimensional spacetime remains to be found.\nArguments against.\nIn parallel to the intense search for a theory of everything, various scholars have debated the possibility of its discovery.\nG\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem.\nA number of scholars claim that G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem suggests that attempts to construct a theory of everything are bound to fail. G\u00f6del's theorem, informally stated, asserts that any formal theory sufficient to express elementary arithmetical facts and strong enough for them to be proved is either inconsistent (both a statement and its denial can be derived from its axioms) or incomplete, in the sense that there is a true statement that can't be derived in the formal theory.\nThe Benedictine priest and science writer Stanley Jaki, in his 1966 book \"The Relevance of Physics\", suggested that G\u00f6del's theorem casts doubt on the \"theory of everything\" will certainly be a consistent non-trivial mathematical theory, it must be incomplete. He claims that this dooms searches for a deterministic theory of everything.\nFreeman Dyson has stated that \"G\u00f6del's theorem implies that pure mathematics is inexhaustible. No matter how many problems we solve, there will always be other problems that cannot be solved within the existing rules. [\u2026] Because of G\u00f6del's theorem, physics is inexhaustible too. The laws of physics are a finite set of rules, and include the rules for doing mathematics, so that G\u00f6del's theorem applies to them.\"\nStephen Hawking originally believed that a theory of everything could be found, but after considering G\u00f6del's Theorem, he concluded that one was not obtainable: \"Some people will be very disappointed if there is not an ultimate theory that can be formulated as a finite number of principles. I used to belong to that camp, but I have changed my mind.\"\nJ\u00fcrgen Schmidhuber (1997) has argued against this view; he asserts that G\u00f6del's theorems are irrelevant for computable physics. In 2000, Schmidhuber explicitly constructed limit-computable, deterministic universes whose pseudo-randomness based on undecidable, G\u00f6del-like halting problems is extremely hard to detect but does not prevent formal theories of everything describable by very few bits of information.\nRelated critique was offered by Solomon Feferman and others. Douglas S. Robertson offers Conway's game of life as an example: The underlying rules are simple and complete, but there are formally undecidable questions about the game's behaviors. Analogously, it may (or may not) be possible to completely state the underlying rules of physics with a finite number of well-defined laws, but there is little doubt that there are questions about the behavior of physical systems which are formally undecidable on the basis of those underlying laws.\nFundamental limits in accuracy.\nNo physical theory to date is believed to be precisely accurate. Instead, physics has proceeded by a series of \"successive approximations\" allowing more and more accurate predictions over a wider and wider range of phenomena. Some physicists believe that it is therefore a mistake to confuse theoretical models with the true nature of reality, and hold that the series of approximations will never terminate in the \"truth\". Einstein himself expressed this view on occasions.\nDefinition of fundamental laws.\nThere is a philosophical debate within the physics community as to whether a theory of everything deserves to be called \"the\" fundamental law of the universe. One view is the hard reductionist position that the theory of everything is the fundamental law and that all other theories that apply within the universe are a consequence of the theory of everything. Another view is that emergent laws, which govern the behavior of complex systems, should be seen as equally fundamental. Examples of emergent laws are the second law of thermodynamics and the theory of natural selection. The advocates of emergence argue that emergent laws, especially those describing complex or living systems are independent of the low-level, microscopic laws. In this view, emergent laws are as fundamental as a theory of everything.\nImpossibility of calculation.\nWeinberg points out that calculating the precise motion of an actual projectile in the Earth's atmosphere is impossible. So how can we know we have an adequate theory for describing the motion of projectiles? Weinberg suggests that we know \"principles\" (Newton's laws of motion and gravitation) that work \"well enough\" for simple examples, like the motion of planets in empty space. These principles have worked so well on simple examples that we can be reasonably confident they will work for more complex examples. For example, although general relativity includes equations that do not have exact solutions, it is widely accepted as a valid theory because all of its equations with exact solutions have been experimentally verified. Likewise, a theory of everything must work for a wide range of simple examples in such a way that we can be reasonably confident it will work for every situation in physics. Difficulties in creating a theory of everything often begin to appear when combining quantum mechanics with the theory of general relativity, as the equations of quantum mechanics begin to falter when the force of gravity is applied to them.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30437", "revid": "1701353", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30437", "title": "Tutankhamun", "text": "Pharaoh of ancient Egypt (18th Dynasty)\nTutankhamun or Tutankhamen (; c.\u20091341 BC\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091323 BC), was the thirteenth pharaoh of the Eighteenth Dynasty of ancient Egypt, who ruled c.\u20091333 \u2013 1323 BC. Born Tutankhaten, he instituted the restoration of the traditional polytheistic form of ancient Egyptian religion, undoing a previous shift to the religion known as Atenism. Tutankhamun's reign is considered one of the greatest restoration periods in ancient Egyptian history, and his tomb door proclaims his dedication to illustrative constructions of the ancient Egyptian gods.\nHis endowments and restorations of cults were recorded on the Restoration Stela. The cult of the god Amun at Thebes was restored to prominence, and the royal couple changed their names to \"Tutankhamun\" and \"Ankhesenamun\", replacing the -aten suffix. He also moved the royal court from Akhenaten's capital, Amarna, back to Memphis almost immediately on his accession to the kingship. He reestablished diplomatic relations with the Mitanni and carried out military campaigns in Nubia and the Near East. Tutankhamun was one of only a few kings known to be worshipped as a deity during their lifetime. He likely began construction of a royal tomb in the Valley of the Kings and an accompanying mortuary temple, but both were unfinished at the time of his death.\nTutankhamun died unexpectedly aged about 18; his health and the cause of his death have been the subject of much debate. In 2012, it was suggested he died from a combination of malaria and a leg fracture. Since his royal tomb was incomplete, he was instead buried in a small non-royal tomb adapted for the purpose. He was succeeded by his vizier Ay, who was probably an old man when he became king, and had a short reign. Ay was succeeded by Horemheb, who had been the commander-in-chief of Tutankhamun's armed forces. Under Horemheb, the restoration of the traditional ancient Egyptian religion was completed; Ay and Tutankhamun's constructions were usurped, and earlier Amarna Period rulers were erased.\nTutankhamun's tomb was discovered in 1922 by excavators led by Howard Carter and his patron, George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon. Several modern accounts note that the first step leading to the tomb was actually uncovered by a young Egyptian water-carrier, Hussein Abdel-Rassoul, while digging a jar hole for the workers at the site, according to testimony collected by Egyptologist Zahi Hawass.\nAlthough it had clearly been raided and robbed in ancient times, it retained much of its original contents, including the king's undisturbed mummy. The discovery received worldwide press coverage; with over 5,000 artifacts, it gave rise to renewed public interest in ancient Egypt, for which Tutankhamun's mask, preserved at the Egyptian Museum, remains a popular symbol. Before it was relocated to the Grand Egyptian Museum in 2025, some of his treasures have traveled worldwide, with unprecedented response; the Egyptian government allowed tours of the tomb beginning in 1961. The deaths of some individuals who were involved in the excavation have been popularly attributed to the \"curse of the pharaohs\" due to the similarity of their circumstances. Since the discovery of his tomb, he has been referred to colloquially as \"King Tut\".\nFamily.\nTutankhamun was born in the reign of Akhenaten, during the Amarna Period of the late Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt. His original name was Tutankhaten or Tutankhuaten, meaning \"living image of Aten\", reflecting the shift in ancient Egyptian religion known as Atenism which characterized Akhenaten's reign.\nHis parentage is debated as they are not attested in surviving inscriptions. He was certainly a prince, as a fragmentary inscription from Hermopolis refers to \"Tutankhuaten\" as a \"king's son\". He is generally thought to have been the son of Akhenaten or his successor Smenkhkare. Inscriptions from Tutankhamun's reign treat him as a son of Akhenaten's father, Amenhotep III, but that is only possible if Akhenaten's 17-year reign included a long co-regency with his father, a possibility that many Egyptologists once supported but is now being abandoned. His mother has been variously suggested to be Akhenaten's chief wife Nefertiti, Amenhotep III's daughter Beketaten, or Akhenaten's daughters Meritaten or Meketaten. Tutankhamun was wet nursed by a woman named Maia, known from her tomb at Saqqara.\nDNA testing identified his father as the mummy from tomb KV55, thought to be Akhenaten, but due to the developmental condition of the mummy's skeleton, most scholars estimate the age to be around twenty, thus effectively ruling out the possibility of Akhenaten; other scholars believe he was Smenkhkare. His mother as \"The Younger Lady\", an anonymous mummy cached in tomb KV35. His parents were full siblings, both being children of Amenhotep III and his chief wife Tiye. The identity of The Younger Lady is unknown, but she cannot be Nefertiti, as she was not known to be a sister of Akhenaten. However, researchers such as Marc Gabolde and Aidan Dodson claim that Nefertiti was indeed Tutankhamun's mother. In this interpretation of the DNA results, the genetic closeness is not due to a brother-sister pairing but the result of three generations of first-cousin marriage, making Nefertiti a first cousin of Akhenaten. The validity and reliability of the genetic data from mummified remains have been questioned due to possible degradation due to decay. Today, scholars consider the mummy from tomb KV55 not to be Akhenaten, but rather Smenkhkare. The Younger Lady is more likely not any of Akhenaten's known wives, but one of Tiye's younger daughters, perhaps Nebetah or Beketaten (or possibly the two were the same person, who changed her name at the beginning of Akhenaten's reign).\nWhen Tutankhaten became king, he married Ankhesenpaaten, one of Akhenaten's daughters, who later changed her name to Ankhesenamun. He fathered two daughters who died at or soon after birth and were buried with him in his tomb. Computed tomography studies published in 2011 revealed that one daughter was born prematurely at 5\u20136 months of pregnancy and the other at full-term, 9 months. DNA testing has suggested the anonymous mummy KV21A is their mother, but the data is not statistically significant enough to allow her to be securely identified as his only known wife, Ankhesenamun. Tutankhamun's death marked the end of the royal bloodline of the Eighteenth Dynasty.\nReign.\nTutankhamun became pharaoh between eight and nine years of age following the short reigns of Akhenaten's successors Smenkhkare and Neferneferuaten. It is uncertain whether Smenkhkare's reign outlasted Akhenaten's; the female ruler Neferneferuaten is now thought to have either been co-regent shortly before Akhenaten's death and to have had a sole reign of 2 or 3 years before the accession of Tutankhamun, which means that she was Tutankhamun's predecessor according to Athena van der Perre and Nozumu Kawai.. On acceding to the throne, Tutankhamun took the throne name Nebkheperure. He reigned for about nine years.\nDuring Tutankhamun's reign, the position of Vizier was split between Upper and Lower Egypt. The principal vizier for Upper Egypt was Usermontu. Another figure named Pentju was also vizier, but it is unclear which lands. It is not entirely known if Ay, Tutankhamun's successor, actually held this position. A gold foil fragment from KV58 seems to indicate, but not certainly, that Ay was referred to as a Priest of Maat along with an epithet of \"vizier, doer of maat.\" The epithet does not fit the usual description used by the regular vizier but might indicate an informal title. It might be that Ay used the title of vizier in an unprecedented manner.\nAn Egyptian priest named Manetho wrote a comprehensive history of ancient Egypt where he refers to a king named Orus, who ruled for 36 years and had a daughter named Acencheres, who reigned for twelve years, and her brother Rathotis, who ruled for only nine years. The Amarna rulers are central in the list, but which name corresponds with which historic figure is not agreed upon by researchers. Orus and Acencheres have been identified with Horemheb and Akhenaten, and Rathotis with Tutankhamun. The names are also associated with Smenkhkare, Amenhotep III, Ay, and the others in differing order.\nFor the pharaoh, who held divine office, to be linked to the people and the gods, special epithets were created for them at their accession to the throne. The ancient Egyptian titulary also served to demonstrate one's qualities and link them to the terrestrial realm. The five names were developed over the centuries, beginning with the Horus name. Tutankhamun's original nomen, \"Tutankhaten\", did not have a Nebty name or a Gold Falcon name associated with it as nothing has been found with the full five-name protocol.\nReligiopolitical countermand.\nAt the beginning of Tutankhaten's reign, the royal court was still located at Amarna, and evidence from his tomb shows that the Aten was still acknowledged. But several pieces of evidence suggest that his court was trying to reconcile Atenism with the traditional religion, and activity at Amarna decreased during the first four years of his reign. These years saw dramatic reversals of Akhenaten's policies, which, given the king's young age, must have been instigated by his advisors.\nIn his third regnal year, Tutankhamun reversed several changes made during his father's reign. He ended the worship of the god Aten and restored the god Amun to supremacy. The ban on the cult of Amun was lifted and traditional privileges were restored to its priesthood. Tutankhamun enriched and endowed the priestly orders of two important cults, initiated a restoration process for old monuments that were damaged during the Amarna Period, and reburied his father's remains in the Valley of the Kings. It has been argued that it was in fact Tutankhamun himself, and not his successors, who began reversing Akhenaten's religious changes on a large scale.\nAround this time, the royal court abandoned Amarna. Memphis became the main seat of royal administration, continuing a trend that dated back to Akhenaten's predecessors, toward administering the country from that central location rather than the more outlying site of Thebes. The capital was moved back to Thebes and the city of Akhetaten was abandoned. With Amun restored as Egypt's preeminent deity, Thebes once again became its greatest center of religious activity.\nTutankhamun's treasurer, Maya, was instrumental in executing Tutankhamun's regal orders of the restoration program. In his autobiography, he described himself as \"one who carried out the plans of the king of my time and one who did not neglect what he had commanded to make splendid the temples, in fashioning the images of the gods\".\nThis countermand rendered Tutankhamun's reign one of the greatest restoration periods in ancient Egyptian history. The action established his legacy as such. Concurrently, Tutankhamun's tomb door describes him as he \"who spent his life fashioning images of the gods\".\nRestoration Stela.\nIn the third year of Tutankhaten's reign, his name was changed to \"Tutankhamun\", and that of his queen to \"Ankhesenamun\". The Restoration Stela, dated to Year 4 of Tutankhamun's reign, characterizes the Amarna Period as a time of disaster, saying:\n\"Temples and the estates of the gods and goddesses from Elephantine to the marshes of the Delta had fallen into ruin\u2026 If you asked a god for advice, he would not attend; and if one spoke to a goddess likewise she would not attend.\"\nThe stela proclaims the rebuilding of the traditional cults; priests and other members of temple staff were restored to their former positions. The Restoration Stela was later usurped by Horemheb.\nArchitectural projects.\nAs part of the restoration of the traditional cults, the king initiated building projects, in particular at Karnak in Thebes, where he laid out the sphinx avenue leading to the temple of Mut. The sphinxes were originally made for Akhenaten and Nefertiti; they were given new ram heads and small statues of the king. At Luxor temple he completed the decoration of the entrance colonnade of Amenhotep III. Tutankhamun made several endowments that enriched and added to the priestly numbers of the cults of Amun and Ptah. He commissioned new statues of the deities from the best metals and stone and had new processional barques made of the finest cedar from Lebanon and had them embellished with gold and silver.\nA building called the Temple-of-Nebkheperure-Beloved-of-Amun-Who-Puts-Thebes-in-Order, which may be identical to a building called Temple-of-Nebkheperre-in-Thebes, a possible mortuary temple, used recycled talatat from Akhenaten's east Karnak Aten temples, indicating that the dismantling of these temples was already underway. Many of Tutankhamun's construction projects were uncompleted at the time of his death and were completed by or usurped by his successors, especially Horemheb. The Sphinx Avenue was completed by his successor, Ay, and the whole was usurped by Horemheb. Pieces of the Temple of Nebkheperure in Thebes were recycled into Horemheb's own building projects.\nDuring-life deification.\nIn ancient Egypt, pharaohs were venerated after their deaths through mortuary cults and associated temples as deities. This form of apotheosis was typically reserved for deceased pharaohs, but Tutankhamun was one of the few pharaohs who was worshiped in this manner during his lifetime. Temples of his cult were built as far away as in Kawa and Faras in Nubia. The title of the sister of the Viceroy of Kush included a reference to the deified king, indicative of the universality of his cult.\nThree positions in the cult and their respective appointees are known, summarized in the table below:\nEgyptologist Lanny Bell described the meaning of a criosphinx imagery at Kawa as a representation of the deified form of Tutankhamun as Amun-Re:\nIn the context of the extensive evidence available on the assimilation of the king to Amun-Re, especially in Nubia, Tutankhamun's adoration of himself as a form of this god at Kawa is hardly as outlandish as might at first have seemed. In this he was following the precedent of Amenhotep III; Ramesses II merely displayed the symbolism of his predecessors on an unparalleled scale.\nTutankhamun patterned his cult parallel to Amenhotep III, except emphasizing Amun instead of Aten. Then, Ramesses II would amplify this cult structure in the design of his own cult.\nThe Stela of Huy from Karnak Temple is also evidence of the lifetime deification of pharaoh Tutankhamun. It contains a hymn directed to the deified form of Tutankhamun. Below is an excerpt of an English translation:\nGive praises the ka of Amun, lord of Karnak homage to Amun, by whom swear the Two Lands\nand ... to the royal ka of Tutankhamun:\nthat they may give a happy lifetime and a body, joyful, every day,\nto the ka of the royal son of Kush, the overseer of the countries of the south, Huy\nThe hymn clearly regards Tutankhamun with equivalent divinity as the god Amun. Lanny Bell also described artwork accompanying the Stela of Huy, stating that Huy is shown standing adoring three deities: Amun-Re the lord of the Thrones of the Two Lands, a ram-headed Amun, and the royal ka of Tutankhamun. Hence, the artwork of the stela also clearly juxtaposes Tutankhamun with deities.\nMilitary campaigns.\nThe country was economically weak and in turmoil following the reign of Akhenaten. Diplomatic relations with other kingdoms had been neglected, and Tutankhamun sought to restore them, in particular with the Mitanni. Evidence of his success is suggested by the gifts from various countries found in his tomb. Despite his efforts for improved relations, battles with Nubians and Asiatics were recorded in his mortuary temple at Thebes, both victories for Egypt. Also, as far as is known, Tutankhamun's military reign was undefeated, and is one of several other undefeated reigns in ancient Egypt's history.\nBattle participation.\nThe extent to which Tutankhamun participated in battles is an open question and has yet to reach consensus among researchers. On one hand, his tomb contained extensive military armament, such as bows, khopesh swords, daggers, wristguards, maces, shields, and a club, indicating he had extensive weaponry training. Many such items were inscribed with his name, and clearly in used condition. Various imagery, in ancient Egypt's classic battle narrative art genre, does depict Tutankhamun as directly participatory in warfare, such as the graphic battle depictions on the painted treasure chest in his tomb, and a gold leaf picture of him during chariot archery against enemies. Additional figurative military art depicts him dominating enemies, such as imagery of him as a sphinx trampling foes. Other personalized artifacts, such as the Nine Bows footstool, walking sticks, and sandals depicting enemies, suggest that he was personally involved in Egypt's international conflict. Egyptologist Bob Brier has argued leaning towards Tutankhamun being an actively participating warrior in his later years.\nOn the other hand, given Tutankhamun's youth and hypothesized physical disabilities, like a speculated cane handicap, some historians are skeptical that he participated in these battles. Yet some experts, such as Biomedical Egyptologist Sofia Aziz and other researchers, have taken the position that the speculations of Tutankhamun's physical frailty are overestimated, arguing that mummy damage has led to misdiagnosis. Instead, they argue that the more rigorous, scientific view is that he was physically active and perhaps militarily participatory. Egyptologist Charlotte Booth states that Tutankhamun participated in at least two battles (one Nubian battle, and one Asiatic battle), nevertheless noting that other researchers suggest that he may have only accompanied the army to the battlefield for moral support, as opposed to actively participating.\nGenealogy.\nA genetic study, published in 2020, revealed Tutankhamun had the haplogroups YDNA R1b, which originated in western Asia and which today makes up 50\u201360% of the genetic pool of modern Europeans, and mtDNA K, which originated in the Near East. He shares this Y-haplogroup with his father, the KV55 mummy (Akhenaten), and grandfather, Amenhotep III (and his entire male ancestral line), and his mtDNA haplogroup with his mother, The Younger Lady, his grandmother, Tiye, and his great-grandmother, Thuya (and his entire female ancestral line). The profiles for Tutankhamun and Amenhotep III were incomplete, and the analysis produced differing probability figures despite having concordant allele results. Because the relationships of these two mummies with the KV55 mummy had previously been confirmed in an earlier study, the haplogroup prediction of both mummies could be derived from the full profile of the KV55 data.\nIn 2022, S.O.Y. Keita analysed 8 Short Tandem loci (STR) data originally published by Hawass et al. in studies from 2010 and 2012. The first of these studies had investigated familial relationships among 11 royal mummies of the New Kingdom, which included Tutankhamun and Amenhotep III, as well as potential inherited disorders and infectious diseases. The second of these studies had investigated the Y-haplogroups and genetic kinship of Ramesses III and an unknown man buried along with him in the royal cache at Deir el Bahari. Keita analysed the STR data from these studies using an algorithm that only has three choices: Eurasians, sub-Saharan Africans, and East Asians. Using these three options, Keita concluded that the majority of the samples had a population \"affinity with 'sub-Saharan' Africans in one affinity analysis\". However, Keita cautioned that this does not mean that the royal mummies \"lacked other affiliations\", which he argued had been obscured in typological thinking. Keita further added that different \"data and algorithms might give different results\", reflecting the complexity of biological heritage and the associated interpretation.\nIn 2025, biochemist Jean-Philippe Gourdine reviewed genetic data on the Ancient Egyptian populations in the international scholarly publication, General History of Africa Volume IX. Expanding on a previous STR analysis co-performed with Keita, on the Amarna royal mummies which included Tutankhamun, Gourdine stated the analysis had found \u201cthat they had strong affinities with current sub-Saharan populations: 41 per cent to 93.9 per cent for sub-Saharan Africa, compared to 4.6 per cent to 41 per cent for Eurasia and 0.3 per cent to 16 per cent for Asia (Gourdine, 2018).\u201d He also referenced comparable analysis conducted by DNA Tribes company, which specialized in genetic genealogy and had large datasets, with the latter having identified strong affinities between the Amarna royal mummies and Sub-Saharan African populations.\nHealth.\nDetails about Tutankhamun's health and early death are heavily debated, and there has been extensive investigation into various hypothesized medical diagnoses, especially about his death. The majority of the diagnoses stem from research conducted on Tutankhamun's mummy, via CT scans and genetic testing, such as the 2005 CT scans of his mummy. Out of the many hypothesized medical conditions of Tutankhamun, two of them have been confirmed to have afflicted him during his lifetime, namely, a malarial infection and a leg fracture. Various podiatric diagnoses have also been suggested. In particular, a left clubfoot diagnosis has been a subject of much debate in conjunction with debate about the purpose of the numerous walking sticks discovered in Tutankhamun's tomb. Furthermore, upon the results of later research, some of the medical diagnoses suggested have been dismissed as confirmed misdiagnoses.\nIn addition to investigations of his medical health, there has also been an investigation of his dental health. CT investigations of Tutankhamun's skull revealed an excellent condition of his dentition in comparison to other ancient Egyptian mummies. He had large front incisors and an overbite characteristic of the Thutmosid royal line to which he belonged.\nMalaria.\nMalaria was endemic in ancient Egypt, as the Nile Delta provided ideal ecological conditions for robust reproduction of the mosquitos carrying the \"Plasmodium falciparum\" parasite responsible for causing human malarial infections. A 2023 meta-analysis study found that 22% of ancient Egyptian mummies tested positive for malaria. Genetic testing on Tutankhamun for STEVOR, AMA1, or MSP1 genes specific for \"Plasmodium falciparum\" revealed indications of malaria tropica in Tutankhamun's mummy. The team discovered DNA from several strains of the parasite, indicating that he was repeatedly infected with the most severe strain of malaria. It has been speculated that his malaria infections may have contributed to a fatal immune response in the body or triggered circulatory shock.\nLeg fracture.\nThe 2005 CT scan also showed that Tutankhamun had experienced a compound left leg fracture. The counterargument of the injury being the result of modern mummy damage has been ruled out due to the ragged edges of the fracture; this is in contrast to modern mummy damage edge patterns, which feature sharp edges. Additionally, embalming substances were present within the fracture, indicating that the wound was present before Tutankhamun's mummification. No signs of healing were present, suggesting that the wound occurred very recently before Tutankhamun's death. In overview, it is reasonable to conclude that Tutankhamun died from leg fracture complications, possibly exacerbated by malarial infection. Egyptologist Raymond Johnson has remarked that it is possible that the leg injury occurred during battle while Tutankhamun was on a military campaign.\nPodiatric diagnoses.\nTutankhamun has been associated with various possible podiatric diagnoses. As a result of the 2005 CT scans, it has been speculated that he had a flat right foot with hypophalangism. Also, it is speculated that he had bone necrosis of the second and third metatarsal bones (Freiberg disease or K\u00f6hler disease II).\nAnother podiatric diagnosis of Tutankhamun is a left clubfoot, which is heavily disputed. If he was inflicted with clubfoot, it could have forced Tutankhamun to walk with the use of a cane as a mobility aid. More than 130 various canes and sticks were found in his tomb. Some scholars interpret this as evidence of podiatric illness, but this is heavily disputed. Many of the sticks were not of a medical type, and were instead fashion accessory sticks like crooks or sceptres like was-sceptres, which served as types of staffs of office. Furthermore, opposed to being clinical assistance, the canes were status symbols functioning as royal regalia for religious rituals and public appearances. Egyptologist Nick Brown has articulated that Tutankhamun's sticks \"served as essentially kingly insignia during his rule, not as walking aids\". Records of other ancient Egyptians' stick usage are consistent with this. For example, the tomb of ancient Egyptian nomarch, Djehutynakht, had over 250 walking sticks in his tomb, while pharaoh Amenhotep II, known for his athletic prowess, is depicted being gifted 30 walking sticks in artwork in tomb TT93, the tomb of Ken-Amun.\nAnother factor in the walking sticks being regalia, as opposed to assistive canes, is the pattern of wear on the sticks. None of them shows the extent of wear expected of essential aids. Also, the wear on Tutankhamun's sandals, where present, was even on both feet. This symmetry indicates that Tutankhamun was not relying more on one foot for mobility, challenging speculated podiatric diagnoses. Around 2020, the \"Tutankhamun's Sticks and Staves Project\" was launched to investigate by an international team of scientists that aimed to analyze the various stick objects in Tutankhamun's tomb. One of the main research goals was to investigate signs of usage on the sticks. The results were that there was very little wear on the sticks, indicating that they were not used to an extent that one would expect if Tutankhamun was using them as assistive canes. The researchers concluded:\nThese sticks were not used as supports, and were more likely ceremonial accessories/objects that did not hit the ground frequently... it does not seem as if Tutankhamun leant heavily for support on the sticks that have been found in his tomb...The absence wear on the tips of the sticks suggests that the king was stronger and more able-bodied than has been suggested, not needing a stick as walking aid, but using it more as a stylish accessory or as part of his royal regalia, as would have been the case for any other pharaoh.\nThis research is consistent with prior research conducted examining the extent of usage of the sticks. Overall, evidence points towards Tutankhamun having healthy mobility.\nMisdiagnoses.\nMultiple speculated medical diagnoses of Tutankhamun have been dismissed as misdiagnoses due to the results of further investigation. In attempts to explain Tutankhamun's unusual depiction in art and his early death, it had been speculated that Tutankhamun was inflicted with gynecomastia, Marfan syndrome, sagittal craniosynostosis syndrome, Antley\u2013Bixler syndrome or one of its variants. However, later genetic testing through STR analysis rejected the hypothesis of gynecomastia and craniosynostoses (e.g., Antley\u2013Bixler syndrome) or Marfan syndrome.\nJames Gamble had instead suggested that Tutankhamun's left clubfoot position is a result of Tutankhamun habitually walking on the outside of his foot due to the pain caused by K\u00f6hler disease II. This hypothesis has been refuted by members of Hawass' team.\nOther speculated diagnoses.\nAlso, as an explanation attempt of certain art depictions and an early death, it has been surmised that Tutankhamun may have had Wilson\u2013Turner X-linked intellectual disability syndrome, Fr\u00f6hlich syndrome (adiposogenital dystrophy), Klinefelter syndrome, androgen insensitivity syndrome, or aromatase excess syndrome. It has also been suggested that he had inherited temporal lobe epilepsy in a bid to explain the religiosity of his great-grandfather Thutmose IV and father Akhenaten and their early deaths. However, caution has been urged in this diagnosis. Timmann and Meyer have argued that sickle cell anemia fits exhibited pathologies exhibited, a suggestion Hawass's team has called \"interesting and plausible\".\nResearchers argued that the results of the 2005 mummy CT scan suggest Tutankhamun had a partial cleft palate on his hard palate. Researchers also speculated that had mild scoliosis. Nevertheless, Tutankhamun's vertebra did not display any rotation or deformation, suggesting that the mummy spinal curvature resulted from embalmer handling.\nPhysical appearance.\nThe appearance of ancient Egyptians, especially Tutankhamun, has remained an area of inquiry and debate. Tutankhamun was of slight build; his mummy measured approximately tall. Analysis of the clothing found in his tomb, particularly the dimensions of his loincloths and belts suggest that he had a narrow waist and rounded hips.\nMultiple attempts have been made to reconstruct a computerized image of Tutankhamun's face, and there has been one attempt at reconstructing imagery of his full figure. Reconstructions have repeatedly incited controversy upon release.\nFacial appearance.\nIn 1983, forensic artist Betty Pat Gatliff, alongside forensic anthropologist Clyde Snow, developed a reconstruction image of Tutankhamun's face from a plaster cast of his skull.\nIn 2005, an extensively media-covered study by the Egyptian Supreme Council of Antiquities and \"National Geographic\" employed three different research teams (Egyptian, French, and American) to develop a facial image using CT scans of his skull. The Egyptian and French teams were informed that their subject was Tutankhamun, while the American team was not informed who the subject was, thereby working blindly. Results were generally similar, although the reconstruction did not resemble effigy artifacts of Tutankhamun. The depiction sparked controversy, particularly for its skin color, which also did not resemble painted effigies of Tutankhamun, such as the Head of Nefertem artifact or the mannequin artifact. Throughout the years, the image's light-skinned representation has ignited numerous picketing protests outside multiple Tutankhamun exhibits that included the depiction. Terry Garcia, executive vice president for mission programs for National Geographic in response to protests purported that Tutankhamun's exact skin tone is unknown and that they aimed for a middle skin tone.\nIn 2007, amidst more exhibition protests, anthropologist Nina Jablonski addressed what an educated guess of Tutankhamun's skin tone might be:\n\"Our best guess is that he was neither lily white nor ebony black. He was probably somewhere in between... When we look at the representation of the Egyptian royalty on the walls of tombs, we see a range of sort of moderate, tan-colored skin on the royalty. This probably is a fairly close approximation of what skin color these people actually had.\"\nIn 2008, Egyptologist Stuart Tyson Smith criticized the skin-tone choice of the 2005 study, stating that the light skin tone was indicative of a bias, elaborating that ancient Egyptians were generally of darker skin tone, especially in more southern regions. In 2022, bioarcheologist Andrew Nelson used CT scans and the 3D bioimaging software, Dragonfly, to create a virtual model of Tutankhamun's face. The result was distinct from prior reconstructions from skull CT scans. Nelson stated that the skull anatomy guided the project which made for a more realistic reconstruction. Nelson's study did not overlay a skin tone on the facial reconstruction. In 2023, researchers developed a new version of Tutankhamun's face using further CT scans. Results greatly resembled the results of the CT scan reconstruction performed in 2005. The skin tone was also akin to the skin tone chosen in the 2005 study.\nDepictions of Tutankhamun deemed Afrocentristic have repeatedly generated protest and tension. In 2023, an exhibit titled \"Kemet: Egypt in Hip-Hop, Jazz, Soul and Funk\" at the Dutch National Museum of Antiquities in Leiden, Netherlands depicted a statue of rapper Nas's (1999) \"I Am...\" album cover, which portrays Nas's face in the Mask of Tutankhamun. Egyptian antiquities expert Abd al-Rahim Rihan accused the exhibit curators of promoting Afrocentric pseudohistory by displaying the Tutankhamun mask with black facial features, indirectly advocating the black Egyptian hypothesis. Similarly, Ahmed Belal, an Egyptian member of parliament, accused the exhibit curators of \"distorting Egyptian identity\" and \"attacking Egyptian heritage and civilization.\" The exhibit curators denied the accusations, stating that the exhibit takes a neutral position on the race of ancient Egyptians. Daniel Soliman, the exhibition curator, who himself is half-Egyptian, stated that some Egyptians feel an exclusive possession to the pharaonic heritage, while the African diaspora's artistic envisioned of ancient Egypt has been ignored. Museum director Wim Weijland stated that the exhibition is about art, not racially classifying ancient Egyptians.\nEgyptian journalist, Shahira Amin, in a 2023 article titled \"Egyptians aren't racist. They're frustrated with Western appropriation of their ancient history\", wrote that \"many Egyptians shun their Africanness, preferring to associate themselves with the Middle East and identify as Muslims and Arabs.\"\nFull-body reconstruction.\nIn a 2014 BBC documentary, presented by Dallas Campbell, titled \"Tutankhamun: The Truth Uncovered\", revealed results of a computerized forensic reconstruction of Tutankhamun's body that harnessed 2,000 CT scans of Tutankhamun's mummy to generate an image of his body. The resultant image depicted Tutankhamun in his underwear, physically infirm with a club foot, an overbite, a gynecomastic chest, and multiple other visible physical disorders. The reconstruction was controversial, characterized as being of poor taste. Jonathan Jones of \"The Guardian\" articulated that the imagery was a \"morbid freak show\" and \"crass and vulgar infotainment\". Egyptologist Zahi Hawass criticized that the virtual reconstruction of Tutankhamun's body was scientifically unfounded. Disability studies scholars have criticized the reconstruction of Tutankhamun, stating that they were derogatory and \"seemed designed to exaggerate the physical features of said impairments, rather than offer any scientific value, let alone any humanity or recognition that this historical figure was a man\".\nDeath.\nThere are no surviving records of the circumstances of Tutankhamun's death; it has been the subject of considerable debate and major studies.\nHawass and his team postulate that his death was likely the result of the combination of his multiple weakening disorders, his femur fracture, perhaps as the result of a fall, and a severe malarial infection.\nMurder by a blow to the head was hypothesised as a result of the 1968 x-ray, which showed two bone fragments inside the skull. This hypothesis was then disproved by further analysis of the x-rays and the CT scan. The intercranial bone fragments were determined to be the result of the modern unwrapping of the mummy, as they are loose and not adherent to the embalming resin. No evidence of bone thinning or calcified membranes, which could be indicative of a fatal blow to the head, was found. It has also been suggested that the Tutankhamun was killed in a chariot accident due to a pattern of crushing injuries, including the fact that the front part of his chest wall and ribs are missing. However, the missing ribs are unlikely to be a result of an injury sustained at the time of death; photographs taken at the conclusion of Carter's excavation in 1926 show that the chest wall of the king was intact, still wearing a beaded collar with falcon-headed terminals. The absence of both the collar and chest wall was noted in the 1968 x-ray and further confirmed by the CT scan. the front part of his chest was likely removed by robbers during the theft of the beaded collar; the intricate beaded skullcap the king was pictured wearing in 1926 was also missing by 1968.\nSuccession.\nSince the two children of Tutankhamun were either stillborn or did not survive long after birth, and Tutankhamun was presumably the last of the royal male siblings, there was no immediate heir apparent to assume the throne. Records in Horemheb's tomb state that Tutankhamun appointed him \"lord of the land\" as Iry-pat (heir designate), which is essentially the designated hereditary prince to maintain law. However, some have argued that Queen Ankhesenamun may have been able to transfer kinship to a husband, but would have preferred not to marry someone of lesser status than royal queen status. Horemheb was a militaryman of peasant birth and was, as the military commander-in-chief, technically a servant of Queen Ankhesenamun. The vizier Ay, while of some royal blood, was an established vizier and also technically a servant of Queen Ankhesenamun. Ankhesenamun's assumed spousal preferences may have ignited a series of disruptions in the fulfillment of what some have argued may have been King Tutankhamun's preference on throne heirship.\nReign of vizier Ay.\nSeeking to resolve her spousal dilemma, Ankhesenamun may have inadvertently generated a predicament involving the Hittite king Suppiluliuma I and his son, prince Zannanza, known as the Zannanza affair, although Ankhesenamun's identification as the Egyptian queen in question is not definite. Meanwhile, during this interregnum period, Tutankhamun's vizier, Ay, may have maneuvered in the midst of Tutankhamun's death to intercept the throne, circumventing Horemheb's heirship, possibly marrying Ankhesenamun towards the onset of this Hittite-Egyptian negotiation period, unbeknownst to the Hittites. The fact that Ay is depicted presiding over Tutankhamun's funeral, which is customary for the successor pharaoh, and the fact that Horemheb appears to have been absent at Tutankhamun's funeral align with this.\nThe pharaoh Ay's reign was short, and his death again appears to have left a vacancy on the throne with no royal bloodline heir because Ay is presumed to have not had children with Queen Ankhesenamun. Toward the end of Ay's reign, Ay named his son, military generalissimo Nakhtmin, to be successor to the throne. However, Nakhtmin died before he could become pharaoh.\nHoremheb Iry-pat fulfillment.\nHoremheb succeeded to the throne as pharaoh after Ay's death. As pharaoh, Horemheb saw to it that the restoration of the traditional ancient Egyptian religion that Tutankhamun was previously spearheading was completed, restabilizing the nation. Notably, during the standard damnatio memoriae process that each new Egyptian pharaoh undertakes, Horemheb defaced Ay's tomb, but left Tutankhamun's untouched, presumably out of respect. Nevertheless, Horemheb's damnatio memoriae venture was one of the most elaborate and successful damnatio memoriae campaigns in Egyptian history.\nIn due course, Horemheb had selected then civilian military officer, Ramesses I, as heir to the throne. Ramesses I's grandson, Ramesses II, would go on to found the Ramesside dynasty and become the greatest pharaoh of ancient Egypt. This initiated a new royal bloodline, replacing the royal bloodline that ended with the death of Tutankhamun.\nTomb.\nTutankhamun was buried in a tomb that was unusually small considering his status. His death may have occurred unexpectedly, before the completion of a grander royal tomb, causing his mummy to be buried in a tomb intended for someone else. This would preserve the observance of the customary 70 days between death and burial. His tomb was robbed at least twice in antiquity, but based on the items taken (including perishable oils and perfumes) and the evidence of restoration of the tomb after the intrusions, these robberies likely took place within several months at most of the initial burial. The location of the tomb was lost because it had come to be buried by debris from subsequent tombs, and workers' houses were built over the tomb entrance.\nRediscovery.\nThe concession rights for excavating the Valley of the Kings were held by Theodore Davis from 1905 until 1914. In that time, he had unearthed ten tombs, including the nearly intact but non-royal tomb of Queen Tiye's parents, Yuya and Thuya. As he continued working there in the later years, he uncovered nothing of major significance. Davis did find several objects in KV58 referring to Tutankhamun, which included knobs and handles bearing his name, most significantly the embalming cache of the king (KV54). He believed this to be the pharaoh's lost tomb and published his findings as such with the line; \"I fear the Valley of the Tombs is exhausted\". In 1907, Howard Carter was invited by William Garstin and Gaston Maspero to excavate for George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon in the Valley. The Earl of Carnarvon and Carter had hoped this would lead to their gaining the concession when Davis gave it up, but had to be satisfied with excavations in different parts of the Theban Necropolis for seven more years.\nAfter a systematic search beginning in 1915, Carter discovered the actual tomb of Tutankhamun (KV62) in November 1922. An ancient stroke of luck allowed the tomb to survive to modern times. The tomb's entrance was buried by mounds of debris from the cutting of KV9 over 150 years after Tutankhamun's burial; ancient workmen's huts were also built on the site. This area remained unexcavated until 1922 due to its proximity to KV9, as excavations would impede tourist access to that tomb. Carter commenced excavations in early November 1922, before the height of the tourist season. The first step of the tomb's entrance staircase was uncovered on 4 November 1922. According to Carter's account, the workmen discovered the step while digging beneath the remains of the huts; Other accounts attribute the discovery to a boy named Hussein Abdul Rasoul (Water boy) who was digging outside the designated work area.\nBy February 1923, the antechamber had been cleared of everything but two sentinel statues. A day and time were selected to unseal the tomb with about twenty appointed witnesses that included Lord Carnarvon, several Egyptian officials, museum representatives, and the staff of the Government Press Bureau. On 17 February 1923 at just after two o'clock, the seal was broken.\nLetters published in 2022 of correspondence between Rex Engelbach and Alan Gardiner reveal that Howard Carter had stolen objects from the tomb before the tomb was officially opened. For instance, Rex Engelbach said in a letter to Gardiner about a 'whm amulet' gifted to Gardiner from Carter that \"The whm amulet you showed me has been undoubtedly stolen from the tomb of Tutankhamun.\"\nContents.\nTutankhamun's tomb is the only royal tomb in the Valley of the Kings found in near-intact condition. There were 5,398 items found in the tomb, including a solid gold coffin, face mask, thrones, archery bows, trumpets, a lotus chalice, two Imiut fetishes, gold toe stalls, furniture, food, wine, sandals, and fresh linen underwear. Howard Carter took 10 years to catalog the items. Analysis from the 1960s onwards suggests a dagger recovered from the tomb had an iron blade made from a meteorite; study of artifacts of the time including other artifacts from Tutankhamun's tomb could provide valuable insights into metalworking technologies around the Mediterranean at the time. Complete study of the iron artefacts from the tomb (besides the blade of a richly decorated golden dagger, small iron chisel blades set into wooden handles, an Eye of Horus amulet, and a miniature headrest) demonstrated that all were made of similar material. Only in 2022, a complex technological and material study of the Tutankhamun's mask was published. Many of Tutankhamun's burial goods show signs of being adapted for his use after being originally made for earlier owners, probably Smenkhkare or Neferneferuaten or both. The golden Nut pectoral (Carter no. 261p1) or (Cairo JE61944) was reused for the funeral of Tutankhamun. Marc Gabolde successfully demonstrated that the original cartouches reinscribed on the pectoral with Tutankhamun's nomen and prenomen were those of Neferneferuaten with the variation of \"Ankhkheperure-Mery-Waenre\" and \"Neferneferuaten-Akhetenhies\" \u201cOne Who is Beneficial for Her Husband,\u201d proving Neferneferuaten was a female king who was at the same time the wife of Akhenaten. Traces of the cartouches of Neferneferuaten were also identified underneath the cartouches of Tutankhamun on the four miniature golden canopic coffins [of the Boy King].\" \nOn 4 November 2007, 85 years to the day after Carter's discovery, Tutankhamun's mummy was placed on display in his underground tomb at Luxor, when the linen-wrapped mummy was removed from its golden sarcophagus to a climate-controlled glass box. The case was designed to prevent the heightened rate of decomposition caused by the humidity and warmth from tourists visiting the tomb. In 2009, the tomb was closed for restoration by the Ministry of Antiquities and the Getty Conservation Institute. While the closure was originally planned for five years to restore the walls affected by humidity, the Egyptian revolution of 2011 set the project back. The tomb reopened in February 2019.\nRumoured curse.\nFor many years, rumors of a \"curse of the pharaohs\" (probably fueled by newspapers seeking sales at the time of the discovery) persisted, emphasizing the early death of some of those who had entered the tomb. The most prominent was George Herbert, 5th Earl of Carnarvon, who died on 5 April 1923, five months after the discovery of the first step leading down to the tomb on 4 November 1922.\nThe cause of Carnarvon's death was pneumonia supervening on [facial] erysipelas (a streptococcal infection of the skin and underlying soft tissue). The Earl had been in an automobile accident in 1901, making him very unhealthy and frail. His doctor recommended a warmer climate, so in 1903, the Carnarvons traveled to Egypt, where the Earl became interested in Egyptology. Along with the stresses of the excavation, Carnarvon was already in a weakened state when an infection led to pneumonia.\nA study showed that of the 58 people who were present when the tomb and sarcophagus were opened, only eight died within a dozen years; Howard Carter died of lymphoma in 1939 at the age of 64. The last survivors included Lady Evelyn Herbert, Lord Carnarvon's daughter who was among the first people to enter the tomb after its discovery in November 1922, who lived for a further 57 years and died in 1980, and American archaeologist J.O. Kinnaman who died in 1961, 39 years after the event.\nLegacy.\nTutankhamun's fame is primarily the result of his well-preserved tomb and the global exhibitions of his associated artifacts. As Jon Manchip White writes, in his foreword to the 1977 edition of Carter's \"The Discovery of the Tomb of Tutankhamun\", \"The pharaoh who in life was one of the least esteemed of Egypt's Pharaohs has become in death the most renowned\".\nThe discoveries in the tomb were prominent news in the 1920s. Tutankhamen came to be called by a modern neologism, \"King Tut\". Ancient Egyptian references became common in popular culture, including Tin Pan Alley songs; the most popular of the latter was \"Old King Tut\" by Harry Von Tilzer from 1923, which was recorded by such prominent artists of the time as Jones &amp; Hare and Sophie Tucker. \"King Tut\" became the name of products, businesses, and the pet dog of U.S. President Herbert Hoover. While The Treasures of Tutankhamun exhibit was touring the United States in 1978, comedian Steve Martin wrote a novelty song \"King Tut\". Originally performed on \"Saturday Night Live\", the song was released as a single and sold over a million copies. In 2023, an extinct whale discovered in the Eocene deposits of Egypt was named \"Tutcetus\", after Tutankhamun, due to the small size and immature age of the type specimen.\nInternational exhibitions.\nTutankhamun's artifacts have traveled the world with unprecedented visitorship. The exhibitions began in 1962 when Algeria won its independence from France. With the ending of that conflict, the Louvre Museum in Paris was quickly able to arrange an exhibition of Tutankhamun's treasures through Christiane Desroches Noblecourt. The French Egyptologist was already in Egypt as part of a UNESCO appointment. The French exhibit drew 1.2 million visitors. Noblecourt had also convinced the Egyptian Minister of Culture to allow British photographer George Rainbird to re-photograph the collection in color. The new color photos, as well as the Louvre exhibition, began a Tutankhamun revival.In 1965, the Tutankhamun exhibit traveled to Tokyo National Museum in Tokyo, Japan (21 August\u201310 October) where it garnered more visitors than the future New York exhibit in 1979. The exhibit next moved to the Kyoto Municipal Museum of Art in Kyoto (15 October\u201328 November) with almost 1.75 million visitors, and then to the Fukuoka Prefectural Cultural Hall in Fukuoka (3 December\u201326 December). The blockbuster attraction exceeded all other exhibitions of Tutankhamun's treasures for the next 60 years. \"The Treasures of Tutankhamun\" tour ran from 1972 to 1979. This exhibition was first shown in London at the British Museum from 30 March until 30 September 1972. More than 1.6\u00a0million visitors saw the exhibition. The exhibition moved on to many other countries, including the United States, Soviet Union, Japan, France, Canada, and West Germany. The Metropolitan Museum of Art organized the U.S. exhibition, which ran from 17 November 1976 through 15 April 1979. More than eight million attended. The showing in the United States was part of a diplomatic effort begun by Henry Kissinger to further convince Americans of the value of Egypt as an ally. It traveled first to Washington, D.C., then to Chicago, New Orleans, Los Angeles, and Seattle, and finished in New York.\nIn 2005, Egypt's Supreme Council of Antiquities, in partnership with Arts and Exhibitions International and the National Geographic Society, launched a tour of Tutankhamun treasures and other 18th Dynasty funerary objects, this time called \"Tutankhamun and the Golden Age of the Pharaohs\". It featured the same exhibits as \"Tutankhamen: The Golden Hereafter\" in a slightly different format. It was expected to draw more than three million people, but exceeded that with almost four million people attending just the first four tour stops. The exhibition started in Los Angeles, then moved to Fort Lauderdale, Chicago, Philadelphia and London before finally returning to Egypt in August 2008. An encore of the exhibition in the United States ran at the Dallas Museum of Art. After Dallas the exhibition moved to the de Young Museum in San Francisco, followed by the Discovery Times Square Exposition in New York City.\nThe exhibition visited Australia for the first time, opening at the Melbourne Museum for its only Australian stop before Egypt's treasures returned to Cairo in December 2011.\nThe exhibition included 80 exhibits from the reigns of Tutankhamun's immediate predecessors in the 18th Dynasty, such as Hatshepsut, whose trade policies greatly increased the wealth of that dynasty and enabled the lavish wealth of Tutankhamun's burial artifacts, as well as 50 from Tutankhamun's tomb. The exhibition did not include the gold mask that was a feature of the 1972\u20131979 tour, as the Egyptian government has decided that the damage that occurred to previous artifacts on tours precludes this one from joining them.\nIn 2018, it was announced that the largest collection of Tutankhamun artifacts, amounting to forty percent of the entire collection, would be leaving Egypt again in 2019 for an international tour entitled; \"King Tut: Treasures of the Golden Pharaoh\". The 2019\u20132022 tour began with an exhibit called; \"Tutankhamun, Pharaoh's Treasures,\" which launched in Los Angeles and then traveled to Paris. The exhibit featured at the Grande Halle de la Villette in Paris ran from March to September 2019. The exhibit featured one hundred and fifty gold coins, along with various pieces of jewelry, sculpture, and carvings, as well as the gold mask of Tutankhamun. Promotion of the exhibit filled the streets of Paris with posters of the event. The exhibit moved to London in November 2019 and was scheduled to travel to Boston and Sydney when the COVID-19 pandemic interrupted the tour. On 28 August 2020 the artifacts that made up the temporary exhibition returned to the Egyptian Museum, Cairo, and other institutions. The treasures will be permanently housed in the new Grand Egyptian Museum in Cairo, expected to open between October 2023 and February 2024.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30438", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30438", "title": "Totalitarian", "text": ""}
{"id": "30439", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30439", "title": "Totalitarianism", "text": "Extreme form of authoritarianism and a theoretical concept\nTotalitarianism is a political system and a form of government that prohibits opposition from political parties, disregards and outlaws the political claims of individual and group opposition to the state, and completely controls the public sphere and the private sphere of society. In the field of political science, totalitarianism is the extreme form of authoritarianism, wherein all political power is held by a dictator. This figure controls the national politics and peoples of the nation with continual propaganda campaigns that are broadcast by state-controlled and state-aligned private mass communications media.\nThe totalitarian government uses ideology to control most aspects of human life, such as the political economy of the country, the system of education, the arts, sciences, and private morality of its citizens. In the exercise of power, the difference between a totalitarian regime of government and an authoritarian regime of government is one of degree; whereas totalitarianism features a charismatic dictator and a fixed worldview, authoritarianism only features a dictator who holds power for the sake of holding power. The authoritarian dictator is supported, either jointly or individually, by a military junta and by the socio-economic elites who are the ruling class of the country.\nThe word \"totalitarian\" was first used in the early 1920s to describe the Italian Fascist regime. The term \"totalitarianism\" gained wider usage in politics of the interwar period; in the early years of the Cold War, it arose from comparison of the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin and Nazi Germany under Adolf Hitler as a theoretical concept of Western political science, achieving hegemony in explaining the nature of Fascist and Communist states, and later entered the Western historiography of Communism, the Soviet Union and the Russian Revolution; in the 21st century, it became applied to Islamist movements and their governments. The concept of totalitarianism has been challenged and criticized by some historians of Nazi Germany and Stalinist USSR. When defined as exemplary cases of totalitarianism, on the grounds that the main characteristics of the concept \u2013 total control over society, total mobilization of the masses, and a monolithic centralized character of the regime \u2013 were never achieved by the dictatorships called totalitarian. To support this claim, the historians argue that the political structures of these states were disorganized and chaotic, and that despite the supposed external similarities between Nazism and Stalinism, their internal logic and structure were substantially different. The applicability of the concept to Islamism has also been criticized.\nDefinitions.\nContemporary background.\nModern political science catalogues three r\u00e9gimes of government: (i) the democratic, (ii) the authoritarian, and (iii) the totalitarian. Varying by political culture, the functional characteristics of the totalitarian r\u00e9gime of government are: political repression of all opposition (individual and collective); a cult of personality about The Leader; official economic interventionism (controlled wages and prices); official censorship of all mass communication media (the press, textbooks, cinema, television, radio, internet); official mass surveillance-policing of public places; and state terrorism. In the essay \"Democide in Totalitarian States\" (1994) the American political scientist Rudolph Rummel, while acknowledging that there is \"much confusion about what is meant by \"totalitarian\"\" up to denial that totalitarian systems have ever existed, defined a totalitarian state as \"one with a system of government that is unlimited, [either] constitutionally or by countervailing powers in society (such as by a Church, rural gentry, labor unions, or regional powers); is not held responsible to the public by periodic secret and competitive elections; and employs its unlimited power to control all aspects of society, including the family, religion, education, business, private property, and social relationships.\" According to Rummel, such governments act as \"agencies of totalitarianism\" itself, that is, \"the ideology of absolute power\", which installs \"mortacracy\" in states controlled by it. Rummel cited Marxism\u2013Leninism and communism in the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin, China under Mao Zedong and in East Germany, Nazism in Germany under Adolf Hitler and fascism in other states, state socialism (Burmese way to socialism) in Burma under U Ne Win and Islamic fundamentalism (Islamism) in Iran as examples of totalitarianism. However, not all scholars believe these regimes and ideologies exemplify totalitarianism: some of those who support of the concept of totalitarianism exclude Burma, Iran and even Fascist Italy from this category, while historians who state that the concept can not adequately describe Stalinism nor Nazism criticize the concept of totalitarianism in general (see below).\nIn exercising the power of government upon society, the application of an official dominant ideology differentiates the worldview of the totalitarian r\u00e9gime from the worldview of the authoritarian r\u00e9gime, which is \"only concerned with political power, and, as long as [government power] is not contested, [the authoritarian government] gives society a certain degree of liberty.\" Having no ideology to propagate, the politically secular authoritarian government \"does not attempt to change the world and human nature\", whereas the \"totalitarian government seeks to completely control the thoughts and actions of its citizens\", by way of an official \"totalist ideology, a [political] party reinforced by a secret police, and monopolistic control of industrial mass society.\"\nHistorical background.\nFor influential philosopher Karl Popper, the social phenomenon of political totalitarianism is a product of Modernism, which Popper said originated in humanist philosophy; in the \"Republic\" (\"res publica\") proposed by Plato in Ancient Greece, in Hegel's conception of the State as a polity of peoples, and in the political economy of Karl Marx in the 19th century\u2014yet historians and philosophers of those periods dispute the historiographic accuracy of Popper's 20th-century interpretation and delineation of the historical origins of totalitarianism, because, for example, the ancient Greek philosopher Plato did not invent the modern State; his approach has been described as a radical denial of historical causation and as an ahistorical attempt to present totalitarianism and liberalism not as products of historical development, but as eternal and timeless categories of humankind itself. \nThere were similar \"ideocratic\" attempts in traditions of the Counter-Enlightenment to trace totalitarianism back to the times preceding the 20th century: Eric Voegelin saw totalitarianism as \"the journey's end of the Gnostic search for a civil theology\", an epilogue of the process of secularization which began with the Reformation which led to a world deprived of any religiosity; Jacob Talmon thought totalitarianism to be a merger of left-wing radical democracy (from Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Maximilien Robespierre and Fran\u00e7ois-No\u00ebl Babeuf) and right-wing irrationalism (from Johann Gottlieb Fichte) as traditions opposed to empirical liberalism; the German philosophers Max Horkheimer and Theodor W. Adorno viewed totalitarianism as an ineluctable destiny of modernity rooted in the origins of the Western civilization and as an ultimate end of the evolution of the Enlightenment from emancipatory reason to instrumental rationality, and as a product of anthropocentrist proposition that: \"Man has become the master of the world, a master unbound by any links to Nature, society, and history\", which excludes the intervention of supernatural beings to earthly politics of government.\nEnzo Traverso believes that the idea of \"total state\", or \"totalitarian state\" as it would be called later, came from the concept of \"total war\" which was used to describe World War I by its contemporaries: the war \"shaped the imagination of an entire generation\" by rationalizing nihilism and \"methodical destruction of the enemy\", introducing \"a new warrior ethos in which the old ideals of heroism and chivalry merged with modern technology\" and a process of brutalization of politics and such examples of \"continentally planned industrial killing\" as the Armenian genocide. \"Total war\" became \"total state\", and after the war, it was used as a pejorative by the Italian anti-fascists of the 1920s and later by the Italian Fascists themselves.\nAmerican historian William Rubinstein wrote that:The 'Age of Totalitarianism' included nearly all the infamous examples of genocide in modern history, headed by the Jewish Holocaust, but also comprising the mass murders and purges of the Communist world, other mass killings carried out by Nazi Germany and its allies, and also the Armenian genocide of 1915. All these slaughters, it is argued here, had a common origin, the collapse of the elite structure and normal modes of government of much of central, eastern and southern Europe as a result of World War I, without which surely neither Communism nor Fascism would have existed except in the minds of unknown agitators and crackpots.\nIn the 20th century, Giovanni Gentile classified Italian Fascism as a political ideology with a philosophy that is \"totalitarian, and [that] the Fascist State\u2014a synthesis and a unity inclusive of all values\u2014interprets, develops, and potentiates the whole life of a people\"; Gentile expressed his ideas in \"The Doctrine of Fascism\" (1932), an essay he co-authored with Benito Mussolini. In 1920s Germany, during the Weimar Republic (1918\u20131933), the Nazi jurist Carl Schmitt integrated Gentile's Fascist philosophy of united national purpose to the supreme-leader ideology of the \"F\u00fchrerprinzip\".\nSince the Cold War, the so-called 'traditionalist', or 'totalitarian', historians (see below) argued that Vladimir Lenin, one of the leaders of the 1917 October Revolution in Russia, was the first politician to establish a totalitarian state; such description of Lenin is opposed by the so-called 'revisionist' historians of Communism and the Soviet Union as well as by a broad range of authors including Hannah Arendt. \nAs the \"Duce\" leading the Italian people to the future, Benito Mussolini said that his dictatorial r\u00e9gime of government made Fascist Italy (1922\u20131943) the representative \"Totalitarian State\": \"Everything in the State, nothing outside the State, nothing against the State.\" Likewise, in \"The Concept of the Political\" (1927), the Nazi jurist Schmitt used the term \"der Totalstaat\" (the Total State) to identify, describe, and establish the legitimacy of a German totalitarian state led by a supreme leader; later Joseph Goebbels would call a totalitarian state the goal of the Nazi Party, although the concept became downplayed in Nazi discourse.\nAfter the Second World War (1937\u20131945), U.S. political discourse (domestic and foreign) included the concepts (ideologic and political) and the terms \"totalitarian\", \"totalitarianism\", and \"totalitarian model\". In the post-war U.S. of the 1950s, to politically discredit the anti-fascism of the Second World War as misguided foreign policy and at the same time direct anti-fascists against Communism, McCarthyite politicians claimed that Left-wing totalitarianism was an existential threat to Western civilisation, and so facilitated the creation of the American national security state to execute the anti-communist Cold War (1945\u20131989) that was fought by client-state proxies of the US and the USSR.\nWhile the concept of totalitarianism became dominant in Anglo-American political discourse after World War II, it remained neglected in continental Europe except for West Germany: in such countries as Italy and France, where the Communist parties played a hegemonic role in the anti-fascist resistance, the pioneering works of the theory of totalitarianism by such authors as Hannah Arendt, Zbigniew Brzezinski and Carl Friedrich were often ignored or not even translated; the political theory of totalitarianism in these countries was promoted by Congress for Cultural Freedom supported by the CIA.\nHistoriography.\n\"Totalitarians\" and \"Revisionists\".\nThe Western historiography of the USSR and of the Soviet period of Russian history and is in two schools of research and interpretation: (i) the traditionalist school of historiography and (ii) the revisionist school of historiography; the traditionalists and neo-traditionalists, or anti-revisionists, are also known as 'totalitarian school' or 'totalitarian approach' and 'Cold War' historians, for relying on concepts and interpretations rooted in the early years of the Cold War and even in the sphere Russian White \u00e9migr\u00e9s of the 1920s.\nTraditionalist-school historians characterise themselves as objective reporters of the claimed totalitarianism allegedly inherent to Marxism, to Communism, and to the political nature of Communist states, such as the USSR, while the Cold War revisionists criticized the politically liberal and anti-communist bias they perceived in the predominance of the traditionalists and describe their approach as emotional and oversimplifying. Revisionist-school historians criticise the traditionalist school's concentration upon the police-state aspects of Cold War history which they say leads it to anti-communist interpretation of history biased towards a right-wing interpretation of the documentary facts. The revisionists also oppose the equation of Nazism and Communism and Stalinism and stress such their ideological differences as the humanist and egalitarian origins of Communist ideology. In the 1960s, revisionists studying the Cold War and the Communist movement in the U.S. criticized the dominant ideas that American Communists were an actual threat to the United States and that the Cold War was the fault of Stalin's territorial and political ambitions and that Soviet expansionism and its alleged strife to conquer the world forced the U.S. to turn from isolationism to a global containment policy.\nThe difference between these two historiographic directions is not only political, but also as methodological: the 'traditionalists' focus on politics, ideology and personalities of the Bolshevik and Communist leaders, putting the latter in the centre of history while largely ignoring social processes, and traditionalists present \"history from above\", directed by the leaders, while the revisionists put emphasis on \"history from below\" and social history of the Soviet regime, and they describe the traditionalists as '(right-wing) romantics.' In their turn, the traditionalists defend their approach and methodology, dismiss focus on social history and accuse their opponents of Marxism and of rationalizing the actions of the Bolsheviks and failing to recognize the primary role of \"one man\" leading a movement (Vladimir Lenin or Adolf Hitler). Between the late 1970s and early 1980s, revisionist approaches became largely accepted in academic circles, and the term \"revisionism\" migrated to characterize a group of social historians focusing on the working class and the upheavals of the Stalin years. At the same time, traditionalist historians retained popularity and influence outside academic circles, especially in politics and public spheres of the United States, where they supported harder policies towards the USSR: for example, Zbigniew Brzezinski served as National Security Advisor to President Jimmy Carter, while Richard Pipes, a prominent historian of 'totalitarian school', headed the CIA group Team B; after 1991, their views have found popularity not only in the West, but also in the former USSR.\nLeninism and the October Revolution.\nSince the 1980s, there has been a debate over the nature of the October Revolution between the traditionalists and the revisionists as well as a debate about the nature of the government of Vladimir Lenin. Traditionalist scholars believe that the government of Vladimir Lenin was a totalitarian dictatorship but revisionist scholars do not; the core argument of the traditionalists was based on their belief that the Revolution was a violent act which was carried out \"from above\" by a small group of intellectuals with brute force. Such traditionalist historians as Richard Pipes claimed that Soviet Russia of 1917\u20131924 was as totalitarian as the Soviet Union under Stalin was, and they also claim that Stalinist totalitarianism was a mere continuation of Lenin's policies because Stalinism was prefigured by Lenin's ideology, that Lenin was the \"inventor\" (Riley) of totalitarianism, and that further totalitarian regimes just implemented the policies already invented: for example, Pipes compared Lenin to Hitler and stated that \"The Stalinist and Nazi holocausts\" stemmed from Lenin's Red Terror and had \"much greater decorum\" than the latter. The revisionists, on the contrary, stressed the genuinely 'popular' nature of the 1917 Revolution, and tended to see a discontinuity between Leninism and Stalinism; a revisionist historian Ronald Suny cites Hannah Arendt who distinguished Lenin's terror of the Russian Civil War, \"a means to exterminate and frighten opponents\", from totalitarian terror aimed not at specific enemies but at fulfilling ideological goals, solving the problem of inequality and poverty, \"an instrument to rule masses who are perfectly obedient.\" It was also noted that Stalin became an uncontested dictator after a period of \"authoritarian pluralism\", while the one-party dictatorship and mass violence (the Red Terror) were interpreted not as a result of Lenin's totalitarian \"blueprint\", but rather of reactions (yet justified by the ideology) to current events and external factors, including wartime conditions and the struggle for survival, some historians highlighted the initial attempts of the Bolsheviks to form a coalition government.\nMartin Malia noted that the debates on history were politically significant: if the 'traditionalists' were right, \"Communism\" \"must be abolished\", but if they were not, it could be reformed. Understanding of relationship of Lenin and Stalin as a continuity of the totalitarian regime was consensual for a major period; the first revisionists of the 1960s, social historians, also believed it to be a continuity, but as a continuity of policies of modernisation, not as a continuity of totalitarianism; starting from the end of the 1960s, availability of new Soviet materials allowed to dispute the continuity for such historians as Moshe Lewin and break the consensus. According to Evan Mawdsley, \"the 'revisionist' school had been dominant from the 1970s\", and achieved \"some success\" in challenging the traditionalists.\nRevisionists on Stalinism.\nThe death of Stalin in 1953 voided the simplistic \"totalitarian model\" of the police-state USSR as the epitome of \"the totalitarian state\". Starting from the 1970s, the 'revisionist' historians, described as those who \"insisted that the old image of the Soviet Union as a totalitarian state bent on world domination was oversimplified or just plain wrong\" and focused not on typology of power, but social history, such as Sheila Fitzpatrick began challenging the totalitarian paradigm; without denying the state violence by the regime, these scholars argued that the Stalinist system could not and did not rule only through coercion and terror, and pointed to support within the population for many of Stalin's policies and argued that the party and state were often responsive to people's desires and values. More to it, they examined the substantial differences of Stalinist and Nazi violence that inevitably put into question the attempt to gather Stalin's and Hitler's regimes into a single category which was presented by the concept of totalitarianism. In 1999 the sociologists Randall Collins and David Waller grouped the concept of totalitarianism among the \"theories that were completely wrong\"; in \"Beyond Totalitarianism: Stalinism and Nazism Compared\" (2008), Fitzpatrick and Michael Geyer critically examined the concept of totalitarianism and made a very detailed comparison of similarities and substantial differences between Hitler and Stalin and made conclusion in agreement with the point of Collins and Waller.\nSome historians who did not align themselves with the 'revisionist school' later openly stated that Stalinist system cannot be regarded as totalitarian. For example, the historian Robert Service in his biography of Stalin wrote that \"this was not a totalitarian dictatorship as conventionally defined because Stalin lacked the capacity, even at the height of his power, to secure automatic universal compliance with his wishes.\" Eric Hobsbawm wrote that although Stalin indeed wanted to achieve total control of the population, he did not establish an actual totalitarian system, what, as he said, \"throws considerable doubt on the usefulness of the term.\"\nAccording to Fitzpatrick, \"totalitarian-model scholarship\" - the USSR as a \"top-down entity,\" a monolithic party grounded on ideology and ruling by terror over a passive society \u2013 \"was in effect a mirror image of the Soviet self-representation, but with the moral signs reversed (instead of the party being always right, it was always wrong).\" A fact common to the revisionist-school interpretations of the reign of Stalin (1927\u20131953) was that the USSR was a country with weak social institutions, and that state terrorism against Soviet citizens indicated the political illegitimacy of Stalin's government: to critics of totalitarian model state terror was a mark of a weak regime, and J. Arch Getty wrote of a \"technically weak and politically divided party whose organisational relationships seem more primitive than totalitarian\", commenting the Smolensk Archive, and so, the criticism of accepted model began with labelling Stalinism as \"inefficient totalitarianism\", where the dictator had to rely on \"shock methods\" to counter the resistance of local autonomies and administrations and political factionalism within the apparatus (including its highest levels); the citizens of the USSR were not devoid of personal agency or of material resources for living, nor were Soviet citizens psychologically atomised by the totalist ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union\u2014because \"the Soviet political system was chaotic, that institutions often escaped the control of the centre, and that Stalin's leadership consisted, to a considerable extent, in responding, on an \"ad hoc\" basis, to political crises as they arose\", and many purges and forced collectivisations were local or even \"popular initiatives which Stalin and his henchmen' could not control\", while the people collectively resisted by such methods as refusing to work efficiently and migrating by the millions. That the legitimacy of Stalin's r\u00e9gime of government relied upon the popular support of the Soviet citizenry as much as Stalin relied upon state terrorism for their support. That by politically purging Soviet society of anti\u2013Soviet people Stalin created employment and upward social mobility for the post\u2013War generation of working class citizens for whom such socio-economic progress was unavailable before the Russian Revolution (1917\u20131924). That the people who benefited from Stalin's social engineering became Stalinists loyal to the USSR; thus, the Revolution had fulfilled her promise to those Stalinist citizens and they supported Stalin because of the state terrorism. \nThe revisionists also conducted new comparative studies of the Third Reich and the USSR, but stressed substantial differences between them. Thus, fascisms lasted much shorter, but experienced cumulative radicalization until their collapse, while Stalinism arose in stabilized and pacified country and fell apart due to an internal crisis after a post-totalitarian period; fascism maintained traditional elites, while Stalinism was a result of revolution and radical social transformation; their ideologies were antipodal; totalitarian model likened \"charismatic authorities\" of Stalin and Hitler and Mussolini, but they were different: Hitler and Mussolini were popular figures of \"providential men\" who needed an almost physical contact with the followers and exemplified the totalitarian \"New Man\" with their bodies and behaviour, while Stalin's cult is described as \"afar\", purely artificial and much more distant, and Stalin never merged with the people, always staying \"hidden from his followers\". Mass state violence was also different: Soviet violence was primarily internal, while that of the Nazis primarily external; the former was an ineffective and irrational means of a rational goal, modernization, while Nazis sought extremely irrational goals with rational industrial means; the efficiency of Soviet forced labor camps (Gulags) was measured by the authorities by practical results, like building train tracks, which would eventually lay a basis of modernity, while Nazism mobilized industry for extermination, and the efficiency of extermination camps was measured by the number of deaths. Thus, the revisionists have argued, both regimes committed inhumane mass violence, but their internal logic was fundamentally different.\nIn the case of East Germany, Eli Rubin posited that East Germany was not a totalitarian state but rather a society shaped by the confluence of unique economic and political circumstances interacting with the concerns of ordinary citizens.\nNazism and Fascism.\nEnzo Traverso and Andrew Vincent point out that the \"totalitarian approach\" or the theoretical concept of totalitarianism, which presented the idea of a monolithic party, no separation between state and society, and total mobilization of the atomized masses and total control over the state, society and economy, is not applicable not only to the USSR, but also to Nazi Germany and Fascist states as well, since it also did not present a monolithic structure exercising total control over society, but on the contrary, that Nazi bureaucracy was highly \"chaotic\", anomic and disorganized and disunited, and that Adolf Hitler was a \"weak dictator\" and \"laissez-faire leader\", as said by such historians as Hans Mommsen and Ian Kershaw; this description of Nazi Germany was first introduced in 1942 by Franz Leopold Neumann in the work \"\", where he provocatively presented Hitlerism \"a Behemoth, a non-state, a chaos, a rule of lawlessness, disorder, and anarchy\", and later entered historiography of Nazism. In the 1970s, the German historians of functionalist school presented Nazism as a \"polycratic\" system grounded on different centers of power \u2013 the Nazi party, the army, the economic elites, and the state bureaucracy; to such historians, totalitarian monolithic state and party were just a facade (similarly to Fitzpatrick's assessment of Stalinism). Historians like Mommsen and Ian Kershaw were critical of concepts of totalitarianism and focused on lack of bureaucratic coherence in the Nazi system and on its immanent tendency towards self-destruction. Michael Mann wrote that these descriptions doubted theories of totalitarianism, since \"anything less like the rigid top-down bureaucracy of totalitarian theory is hard to imagine\", but that Stalinism and Nazism \"belong together\", and that \"it is only a question of finding the right family name\". According to Mann, \"totalitarian theorists depicted an unreal level of coherence for any state. Modern states are a long way short of Hegelian or Weberian rational bureaucracy and they rarely act as singular, coherent actors. Normally regimes are factionalised; in an unpredictable world they stumble along with many foul-ups. Second, we should remember Weber's essential point about bureaucracy: it kept politics out of administration. Political and moral values ('value rationality') were settled outside of bureaucratic administration, which then limited itself to finding efficient means of implementing those values ('formal rationality'). Contrary to totalitarian theory, the twentieth-century states most capable of such formally rational bureaucracy were not the dictatorships but the democracies.\"\nThe concept of totalitarianism appeared in the debates among German historians and public intellectuals known as \"Historikerstreit\", in which one of the parties defended the idea of exceptionalism of Nazism, while their conservative opponents believed that the Third Reich may be explained through comparison with the USSR; at the same time, such conservative historians as Karl-Dietrich Bracher and Klaus Hildebrand rejected the notion of Nazism as a branch of generic fascism, on the grounds that the uniqueness of Nazism lay in the person and ideology of Hitler and that Nazism was defined primarily by Hitler's personality and personal beliefs rather than by any external factors.\nStanley Payne wrote that indeed, both Mussolini and Hitler failed to achieve full totalitarianism, and of Mussolini it was said that his regime was not totalitarian (excluding \"merely fascist\" Italy from totalitarian regimes, started by Hannah Arendt who also thought that Nazism became totalitarian only in 1938\u20131942, is a not unpopular but contested position in contemporary historiography), so Payne concludes that \"only a socialist or Communist system can achieve full totalitarianism, since total control requires total institutional revolution that can only be effected by state socialism\" (according to Payne, both Lenin and Stalin were totalitarian). Payne writes that \"it is easy to argue either that many different kinds of regimes are totalitarian or conversely that none were perfectly total\", yet, he writes that the concept \"totalitarianism is both valid and useful if defined in the precise and literal sense of a state system that attempts to exercise direct control over all significant aspects of all major national institutions.\"\nFurther debates.\n1980s - 1990s.\nWriting in 1987, Walter Laqueur dismissed the arguments of revisionists as \"reappraisals of Stalin and Stalinism\" and compared them with German 'revisionist' historians of Nazism, particularly Ernst Nolte, whom he did not distinguish from functionalist historians of Nazism (\"weak dictator\" thesis), and called their analysis \"Marxist\", for which Stalin was \"not promising material\". As Laqueur wrote, the historians who disagreed with the revisionists \"still ha[d] very strong feelings\" towards Stalinism and found concepts such as modernisation inadequate tools for explaining Soviet history, unlike the concept of totalitarianism; citing Mikhail Gorbachev using the term \"totalitarianism\", Laqueur wrote that the efforts of the revisionists to abolish the totalitarian model \"ha[d] become difficult.\"\nLaure Neumayer posited that \"despite the disputes over its heuristic value and its normative assumptions, the concept of totalitarianism made a vigorous return to the political and academic fields at the end of the Cold War\". In 1978, the term was 'revived' in Western Europe: such historians as Fran\u00e7ois Furet produced 'revisionist' critical re-evaluations of the French Revolution which, according to them, led to the emergence of totalitarianism, while in Italy, \"anti-anti-Fascist\" historians, notably Renzo De Felice and after him Emilio Gentile, challenged the 'myth' produced by the hegemonic role of the Communists in the Italian resistance, stated that the choice between Fascism and Communism was equal for Italy, and implied that the latter could be even worse, what led to the resurgence of the concept of totalitarianism as a new dimension of studies of Fascism, while the ones who doubted their theories were \"swept away\" with the collapse of the Eastern Bloc between 1989 and 1991. The 'revival' of the concept which started in the 1970s in Europe took some time to re-appear in English-language literature, as the 'revisionists' achieved hegemony in the academy, while the 'totalitarians' retained control over public discourse; the European debates were transferred to English-language historiography by Martin Malia. In 1995, Furet made a comparative analysis and used the term \"totalitarian twins\" to link Nazism and Stalinism. Pipes and Malia continued depicting ideological developments as the grounds of communism, and thus, totalitarianism, drawing a line from utopianism and the French Revolution, which Pipes compared to a \"virus\", to Lenin, and to describe the nature of totalitarianism, they used the concept of ideocracy. Furet and Ernst Nolte, a historian praised by Furet, also identified anti-Fascism as Communist totalitarianism; Nolte presented a conflict between totalitarianisms as European Civil War, stating that it was begun by Bolshevism and produced Nazism, an \"inverted Bolshevism\", thus assessing the latter as only a response to the threat of Bolshevism and the Holocaust and Operation Barbarossa as \"both a retaliation and a preventive measure\" against Bolshevism. Another major work belonging to the same period was \"The Black Book of Communism\" (1997), the editor of which, Stephane Courtois, stressed structural homology of totalitarian systems embodied in identity of \"class genocide\" of Communism and \"race genocide\" of Nazism, and concluded that Communism was more murderous than Nazism or any other ideology from counting and summing the number of victims that can be attributed to 'Communist states' and thus communism in general, what triggered an emotional debate in France on whether Communism should be treated as a single unified phenomena and whether \"a blanket condemnation\" of Communism as an ideology makes sense. While Nolte and the historians supporting him were not victorious in the \"Historikerstreit\", but his influence on Furet and the historians outside Germany legitimized his ideas, and they returned to Germany in other forms, what thus led to the resurgence of the concept in Germany. The concept entered historiography in Eastern Europe, in former countries of the Eastern Bloc, describing not only Stalinism, but the whole Communist project in general along with the \"Double genocide theory\", which summarized Nazi and Stalinist violence into a single metanarrative and became an influential framework of interpretation.\nFuret's totalitarian interpretation of the French Revolution, directed against the classic \"Marxist\" or \"Jacobin\" interpretation, triggered debates with such historians as Michel Vovelle, who led new studies on it; as Eric Hobsbawm concluded in 2007, \"the Furet Revolution\" was \"now over\". In regards to Furet's ideas on the 20th century, Hobsbawm wrote that \"[Nazism and Stalinism] were functionally and not ideologically derived [...] Furet, as a distinguished historian of ideas, knows that they belonged to different if structurally convergent taxonomic families\"; contrary to conception of anti-Fascism as a mask of Stalinism, Hobsbawm attributed the \"alliance\" between liberalism and communism, which had enabled capitalism to overcome its crisis, and wrote that Furet's work \"reads like a belated product of the Cold War era\". Historians Enzo Traverso and Arno J. Mayer and the author Domenico Losurdo accepted Nolte's concept of the \"European Civil War\", although set its beginning to 1914 and differently interpreted it, not in terms of struggle between two totalitarianisms.\nMichael Parenti (1997) and James Petras (1999) have suggested that the totalitarianism concept has been politically employed and used for anti-communist purposes. Parenti has also analysed how \"left anti-communists\" attacked the Soviet Union during the Cold War. For Petras, the CIA funded the Congress for Cultural Freedom to attack \"Stalinist anti-totalitarianism.\"\nAccording to some scholars and authors, such as Domenico Losurdo calling Joseph Stalin \"totalitarian\" instead of \"authoritarian\" has been asserted to be a high-sounding but specious excuse for Western self-interest, just as surely as the counterclaim that allegedly debunking the totalitarian concept may be a high-sounding but specious excuse for Russian self-interest. For Losurdo, totalitarianism is a polysemic concept with origins in Christian theology and applying it to the political sphere requires an operation of abstract schematism which makes use of isolated elements of historical reality to place fascist regimes and the Soviet Union in the dock together, serving the anti-communism of Cold War-era intellectuals rather than reflecting intellectual research.\nAfter the 1990s.\nAfter 1990s, criticisms of totalitarianism as a historical concept and a tool of analysis continued; however, while these critics called for expulsion of the concept from academic field, they stated that its legitimate outside it. Hans Mommsen criticized it as \"a descriptive concept, not a theory\" with \"little or no explanatory power\": \"But the basis of comparison is a shallow one, largely confined to the apparatus of rule.\" However, he wrote that \"the totalitarianism concept allows comparative analysis of a number of techniques and instruments of domination, and this, too, must be seen as legitimate in itself\", and that it is legitimate in \"non-scholarly usage\". Enzo Traverso in his essay \"Totalitarianism Between History and Theory\" (2017) dismisses the term as \"both useless and irreplaceable\" for political science and academic history and cites Franz Leopold Neumann who called it a Weberian \"ideal type\", an abstraction that does not exist in reality as opposed to concrete totality of history, and believes it to be a term of abuse in Western political science and propaganda, he writes about its legitimacy for storing traumatic collective experience of the 20th century state violence:\nThus, if the concept of totalitarianism continues to be criticized for its ambiguities, weaknesses, and abuses, it probably will not be abandoned. Beyond being a Western banner, it stores the memory of a century that experienced Auschwitz and Kolyma, the death camps of Nazism, the Stalinist Gulags, and Pol Pot's killing fields. There lies its legitimacy, which does not need any academic recognition.\nIn the essay, \"Totalitarianism: Defunct Theory, Useful Word\" (2010), the historian John Connelly said that \"totalitarianism\" is a useful word, but that the old 1950s \"theory\" about totalitarianism is defunct among scholars, because \"The word is as functional now as it was fifty years ago. It means the kind of r\u00e9gime that existed in Nazi Germany, the Soviet Union, the Soviet satellites, Communist China, and maybe Fascist Italy, where the word originated. . . . Who are we to tell V\u00e1clav Havel or Adam Michnik that they were fooling themselves when they perceived their rulers as totalitarian? Or, for that matter, any of the millions of former subjects of Soviet-type rule who use the local equivalents of the Czech [word] \"totalita\" to describe the systems they lived under before 1989? [Totalitarianism] is a useful word, and everyone knows what it means as a general referent. Problems arise when people confuse the useful descriptive term with the old 'theory' from the 1950s.\"\nPolitics.\nEarly usages.\nSelf-description of autocracies.\nThe term \"totalitarian\" was used by leaders and senior officials of right-wing and far-right dictatorships and autocracies established during the interwar period and World War II to describe their regimes, most notably by Benito Mussolini of Fascist Italy. While in the triade of the Soviet Union, Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, in the latter it became an official self-description, in the second it was also used but to a less extent, and in the first it was not used it all, this pattern of self-description was reversed by later theories of totalitarianism which regarded the USSR as an epitome of totalitarianism, projected this understanding on Nazi Germany and to a less extent on Fascist Italy. Thus, the meaning of the term used in self-descriptions of the Fascists and the one used after World War II were different.\nIn 1923, in the early reign of Mussolini's government (1922\u20131943), the anti-fascist academic Giovanni Amendola was the first Italian public intellectual to define and describe Totalitarianism as a \"r\u00e9gime of government\" wherein the supreme leader personally exercises total power (political, military, economic, social) as \"Il Duce\" of The State. That Italian fascism is a political system with an ideological, utopian worldview unlike the realistic politics of the personal dictatorship of a man who holds power for the sake of holding power. The term \"totalitarian\" became used by the Fascists themselves: later, the theoretician of Italian Fascism Giovanni Gentile ascribed politically positive meanings to the ideological terms \"totalitarianism\" and \"totalitarian\" in defence of \"Duce\" Mussolini's legal, illegal, and legalistic social engineering of Italy. As ideologues, the intellectual Gentile and the politician Mussolini used the term \"totalitario\" to identify and describe the ideological nature of the societal structures (government, social, economic, political) and the practical goals (economic, geopolitical, social) of the new Fascist Italy (1922\u20131943), which was the \"total representation of the nation and total guidance of national goals.\" In proposing the totalitarian society of Italian Fascism, Gentile defined and described a civil society wherein totalitarian ideology (subservience to the state) determined the public sphere and the private sphere of the lives of the Italian people. That to achieve the Fascist utopia in the imperial future, Italian totalitarianism must politicise human existence into subservience to the state, which Mussolini summarised with the epigram: \"Everything within the state, nothing outside the state, nothing against the state.\"\nHannah Arendt, in her book \"The Origins of Totalitarianism\", contended that Mussolini's dictatorship was not a totalitarian regime until 1938. Arguing that one of the key characteristics of a totalitarian movement was its ability to garner mass mobilization, Arendt wrote: \"While all political groups depend upon proportionate strength, totalitarian movements depend on the sheer force of numbers to such an extent that totalitarian regimes seem impossible, even under otherwise favorable circumstances, in countries with relatively small populations... [E]ven Mussolini, who was so fond of the term \"totalitarian state,\" did not attempt to establish a full-fledged totalitarian regime and contented himself with dictatorship and one-party rule.\"\nFor example, Victor Emmanuel III still reigned as a figurehead and helped play a role in the dismissal of Mussolini in 1943. Also, the Catholic Church was allowed to independently exercise its religious authority in Vatican City per the 1929 Lateran Treaty, under the leadership of Pope Pius XI (1922\u20131939) and Pope Pius XII (1939\u20131958).\nAs the Nazis rose to power in 1933, they began using the concept of totalitarian state propagated by Mussolini and Schmitt to characterize their regime. Joseph Goebbels stated in his 1933 speech: \"Our party has always aspired to the totalitarian state. [\u2026] the goal of the revolution [National Socialist] has to be a totalitarian state that penetrates into all spheres of public life.\" However, the concept of totalitarianism was downplayed among the Nazis who preferred the term \"Volksstaat\" (\"people's state\" or \"racial state\") to describe their regime.\nJos\u00e9 Mar\u00eda Gil-Robles y Qui\u00f1ones, the leader of the historic Spanish reactionary party called the Spanish Confederation of the Autonomous Right (CEDA), declared his intention to \"give Spain a true unity, a new spirit, a totalitarian polity\" and went on to say: \"Democracy is not an end but a means to the conquest of the new state. When the time comes, either parliament submits or we will eliminate it.\" General Francisco Franco was determined not to have competing right-wing parties in Spain and CEDA was dissolved in April 1937. Later, Gil-Robles went into exile.\nGeneral Franco began using the term 'totalitarian' towards his regime during the Spanish Civil War (1936\u20131939). On 1 October 1936, he announced his intention to organize Spain \"within a broad totalitarian concept of unity and continuity\", and practical realization of this intention began with the forced unification of all parties of the Nationalist zone into FET y de las JONS, the sole ruling party of the new regime; after that, he and his ideologues stressed the \"missionary and totalitarian\" nature of the new state that was under construction \"as in other countries of totalitarian regime\", these being Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy, and totalitarianism was described as an essentially Spanish way of government. In December 1942, as World War II progressed, Franco stopped using the term, and it received a negative connotation as Franco called for a struggle with \"Bolshevist totalitarianism.\"\nIoannis Metaxas, the leader of the 4th of August Regime in Greece which took some inspiration from Fascism, wrote in his diary that he established \"an anti-communist, anti-parliamentary state, a totalitarian state, a state based on agriculture and labour, and therefore anti-plutocratic\"; after the Italian and German invasions of Greece, he wrote that \"by beating Greece, they were beating what their flag stood for.\" Although Metaxas did not create the governing single party, he believed that \"the whole of the Greek people, the nation, constituted if any, such a political party, excluding of course the Communists and reactionary old political parties or factions.\nIon Antonescu, the Axis-aligned dictator of the Kingdom of Romania during World War II, described his regime as \"ethnocratic\", \"ethnic Christian\" and as \"the national-totalitarian regime, the regime of\nnational and social restoration\", devoted to the ideology of extreme Romanian nationalism, springing from the Romanian heritage. It enacted antisemitic and racial legislation and was active in perpetrating the Holocaust; however, in 1941, Antonescu dissolved the ruling party, the Iron Guard, denounced its terrorist methods, and continued his rule without the single-party system; the regime also spared half of the Jews during its existence.\nIn 1940, the foreign minister of the Empire of Japan Matsuoka Yosuke expressed in an interview the ideological assumptions prevailing within the Sh\u014dwa statist government of Japan: \"In the battle between democracy and totalitarianism the latter adversary will without question win and will control the world. The era of democracy is finished and the democratic system bankrupt... Fascism will develop in Japan through the people's will. It will come out of love for the Emperor.\" A document produced by the government's cabinet planning board pointed out that \"since the founding of our country, Japan has had an unparalleled totalitarianism... an ideal totalitarianism is manifest in our national polity... Germany's totalitarianism has existed for only eight years, but Japanese [totalitarianism] has shone through 3,000 years of ageless tradition\".\nCriticism and analysis.\nIn the interwar period \"totalitarianism\" emerged as a term used in criticism and analysis of dictatorships of the time. In this critical period, the term began to be used to describe fascism and later became a ground of comparison of fascist states and the Soviet Union, but was not understood as an element of a single liberal-totalitarian dychotomy and as something opposite to liberal democracy.\nIn the 1930s, left-wing critics of Stalinism began applying the term to the Soviet state and use it to compare it to fascist states. Leon Trotsky was one of the first to do so, thus producing perhaps most famous example of such usage of the term by a left-wing anti-Stalinist dissident. It seems that the first to use the term towards the USSR was the writer and left-wing activist Victor Serge, who did it shortly before his arrest in the USSR in a letter published in France. The same year, Trotsky compared fascist and Soviet bureaucracies, describing both as parasitic, and later stated that \"in the last period the Soviet bureaucracy has familiarised itself with many traits of victorious fascism, first of all by getting rid of the control of the party and establishing the cult of the leader.\" In \"The Revolution Betrayed\" (1936), Trotsky began using the term \"totalitarian\" to analyse the USSR and compare it with Fascism, attributing to totalitarianism, rooted in \"the dilatoriness of the world proletariat in solving the problems set for it by history\", such features as concentration of power in the hands of a single individual, the abolition of popular control over the leadership, the use of extreme repression, and the elimination of contending loci of power; later he included \"the suppression of all freedom to criticize; the subjection of the accused to the military; examining magistrates, a prosecutor and judge in one; a monolithic press whose howlings terrorize the accused and hypnotize public opinion\"; Trotsky wrote that the USSR \"had become \"totalitarian\" in character several years before this word arrived from Germany.\" However, his concept was much less defined than those of the Cold War theorists, and he would have disagreed with their core points: that 'central control and direction of the entire economy' was applicable to fascism, and would have rejected their tendency to depict 'totalitarian' societies as politically monolithic and inherently static, as well as their anti-communist perspective and their description of Lenin as a totalitarian dictator; scholars even argued that for him it was a pejorative, not a sociologal concept based on equating Fascism and socialism, like it was for Cold War theorists.\nOne of the first people to use the term \"totalitarianism\" in the English language was Austrian writer Franz Borkenau in his 1938 book \"The Communist International\", in which he commented that it united the Soviet and German dictatorships more than it divided them. The label \"totalitarian\" was twice affixed to Nazi Germany during Winston Churchill's speech of 5 October 1938 before the House of Commons, in opposition to the Munich Agreement, by which France and Great Britain consented to Nazi Germany's annexation of the Sudetenland. Churchill was then a backbencher MP representing the Epping constituency. In a radio address two weeks later, Churchill again employed the term, this time applying the concept to \"a Communist or a Nazi tyranny.\"\nThe concept gained legitimacy in 1939 with the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, after which it became accepted, at least until 1941, to present Stalin and Hitler as \"twin dictators\" and call Nazism \"brown Bolshevism\" and Stalinism \"red Fascism\". The same year, scholars of various disciplines held the first international symposium on totalitarianism in Philadelphia. The concept was abandoned in 1941, as the Third Reich invaded the USSR, and the latter became depicted in Western propaganda as \"valiant freedom-loving\" ally in the war; among the major productions of pro-Stalinist Western propaganda was the film \"Mission to Moscow\" (1943), based on the 1941 book of the same name.\nIn the aftermath of the Second World War (1939\u20131945), in the lecture series (1945) and book (1946) titled \"The Soviet Impact on the Western World\", the British historian E. H. Carr said that \"the trend away from individualism and towards totalitarianism is everywhere unmistakable\" in the decolonising countries of Eurasia. That revolutionary Marxism\u2013Leninism was the most successful type of totalitarianism, as proved by the USSR's rapid industrialisation (1929\u20131941) and the Great Patriotic War (1941\u20131945) that defeated Nazi Germany. That, despite those achievements in social engineering and warfare, in dealing with the countries of the Communist bloc only the \"blind and incurable\" ideologue could ignore the Communist r\u00e9gimes' trend towards police-state totalitarianism in their societies.\nPolitically matured by having fought and been wounded and survived the Spanish Civil War, in the essay \"Why I Write\" (1946), the socialist George Orwell said, \"the Spanish war and other events in 1936\u201337 turned the scale and thereafter I knew where I stood. Every line of serious work that I have written since 1936 has been written, directly or indirectly, against totalitarianism and for democratic socialism, as I understand it.\" That future totalitarian r\u00e9gimes would spy upon their societies and use the mass communications media to perpetuate their dictatorships, that \"If you want a vision of the future, imagine a boot stamping on a human face\u2014forever.\"\nCold War.\nIn \"The Origins of Totalitarianism\" (1951), the political scientist Hannah Arendt said that, in their times in the early 20th century, corporate Nazism and soviet Communism were new forms of totalitarian government, not updated versions of the old tyrannies of a military or a corporate dictatorship. That the human emotional comfort of \"political certainty\" is the source of the mass appeal of revolutionary totalitarian r\u00e9gimes, because the totalitarian worldview gives psychologically comforting and definitive answers about the complex socio-political mysteries of the past, of the present, and of the future; thus did Nazism propose that all history is the history of ethnic conflict, of the survival of the fittest race; and Marxism\u2013Leninism proposes that all history is the history of class conflict, of the survival of the fittest social class. That upon the believers' acceptance of the \"universal applicability\" of totalitarian ideology, the Nazi revolutionary and the Communist revolutionary then possess the simplistic moral certainty with which to justify all other actions by the State, either by an appeal to historicism (Law of History) or by an appeal to nature, as expedient actions necessary to establishing an authoritarian state apparatus.\nIn \"The True Believer: Thoughts on the Nature of Mass Movements\" (1951), Eric Hoffer said that political mass movements, such as Italian Fascism (1922\u20131943), German Nazism (1933\u20131945), and Russian Stalinism (1929\u20131953), featured the common political praxis of negatively comparing their totalitarian society as culturally superior to the morally decadent societies of the democratic countries of Western Europe. That such mass psychology indicates that participating in and then joining a political mass movement offers people the prospect of a glorious future, that such membership in a community of political belief is an emotional refuge for people with few accomplishments in their real lives, in both the public sphere and in the private sphere. In the event, the true believer is assimilated into a collective body of true believers who are mentally protected with \"fact-proof screens from reality\" drawn from the official texts of the totalitarian ideology.\nIn \"European Protestants Between Anti-Communism and Anti-Totalitarianism: The Other Interwar Kulturkampf?\" (2018) the historian Paul Hanebrink said that Hitler's assumption of power in Germany in 1933 frightened Christians into anti-communism, because for European Christians, Catholic and Protestant alike, the new postwar 'culture war' crystallized as a struggle against Communism. Throughout the European interwar period (1918\u20131939), right-wing totalitarian r\u00e9gimes indoctrinated Christians to demonize the Communist r\u00e9gime in Russia as the apotheosis of secular materialism and [as] a militarized threat to worldwide Christian social and moral order\". That throughout Europe, the Christians who became anti-communist totalitarians perceived Communism and communist r\u00e9gimes of government as an existential threat to the moral order of their respective societies; and collaborated with Fascists and Nazis in the idealistic hope that anti-communism would restore the societies of Europe to their root Christian culture.\nTotalitarian model.\nIn the U.S. geopolitics of the late 1950s, the Cold War concepts and the terms \"totalitarianism\", \"totalitarian\", and \"totalitarian model\", presented in \"Totalitarian Dictatorship and Autocracy\" (1956), by Carl Joachim Friedrich and Zbigniew Brzezinski, became common usages in the foreign-policy discourse of the U.S. Subsequently established, the \"totalitarian model\" became the analytic and interpretational paradigm for Kremlinology, the academic study of the monolithic police-state USSR. The Kremlinologists analyses of the internal politics (policy and personality) of the politburo crafting policy (national and foreign) yielded strategic intelligence for dealing with the USSR. Moreover, the U.S. also used the totalitarian model when dealing with fascist totalitarian r\u00e9gimes, such as that of a banana republic country. As anti\u2013Communist political scientists, Friedrich and Brzezinski described and defined totalitarianism with the monolithic totalitarian model of six interlocking, mutually supporting characteristics:\nCriticism and evolution of the totalitarian model.\nAs traditionalist historians, Friedrich and Brzezinski said that the totalitarian r\u00e9gimes of government in the USSR (1917), Fascist Italy (1922\u20131943), and Nazi Germany (1933\u20131945) originated from the political discontent caused by the socio-economic aftermath of the First World War (1914\u20131918), which rendered impotent the government of Weimar Germany (1918\u20131933) to resist, counter, and quell left-wing and right-wing revolutions of totalitarian temper. Revisionist historians noted the historiographic limitations of the totalitarian-model interpretation of Soviet and Russian history, because Friedrich and Brzezinski did not take account of the actual functioning of the Soviet social system, neither as a political entity (the USSR) nor as a social entity (Soviet civil society), which could be understood in terms of socialist class struggle among the professional \u00e9lites (political, academic, artistic, scientific, military) seeking upward mobility into the \"nomenklatura\", the ruling class of the USSR. That the political economics of the politburo allowed measured executive power to regional authorities for them to implement policy was interpreted by revisionist historians as evidence that a totalitarian r\u00e9gime adapts the political economy to include new economic demands from civil society; whereas traditionalist historians interpreted the politico-economic collapse of the USSR to prove that the totalitarian r\u00e9gime of economics failed because the politburo did not adapt the political economy to include actual popular participation in the Soviet economy.\nThe historian of Nazi Germany, Karl Dietrich Bracher said that the \"totalitarian typology\" developed by Friedrich and Brzezinski was an inflexible model, for not including the \"revolutionary dynamics\" of bellicose people committed to realising the violent revolution required to establish totalitarianism in a sovereign state. That the essence of totalitarianism is total control to remake every aspect of civil society using a universal ideology\u2014which is interpreted by an authoritarian leader\u2014to create a collective national identity by merging civil society into the State. Given that the supreme leaders of the Communist, the Fascist, and the Nazi total states did possess government administrators, Bracher said that a totalitarian government did not necessarily require an actual supreme leader, and could function by way of collective leadership. The American historian Walter Laqueur agreed that Bracher's totalitarian typology more accurately described the functional reality of the politburo than did the totalitarian typology proposed by Friedrich and Brzezinski.\nIn \"Democracy and Totalitarianism\" (1968) the political scientist Raymond Aron said that for a r\u00e9gime of government to be considered totalitarian it can be described and defined with the totalitarian model of five interlocking, mutually supporting characteristics:\nIn 1980, in a book review of \"How the Soviet Union is Governed\" (1979), by J.F. Hough and Merle Fainsod, William Zimmerman said that \"the Soviet Union has changed substantially. Our knowledge of the Soviet Union has changed, as well. We all know that the traditional paradigm [of the totalitarian model] no longer satisfies [our ignorance], despite several efforts, primarily in the early 1960s (the directed society, totalitarianism without police terrorism, the system of conscription) to articulate an acceptable variant [of Communist totalitarianism]. We have come to realize that models which were, in effect, offshoots of totalitarian models do not provide good approximations of post\u2013Stalinist reality [of the USSR].\" In a book review of \"Totalitarian Space and the Destruction of Aura\" (2019), by Ahmed Saladdin, Michael Scott Christofferson said that Hannah Arendt's interpretation of the USSR after Stalin was her attempt to intellectually distance her work from \"the Cold War misuse of the concept [of the origins of totalitarianism]\" as anti-Communist propaganda.\nKremlinology.\nDuring the Russo\u2013American Cold War (1945\u20131989), the academic field of Kremlinology (analysing politburo policy politics) produced historical and policy analyses dominated by the \"totalitarian model\" of the USSR as a police state controlled by the absolute power of the supreme leader Stalin, who heads a monolithic, centralised hierarchy of government. The study of the internal politics of the politburo crafting policy at the Kremlin produced two schools of historiographic interpretation of Cold War history: (i) traditionalist Kremlinology and (ii) revisionist Kremlinology. Traditionalist Kremlinologists worked with and for the \"totalitarian model\" and produced interpretations of Kremlin politics and policies that supported the police-state version of \"Communist Russia\". The revisionist Kremlinologists presented alternative interpretations of Kremlin politics and reported the effects of politburo policies upon Soviet society, civil and military. Despite the limitations of police-state historiography, revisionist Kremlinologists said that the old image of the Stalinist USSR of the 1950s\u2014a totalitarian state intent upon world domination\u2014was oversimplified and inaccurate, because the death of Stalin changed Soviet society. After the Cold War and the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact, most revisionist Kremlinologists worked the national archives of ex\u2013Communist states, especially the State Archive of the Russian Federation about Soviet-period Russia.\nTotalitarian model as an official policy.\nIn the 1950s, the political scientist Carl Joachim Friedrich said that Communist states, such as Soviet Russia and Red China, were countries which were systematically controlled by a supreme leader who used the five features of the \"totalitarian model\" of government: (i) an official dominant ideology that includes a cult of personality about the leader, (ii) control of all civil and military weapons, (iii) control of the public and the private mass communications media, (iv) the use of state terrorism to police the populace, and (v) a political party of mass membership who perpetually re-elect The Leader.\nIn the 1960s, the revisionist Kremlinologists researched the organisations and they also studied the policies of the relatively autonomous bureaucracies that influenced the crafting of high-level policy for governing Soviet society in the USSR. Revisionist Kremlinologists, such as J. Arch Getty and Lynne Viola, transcended the interpretational limitations of the totalitarian model by \"recognising\" and \"reporting\" that the Soviet government, the communist party, and the civil society of the USSR had greatly changed upon the death of Stalin. The revisionist social history indicated that the social forces of Soviet society had compelled the Government of the USSR to adjust public policy to the actual political economy of a Soviet society composed of pre\u2013War and post\u2013War generations of people with different perceptions of the utility of Communist economics for all the Russias. Hence, Russian modern history had outdated the \"totalitarian model\" that was the post\u2013Stalinist perception of the police-state USSR of the 1950s.\nPost\u2013Cold War.\nIn \"Did Somebody Say Totalitarianism?: Five Interventions in the (Mis)Use of a Notion\", Slavoj \u017di\u017eek ironically described the concept of totalitarianism as an \"ideological antioxidant\" similar to the \"Celestial Seasonings\" green tea that, according to its advertisement, \"neutralizes harmful molecules in the body known as free radicals\" and wrote that \"[t]he notion of 'totalitarianism', far from being an effective theoretical concept, is a kind of stopgap: instead of enabling us to think, forcing us to acquire a new insight into the historical reality it describes, it relieves us of the duty to think, or even actively prevents us from thinking\".\nSaladdin Ahmed criticizes the concept of totalitarianism as formulated by Brzezinski and Friedrich, and to less extent, Arendt, in \"Totalitarian Space and the Destruction of Aura\" (2019) and notes that their definition of totalitarianism can be invalidated by questioning whether the term 'totalitarian' is applicable to a regime which lacks \"any one\" of criterion formulated by them: \"this was the case in General August Pinochet's Chile\", yet it would be absurd to exempt it from the class of totalitarian regimes for that reason alone\", since while Pinochet did not adopt an \"official\" ideology, but \"ideological hegemony, whereby the dominant ideology becomes internalized and normalized, is far more effective than imposing an official ideology.\" Saladdin posited that while Chile under Pinochet had no \"official\" ideology, there was one man who ruled Chile from \"behind the scenes\", \"none other than Milton Friedman, the godfather of neoliberalism and the most influential teacher of the Chicago Boys, was Pinochet's adviser\". To Saladdin, such hegemonic yet not \"official\" ideology is much a more effective means of \"totalitarian\" control of society than an \"official\" ideology openly imposed by the state, what is exemplified by comparing Chile to Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu's Romania, which collapsed within a short period: \"No one defended them; no masses poured onto the streets to mourn their deaths. Ceausescu's Romania, as an exemplary Stalinist state, met all of Friedrich and Brzezinski's criteria of a totalitarian state, but it was nowhere close to achieving total domination.\" In this sense, Saladdin criticised the concept of totalitarianism because it was only being applied to \"opposing ideologies\" and it was not being applied to liberalism. He also criticized the other criterion of totalitarianism formulated by Brzezinski, Friedrich and Arendt. \"In sum, a regime that does not meet all of Friedrich and Brzezinski's criteria would not necessarily be nontotalitarian or even less totalitarian, if we agree that totalitarianism ultimately amounts to total domination. If anything, realizing a greater degree of domination would necessarily require going beyond each of Friedrich and Brzezinski's criteria. Even without empirical cases which can always be dismissed to spare the proposed criteria \u2013 we could, with little difficulty, imagine a system that demonstrates none of the six criteria but is nonetheless more efficient as a totalitarian system. This will become clearer over the course of the rest of this chapter, but it should already be evident that the pioneers of the Cold War definition of totalitarianism molded their conception on the least developed of totalitarian systems... Tailored to Stalinism, [totalitarianism] aimed to predetermine that the negation of liberal capitalism would logically and empirically lead to a horrific system of total and arbitrary terror\"; \"Philosophically, their account of totalitarianism is invalid because it stipulates \"criteria\" that amount to an abstracted description of Stalin's USSR, rendering the notion predeterministic.\"\nIn the early 2010s, Richard Shorten, Vladimir Tism\u0103neanu, and Aviezer Tucker posited that totalitarian ideologies can take different forms in different political systems but all of them focus on utopianism, scientism, or political violence. They posit that Nazism and Stalinism both emphasised the role of specialisation in modern societies and they also saw polymathy as a thing of the past, and they also stated that their claims were supported by statistics and science, which led them to impose strict ethical regulations on culture, use psychological violence, and persecute entire groups. Their arguments have been criticised by other scholars due to their partiality and anachronism. Juan Francisco Fuentes treats totalitarianism as an \"invented tradition\" and he believes that the notion of \"modern despotism\" is a \"reverse anachronism\"; for Fuentes, \"the anachronistic use of totalitarian/totalitarianism involves the will to reshape the past in the image and likeness of the present\".\nOther studies try to link modern technological changes to totalitarianism. According to Shoshana Zuboff, the economic pressures of modern surveillance capitalism are driving the intensification of connection and monitoring online with spaces of social life becoming open to saturation by corporate actors, directed at the making of profit and/or the regulation of action. Toby Ord believed that George Orwell's fears of totalitarianism constituted a notable early precursor to modern notions of anthropogenic existential risk, the concept that a future catastrophe could permanently destroy the potential of Earth-originating intelligent life due in part to technological changes, creating a permanent technological dystopia. Ord said that Orwell's writings show that his concern was genuine rather than just a throwaway part of the fictional plot of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". In 1949, Orwell wrote that \"[a] ruling class which could guard against (four previously enumerated sources of risk) would remain in power permanently\". That same year, Bertrand Russell wrote that \"modern techniques have made possible a new intensity of governmental control, and this possibility has been exploited very fully in totalitarian states\".\nIn 2016, \"The Economist\" described China's developed Social Credit System under Chinese Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping's administration, to screen and rank its citizens based on their personal behavior, as \"totalitarian\". Opponents of China's ranking system say that it is intrusive and it is just another tool which a one-party state can use to control the population. Supporters say that it will transform China into a more civilised and law-abiding society. Shoshana Zuboff considers it instrumentarian rather than totalitarian.\nIn \"Revolution and Dictatorship: The Violent Origins of Durable Authoritarianism\" (2022), the political scientists Steven Levitsky and Lucan Way said that nascent revolutionary r\u00e9gimes usually became totalitarian r\u00e9gimes if not destroyed with a military invasion. Such a revolutionary r\u00e9gime begins as a social revolution independent of the existing social structures of the state (not political succession, election to office, or a military \"coup d'\u00e9tat\"). For example, the Soviet Union and Maoist China were founded after the years long Russian Civil War (1917\u20131922) and Chinese Civil War (1927\u20131936 and 1945\u20131949), respectively, not merely state succession. They produce totalitarian dictatorships with three functional characteristics: (i) a cohesive ruling class comprising the military and the political \u00e9lites, (ii) a strong and loyal coercive apparatus of police and military forces to suppress dissent, and (iii) the destruction of rival political parties, organisations, and independent centres of socio-political power. Moreover, the unitary functioning of the characteristics of totalitarianism allow a totalitarian government to perdure against economic crises (internal and external), large-scale failures of policy, mass social-discontent, and political pressure from other countries. Some totalitarian one-party states were established through coups orchestrated by military officers loyal to a vanguard party that advanced socialist revolution, such as the Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma (1962), Syrian Arab Republic (1963), and Democratic Republic of Afghanistan (1978).\nPossible future emergence\nOther emerging technologies that could empower future totalitarian regimes include brain-reading and various applications of artificial intelligence. Philosopher Nick Bostrom said that there is a possible trade-off, namely that some existential risks might be mitigated by the establishment of a powerful and permanent world government, and in turn the establishment of such a government could enhance the existential risks which are associated with the rule of a permanent dictatorship.\nReligious totalitarianism.\nIslamic.\nThe Taliban is a totalitarian Sunni Islamist militant group and political movement in Afghanistan that emerged in the aftermath of the Soviet\u2013Afghan War and the end of the Cold War. It governed most of Afghanistan from 1996 to 2001 and returned to power in 2021, controlling the entirety of Afghanistan. Features of its totalitarian governance include the imposition of Pashtunwali culture of the majority Pashtun ethnic group as religious law, the exclusion of minorities and non-Taliban members from the government, and extensive violations of women's rights.\nThe Islamic State is a Salafi-Jihadist militant group that was established in 2006 by Abu Omar al-Baghdadi during the Iraqi insurgency, under the name \"Islamic State of Iraq\". Under the leadership of Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, the organization later changed its name to the \"Islamic State of Iraq and Levant\" in 2013. The group espouses a totalitarian ideology that is a fundamentalist hybrid of Global Jihadism, Wahhabism, and Qutbism. Following its territorial expansion in 2014, the group renamed itself as the \"Islamic State\" and declared itself as a caliphate that sought domination over the Muslim world and established what has been described as a \"political-religious totalitarian regime\". The quasi-state held significant territory in Iraq and Syria during the course of the Third Iraq War and the Syrian civil war from 2013 to 2019 under the dictatorship of its first Caliph, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi, who imposed a strict interpretation of Sharia law.\nCriticism of the classification of Islamism as totalitarianism.\nEnzo Traverso, a critic of totalitarianism as a theoretical concept of historical and political sciences, is also critical of the usage of it in relation to Islamist movements like ISIS and the Taliban and their state formations: according to Traverso, such notion contradicts the very theoretical concept of totalitarianism. Systems which are commonly described as totalitarian, fascism and communism, sought to create a utopian \"New Man\" and as a result, they set their projects toward the future, not to revive old forms of absolutism, as noted by Tzvetan Todorov. \"The reactionary modernism of Islamic terrorism, on the contrary, employs modern technologies in order to return to the original purity of a mythical Islam. If it has utopian tendencies, they look to the past rather than the future.\" More to it, totalitarianism has been applied to secular movements which have been described as irrational \"political religions\" which seek to abolish traditional religions, liturgies and symbols and replace them with their own liturgies and symbols, while Islamic fundamentalism, on the contrary, is a politicized religion and a reaction to secularization and modernisation. Besides that, as a form of violence, terrorism is usually described as antipodal to state violence; while fascism was a reaction to democracy, Islamism arose in authoritarian, but weak states. \"Speaking of a \"theocratic\" totalitarianism makes this concept even more flexible and ambiguous than ever, once again confirming its essential function: not critically interpreting history and the world, but rather fighting an enemy\". Traverso writes that the usage of the term began after 9/11 by Western propaganda, which previously used it against the other enemies while maintaining the geopolitical interests of the West. He notes that the Islamic state which most resembles the concept of totalitarianism, Saudi Arabia, is an ally of the West and as a result, it cannot be considered a part of the \"Axis of Evil\", and for that reason, as he believes, Saudi Arabia is rarely described as \"totalitarian\", unlike Iran.\nChristian.\nFrancoist Spain (1936\u20131975), under the dictator Francisco Franco, had been commonly characterized as totalitarian until 1964, when Juan Linz challenged this characterization and instead described Francoism as \"authoritarian\" because of its \"limited degree of political pluralism\" caused by the struggle between 'Francoist families' (Falangists, Carlists, etc.) within the sole legal party FET y de las JONS and the \"Movimiento Nacional\" and by other such features as, according to Linz, lack of 'totalitarian' ideology, as Franco relied on National Catholicism and traditionalism. Such revision caused a major debate, some critics of Linz felt that his concept may be a form of acquittal of Francoism and did not concern its early phase (often called \"First Francoism\"). Later debates focused on whether the regime could be described as 'fascist' rather than whether it was totalitarian; some historians stressed the traits of a military dictatorship, while the others emphasized the Fascist component, calling the regime a para-fascist or 'fascistized' dictatorship. While Enrique Moradiellos notes that \"it is now increasingly rare to define Francoism as a truly fascist and totalitarian regime\", although he writes that the debates on Francoism haven't finished yet, Ismael Saz notes that \"it has also begun to be recognised that\" Francoism underwent a \"totalitarian or quasi-totalitarian, fascist or quasi-fascist\" phase. The historians who continue to criticize Linz and describe the regime as totalitarian usually limit such characterization to ten to twenty years of the \"First Francoism.\"\nLinz wrote that \"the heteronomous control of the ideological content of Catholic thought by a universal church and specifically by the Pope is one of the most serious obstacles to the creation of a truly totalitarian system...\" This argument is also debated: \"The frequent and saturated references to Francoist Catholic humanism... coming from Christian theology, could hardly conceal the fact that the individual was only understood as a citizen to the extent of his adherence to the Catholic, hierarchical and economically privatist community that the military uprising had saved\"; \"Catholic values that permeated the conservative ideological substratum... were precisely what was wielded by the Francoist Spanish political doctrine of the late thirties and early forties to justify the need for the constitution of a totalitarian State at the service and expansion of the Catholic religion.\"\nFranco was portrayed as a fervent Catholic and a staunch defender of Catholicism, the declared state religion. Civil marriages that had taken place in the Republic were declared null and void unless they had been validated by the Church, along with divorces. Divorce, contraception and abortions were forbidden. According to historian Stanley G. Payne, an opponent of describing Francoism as a totalitarian system, Franco had more day-to-day power than Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin possessed at the respective heights of their power. Payne noted that Hitler and Stalin at least maintained rubber-stamp parliaments, while Franco dispensed with even that formality in the early years of his rule. According to Payne, the lack of even a rubber-stamp parliament made Franco's government \"the most purely arbitrary in the world.\" However, from 1959 to 1974 the \"Spanish Miracle\" took place under the leadership of technocrats, many of whom were members of Opus Dei and a new generation of politicians that replaced the old Falangist guard. Reforms were implemented in the 1950s and Spain abandoned autarky, reassigning economic authority from the isolationist Falangist movement. This led to massive economic growth that lasted until the mid-1970s, known as the \"Spanish miracle\". This is comparable to De-Stalinization in the Soviet Union in the 1950s, where Francoist Spain changed from being openly totalitarian to an authoritarian dictatorship with a certain degree of economic freedom.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "30440", "revid": "30021739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30440", "title": "Thomas Gray", "text": "English poet and classical scholar (1716\u20131771)\nThomas Gray (26 December 1716 \u2013 30 July 1771) was an English poet, letter-writer, and classical scholar at Cambridge University, being a fellow first of Peterhouse then of Pembroke College. He is widely known for his \"Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard,\" published in 1751. Gray was a self-critical writer who published only 13 poems in his lifetime, despite being very popular. He was even offered the position of Poet Laureate in 1757 after the death of Colley Cibber, though he declined.\nEarly life and education.\nThomas Gray was born in Cornhill, London. His father, Philip Gray, was a scrivener and his mother, Dorothy Antrobus, was a milliner. He was the fifth of twelve children, and the only one to survive infancy. An 1803 newspaper article including a biography of Gray suggests that Gray almost died in infancy due to suffocation from a fullness of blood. However, his mother \u201cventured to open a vein with her own hand, which instantly removed the paroxysm,\u201d saving his life. He lived with his mother after she left his abusive and mentally unwell father.\nGray's mother paid for him to go to Eton College, where his uncles Robert and William Antrobus worked. Robert became Gray's first teacher and helped inspire in Gray a love for botany and observational science. Gray's other uncle, William, became his tutor. He recalled his schooldays as a time of great happiness, as is evident in his \"\". Gray was a delicate and scholarly boy who spent his time reading and avoiding athletics. He lived in his uncle's household rather than at college. He made three close friends at Eton: Horace Walpole, son of the Prime Minister Robert Walpole; Thomas Ashton; and Richard West, son of another Richard West (who was briefly Lord Chancellor of Ireland). The four prided themselves on their sense of style, sense of humour, and appreciation of beauty. They were called the \"quadruple alliance\". Gray\u2019s nickname in the \u201cQuadruple Alliance\u201d was Orozmades, \u201cthe Zoroastrian divinity, who is mentioned in Lee\u2019s \"The Rival Queens\" as a \u2018dreadful god\u2019 who from his cave issues groans and shrieks to predict the fall of Babylon.\u201d\nIn 1734, Gray went up to Peterhouse, Cambridge. He found the curriculum dull. He wrote letters to friends listing all the things he disliked: the masters (\"mad with Pride\") and the Fellows (\"sleepy, drunken, dull, illiterate Things\"). Intended by his family for the law, he spent most of his time as an undergraduate reading classical and modern literature, and playing Vivaldi and Scarlatti on the harpsichord for relaxation.\nIn 1738, he accompanied his old school friend Walpole on his Grand Tour of Europe, possibly at Walpole's expense. The two fell out and parted in Tuscany because Walpole wanted to attend fashionable parties and Gray wanted to visit all the antiquities. They were reconciled a few years later. It was Walpole who later helped publish Gray's poetry. When Gray sent his most famous poem, \"Elegy\", to Walpole, Walpole sent off the poem as a manuscript and it appeared in different magazines. Gray then published the poem himself and received the credit he was due.\nWriting and academia.\nGray began seriously writing poems in 1742, mainly after the death of his close friend Richard West, which inspired \"Sonnet on the Death of Richard West\". He moved to Cambridge and began a self-directed programme of literary study, becoming one of the most learned men of his time. He became a Fellow first of Peterhouse, and later of Pembroke College, Cambridge. According to college tradition, he left Peterhouse for Pembroke College after being the victim of a practical joke played by undergraduates. Gray is supposed to have been afraid of fire, and had attached a bar outside his window to which a rope could be tied. After being woken by undergraduates with a fire made of shavings, Gray climbed down the rope but landed in a tub of water which had been placed below his window.\nGray spent most of his life as a scholar in Cambridge, and only later in his life did he begin travelling again. Although he was one of the least productive poets (his collected works published during his lifetime amount to fewer than 1,000 lines), he is regarded as the foremost English-language poet of the mid-18th century. In 1757, he was offered the post of Poet Laureate, which he refused. Gray was so self-critical and fearful of failure that he published only thirteen poems during his lifetime. He once wrote that he feared his collected works would be \"mistaken for the works of a flea.\" Walpole said that \"He never wrote anything easily but things of Humour.\" Gray came to be known as one of the \"Graveyard poets\" of the late 18th century, along with Oliver Goldsmith, William Cowper, and Christopher Smart. Gray perhaps knew these men, sharing ideas about death, mortality, and the finality and sublimity of death.\nIn 1762, the Regius chair of Modern History at Cambridge, a sinecure which carried a salary of \u00a3400, fell vacant after the death of Shallet Turner, and Gray's friends lobbied the government unsuccessfully to secure the position for him. In the event, Gray lost out to Lawrence Brockett, but he secured the position in 1768 after Brockett's death.\n\"Elegy\" masterpiece.\nIt is believed by a number of writers that Gray began writing arguably his most celebrated piece, the \"Elegy Written in a Country Churchyard\", in the graveyard of St Giles' parish church in Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire (though this claim is not exclusive), in 1742. After several years of leaving it unfinished, he completed it in 1750 (see elegy for the form). The poem was a literary sensation when published by Robert Dodsley in February 1751 (see 1751 in poetry). Its reflective, calm, and stoic tone was greatly admired, and it was pirated, imitated, quoted, and translated into Latin and Greek. It is still one of the most popular and frequently quoted poems in the English language.\nIn 1759, during the Seven Years War, before the Battle of the Plains of Abraham, British General James Wolfe is said to have recited it to one of his officers, adding, \"I would prefer being the author of that Poem to the glory of beating the French to-morrow.\"\nThe \"Elegy\" was recognised immediately for its beauty and skill. It contains many phrases which have entered the common English lexicon, either on their own or as quoted in other works. These include:\n\"Elegy\" contemplates such themes as death and afterlife. These themes foreshadowed the upcoming Gothic movement. It is suggested that perhaps Gray found inspiration for his poem by visiting the grave-site of his aunt, Mary Antrobus. The aunt was buried at the graveyard by the St. Giles' churchyard, which he and his mother would visit. This is the same grave-site where Gray himself was later buried.\nGray also wrote light verse, including \"\", a mock-heroic elegy concerning Horace Walpole's cat. Even this humorous poem contains some of Gray's most famous lines. Walpole owned two cats: Zara and Selima. Scholars allude to the name Selima mentioned in the poem. After setting the scene with the couplet \"What female heart can gold despise? What cat's averse to fish?\", the poem moves to its multiple proverbial conclusion: \"a fav'rite has no friend\", \"[k]now one false step is ne'er retrieved\" and \"nor all that glisters, gold\". (Walpole later displayed the fatal china vase (the tub) on a pedestal at his house in Strawberry Hill, where it can still be seen).\nGray's surviving letters also show his sharp observation and playful sense of humour. He is well known for his phrase, \"where ignorance is bliss, 'tis folly to be wise,\" from \"\". It has been asserted that the Ode also abounds with images which find \"a mirror in every mind\". This was stated by Samuel Johnson who said of the poem, \"I rejoice to concur with the common reader ... The Church-yard abounds with images which find a mirror in every mind, and with sentiments to which every bosom returns an echo\". Indeed, Gray's poem follows the style of the mid-century literary endeavour to write of \"universal feelings.\" Samuel Johnson also said of Gray that he spoke in \"two languages\". He spoke in the language of \"public\" and \"private\" and according to Johnson, he should have spoken more in his private language as he did in his \"Elegy\" poem.\nForms.\nGray considered his two Pindaric odes, \"The Progress of Poesy\" and \"The Bard\", as his best works. Pindaric odes are to be written with fire and passion, unlike the calmer and more reflective Horatian odes such as \"Ode on a distant Prospect of Eton College\". \"The Bard\" tells of a wild Welsh poet cursing the Norman king Edward I after his conquest of Wales and prophesying in detail the downfall of the House of Plantagenet. It is melodramatic, and ends with the bard hurling himself to his death from the top of a mountain.\nWhen his duties allowed, Gray travelled widely throughout Britain to places such as Yorkshire, Derbyshire, Scotland and most notably the Lake District (see his \"Journal of a Visit to the Lake District\" in 1769) in search of picturesque landscapes and ancient monuments. These elements were not generally valued in the early 18th century, when the popular taste ran to classical styles in architecture and literature, and most people liked their scenery tame and well-tended. The Gothic details that appear in his \"Elegy\" and \"The Bard\" are a part of the first foreshadowing of the Romantic movement that dominated the early 19th century, when William Wordsworth and the other Lake poets taught people to value the picturesque, the sublime, and the Gothic. Gray combined traditional forms and poetic diction with new topics and modes of expression, and may be considered as a classically focused precursor of the romantic revival.\nGray's connection to the Romantic poets is vexed. In the prefaces to the 1800 and 1802 editions of Wordsworth's and Samuel Taylor Coleridge's \"Lyrical Ballads\", Wordsworth singled out Gray's \"Sonnet on the Death of Richard West\" to exemplify what he found most objectionable in poetry, declaring it was\n\"Gray, who was at the head of those who, by their reasonings, have attempted to widen the space of separation betwixt prose and metrical composition, and was more than any other man curiously elaborate in the structure of his own poetic diction.\" Gray wrote in a letter to West, that \"the language of the age is never the language of poetry.\"\nDeath.\nGray died on 30 July 1771 in Cambridge, and was buried beside his mother in the churchyard of the Church of St Giles, Stoke Poges, the reputed (though disputed) setting for his famous \"Elegy\". His grave can still be seen there. A monument sculpted by John Bacon was also erected in Westminster Abbey soon after his death.\nScholarly Reception.\nToday, Gray remains a topic of academic discussion. Some scholars analyze his work for his use of language and inspiration from Greek classics and Norse poetry. Other scholars, such as George E. Haggerty, focus on Gray's various relationships with other men, examining his letters and poetry for instances of \"male-male love\" and \"same-sex desire.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30448", "revid": "262666", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30448", "title": "Taylor series", "text": "Mathematical approximation of a function \nIn mathematical analysis, the Taylor series or Taylor expansion of a function is an infinite sum of terms that are expressed in terms of the function's derivatives at a single point. For most common functions, the function and the sum of its Taylor series are equal near this point. Taylor series are named after Brook Taylor, who introduced them in 1715. A Taylor series is also called a Maclaurin series when 0 is the point where the derivatives are considered, after Colin Maclaurin, who made extensive use of this special case of Taylor series in the 18th century.\nThe partial sum formed by the first \"n\" + 1 terms of a Taylor series is a polynomial of degree n that is called the nth Taylor polynomial of the function. Taylor polynomials are approximations of a function, which become generally more accurate as n increases. Taylor's theorem gives quantitative estimates on the error introduced by the use of such approximations. If the Taylor series of a function is convergent, its sum is the limit of the infinite sequence of the Taylor polynomials. A function may differ from the sum of its Taylor series, even if its Taylor series is convergent. A function is analytic at a point x if it is equal to the sum of its Taylor series in some open interval (or open disk in the complex plane) containing x. This implies that the function is analytic at every point of the interval (or disk).\nDefinition.\nThe Taylor series of a real or complex-valued function \"f\"\u2009(\"x\"), that is infinitely differentiable at a real or complex number \"a\", is the power series\nformula_1\nHere, \"n\"! denotes the factorial of n. The function \"f\"(\"n\")(\"a\") denotes the nth derivative of f evaluated at the point a. The derivative of order zero of f is defined to be f itself and (\"x\" \u2212 \"a\")0 and 0! are both defined to be\u00a01. This series can be written by using sigma notation, as in the right side formula. With \"a\" \n 0, the Maclaurin series takes the form:\nformula_2\nExamples.\nThe Taylor series of any polynomial is the polynomial itself.\nThe Maclaurin series of is the geometric series\nformula_3\nSo, by substituting x for 1 \u2212 \"x\", the Taylor series of at \"a\" \n 1 is\nformula_4\nBy integrating the above Maclaurin series, we find the Maclaurin series of ln(1 \u2212 \"x\"), where ln denotes the natural logarithm:\nformula_5\nThe corresponding Taylor series of ln \"x\" at \"a\" \n 1 is\nformula_6\nand more generally, the corresponding Taylor series of ln \"x\" at an arbitrary nonzero point a is\nformula_7\nThe Maclaurin series of the exponential function \"e\"\"x\" is\nformula_8\nThe above expansion holds because the derivative of \"e\"\"x\" with respect to x is also \"e\"\"x\", and \"e\"0 equals\u00a01. This leaves the terms (\"x\" \u2212 0)\"n\" in the numerator and \"n\"! in the denominator of each term in the infinite sum.\nHistory.\nThe ancient Greek philosopher Zeno of Elea considered the problem of summing an infinite series to achieve a finite result, but rejected it as an impossibility; the result was Zeno's paradox. Later, Aristotle proposed a philosophical resolution of the paradox, but the mathematical content was apparently unresolved until taken up by Archimedes, as it had been prior to Aristotle by the Presocratic Atomist Democritus. It was through Archimedes's method of exhaustion that an infinite number of progressive subdivisions could be performed to achieve a finite result. Liu Hui independently employed a similar method a few centuries later.\nIn the 14th century, the earliest examples of specific Taylor series (but not the general method) were given by the Indian mathematician Madhava of Sangamagrama. Though no record of his work survives, writings of his followers in the Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics suggest that he found the Taylor series for the trigonometric functions of sine, cosine, and arctangent; see Madhava series. During the following two centuries, his followers developed further series expansions and rational approximations.\nIn late 1670, James Gregory was shown in a letter from John Collins several Maclaurin series formula_9 formula_10 and derived by Isaac Newton, and told that Newton had developed a general method for expanding functions in series. Newton had in fact used a cumbersome method involving long division of series and term-by-term integration, but Gregory did not know it and set out to discover a general method for himself. In early 1671 Gregory discovered something like the general Maclaurin series and sent a letter to Collins including series for formula_11 formula_12 formula_13 formula_14 (the integral of formula_15), formula_16 (the integral of sec, the inverse Gudermannian function), formula_17 and formula_18 (the Gudermannian function). However, thinking that he had merely redeveloped a method by Newton, Gregory never described how he obtained these series, and it can only be inferred that he understood the general method by examining scratch work he had scribbled on the back of another letter from 1671.\nIn 1691\u20131692, Newton wrote down an explicit statement of the Taylor and Maclaurin series in an unpublished version of his work \"De Quadratura Curvarum\". It was the earliest explicit formulation of the general Taylor series. However, this work by Newton was never completed and the relevant sections were omitted from the portions published in 1704 under the title \"Tractatus de Quadratura Curvarum\".\nIt was not until 1715 that a general method for constructing these series for all functions for which they exist was finally published by Brook Taylor, after whom the series are now named.\nThe Maclaurin series was named after Colin Maclaurin, a Scottish mathematician, who published a special case of the Taylor result in the mid-18th century.\nAnalytic functions.\nIf \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") is given by a convergent power series in an open disk centred at b in the complex plane (or an interval in the real line), it is said to be analytic in this region. Thus for x in this region, f is given by a convergent power series\nformula_19\nDifferentiating by x the above formula n times, then setting \"x\" \n \"b\" gives\nformula_20\nand so the power series expansion agrees with the Taylor series. Thus, a function is analytic in an open disk centered at b if and only if its Taylor series converges to the value of the function at each point of the disk.\nIf \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") is equal to the sum of its Taylor series for all x in the complex plane, it is called entire. The polynomials, exponential function \"e\"\"x\", and the trigonometric functions of sine and cosine, are examples of entire functions. Examples of functions that are not entire include the square root, the logarithm, the trigonometric function tangent, and its inverse, arctan. For these functions, the Taylor series do not converge if x is far from b. That is, the Taylor series diverges at x if the distance between x and b is larger than the radius of convergence. The Taylor series can be used to calculate the value of an entire function at every point, provided the value of the function and all its derivatives are known at a single point.\nUses of the Taylor series for analytic functions include:\nApproximation error and convergence.\nThe \"error\" incurred in approximating a function by its nth-degree Taylor polynomial is called the remainder and is denoted by the function \"R\"\"n\"(\"x\"). Taylor's theorem can be used to obtain a bound on the size of the remainder.\nIn general, Taylor series need not be convergent at all. In fact, the set of functions with a convergent Taylor series is a meager set in the Fr\u00e9chet space of smooth functions. Even if the Taylor series of a function f does converge, its limit need not be equal to the value of the function \"f\"\u2009(\"x\"). For example, the function\nformula_21\nis infinitely differentiable at \"x\" \n 0, and has all derivatives zero there. Consequently, the Taylor series of \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") about \"x\" \n 0 is identically zero. However, \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") is not the zero function, so it does not equal its Taylor series around the origin. Thus, \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") is an example of a non-analytic smooth function. This example shows that there are infinitely differentiable functions \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") in real analysis, whose Taylor series are \"not\" equal to \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") even if they converge. By contrast, the holomorphic functions studied in complex analysis always possess a convergent Taylor series, and even the Taylor series of a meromorphic function, which might have singularities, never converges to a value different from the function itself. The complex function \"e\"\u22121/\"z\"2, however, does not approach 0 when z approaches 0 along the imaginary axis, so it is not continuous in the complex plane and its Taylor series is undefined at 0.\nEvery sequence of real or complex numbers can appear more generally as coefficients in the Taylor series of an infinitely differentiable function defined on the real line, a consequence of Borel's lemma. As a result, the radius of convergence of a Taylor series can be zero. There are even infinitely differentiable functions defined on the real line whose Taylor series have a radius of convergence 0 everywhere.\nA function cannot be written as a Taylor series centred at a singularity. In these cases, one can often still achieve a series expansion if one also allows negative powers of the variable x. For example, \"f\"\u2009(\"x\") \n \"e\"\u22121/\"x\"2 can be written as a Laurent series.\nGeneralization.\nThe generalization of the Taylor series does converge to the value of the function itself for any bounded continuous function on (0,\u221e), and this can be done by using the calculus of finite differences. Specifically, the following theorem, due to Einar Hille, that for any \"t\" &gt; 0,\nformula_22\nHere \u0394 is the nth finite difference operator with step size h. The series is precisely the Taylor series, except that divided differences appear in place of differentiation: the series is formally similar to the Newton series. When the function f is analytic at a, the terms in the series converge to the terms of the Taylor series, and in this sense generalizes the usual Taylor series.\nIn general, for any infinite sequence \"a\"\"i\", the following power series identity holds:\nformula_23\nSo in particular,\nformula_24\nThe series on the right is the expected value of \"f\"\u2009(\"a\" + \"X\"), where X is a Poisson-distributed random variable that takes the value \"jh\" with probability \"e\"\u2212\"t\"/\"h\"\u00b7. Hence,\nformula_25\nThe law of large numbers implies that the identity holds.\nList of Maclaurin series of some common functions.\nSeveral important Maclaurin series expansions follow. All these expansions are valid for complex arguments x.\nExponential function.\nThe exponential function formula_26 (with base e) has Maclaurin series\nformula_27\nIt converges for all x.\nThe exponential generating function of the Bell numbers is the exponential function of the predecessor of the exponential function:\nformula_28\nNatural logarithm.\nThe natural logarithm (with base e) has Maclaurin series\nformula_29\nThe last series is known as Mercator series, named after Nicholas Mercator (since it was published in his 1668 treatise \"Logarithmotechnia\"). Both of these series converge for formula_30. (In addition, the series for ln(1 \u2212 \"x\") converges for \"x\" \n \u22121, and the series for ln(1 + \"x\") converges for \"x\" \n 1.)\nGeometric series.\nThe geometric series and its derivatives have Maclaurin series\nformula_31\nAll are convergent for formula_30. These are special cases of the binomial series given in the next section.\nBinomial series.\nThe binomial series is the power series\nformula_33\nwhose coefficients are the generalized binomial coefficients\nformula_34\n(If \"n\" = 0, this product is an empty product and has value 1.) It converges for formula_30 for any real or complex number \u03b1.\nWhen \"\u03b1\" = \u22121, this is essentially the infinite geometric series mentioned in the previous section. The special cases \"\u03b1\" = and \"\u03b1\" = \u2212 give the square root function and its inverse:\nformula_36\nWhen only the linear term is retained, this simplifies to the binomial approximation.\nTrigonometric functions.\nThe usual trigonometric functions and their inverses have the following Maclaurin series:\nformula_37\nAll angles are expressed in radians. The numbers \"Bk\" appearing in the expansions of tan \"x\" are the Bernoulli numbers. The \"E\"\"k\" in the expansion of sec \"x\" are Euler numbers.\nHyperbolic functions.\nThe hyperbolic functions have Maclaurin series closely related to the series for the corresponding trigonometric functions:\nformula_38\nThe numbers \"Bk\" appearing in the series for tanh \"x\" are the Bernoulli numbers.\nPolylogarithmic functions.\nThe polylogarithms have these defining identities:\nformula_39\nThe Legendre chi functions are defined as follows:\nformula_40\nAnd the formulas presented below are called \"inverse tangent integrals\":\nformula_41\nIn statistical thermodynamics these formulas are of great importance.\nElliptic functions.\nThe complete elliptic integrals of first kind K and of second kind E can be defined as follows:\nformula_42\nThe Jacobi theta functions describe the world of the elliptic modular functions and they have these Taylor series:\nformula_43\nThe regular partition number sequence P(n) has this generating function:\nformula_44 \nThe strict partition number sequence Q(n) has the generating function:\nformula_45\nCalculation of Taylor series.\nSeveral methods exist for the calculation of the Taylor series of a large number of functions. One can attempt to use the definition of the Taylor series, though this often requires generalizing the form of the coefficients according to a readily apparent pattern. Alternatively, one can use manipulations such as substitution, multiplication or division, addition or subtraction of standard Taylor series to construct the Taylor series of a function, by virtue of the Taylor series being a power series. In some cases, one can also derive the Taylor series by repeatedly applying integration by parts. Particularly convenient is the use of computer algebra systems to calculate Taylor series.\nFirst example.\nIn order to compute the 7th-degree Maclaurin polynomial for the function\nformula_46\none may first rewrite the function as\nformula_47\nthe composition of two functions formula_48 and formula_49 The Taylor series for the natural logarithm is (using big O notation)\nformula_50\nand for the cosine function\nformula_51\nThe first several terms from the second series can be substituted into each term of the first series. Because the first term in the second series has degree 2, three terms of the first series suffice to give a 7th-degree polynomial:\nformula_52\nSince the cosine is an even function, the coefficients for all the odd powers are zero.\nSecond example.\nSuppose we want the Taylor series at 0 of the function\nformula_53\nThe Taylor series for the exponential function is\nformula_54\nand the series for cosine is\nformula_55\nAssume the series for their quotient is\nformula_56\nMultiplying both sides by the denominator formula_57 and then expanding it as a series yields\nformula_58\nComparing the coefficients of formula_59 with the coefficients of formula_60\nformula_61\nThe coefficients formula_62 of the series for formula_63 can thus be computed one at a time, amounting to long division of the series for formula_26 and formula_57:\nformula_66\nThird example.\nHere we employ a method called \"indirect expansion\" to expand the given function. This method uses the known Taylor expansion of the exponential function. In order to expand (1 + \"x\")\"ex\" as a Taylor series in x, we use the known Taylor series of function \"e\"\"x\":\nformula_67\nThus,\nformula_68\nTaylor series as definitions.\nClassically, algebraic functions are defined by an algebraic equation, and transcendental functions (including those discussed above) are defined by some property that holds for them, such as a differential equation. For example, the exponential function is the function which is equal to its own derivative everywhere, and assumes the value 1 at the origin. However, one may equally well define an analytic function by its Taylor series.\nTaylor series are used to define functions and \"operators\" in diverse areas of mathematics. In particular, this is true in areas where the classical definitions of functions break down. For example, using Taylor series, one may extend analytic functions to sets of matrices and operators, such as the matrix exponential or matrix logarithm.\nIn other areas, such as formal analysis, it is more convenient to work directly with the power series themselves. Thus one may define a solution of a differential equation \"as\" a power series which, one hopes to prove, is the Taylor series of the desired solution.\nTaylor series in several variables.\nThe Taylor series may also be generalized to functions of more than one variable with\nformula_69\nFor example, for a function formula_70 that depends on two variables, x and y, the Taylor series to second order about the point (\"a\", \"b\") is\nformula_71\nwhere the subscripts denote the respective partial derivatives.\nSecond-order Taylor series in several variables.\nA second-order Taylor series expansion of a scalar-valued function of more than one variable can be written compactly as\nformula_72\nwhere \"D\" \"f\"\u2009(a) is the gradient of f evaluated at x \n a and \"D\"2 \"f\"\u2009(a) is the Hessian matrix. Applying the multi-index notation the Taylor series for several variables becomes\nformula_73\nwhich is to be understood as a still more abbreviated multi-index version of the first equation of this paragraph, with a full analogy to the single variable case.\nExample.\nIn order to compute a second-order Taylor series expansion around point (\"a\", \"b\") \n (0, 0) of the function\nformula_74\none first computes all the necessary partial derivatives:\nformula_75\nEvaluating these derivatives at the origin gives the Taylor coefficients\nformula_76\nSubstituting these values in to the general formula\nformula_77\nproduces\nformula_78\nSince ln(1 + \"y\") is analytic in , we have\nformula_79\nComparison with Fourier series.\nThe trigonometric Fourier series enables one to express a periodic function (or a function defined on a closed interval [\"a\",\"b\"]) as an infinite sum of trigonometric functions (sines and cosines). In this sense, the Fourier series is analogous to Taylor series, since the latter allows one to express a function as an infinite sum of powers. Nevertheless, the two series differ from each other in several relevant issues:\n \"a\" are all exactly equal to \"f\" at \"a\". In contrast, the Fourier series is computed by integrating over an entire interval, so there is generally no such point where all the finite truncations of the series are exact.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30449", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30449", "title": "TECO (text editor)", "text": "Programmable text editor\nTECO (), short for Text Editor &amp; Corrector,\n is both a character-oriented text editor and a programming language, that was developed in 1962 for use on Digital Equipment Corporation computers, and has since become available on PCs and Unix. Dan Murphy developed TECO while a student at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT).\nAccording to Murphy, the initial acronym was Tape Editor and Corrector because \"punched paper tape was the only medium for the storage of program source on our PDP-1. There was no hard disk, floppy disk, magnetic tape (magtape), or network.\" By the time TECO was made available for general use, the name had become \"Text Editor and Corrector\", since even the PDP-1 version\nby then supported other media. It was subsequently modified by many other people and is a direct ancestor of Emacs, which was originally implemented in TECO macros.\nDescription.\nTECO is not only an editor but also an interpreted programming language for text manipulation. Arbitrary programs (called \"macros\") for searching and modifying text give it great power. Unlike regular expressions, however, the language was imperative, though some versions had an \"or\" operator in string search.\nTECO does not really have syntax; each character in a program is an imperative command, dispatched to its corresponding routine. That routine may read further characters from the program stream (giving the effect of string arguments), change the position of the \"program counter\" (giving the effect of control structures), or push values onto a value stack (giving the effect of nested parentheses). But there is nothing to prevent operations like jumping into the middle of a comment, since there is no syntax and no parsing.\nTECO ignores case and whitespace (except tab, which is an insertion command).\nA satirical essay on computer programming, \"Real Programmers Don't Use Pascal\", suggested that a common game for TECO fans was to enter their name as a command sequence, and then try to work out what would happen. The same essay in describing TECO coined the acronym \"YAFIYGI\", meaning \"You Asked For It You Got It\" (in contrast to WYSIWYG).\nImpact.\nThe EMACS editor originally started by David A. Moon and Guy L. Steele Jr. was implemented in TECO as a set of Editor MACroS. TECO became more widely used following a Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) PDP-6 implementation developed at MIT's Project MAC in 1964. This implementation continuously displayed the edited text visually on a CRT screen, and was used as an interactive online editor. Later versions of TECO were capable of driving full-screen mode on various DEC RS-232 video terminals such as the VT52 or VT100.\nTECO was available for several operating systems and computers, including the PDP-1 computer, the PDP-8 (under OS/8), the Incompatible Timesharing System (ITS) on the PDP-6 and PDP-10, and TOPS-10 and TOPS-20 on the PDP-10. A version of TECO was provided with all DEC operating systems; the version available for RT11 was able to drive the GT40 graphics display while the version available for RSTS/E was implemented as a multi-user run-time system and could be used as the user's complete operating environment; the user never actually had to exit TECO. The VTEDIT (Video Terminal Editor) TECO macro was commonly used on RSTS/E and VAX systems with terminals capable of direct-cursor control (e.g. VT52 and VT100) to provide a full-screen visual editor similar in function to the contemporaneously developed Emacs.\nTECO continues to be included in OpenVMS by VSI, and is invoked with the codice_1 command.\nA descendant of the version DEC distributed for the PDP-10 is still available on the Internet, along with several partial implementations for the MS-DOS/Microsoft Windows environment.\nHistory.\nTECO was originally developed at MIT in around 1963 by Daniel L. Murphy for use on two PDP-1 computers, belonging to different departments, both housed in MIT's Building 26. On these machines, the normal development process involved the use of a Friden Flexowriter to prepare source code offline on a continuous strip of punched paper tape. Programmers of the big IBM mainframes customarily punched their source code on cards, using key punches which printed human-readable dot-matrix characters along the top of every card at the same time as they punched each machine-readable character. Thus IBM programmers could read, insert, delete, and move lines of code by physically manipulating the cards in the deck. Punched paper tape offered no such amenities, leading to the development of online editing.\nAn early editor for the PDP-1 was named \"Expensive Typewriter\". Written by Stephen D. Piner, it was the most rudimentary imaginable line-oriented editor, lacking even search-and-replace capabilities. Its name was chosen as a wry poke at an earlier, rather bloated, editor called \"Colossal Typewriter\". Even in those days, online editing could save time in the debugging cycle. Another program written by the PDP-1 hackers was Expensive Desk Calculator, in a similar vein.\nThe original stated purpose of TECO was to make more efficient use of the PDP-1. As envisioned in the manual, rather than performing editing \"expensively\" by sitting at a console, one would simply examine the faulty text and prepare a \"correction tape\" describing the editing operations to be performed on the text. One would efficiently feed the source tape and the correction tape into the PDP-1 via its high-speed (200 characters per second) reader. Running TECO, it immediately would punch an edited tape with its high-speed (60 characters per second) punch. One could then immediately proceed to load and run the assembler, with no time wasted in online editing.\nTECO's sophisticated searching operations were motivated by the fact that the offline Flexowriter printouts were not line-numbered. Editing locations therefore needed to be specified by context rather than by line number. The various looping and conditional constructs (which made TECO Turing-complete) were included in order to provide sufficient descriptive power for the correction tape. The terse syntax minimized the number of keystrokes needed to prepare the correction tape.\nThe correction tape was a program, and required debugging just like any other program. The pitfalls of even the simplest global search-and-replace soon became evident. In practice, TECO editing was performed online just as it had been with Expensive Typewriter (although TECO was certainly a more feature-complete editor than Expensive Typewriter, so editing was much more efficient with TECO). The original PDP-1 version had no screen display. The only way to observe the state of the text during the editing process was to type in commands that would cause the text (or portions thereof) to be typed out on the console typewriter.\nBy 1964, a special Version of TECO (\"TECO-6\") had been implemented on the PDP-6 at MIT. That version supported visual editing, using a screen display that showed the contents of the editing buffer in real time, updating as it changed. Amongst the creators of TECO-6 were Richard Greenblatt and Stewart Nelson.\nAt MIT, TECO development continued in the fall of 1971. Carl Mikkelsen had implemented a real-time edit mode loosely based on the TECO-6 graphic console commands, but working with the newly installed Datapoint-3300 CRT text displays. The TECO buffer implementation, however, was terribly inefficient for processing single character insert or delete functions\u2014editing consumed 100% of the PDP-10. With Richard Greenblatt's support, in summer of 1972 Carl reimplemented the TECO buffer storage and reformed the macros as native PDP-10 code. As entering the real-time mode was by typing , this was known as control-R mode. At the same time, Rici Liknaitski added input-time macros (), which operated as the command string was read rather than when executed. Read-time macros made the TECO auxiliary text buffers, called Q-registers, more useful. Carl expanded the Q-register name space. With read-time macros, a large Q-register name space, and efficient buffer operations, the stage was set for binding each key to a macro. These edit macros evolved into Emacs.\nThe VMS implementation has a long history - it began as TECO-8, implemented in PDP-8 assembly. This code was translated into PDP-11 assembly to produce TECO-11. TECO-11 was used in early versions of VAX/VMS in PDP-11 compatibility mode. It was later translated from PDP-11 assembly into VAX assembly to produce TECO32. TECO32 was then converted with the VEST and AEST binary translation utilities to make it compatible with OpenVMS on the Alpha and Itanium respectively.\nOS/8 MUNG command.\nThe OS/8 CCL MUNG command invoked TECO to read and execute the specified .TE TECO macro. Optional command line parameters gave added adaptability.\nAs a programmer's tool.\nDuring and shortly following the years of the punched card era, there were source programs that had begun as punched card-based. Comments were often a series of lines that included single marginal asterisks and top/bottom full lines of asterisks. Once the cards were transferred online, it was difficult to realign the marginal stars. TECO aimed to solve this problem.\nAs a programming language.\nThe obscurity of the TECO programming language is described in the following quote from \"Real Programmers Don't Use Pascal\", a letter from Ed Post to Datamation, July 1983:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It has been observed that a TECO command sequence more closely resembles transmission line noise than readable text. One of the more entertaining games to play with TECO is to type your name in as a command line and try to guess what it does. Just about any possible typing error while talking with TECO will probably destroy your program, or even worse - introduce subtle and mysterious bugs in a once working subroutine.\nAccording to Craig Finseth, author of \"The Craft of Text Editing\", TECO has been described as a \"write-only\" language, implying that once a program is written in TECO, it is extremely difficult to comprehend what it did without appropriate documentation.\nDespite its syntax, the TECO command language was tremendously powerful, and clones are still available for MS-DOS and for Unix.\nTECO commands are characters (including control-characters), and the prompt is a single asterisk:\nThe escape key displays as a dollar sign, pressed once it delineates the end of a command requiring an argument and pressed twice initiates the execution of the entered commands:\nExample editing session.\nGiven a file named hello.c with the following contents:\n int main(int argc, char **argv)\n printf(\"Hello world!\\n\");\n return 0;\n... one could use the following TECO session (noting that the prompt is \"*\" and \"$\" is how ESC is echoed) to change \"Hello\" into \"Goodbye\":\nCode examples.\nThe following two example programs are a simple interchange sort of the current text buffer, based on the first character of each line, taken from the PDP-11 TECO User's Guide. A \"goto\" and \"structured\" version are shown. \nExample 1.\n !START! j 0aua ! jump to beginning, load 1st char in register A !\n !CONT! l 0aub ! load first char of next line in register B !\n qa-qb\"g xa k -l ga 1uz ' ! if A&gt;B, switch lines and set flag in register Z !\n qbua ! load B into A !\n l z-.\"g -l @o/CONT/ ' ! loop back if another line in buffer !\n qz\"g 0uz @o/START/ ' ! repeat if a switch was made on last pass !\nExample 2.\n &lt;0uz ! clear repeat flag !\n j 0aua l ! load 1st char into register A !\n &lt;0aub ! load 1st char of next line into B !\n qa-qb\"g xa k -l ga -1uz ' ! if A&gt;B, switch lines and set flag !\n qbua ! load B into A !\n l .-z;&gt; ! loop back if another line in buffer !\n qz;&gt; ! repeat if a switch was made last pass !\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n\"This article is based in part on the Jargon File, which is in the public domain.\""}
{"id": "30450", "revid": "39177298", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30450", "title": "Topological space", "text": "Mathematical space with a notion of closeness\nIn mathematics, a topological space is, roughly speaking, a geometrical space in which closeness is defined but cannot necessarily be measured by a numeric distance. More specifically, a topological space is a set whose elements are called points, along with an additional structure called a topology, which can be defined as a set of neighbourhoods for each point that satisfy some axioms formalizing the concept of closeness. There are several equivalent definitions of a topology, the most commonly used of which is the definition through open sets.\nA topological space is the most general type of a mathematical space that allows for the definition of limits, continuity, and connectedness. Common types of topological spaces include Euclidean spaces, metric spaces and manifolds.\nAlthough very general, the concept of topological spaces is fundamental, and used in virtually every branch of modern mathematics. The study of topological spaces in their own right is called general topology (or point-set topology).\nHistory.\nAround 1735, Leonhard Euler discovered the formula formula_1 relating the number of vertices (V), edges (E) and faces (F) of a convex polyhedron, and hence of a planar graph. The study and generalization of this formula, specifically by Cauchy (1789\u20131857) and L'Huilier (1750\u20131840), boosted the study of topology. In 1827, Carl Friedrich Gauss published \"General investigations of curved surfaces\", which in section 3 defines the curved surface in a similar manner to the modern topological understanding: \"A curved surface is said to possess continuous curvature at one of its points A, if the direction of all the straight lines drawn from A to points of the surface at an infinitesimal distance from A are deflected infinitesimally from one and the same plane passing through A.\"\nYet, \"until Riemann's work in the early 1850s, surfaces were always dealt with from a local point of view (as parametric surfaces) and topological issues were never considered\". \"M\u00f6bius and Jordan seem to be the first to realize that the main problem about the topology of (compact) surfaces is to find invariants (preferably numerical) to decide the equivalence of surfaces, that is, to decide whether two surfaces are homeomorphic or not.\"\nThe subject is clearly defined by Felix Klein in his \"Erlangen Program\" (1872): the geometry invariants of arbitrary continuous transformation, a kind of geometry. The term \"topology\" was introduced by Johann Benedict Listing in 1847, although he had used the term in correspondence some years earlier instead of previously used \"Analysis situs\". The foundation of this science, for a space of any dimension, was created by Henri Poincar\u00e9. His first article on this topic appeared in 1894. In the 1930s, James Waddell Alexander II and Hassler Whitney first expressed the idea that a surface is a topological space that is locally like a Euclidean plane.\nTopological spaces were first defined by Felix Hausdorff in 1914 in his seminal \"Principles of Set Theory\". Metric spaces had been defined earlier in 1906 by Maurice Fr\u00e9chet, though it was Hausdorff who popularised the term \"metric space\" ().\nDefinitions.\nThe utility of the concept of a \"topology\" is shown by the fact that there are several equivalent definitions of this mathematical structure. Thus one chooses the axiomatization suited for the application. The most commonly used is that in terms of open sets, but perhaps more intuitive is that in terms of neighbourhoods and so this is given first.\nDefinition via neighbourhoods.\nThis axiomatization is due to Felix Hausdorff.\nLet formula_2 be a (possibly empty) set. The elements of formula_2 are usually called points, though they can be any mathematical object. Let formula_4 be a function assigning to each formula_5 (point) in formula_2 a non-empty collection formula_7 of subsets of formula_8 The elements of formula_7 will be called neighbourhoods of formula_5 with respect to formula_4 (or, simply, neighbourhoods of formula_5). The function formula_4 is called a neighbourhood topology if the axioms below are satisfied; and then formula_2 with formula_4 is called a topological space.\nThe first three axioms for neighbourhoods have a clear meaning. The fourth axiom has a very important use in the structure of the theory, that of linking together the neighbourhoods of different points of formula_8\nA standard example of such a system of neighbourhoods is for the real line formula_38 where a subset formula_16 of formula_40 is defined to be a neighbourhood of a real number formula_5 if it includes an open interval containing formula_26\nGiven such a structure, a subset formula_43 of formula_2 is defined to be open if formula_43 is a neighbourhood of all points in formula_46 The open sets then satisfy the axioms given below in the next definition of a topological space. Conversely, when given the open sets of a topological space, the neighbourhoods satisfying the above axioms can be recovered by defining formula_16 to be a neighbourhood of formula_5 if formula_16 includes an open set formula_43 such that formula_51\nDefinition via open sets.\nA \"topology\" on a set X may be defined as a collection formula_52 of subsets of X, called open sets and satisfying the following axioms:\nAs this definition of a topology is the most commonly used, the set formula_52 of the open sets is commonly called a topology on formula_8 \nA subset formula_61 is said to be closed in formula_62 if its complement formula_63 is an open set. Note that from this definition, it follows that the empty set and formula_2 are simultaneously open \"and\" closed \u2013 that is, the two sets are complements of one another, while each of them is, itself, open. In general, any subset of formula_2 with this property is said to be \"clopen.\"\nDefinition via closed sets.\nUsing de Morgan's laws, the above axioms defining open sets become axioms defining closed sets:\nUsing these axioms, another way to define a topological space is as a set formula_2 together with a collection formula_52 of closed subsets of formula_8 Thus the sets in the topology formula_52 are the closed sets, and their complements in formula_2 are the open sets.\nOther definitions.\nThere are many other equivalent ways to define a topological space: in other words the concepts of neighbourhood, or that of open or closed sets can be reconstructed from other starting points and satisfy the correct axioms.\nAnother way to define a topological space is by using the Kuratowski closure axioms, which define the closed sets as the fixed points of an operator on the power set of formula_8\nA net is a generalisation of the concept of sequence. A topology is completely determined if for every net in formula_2 the set of its accumulation points is specified.\nComparison of topologies.\nMany topologies can be defined on a set to form a topological space. When every open set of a topology formula_94 is also open for a topology formula_95 one says that formula_96 is finer than formula_97 and formula_94 is coarser than formula_99 A proof that relies only on the existence of certain open sets will also hold for any finer topology, and similarly a proof that relies only on certain sets not being open applies to any coarser topology. The terms larger and smaller are sometimes used in place of finer and coarser, respectively. The terms stronger and weaker are also used in the literature, but with little agreement on the meaning, so one should always be sure of an author's convention when reading.\nThe collection of all topologies on a given fixed set formula_2 forms a complete lattice: if formula_101 is a collection of topologies on formula_77 then the meet of formula_103 is the intersection of formula_104 and the join of formula_103 is the meet of the collection of all topologies on formula_2 that contain every member of formula_107\nContinuous functions.\nA function formula_108 between topological spaces is called continuous if for every formula_109 and every neighbourhood formula_16 of formula_111 there is a neighbourhood formula_33 of formula_5 such that formula_114 This relates easily to the usual definition in analysis. Equivalently, formula_115 is continuous if the inverse image of every open set is open. This is an attempt to capture the intuition that there are no \"jumps\" or \"separations\" in the function. A homeomorphism is a bijection that is continuous and whose inverse is also continuous. Two spaces are called homeomorphic if there exists a homeomorphism between them. From the standpoint of topology, homeomorphic spaces are essentially identical.\nIn category theory, one of the fundamental categories is Top, which denotes the category of topological spaces whose objects are topological spaces and whose morphisms are continuous functions. The attempt to classify the objects of this category (up to homeomorphism) by invariants has motivated areas of research, such as homotopy theory, homology theory, and K-theory.\nExamples of topological spaces.\nA given set may have many different topologies. If a set is given a different topology, it is viewed as a different topological space. Any set can be given the discrete topology in which every subset is open. The only convergent sequences or nets in this topology are those that are eventually constant. Also, any set can be given the trivial topology (also called the indiscrete topology), in which only the empty set and the whole space are open. Every sequence and net in this topology converges to every point of the space. This example shows that in general topological spaces, limits of sequences need not be unique. However, often topological spaces must be Hausdorff spaces where limit points are unique.\nThere exist numerous topologies on any given finite set. Such spaces are called finite topological spaces. Finite spaces are sometimes used to provide examples or counterexamples to conjectures about topological spaces in general.\nAny set can be given the cofinite topology in which the open sets are the empty set and the sets whose complement is finite. This is the smallest T1 topology on any infinite set.\nAny set can be given the cocountable topology, in which a set is defined as open if it is either empty or its complement is countable. When the set is uncountable, this topology serves as a counterexample in many situations.\nThe real line can also be given the lower limit topology. Here, the basic open sets are the half open intervals formula_116 This topology on formula_40 is strictly finer than the Euclidean topology defined above; a sequence converges to a point in this topology if and only if it converges from above in the Euclidean topology. This example shows that a set may have many distinct topologies defined on it.\nIf formula_118 is an ordinal number, then the set formula_119 may be endowed with the order topology generated by the intervals formula_120 formula_121 and formula_122 where formula_123 and formula_124 are elements of formula_125\nEvery manifold has a natural topology since it is locally Euclidean. Similarly, every simplex and every simplicial complex inherits a natural topology from .\nThe Sierpi\u0144ski space is the simplest non-discrete topological space. It has important relations to the theory of computation and semantics.\nTopology from other topologies.\nEvery subset of a topological space can be given the subspace topology in which the open sets are the intersections of the open sets of the larger space with the subset. For any indexed family of topological spaces, the product can be given the product topology, which is generated by the inverse images of open sets of the factors under the projection mappings. For example, in finite products, a basis for the product topology consists of all products of open sets. For infinite products, there is the additional requirement that in a basic open set, all but finitely many of its projections are the entire space. This construction is a special case of an initial topology.\nA quotient space is defined as follows: if formula_2 is a topological space and formula_127 is a set, and if formula_108 is a surjective function, then the quotient topology on formula_127 is the collection of subsets of formula_127 that have open inverse images under formula_131 In other words, the quotient topology is the finest topology on formula_127 for which formula_115 is continuous. A common example of a quotient topology is when an equivalence relation is defined on the topological space formula_8 The map formula_115 is then the natural projection onto the set of equivalence classes. This construction is a special case of a final topology.\nMetric spaces.\nMetric spaces embody a metric, a precise notion of distance between points.\nEvery metric space can be given a metric topology, in which the basic open sets are open balls defined by the metric. This is the standard topology on any normed vector space. On a finite-dimensional vector space this topology is the same for all norms.\nThere are many ways of defining a topology on formula_38 the set of real numbers. The standard topology on formula_40 is generated by the open intervals. The set of all open intervals forms a base or basis for the topology, meaning that every open set is a union of some collection of sets from the base. In particular, this means that a set is open if there exists an open interval of non zero radius about every point in the set. More generally, the Euclidean spaces formula_138 can be given a topology. In the usual topology on formula_138 the basic open sets are the open balls. Similarly, formula_140 the set of complex numbers, and formula_141 have a standard topology in which the basic open sets are open balls.\nTopology from algebraic structure.\nFor any algebraic objects we can introduce the discrete topology, under which the algebraic operations are continuous functions. For any such structure that is not finite, we often have a natural topology compatible with the algebraic operations, in the sense that the algebraic operations are still continuous. This leads to concepts such as topological groups, topological rings, topological fields and topological vector spaces over the latter. Local fields are topological fields important in number theory.\nThe Zariski topology is defined algebraically on the spectrum of a ring or an algebraic variety. On formula_138 or formula_143 the closed sets of the Zariski topology are the solution sets of systems of polynomial equations.\nTopology from other structure.\nIf formula_147 is a filter on a set formula_2 then formula_149 is a topology on formula_8\nMany sets of linear operators in functional analysis are endowed with topologies that are defined by specifying when a particular sequence of functions converges to the zero function.\nA linear graph has a natural topology that generalizes many of the geometric aspects of graphs with vertices and edges.\nOuter space of a free group formula_151 consists of the so-called \"marked metric graph structures\" of volume 1 on formula_152\nClassification of topological spaces.\nTopological spaces can be broadly classified, up to homeomorphism, by their topological properties. A topological property is a property of spaces that is invariant under homeomorphisms. To prove that two spaces are not homeomorphic it is sufficient to find a topological property not shared by them. Examples of such properties include connectedness, compactness, and various separation axioms. For algebraic invariants see algebraic topology.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30452", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30452", "title": "Tychonov space", "text": ""}
{"id": "30455", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30455", "title": "TECO/Example", "text": ""}
{"id": "30456", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30456", "title": "Talking Heads", "text": "American rock band\nTalking Heads were an American rock band formed in New York City in 1975. It consisted of vocalist-guitarist David Byrne, drummer Chris Frantz, bassist Tina Weymouth, and guitarist-keyboardist Jerry Harrison. Described as \"one of the most critically acclaimed groups of the '80s,\" Talking Heads helped to pioneer new wave music by combining elements of punk, art rock, funk, and world music with \"an anxious yet clean-cut image\".\nByrne, Frantz, and Weymouth met as freshmen at the Rhode Island School of Design, where Byrne and Frantz were part of a band called the Artistics.https:// The trio moved to New York City in 1975, adopted the name Talking Heads, joined the New York punk scene, and recruited Harrison to round out the band; this lineup remained the same for the rest of Talking Heads' career. Signing to Sire Records in 1976, the band's debut album, \", was released in the following year to positive reviews. They collaborated with the British producer Brian Eno on the acclaimed albums \"More Songs About Buildings and Food\" (1978), \"Fear of Music\" (1979), and \"Remain in Light\" (1980), which blended their art school sensibilities with influence from artists such as Parliament-Funkadelic and Fela Kuti. From the early 1980s, they included additional musicians in their recording sessions and shows, including guitarist Adrian Belew, keyboardist Bernie Worrell, singer Nona Hendryx, and bassist Busta Jones.\nTalking Heads reached their commercial peak in 1983 with the U.S. Top 10 hit \"Burning Down the House\" from the album \"Speaking in Tongues\". In 1984, they released the concert film \"Stop Making Sense\", which was directed by Jonathan Demme. For these performances, they were joined by Worrell, guitarist Alex Weir, percussionist Steve Scales, and singers Lynn Mabry and Ednah Holt. In 1985, Talking Heads released their best-selling album, \"Little Creatures\". They produced a soundtrack album for Byrne's film \"True Stories\" (1986), and released their final album, the worldbeat-influenced \"Naked\" (1988), before disbanding in 1991. Without Byrne, the other band members performed under the name Shrunken Heads, and released an album, \"No Talking, Just Head\", as the Heads in 1996, featuring various singers in place of Byrne.\nFour of their albums appeared on \"Rolling Stone\"'s 2003 list of the \"500 Greatest Albums of All Time\", and three of their songs\u2014\"Psycho Killer\", \"Life During Wartime\", and \"Once in a Lifetime\"\u2014were included among the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame's 500 Songs That Shaped Rock and Roll. The band was also ranked number 64 on VH1's list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\". In the 2011 update of \"Rolling Stone\"'s list of the \"100 Greatest Artists of All Time\", they were ranked number 100.\nHistory.\n1973\u20131977: Early years.\nIn 1973, Rhode Island School of Design students David Byrne (guitar and vocals) and Chris Frantz (drums) formed a band, the Artistics.https:// Frantz has described the Artistics as a \"prototype punk band\" that would perform a number of covers, including \"Psycho\" by the Sonics, the Who's \"I Can't Explain\" and Al Green's \"Love and Happiness\", live. Fellow student Tina Weymouth, Frantz's girlfriend, often provided transportation. The Artistics dissolved the following year, and the three moved to New York City, eventually sharing a communal loft. After they were unable to find a bassist, Weymouth took up the role. Frantz encouraged Weymouth to learn to play bass by listening to Suzi Quatro albums. Byrne asked Weymouth to audition three times before she joined the band.\nThe band played their first gig as Talking Heads\u2014opening for the Ramones at CBGB in the East Village\u2014on June 5, 1975. According to Weymouth, the name Talking Heads came from an issue of \"TV Guide\", which \"explained the term used by TV studios to describe a head-and-shoulder shot of a person talking as 'all content, no action'. It fit.\" Later that year, the band recorded a series of demos for CBS, but did not receive a record contract. However, they drew a following and signed to Sire Records in November 1976. They released their first single in February the following year, \"Love \u2192 Building on Fire\". In March 1977, they added Jerry Harrison, formerly of the Modern Lovers, on keyboards, guitar, and backing vocals. Gary Kurfirst started managing Talking Heads in 1977.\nThe first Talking Heads album, \"\", received acclaim and produced their first charting single, \"Psycho Killer\". Many connected the song to the serial killer known as the Son of Sam, who had been terrorizing New York City months earlier; however, Byrne said he had written the song years prior. Weymouth and Frantz married in 1977.\n1978\u20131980: Collaborations with Brian Eno.\n\"More Songs About Buildings and Food\" (1978) was Talking Heads' first collaboration with producer Brian Eno, who had previously worked with Roxy Music, David Bowie, John Cale, and Robert Fripp; the title of Eno's 1977 song \"King's Lead Hat\" is an anagram of the band's name. Eno's unusual style meshed with the group's artistic sensibilities, and they began to explore an increasingly diverse range of musical directions\u2014from psychedelic funk to Afrobeat, influenced prominently by Fela Kuti and Parliament-Funkadelic. This recording also established the band's relationship with Compass Point Studios in Nassau, The Bahamas. \"More Songs About Buildings and Food\" included a cover of Al Green's \"Take Me to the River\", which brought Talking Heads into the public consciousness and gave them their first \"Billboard\" Top 30 hit.\nThe collaboration continued with \"Fear of Music\" (1979), which mixed the darker stylings of post-punk rock with funk and subliminal references to the geopolitical instability of the late 1970s. Music journalist Simon Reynolds cited \"Fear of Music\" as representing the Eno\u2013Talking Heads collaboration \"at its most mutually fruitful and equitable\". The single \"Life During Wartime\" produced the catchphrase \"This ain't no party, this ain't no disco\". The song refers to the Mudd Club and CBGB, two popular New York nightclubs of the time.\n\"Remain in Light\" (1980) was heavily influenced by Fela Kuti, whose music had been introduced to the band by Eno. It explored West African polyrhythms, weaving these together with Arabic music from North Africa, disco, funk, and \"found\" voices. These combinations foreshadowed Byrne's later interest in world music. To perform these more complex arrangements, the band toured with an expanded group, including guitarist Adrian Belew and keyboardist Bernie Worrell among others, first at the Heatwave festival in August 1980.\nDuring this period, Weymouth and Frantz formed a commercially successful splinter group, Tom Tom Club, influenced by the foundational elements of hip hop, and Harrison released his first solo album, \"The Red and the Black\". Byrne and Eno released \"My Life in the Bush of Ghosts\", which incorporated world music, found sounds and a number of other prominent international and post-punk musicians.\n\"Remain in Light\"'s lead single, \"Once in a Lifetime\", became a Top 20 hit in the UK, but initially failed to make an impression in the US. It grew into a popular standard over the next few years on the strength of its music video, which \"Time\" named one of the greatest of all time.\n1981\u20131991: Commercial peak and breakup.\nAfter releasing four albums in barely four years, the group went on a recording hiatus, and nearly three years passed before their next release, although Frantz and Weymouth continued to record with Tom Tom Club. In the meantime, Talking Heads released the live album \"The Name of This Band Is Talking Heads\", toured the United States and Europe as an eight-piece group, and parted ways with Eno, who went on to produce albums with U2.\n1983 saw the release of \"Speaking in Tongues\", a commercial breakthrough that produced the band's only American Top 10 hit, \"Burning Down the House\". Once again, a striking video was inescapable, owing to it being played so much on MTV. The following tour was documented in Jonathan Demme's \"Stop Making Sense\", which generated another live album of the same name. The tour in support of \"Speaking in Tongues\" was their last.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI try to write about small things. Paper, animals, a house\u2026 love is kind of big. I have written a love song, though. In this film, I sing it to a lamp.\n \u2014David Byrne, interviewing himself in \"Stop Making Sense\"\nThree more albums followed: 1985's \"Little Creatures\" (which featured the hit singles \"And She Was\" and \"Road to Nowhere\"), 1986's \"True Stories\" (Talking Heads covering all the soundtrack songs of Byrne's musical comedy film, in which the band also appeared), and 1988's \"Naked\". \"Little Creatures\" offered a much more American pop-rock sound as opposed to previous efforts. Similar in genre, \"True Stories\" hatched one of the group's most successful hits, \"Wild Wild Life\", and the accordion-driven track \"Radio Head\". \"Naked\" explored politics, sex, and death, with much African influence of polyrhythmic styles like those seen on \"Remain in Light\". During that time, the group was falling increasingly under David Byrne's control, and after \"Naked\", the band went on \"hiatus\". In 1987, Talking Heads released a book by David Byrne, \"What the Songs Look Like: Contemporary Artists Interpret Talking Heads Songs\", with HarperCollins that contained artwork by some of the top New York visual artists of the decade.\nIn December 1991, Talking Heads announced that they had disbanded. Frantz said he learned that Byrne had left from an article in the \"Los Angeles Times\", and said: \"As far as we're concerned, the band never really broke up. David just decided to leave.\" Their final release was \"Sax and Violins\", an original song that had appeared earlier that year on the soundtrack to Wim Wenders' \"Until the end of the World\". Byrne continued his solo career, releasing \"Rei Momo\" in 1989 and \"The Forest\" in 1991. This period also saw a revived flourish from Tom Tom Club (\"Boom Boom Chi Boom Boom\" and \"Dark Sneak Love Action\") and Harrison (\"Casual Gods\" and \"Walk on Water\"), who toured together in 1990.\n1992\u2013present: Post-breakup and reunions.\nHarrison produced records such as the Violent Femmes' \"The Blind Leading the Naked;\" the Fine Young Cannibals' \"The Raw and the Cooked;\" General Public's \"Rub It Better;\" Crash Test Dummies' \"God Shuffled His Feet;\" Live's \"Mental Jewelry\", \"Throwing Copper\", and \"The Distance to Here;\" and No Doubt's song \"New\" from \"Return of Saturn\". Frantz and Weymouth have produced for several artists, including Happy Mondays and Ziggy Marley. Tom Tom Club continues to record and tour intermittently.\nTalking Heads reunited to play \"Life During Wartime\", \"Psycho Killer\", and \"Burning Down the House\" on March 18, 2002, at the ceremony of their induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, joined onstage by former touring members Bernie Worrell and Steve Scales. Byrne said further work together was unlikely, due to \"bad blood\" and being musically \"miles apart\". Weymouth has been critical of Byrne, describing him as \"a man incapable of returning friendship\" and saying that he did not \"love\" her, Frantz, and Harrison. In 2020, Frantz published a memoir about his relationship with Weymouth, \"Remain in Love\", which covered the band's conflicts.\nWeymouth, Frantz, and Harrison toured without Byrne as Shrunken Heads in the early 1990s. In 1996, they released an album, \"No Talking, Just Head\", under the name the Heads. The album featured a number of vocalists, including Gavin Friday of the Virgin Prunes, Debbie Harry of Blondie, Johnette Napolitano of Concrete Blonde, Andy Partridge of XTC, Gordon Gano of Violent Femmes, Michael Hutchence of INXS, Ed Kowalczyk of Live, Shaun Ryder of Happy Mondays, Richard Hell, and Maria McKee. It was accompanied by a tour with Napolitano as the vocalist. Byrne took legal action to prevent the band using the name the Heads, which he saw as \"a pretty obvious attempt to cash in on the Talking Heads name\". The band briefly reunited in 1999 to promote the 15th anniversary re-release of \"Stop Making Sense\", but did not perform together. In 2002, Talking Heads reunited for a one-off performance for their induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. \nIn September 2023, \"Stop Making Sense\" was re-released in IMAX with remastered sound and picture to coincide with the film's 40th anniversary. The band members reunited that month for a Q&amp;A at the Toronto International Film Festival, following limited showings of the film in theaters, and gave subsequent interviews together to promote the re-release. With regard to the possibility of a reunion tour, Harrison told the \"Los Angeles Times\": \"Right now, we're concentrating on \"Stop Making Sense\" and how much fun we're having revisiting the film. We're living in the moment, so that's all we're thinking about.\" In January 2024, \"Billboard\" reported that Talking Heads had turned down an $80\u00a0million offer for a reunion tour, which would have included a performance at Coachella.\nIn 2023 and 2025, Harrison and Belew toured with a band performing \"Remain in Light\" songs. On June 5, 2025, their 50th anniversary, Talking Heads released a music video for \"Psycho Killer\" directed by Mike Mills and starring Saoirse Ronan.\nMusical style.\nAllMusic wrote that Talking Heads started out as \"art-school punks\", but evolved into one of the most celebrated bands of the post-punk era, and \"had recorded everything from art-funk to polyrhythmic worldbeat explorations and simple, melodic guitar pop,\" by the time of their breakup. Andy Cush of \"Pitchfork\" also described the band as \"New York art-punks\" whose \"blend of nervy postmodernism and undeniable groove made them one of the defining rock bands of the late 1970s and \u201980s.\" Media theorist Dick Hebdige said the group \"draw eclectically on a wide range of visual and aural sources to create a distinctive pastiche or hybrid 'house style' which they have used since their formation in the mid-1970s deliberately to stretch received (industrial) definitions of what rock/pop/video/Art/ performance/audience are\", calling them \"a properly postmodernist band.\"\nWhile originating in the New York punk scene, Talking Heads rose to prominence for their art pop innovations, which had a long-lasting impact on music. David Byrne's \"manic yelp\" combined with \"tight R&amp;B grooves\" helped the band define the new wave genre in the United States, alongside Devo, Ramones, and Blondie. \"PopMatters\" labeled the band a \"dance-rock outfit\" who most in the punk subculture will have trouble getting into, due to their \"outward antisocial stance.\" Talking Heads also embraced funk rock and experimental pop as their career progressed, while their more cosmopolitan hits like 1980's \"Remain in Light\" helped bring African rock to the Western world in the form of Afrobeat. \nLegacy and influence.\nTalking Heads have been cited as an influence by many artists, including Nelly Furtado, Eddie Vedder, LCD Soundsystem, Foals, the Weeknd, Primus, Bell X1, the 1975, Kesha, St. Vincent, Danny Brown, Trent Reznor, Franz Ferdinand frontman Alex Kapranos, and Radio 4. Radiohead took their name from the 1986 Talking Heads song \"Radio Head\", and cited \"Remain in Light\" as a critical influence on their 2000 album \"Kid A\". Italian filmmaker and director Paolo Sorrentino, receiving the Oscar for his film \"La Grande Bellezza\" in 2014, thanked Talking Heads, among others, as a source of inspiration.\nAwards and Nominations.\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee(s)\n! scope=\"col\" | Category\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\n! scope=\"col\" class=\"unsortable\"| Ref.\n!scope=\"row\" rowspan=2|UK Music Video Awards\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30457", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30457", "title": "Thomas Alva Edison", "text": ""}
{"id": "30461", "revid": "310173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30461", "title": "Transfinite induction", "text": "Mathematical concept\nTransfinite induction is an extension of mathematical induction to well-ordered sets, for example to sets of ordinal numbers or cardinal numbers. Its correctness is a theorem of ZFC.\nInduction by cases.\nLet formula_1 be a property defined for all ordinals formula_2. Suppose that whenever formula_3 is true for all formula_4, then formula_1 is also true. Then transfinite induction tells us that formula_6 is true for all ordinals.\nUsually the proof is broken down into three cases:\nAll three cases are identical except for the type of ordinal considered. They do not formally need to be considered separately, but in practice the proofs are typically so different as to require separate presentations. Zero is sometimes considered a limit ordinal and then may sometimes be treated in proofs in the same case as limit ordinals.\nTransfinite recursion.\nTransfinite recursion is similar to transfinite induction; however, instead of proving that something holds for all ordinal numbers, we construct a sequence of objects, one for each ordinal.\nAs an example, a basis for a (possibly infinite-dimensional) vector space can be created by starting with the empty set and for each ordinal \"\u03b1 &gt; 0\" choosing a vector that is not in the span of the vectors formula_17. This process stops when no vector can be chosen.\nMore formally, we can state the Transfinite Recursion Theorem as follows:\nTransfinite Recursion Theorem (version 1). Given a class function \"G\": \"V\" \u2192 \"V\" (where \"V\" is the class of all sets), there exists a unique transfinite sequence \"F\": Ord \u2192 \"V\" (where Ord is the class of all ordinals) such that\nformula_18 for all ordinals \"\u03b1\", where formula_19 denotes the restriction of \"F\"'s domain to ordinals &lt;\u200a\"\u03b1\".\nAs in the case of induction, we may treat different types of ordinals separately: another formulation of transfinite recursion is the following:\nTransfinite Recursion Theorem (version 2). Given a set \"g\"1, and class functions \"G\"2, \"G\"3, there exists a unique function \"F\": Ord \u2192 \"V\" such that\nNote that we require the domains of \"G\"2, \"G\"3 to be broad enough to make the above properties meaningful. The uniqueness of the sequence satisfying these properties can be proved using transfinite induction.\nMore generally, one can define objects by transfinite recursion on any well-founded relation \"R\". (\"R\" need not even be a set; it can be a proper class, provided it is a set-like relation; i.e. for any \"x\", the collection of all \"y\" such that \"yRx\" is a set.)\nRelationship to the axiom of choice.\nProofs or constructions using induction and recursion often use the axiom of choice to produce a well-ordered relation that can be treated by transfinite induction. However, if the relation in question is already well-ordered, one can often use transfinite induction without invoking the axiom of choice. For example, many results about Borel sets are proved by transfinite induction on the ordinal rank of the set; these ranks are already well-ordered, so the axiom of choice is not needed to well-order them.\nThe following construction of the Vitali set shows one way that the axiom of choice can be used in a proof by transfinite induction:\n First, well-order the real numbers (this is where the axiom of choice enters via the well-ordering theorem), giving a sequence formula_21, where \u03b2 is an ordinal with the cardinality of the continuum. Let \"v\"0 equal \"r\"0. Then let \"v\"1 equal \"r\"\"\u03b1\"1, where \"\u03b1\"1 is least such that \"r\"\"\u03b1\"1\u00a0\u2212\u00a0\"v\"0 is not a rational number. Continue; at each step use the least real from the \"r\" sequence that does not have a rational difference with any element thus far constructed in the \"v\" sequence. Continue until all the reals in the \"r\" sequence are exhausted. The final \"v\" sequence will enumerate the Vitali set.\nThe above argument uses the axiom of choice in an essential way at the very beginning, in order to well-order the reals. After that step, the axiom of choice is not used again.\nOther uses of the axiom of choice are more subtle. For example, a construction by transfinite recursion frequently will not specify a \"unique\" value for \"A\"\"\u03b1\"+1, given the sequence up to \"\u03b1\", but will specify only a \"condition\" that \"A\"\"\u03b1\"+1 must satisfy, and argue that there is at least one set satisfying this condition. If it is not possible to define a unique example of such a set at each stage, then it may be necessary to invoke (some form of) the axiom of choice to select one such at each step. For inductions and recursions of countable length, the weaker axiom of dependent choice is sufficient. Because there are models of Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory of interest to set theorists that satisfy the axiom of dependent choice but not the full axiom of choice, the knowledge that a particular proof only requires dependent choice can be useful.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30462", "revid": "1318999303", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30462", "title": "Triple point", "text": "Thermodynamic point where three matter phases exist\nIn thermodynamics, the triple point of a substance is the temperature and pressure at which the three phases (gas, liquid, and solid) of that substance coexist in thermodynamic equilibrium. It is that temperature and pressure at which the sublimation, fusion, and vapourisation curves meet. For example, the triple point of mercury occurs at a temperature of and a pressure of 0.165 mPa.\nIn addition to the triple point for solid, liquid, and gas phases, a triple point may involve more than one solid phase, for substances with multiple polymorphs. Helium-4 is unusual in that it has no sublimation/deposition curve and therefore no triple points where its solid phase meets its gas phase. Instead, it has a vapor-liquid-superfluid point, a solid-liquid-superfluid point, a solid-solid-liquid point, and a solid-solid-superfluid point. None of these should be confused with the lambda point, which is not any kind of triple point.\nThe first mention of the term \"triple point\" was on August 3, 1871 by James Thomson, brother of Lord Kelvin. The triple points of several substances are used to define points in the ITS-90 international temperature scale, ranging from the triple point of hydrogen (13.8033\u00a0K) to the triple point of water (273.16\u00a0K, 0.01\u00a0\u00b0C, or 32.018\u00a0\u00b0F).\nBefore 2019, the triple point of water was used to define the kelvin, the base unit of thermodynamic temperature in the International System of Units (SI). The kelvin was defined so that the triple point of water is exactly 273.16\u00a0K, but that changed with the 2019 revision of the SI, where the kelvin was redefined so that the Boltzmann constant is exactly , and the triple point of water became an experimentally measured constant.\nTriple point of water.\nGas\u2013liquid\u2013solid triple point.\nFollowing the 2019 revision of the SI, the value of the triple point of water is no longer used as a defining point. However, its empirical value remains important: the unique combination of pressure and temperature at which liquid water, solid ice, and water vapour coexist in a stable equilibrium is approximately and a vapour pressure of .\nLiquid water can only exist at pressures equal to or greater than the triple point. Below this, in the vacuum of outer space, solid ice sublimates, transitioning directly into water vapor when heated at a constant pressure. Conversely, at pressure above the triple point, solid ice upon heating first melts into liquid water at constant temperature, then evaporates or boils to form vapor at a higher temperature.\nFor most substances, the gas\u2013liquid\u2013solid triple point is the minimum temperature where the liquid can exist. For water, this is not the case. The melting point of ordinary ice decreases with pressure, as shown by the phase diagram's dashed green line. Just below the triple point, compression at a constant temperature transforms water vapor first to solid and then to liquid.\nHistorically, during the Mariner 9 mission to Mars, the triple point pressure of water was used to define \"sea level\". Now, laser altimetry and gravitational measurements are preferred to define Martian elevation.\nHigh-pressure phases.\nAt high pressures, water has a complex phase diagram with 15 known phases of ice and several triple points, including 10 whose coordinates are shown in the diagram. For example, the triple point at 251\u00a0K (\u221222\u00a0\u00b0C) and 210\u00a0MPa (2070\u00a0atm) corresponds to the conditions for the coexistence of ice Ih (ordinary ice), ice III and liquid water, all at equilibrium. There are also triple points for the coexistence of three solid phases, for example ice II, ice V and ice VI at 218\u00a0K (\u221255\u00a0\u00b0C) and 620\u00a0MPa (6120\u00a0atm).\nFor those high-pressure forms of ice which can exist in equilibrium with liquid, the diagram shows that melting points increase with pressure. At temperatures above 273\u00a0K (0\u00a0\u00b0C), increasing the pressure on water vapor results first in liquid water and then a high-pressure form of ice. In the range , ice\u00a0I is formed first, followed by liquid water and then ice\u00a0III or ice\u00a0V, followed by other still denser high-pressure forms.\nTriple-point cells.\nTriple-point cells are used in the calibration of thermometers. For exacting work, triple-point cells are typically filled with a highly pure chemical substance such as hydrogen, argon, mercury, or water (depending on the desired temperature). The purity of these substances can be such that only one part in a million is a contaminant, called \"six nines\" because it is 99.9999% pure. A specific isotopic composition (for water, VSMOW) is used because variations in isotopic composition cause small changes in the triple point. Triple-point cells are so effective at achieving highly precise, reproducible temperatures, that an international calibration standard for thermometers called ITS\u201390 relies upon triple-point cells of hydrogen, neon, oxygen, argon, mercury, and water for delineating six of its defined temperature points.\nTable of triple points.\nThis table lists the gas\u2013liquid\u2013solid triple points of several substances. Unless otherwise noted, the data come from the U.S. National Bureau of Standards (now NIST, National Institute of Standards and Technology).\nNotes:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30463", "revid": "42117739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30463", "title": "Taxonomy (biology)", "text": "Science of classifying organisms\nIn biology, taxonomy (from grc \" \"\u03c4\u03ac\u03be\u03b9\u03c2\" (taxis)\"\u00a0'arrangement' and \" \"-\u03bd\u03bf\u03bc\u03af\u03b1\" (-nomia)\"\u00a0'method') is the scientific study of naming, defining (circumscribing) and classifying groups of biological organisms based on shared characteristics. Organisms are grouped into taxa (singular: taxon), and these groups are given a taxonomic rank; groups of a given rank can be aggregated to form a more inclusive group of higher rank, thus creating a taxonomic hierarchy. The principal ranks in modern use are domain, kingdom, phylum (\"division\" is sometimes used in botany in place of \"phylum\"), class, order, family, genus, and species. The Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus is regarded as the founder of the current system of taxonomy, having developed a ranked system known as Linnaean taxonomy for categorizing organisms.\nWith advances in the theory, data and analytical technology of biological systematics, the Linnaean system has transformed into a system of modern biological classification intended to reflect the evolutionary relationships among organisms, both living and extinct.\nDefinition.\nThe exact definition of taxonomy varies from source to source, but the core of the discipline remains: the conception, naming, and classification of groups of organisms. As points of reference, recent definitions of taxonomy are presented below:\nThe varied definitions either place taxonomy as a sub-area of systematics (definition 2), invert that relationship (definition 6), or appear to consider the two terms synonymous. There is some disagreement as to whether biological nomenclature is considered a part of taxonomy (definitions 1 and 2), or a part of systematics outside taxonomy. For example, definition 6 is paired with the following definition of systematics that places nomenclature outside taxonomy:\nIn 1970, Michener \"et al.\" defined \"systematic biology\" and \"taxonomy\" in relation to one another as follows:\nSystematic biology (hereafter called simply systematics) is the field that\nThis is a field with a long history that in recent years has experienced a notable renaissance, principally with respect to theoretical content. Part of the theoretical material has to do with evolutionary areas (topics e and f above), the rest relates especially to the problem of classification. Taxonomy is that part of Systematics concerned with topics (a) to (d) above.\nA whole set of terms including taxonomy, systematic biology, systematics, scientific classification, biological classification, and phylogenetics have at times had overlapping meanings \u2013 sometimes the same, sometimes slightly different, but always related and intersecting. The broadest meaning of \"taxonomy\" is used here. The term itself was introduced in 1813 by de Candolle, in his \"Th\u00e9orie \u00e9l\u00e9mentaire de la botanique\". John Lindley provided an early definition of systematics in 1830, although he wrote of \"systematic botany\" rather than using the term \"systematics\". Europeans tend to use the terms \"systematics\" and \"biosystematics\" for the study of biodiversity as a whole, whereas North Americans tend to use \"taxonomy\" more frequently. However, taxonomy, and in particular alpha taxonomy, is more specifically the identification, description, and naming (i.e., nomenclature) of organisms, while \"classification\" focuses on placing organisms within hierarchical groups that show their relationships to other organisms.\nMonograph and taxonomic revision.\nA taxonomic revision or taxonomic review is a novel analysis of the variation patterns in a particular taxon. This analysis may be executed on the basis of any combination of the various available kinds of characters, such as morphological, anatomical, palynological, biochemical and genetic. A monograph or complete revision is a revision that is comprehensive for a taxon for the information given at a particular time, and for the entire world. Other (partial) revisions may be restricted in the sense that they may only use some of the available character sets or have a limited spatial scope. A revision results in a conformation of or new insights in the relationships between the subtaxa within the taxon under study, which may lead to a change in the classification of these subtaxa, the identification of new subtaxa, or the merger of previous subtaxa.\nTaxonomic characters.\nTaxonomic characters are the taxonomic attributes that can be used to provide the evidence from which relationships (the phylogeny) between taxa are inferred. Kinds of taxonomic characters include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAlpha and beta taxonomy.\nThe term \"alpha taxonomy\" is primarily used to refer to the discipline of finding, describing, and naming taxa, particularly species. In earlier literature, the term had a different meaning, referring to morphological taxonomy, and the products of research through the end of the 19th century.\nWilliam Bertram Turrill introduced the term \"alpha taxonomy\" in a series of papers published in 1935 and 1937 in which he discussed the philosophy and possible future directions of the discipline of taxonomy. ... there is an increasing desire amongst taxonomists to consider their problems from wider viewpoints, to investigate the possibilities of closer co-operation with their cytological, ecological and genetics colleagues and to acknowledge that some revision or expansion, perhaps of a drastic nature, of their aims and methods, may be desirable ... Turrill (1935) has suggested that while accepting the older invaluable taxonomy, based on structure, and conveniently designated \"alpha\", it is possible to glimpse a far-distant taxonomy built upon as wide a basis of morphological and physiological facts as possible, and one in which \"place is found for all observational and experimental data relating, even if indirectly, to the constitution, subdivision, origin, and behaviour of species and other taxonomic groups\". Ideals can, it may be said, never be completely realized. They have, however, a great value of acting as permanent stimulants, and if we have some, even vague, ideal of an \"omega\" taxonomy we may progress a little way down the Greek alphabet. Some of us please ourselves by thinking we are now groping in a \"beta\" taxonomy.\nTurrill thus explicitly excludes from alpha taxonomy various areas of study that he includes within taxonomy as a whole, such as ecology, physiology, genetics, and cytology. He further excludes phylogenetic reconstruction from alpha taxonomy.\nLater authors have used the term in a different sense, to mean the delimitation of species (not subspecies or taxa of other ranks), using whatever investigative techniques are available, and including sophisticated computational or laboratory techniques. Thus, Ernst Mayr in 1968 defined \"beta taxonomy\" as the classification of ranks higher than species.An understanding of the biological meaning of variation and of the evolutionary origin of groups of related species is even more important for the second stage of taxonomic activity, the sorting of species into groups of relatives (\"taxa\") and their arrangement in a hierarchy of higher categories. This activity is what the term classification denotes; it is also referred to as \"beta taxonomy\".\nMicrotaxonomy and macrotaxonomy.\nHow species should be defined in a particular group of organisms gives rise to practical and theoretical problems that are referred to as the species problem. The scientific work of deciding how to define species has been called microtaxonomy. By extension, macrotaxonomy is the study of groups at the higher taxonomic ranks subgenus and above, or simply in clades that include more than one taxon considered a species, expressed in terms of phylogenetic nomenclature.\nHistory.\nWhile some descriptions of taxonomic history attempt to date taxonomy to ancient civilizations, a truly scientific attempt to classify organisms did not occur until the 18th century, with the possible exception of Aristotle, whose works hint at a taxonomy. Earlier works were primarily descriptive and focused on plants that were useful in agriculture or medicine. \nThere are a number of stages in this scientific thinking. Early taxonomy was based on arbitrary criteria, the so-called \"artificial systems\", including Linnaeus's system of sexual classification for plants (Linnaeus's 1735 classification of animals was entitled \"Systema Naturae\" (\"the System of Nature\"), implying that he, at least, believed that it was more than an \"artificial system\"). \nLater came systems based on a more complete consideration of the characteristics of taxa, referred to as \"natural systems\", such as those of de Jussieu (1789), de Candolle (1813) and Bentham and Hooker (1862\u20131863). These classifications described empirical patterns and were pre-evolutionary in thinking. \nThe publication of Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\" (1859) led to a new explanation for classifications, based on evolutionary relationships. This was the concept of phyletic systems, from 1883 onwards. This approach was typified by those of Eichler (1883) and Engler (1886\u20131892). \nThe advent of cladistic methodology in the 1970s led to classifications based on the sole criterion of monophyly, supported by the presence of synapomorphies. Since then, the evidentiary basis has been expanded with data from molecular genetics that for the most part complements traditional morphology.\nPre-Linnaean.\nEarly taxonomists.\nNaming and classifying human surroundings likely began with the onset of language. Distinguishing poisonous plants from edible plants is integral to the survival of human communities. Medicinal plant illustrations show up in Egyptian wall paintings from c.\u20091500 BC, indicating that the uses of different species were understood and that a basic taxonomy was in place.\nAncient times.\nOrganisms were first classified by Aristotle (Greece, 384\u2013322 BC) during his stay on the island of Lesbos. He classified beings by their parts, or in modern terms \"attributes\", such as having live birth, having four legs, laying eggs, having blood, or being warm-bodied. He divided all living things into two groups: plants and animals. \nSome of his groups of animals, such as \"Anhaima\" (animals without blood, translated as invertebrates) and \"Enhaima\" (animals with blood, roughly the vertebrates), as well as groups like the sharks and cetaceans, are commonly used.\nHis student Theophrastus (Greece, 370\u2013285 BC) carried on this tradition, mentioning some 500 plants and their uses in his \"Historia Plantarum\". Several plant genera can be traced back to Theophrastus, such as \"Cornus\", \"Crocus\", and \"Narcissus\".\nMedieval.\nTaxonomy in the Middle Ages was largely based on the Aristotelian system, with additions concerning the philosophical and existential order of creatures. This included concepts such as the great chain of being in the Western scholastic tradition, again deriving ultimately from Aristotle. \nThe Aristotelian system did not classify plants or fungi, due to the lack of microscopes at the time, as his ideas were based on arranging the complete world in a single continuum, as per the \"scala naturae\" (the Natural Ladder). This, as well, was taken into consideration in the great chain of being. \nAdvances were made by scholars such as Procopius, Timotheus of Gaza, Demetrios Pepagomenos, and Thomas Aquinas. Medieval thinkers used abstract philosophical and logical categorizations more suited to abstract philosophy than to pragmatic taxonomy. In the Muslim world, Al-Damiri (d. 1405) wrote an influential work called Life of Animals (\"\u1e24ay\u0101t al-\u1e25ayaw\u0101n al-kubr\u0101\", c.1371) which treats in alphabetic order of 931 animals mentioned in the Quran, the traditions and the poetic and proverbial literature of the Arabs.\nRenaissance and early modern.\nDuring the Renaissance and the Age of Enlightenment, categorizing organisms became more prevalent, and taxonomic works became ambitious enough to replace the ancient texts. This is sometimes credited to the development of sophisticated optical lenses, which allowed the morphology of organisms to be studied in much greater detail. \nOne of the earliest authors to take advantage of this leap in technology was the Italian physician Andrea Cesalpino (1519\u20131603), who has been called \"the first taxonomist\". His magnum opus \"De Plantis\" came out in 1583, and described more than 1,500 plant species. Two large plant families that he first recognized are in use: the Asteraceae and Brassicaceae. \nIn the 17th century, John Ray (England, 1627\u20131705) wrote many important taxonomic works. Arguably his greatest accomplishment was \"Methodus Plantarum Nova\" (1682), in which he published details of over 18,000 plant species. At the time, his classifications were perhaps the most complex yet produced by any taxonomist, as he based his taxa on many combined characters. \nThe next major taxonomic works were produced by Joseph Pitton de Tournefort (France, 1656\u20131708). His work from 1700, \"Institutiones Rei Herbariae\", included more than 9,000 species in 698 genera, which directly influenced Linnaeus, as it was the text he used as a young student.\nLinnaean era.\nThe Swedish botanist Carl Linnaeus (1707\u20131778) ushered in a new era of taxonomy. With his major works \"Systema Naturae\" 1st Edition in 1735, \"Species Plantarum\" in 1753, and \"Systema Naturae\" 10th Edition, he revolutionized modern taxonomy. His works implemented a standardized binomial naming system for animal and plant species, which proved to be an elegant solution to a chaotic and disorganized taxonomic literature. He not only introduced the standard of class, order, genus, and\u00a0species, but also made it possible to identify plants and animals from his book, by using the smaller parts of the flower (known as the Linnaean system).\nPlant and animal taxonomists regard Linnaeus' work as the \"starting point\" for valid names (at 1753 and 1758 respectively). Names published before these dates are referred to as \"pre-Linnaean\", and not considered valid (with the exception of spiders published in \"Svenska Spindlar\"). Even taxonomic names published by Linnaeus himself before these dates are considered pre-Linnaean.\nModern system of classification.\nA pattern of groups nested within groups was specified by Linnaeus' classifications of plants and animals, and these patterns began to be represented as dendrograms of the animal and plant kingdoms toward the end of the 18th century, well before Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\" was published. The pattern of the \"Natural System\" did not entail a generating process, such as evolution, but may have implied it, inspiring early transmutationist thinkers. Among early works exploring the idea of a transmutation of species were \"Zoonomia\" in 1796 by Erasmus Darwin (Charles Darwin's grandfather), and Jean-Baptiste Lamarck's \"Philosophie zoologique\" of 1809. The idea was popularized in the Anglophone world by the speculative but widely read \"Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation\", published anonymously by Robert Chambers in 1844.\nWith Darwin's theory, a general acceptance quickly appeared that a classification should reflect the Darwinian principle of common descent. Tree of life representations became popular in scientific works, with known fossil groups incorporated. One of the first modern groups tied to fossil ancestors was birds. Using the then newly discovered fossils of \"Archaeopteryx\" and \"Hesperornis\", Thomas Henry Huxley pronounced that they had evolved from dinosaurs, a group formally named by Richard Owen in 1842. The resulting description, that of dinosaurs \"giving rise to\" or being \"the ancestors of\" birds, is the essential hallmark of evolutionary taxonomic thinking. As more and more fossil groups were found and recognized in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, palaeontologists worked to understand the history of animals through the ages by linking together known groups. With the modern evolutionary synthesis of the early 1940s, an essentially modern understanding of the evolution of the major groups was in place. As evolutionary taxonomy is based on Linnaean taxonomic ranks, the two terms are largely interchangeable in modern use.\nThe cladistic method has emerged since the 1960s. In 1958, Julian Huxley used the term \"clade\". Later, in 1960, Cain and Harrison introduced the term \"cladistic\". The salient feature is arranging taxa in a hierarchical evolutionary tree, with the desired objective of all named taxa being monophyletic. A taxon is called monophyletic if it includes all the descendants of an ancestral form. Groups that have descendant groups removed from them are termed paraphyletic, while groups representing more than one branch from the tree of life are called polyphyletic. Monophyletic groups are recognized and diagnosed on the basis of synapomorphies, shared derived character states.\nCladistic classifications are compatible with traditional Linnean taxonomy and the Codes of Zoological and Botanical nomenclature, to a certain extent. An alternative system of nomenclature, the \"International Code of Phylogenetic Nomenclature\" or \"PhyloCode\" has been proposed, which regulates the formal naming of clades. Linnaean ranks are optional and have no formal standing under the \"PhyloCode\", which is intended to coexist with the current, rank-based codes. While popularity of phylogenetic nomenclature has grown steadily in the last few decades, it remains to be seen whether a majority of systematists will eventually adopt the \"PhyloCode\" or continue using the current systems of nomenclature that have been employed (and modified, but arguably not as much as some systematists wish) for over 250 years.\nKingdoms and domains.\nDomains are a relatively new grouping. First proposed in 1977, Carl Woese's three-domain system was not generally accepted until later. One main characteristic of the three-domain method is the separation of Archaea and Bacteria, previously grouped into the single kingdom Bacteria (a kingdom also sometimes called Monera), with the Eukaryota for all organisms whose cells contain a nucleus. A small number of scientists include a sixth kingdom, Archaea, but do not accept the domain method.\nThomas Cavalier-Smith, who published extensively on the classification of protists, in 2002 proposed that the Neomura, the clade that groups together the Archaea and Eucarya, would have evolved from Bacteria, more precisely from Actinomycetota. His 2004 classification treated the archaeobacteria as part of a subkingdom of the kingdom Bacteria, i.e., he rejected the three-domain system entirely. Stefan Luketa in 2012 proposed a five \"dominion\" system, adding Prionobiota (acellular and without nucleic acid) and Virusobiota (acellular but \"with\" nucleic acid) to the traditional three domains.\nRecent comprehensive classifications.\nPartial classifications exist for many individual groups of organisms and are revised and replaced as new information becomes available; however, comprehensive, published treatments of most or all life are rarer; recent examples are that of Adl et al., 2012 and 2019, which covers eukaryotes only with an emphasis on protists, and Ruggiero et al., 2015, covering both eukaryotes and prokaryotes to the rank of Order, although both exclude fossil representatives. A separate compilation (Ruggiero, 2014) covers extant taxa to the rank of Family. Other, database-driven treatments include the Encyclopedia of Life, the Global Biodiversity Information Facility, the NCBI taxonomy database, the Interim Register of Marine and Nonmarine Genera, the Open Tree of Life, and the Catalogue of Life. The Paleobiology Database is a resource for fossils.\nApplication.\nBiological taxonomy is a sub-discipline of biology, and is generally practiced by biologists known as \"taxonomists\", although enthusiastic naturalists are also frequently involved in the publication of new taxa. Because taxonomy aims to describe and organize life, the work conducted by taxonomists is essential for the study of biodiversity and the resulting field of conservation biology.\nClassifying organisms.\nBiological classification is a critical component of the taxonomic process. As a result, it informs the user as to what the relatives of the taxon are hypothesized to be. Biological classification uses taxonomic ranks, including among others (in order from most inclusive to least inclusive): domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species, and strain.\nTaxonomic descriptions.\nThe \"definition\" of a taxon is encapsulated by its description or its diagnosis or by both combined. There are no set rules governing the definition of taxa, but the naming and publication of new taxa is governed by sets of rules. In zoology, the nomenclature for the more commonly used ranks (superfamily to subspecies), is regulated by the \"International Code of Zoological Nomenclature\" (\"ICZN Code\"). In the fields of phycology, mycology, and botany, the naming of taxa is governed by the \"International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants\" (\"ICN\").\nThe initial description of a taxon involves five main requirements:\nHowever, often much more information is included, like the geographic range of the taxon, ecological notes, chemistry, behavior, etc. How researchers arrive at their taxa varies: depending on the available data, and resources, methods vary from simple quantitative or qualitative comparisons of striking features, to elaborate computer analyses of large amounts of DNA sequence data.\nAuthor citation.\nAn \"authority\" may be placed after a scientific name. The authority is the name of the scientist or scientists who first validly published the name. For example, in 1758, Linnaeus gave the Asian elephant the scientific name \"Elephas maximus\", so the name is sometimes written as \"\"Elephas maximus\" Linnaeus, 1758\". The names of authors are often abbreviated: the abbreviation \"L.\", for \"Linnaeus,\" is commonly used. In botany, there is, in fact, a regulated list of standard abbreviations (see list of botanists by author abbreviation). The system for assigning authorities differs slightly between botany and zoology. However, it is standard that if the genus of a species has been changed since the original description, the original authority's name is placed in parentheses.\nPhenetics.\nIn phenetics, also known as taximetrics, or numerical taxonomy, organisms are classified based on overall similarity, regardless of their phylogeny or evolutionary relationships. It results in a measure of hypergeometric \"distance\" between taxa. Phenetic methods have become relatively rare in modern times, largely superseded by cladistic analyses, as phenetic methods do not distinguish shared ancestral (or plesiomorphic) traits from shared derived (or apomorphic) traits. However, certain phenetic methods, such as neighbor joining, have persisted, as rapid estimators of relationships when more advanced methods (such as Bayesian inference) are too computationally expensive.\nDatabases.\nModern taxonomy uses database technologies to search and catalogue classifications and their documentation. While there is no commonly used database, there are comprehensive databases such as the \"Catalogue of Life\", which attempts to list every documented species. The catalogue listed 1.64\u00a0million species for all kingdoms as of \u00a02016[ [update]], claiming coverage of more than three-quarters of the estimated species known to modern science.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30467", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30467", "title": "Tyrannosaurus", "text": "Genus of Late Cretaceous theropod\nTyrannosaurus () is a genus of large theropod dinosaur. The type species Tyrannosaurus rex ( meaning 'king' in Latin), often shortened to T. rex or colloquially t-rex, is one of the best represented theropods. It lived throughout what is now western North America, on what was then an island continent known as Laramidia. \"Tyrannosaurus\" had a much wider range than other tyrannosaurids. Fossils are found in a variety of geological formations dating to the late Maastrichtian age of the late Cretaceous period, 69 to 66\u00a0million years ago, with isolated specimens possibly indicating an earlier origin in the middle Campanian age. It was one of the last known members of the tyrannosaurids and among the last non-avian dinosaurs to exist before the Cretaceous\u2013Paleogene extinction event.\nLike other tyrannosaurids, \"Tyrannosaurus\" was a bipedal carnivore with a massive skull balanced by a long, heavy tail. Relative to its large and powerful hind limbs, the forelimbs of \"Tyrannosaurus\" were short but unusually powerful for their size, and they had two clawed digits. The most complete specimen measures in length, but according to most modern estimates, \"Tyrannosaurus\" could have exceeded sizes of in length, in hip height, and in mass. Although some other theropods might have rivaled or exceeded \"Tyrannosaurus\" in size, it is still among the largest known land predators, with its estimated bite force being the largest among all terrestrial animals. By far the largest carnivore in its environment, \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" was most likely an apex predator, preying upon hadrosaurs, juvenile armored herbivores like ceratopsians and ankylosaurs, and possibly sauropods. Some experts have suggested the dinosaur was primarily a scavenger. The question of whether \"Tyrannosaurus\" was an apex predator or a pure scavenger was among the longest debates in paleontology. Most paleontologists today accept that \"Tyrannosaurus\" was both a predator and a scavenger.\nSome specimens of \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" are nearly complete skeletons. Soft tissue and proteins have been reported in at least one of these specimens. The abundance of fossil material has allowed significant research into many aspects of the animal's biology, including its life history and biomechanics. The feeding habits, physiology, and potential speed of \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" are a few subjects of debate. Its taxonomy is also controversial. The Asian \"Tarbosaurus bataar\" is very closely related to \"Tyrannosaurus\" and has sometimes been seen as a species of this genus. Several North American tyrannosaurids have been synonymized with \"Tyrannosaurus\", while some \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimens have been proposed as distinct species. The validity of these species, such as the more recently discovered T. mcraeensis, is contentious.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\" has been one of the best-known dinosaurs since the early 20th century. Science writer Riley Black has called it the \"ultimate dinosaur\". Its fossils have been a popular attraction in museums and has appeared in media like \"Jurassic Park\".\nHistory of research.\nEarliest finds.\nA tooth from what is now documented as a \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" was found in July 1874 upon South Table Mountain (Colorado) by Jarvis Hall (Colorado) student Peter T. Dotson under the auspices of Arthur Lakes near Golden, Colorado. In the early 1890s, John Bell Hatcher collected postcranial elements in eastern Wyoming. The fossils were believed to be from the large species \"Ornithomimus grandis\" (now \"Deinodon\") but are now considered \"T. rex\" remains.\nIn 1892, Edward Drinker Cope found two vertebral fragments of a large dinosaur. Cope believed the fragments belonged to an \"agathaumid\" (ceratopsid) dinosaur, and named them \"Manospondylus gigas\", meaning \"giant porous vertebra\", in reference to the numerous openings for blood vessels he found in the bone. The \"M. gigas\" remains were, in 1907, identified by Hatcher as those of a theropod rather than a ceratopsid.\nHenry Fairfield Osborn recognized the similarity between \"Manospondylus gigas\" and \"T. rex\" as early as 1917, by which time the second vertebra had been lost. Owing to the fragmentary nature of the \"Manospondylus\" vertebrae, Osborn did not synonymize the two genera, instead considering the older genus indeterminate. In June 2000, the Black Hills Institute found around 10% of a \"Tyrannosaurus\" skeleton (BHI 6248) at a site that might have been the original \"M. gigas\" locality. While Larson initially considered this specimen as the same animal as the \"M. gigas\" holotype and suggested that it would take priority over \"T. rex\", other researchers including Christopher Brochu remained skeptical that the name \"T. rex\" would be abandoned. In 2003, Brochu further argued that although both taxa probably represent the same species, it is impossible to demonstrate that the specimen discovered by the Black Hills Institute represents the same animal as \"M. gigas\" due to the poor preservation of the \"M. gigas\" holotype; additionally, following the 2000 International Code of Zoological Nomenclature amendment, a name in popular usage like \"T. rex\" has priority over a name with technical priority but not used as a valid name in formal literature after the year 1899 for over fifty years like \"M. gigas\".\nSkeleton discovery and naming.\nBarnum Brown, assistant curator of the American Museum of Natural History, found the first partial skeleton of \"T. rex\" in eastern Wyoming in 1900. Brown found another partial skeleton in the Hell Creek Formation in Montana in 1902, comprising approximately 34 fossilized bones. Writing at the time Brown said \"Quarry No. 1 contains the femur, pubes, humerus, three vertebrae and two undetermined bones of a large Carnivorous Dinosaur not described by Marsh.\u00a0... I have never seen anything like it from the Cretaceous.\" Henry Fairfield Osborn, president of the American Museum of Natural History, named the second skeleton \"T. rex\" in 1905. The generic name is derived from the Greek words (, meaning \"tyrant\") and (, meaning \"lizard\"). Osborn used the Latin word , meaning \"king\", for the specific name. The full binomial therefore translates to \"tyrant lizard the king\" or \"King Tyrant Lizard\", emphasizing the animal's size and presumed dominance over other species of the time.\nOsborn named the other specimen \"Dynamosaurus imperiosus\" in a paper in 1905. In 1906, Osborn recognized that the two skeletons were from the same species and selected \"Tyrannosaurus\" as the preferred name. In 1941, the \"T. rex\" type specimen was sold to the Carnegie Museum of Natural History in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, for $7,000. The original \"Dynamosaurus\" material now resides in the collections of the Natural History Museum, London. \"Dynamosaurus\" would later be honored by the 2018 description of another species of tyrannosaurid by Andrew McDonald and colleagues, \"Dynamoterror dynastes\", whose name was chosen in reference to the 1905 name, as it had been a \"childhood favorite\" of McDonald's.\nFrom the 1910s through the end of the 1950s, Barnum's discoveries remained the only specimens of \"Tyrannosaurus\", as the Great Depression and wars kept many paleontologists out of the field.\nContinued study.\nBeginning in the 1960s, there was renewed interest in \"Tyrannosaurus\", resulting in the recovery of 42 skeletons (5\u201380% complete by bone count) from Western North America. In 1967, Dr. William MacMannis located and recovered the skeleton named \"MOR 008\", which is 15% complete by bone count and has a reconstructed skull displayed at the Museum of the Rockies. The 1990s saw numerous discoveries, with nearly twice as many finds as in all previous years, including two of the most complete skeletons found to date: Sue and Stan.\nSue Hendrickson, an amateur paleontologist, discovered the most complete (approximately 85%) and largest \"Tyrannosaurus\" skeleton in the Hell Creek Formation on August 12, 1990. The specimen Sue, named after the discoverer, was the object of a legal battle over its ownership. In 1997, the litigation was settled in favor of Maurice Williams, the original land owner. The fossil collection was purchased by the Field Museum of Natural History at auction for $7.6\u00a0million, making it the most expensive dinosaur skeleton until the sale of Stan for $31.8 million in 2020. From 1998 to 1999, Field Museum of Natural History staff spent over 25,000 hours taking the rock off the bones. The bones were then shipped to New Jersey where the mount was constructed, then shipped back to Chicago for the final assembly. The mounted skeleton opened to the public on May 17, 2000, in the Field Museum of Natural History. A study of this specimen's fossilized bones showed that Sue reached full size at age 19 and died at the age of 28, the longest estimated life of any tyrannosaur known. \nAnother \"Tyrannosaurus\", nicknamed Stan (BHI 3033), in honor of amateur paleontologist Stan Sacrison, was recovered from the Hell Creek Formation in 1992. Stan is the second most complete skeleton found, with 199 bones recovered representing 70% of the total. This tyrannosaur also had many bone pathologies, including broken and healed ribs, a broken (and healed) neck, and a substantial hole in the back of its head, about the size of a \"Tyrannosaurus\" tooth.\nIn 1998, 20-year-old Bucky Derflinger noticed a \"T. rex\" toe exposed above ground, making him the youngest person to discover a \"Tyrannosaurus\". The specimen, dubbed in honor of its discoverer, was a young adult, tall and long. Bucky is the first \"Tyrannosaurus\" to be found that preserved a furcula (wishbone). Bucky is permanently displayed at The Children's Museum of Indianapolis.\nIn the summer of 2000, crews organized by Jack Horner discovered five \"Tyrannosaurus\" skeletons near the Fort Peck Reservoir. In 2001, a 50% complete skeleton of a juvenile \"Tyrannosaurus\" was discovered in the Hell Creek Formation by a crew from the Burpee Museum of Natural History. Dubbed Jane (BMRP 2002.4.1), the find was thought to be the first known skeleton of a pygmy tyrannosaurid, \"Nanotyrannus\", but other researchers considered it as the most complete juvenile \"T. rex\"; currently exhibited at the Burpee Museum of Natural History, Jane is now re-described as the holotype of \"N. lethaeus\". In 2002, a skeleton nicknamed \"Wyrex\", discovered by amateur collectors Dan Wells and Don Wyrick, had 114 bones and was 38% complete. The dig was concluded over 3 weeks in 2004 by the Black Hills Institute with the first live online \"Tyrannosaurus\" excavation providing daily reports, photos, and video.\nIn 2006, Montana State University revealed that it possessed the largest \"Tyrannosaurus\" skull yet discovered (from a specimen named MOR 008), measuring long. Subsequent comparisons indicated that the longest head was (from specimen LACM 23844) and the widest head was (from Sue).\nDescription.\nSize.\n\"T. rex\" was one of the largest land carnivores of all time. One of its largest and the most complete specimens, nicknamed Sue (FMNH PR2081), is located at the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago. Sue measured long, was tall at the hips, and according to the most recent studies, using a variety of techniques, maximum body masses have been estimated approximately . A specimen nicknamed Scotty (RSM P2523.8), located at the Royal Saskatchewan Museum, is reported to measure in length. Using a mass estimation technique that extrapolates from the circumference of the femur, Scotty was estimated as the largest known specimen at in body mass.\nNot every adult \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimen recovered is as big. Historically average adult mass estimates have varied widely over the years, from as low as , to more than , with most modern estimates ranging between .\nA 2024 study found that there was little evidence of size-based sexual dimorphism in \"T. rex\".\nSkull.\nThe largest known \"T. rex\" skulls measure up to in length. Large fenestrae (openings) in the skull reduced weight, as in all carnivorous theropods. In other respects \"Tyrannosaurus\"'s skull was significantly different from those of large non-tyrannosaurid theropods. It was extremely wide at the rear but had a narrow snout, allowing unusually good binocular vision. The skull bones were massive and the nasals and some other bones were fused, preventing movement between them; but many were pneumatized (contained a \"honeycomb\" of tiny air spaces) and thus lighter. These and other skull-strengthening features are part of the tyrannosaurid trend towards an increasingly powerful bite, which easily surpassed that of all non-tyrannosaurids. The tip of the upper jaw was U-shaped (most non-tyrannosauroid carnivores had V-shaped upper jaws), which increased the amount of tissue and bone a tyrannosaur could rip out with one bite, although it also increased the stresses on the front teeth.\nThe teeth of \"T. rex\" displayed marked heterodonty (differences in shape). The premaxillary teeth, four per side at the front of the upper jaw, were closely packed, \"D\"-shaped in cross-section, had reinforcing ridges on the rear surface, were incisiform (their tips were chisel-like blades) and curved backwards. The \"D\"-shaped cross-section, reinforcing ridges and backwards curve reduced the risk that the teeth would snap when \"Tyrannosaurus\" bit and pulled. The remaining teeth were robust, like \"lethal bananas\" rather than daggers, more widely spaced and also had reinforcing ridges. Those in the upper jaw, twelve per side in mature individuals, were larger than their counterparts of the lower jaw, except at the rear. The largest found so far is estimated to have been long including the root when the animal was alive, making it the largest tooth of any carnivorous dinosaur yet found. The lower jaw was robust. Its front dentary bone bore thirteen teeth. Behind the tooth row, the lower jaw became notably taller. The upper and lower jaws of \"Tyrannosaurus\", like those of many dinosaurs, possessed numerous foramina, or small holes in the bone. Various functions have been proposed for these foramina, such as a crocodile-like sensory system or evidence of extra-oral structures such as scales or potentially lips, with subsequent research on theropod tooth wear patterns supporting such a proposition.\nSkeleton.\nThe vertebral column of \"Tyrannosaurus\" consisted of ten neck vertebrae, thirteen back vertebrae and five sacral vertebrae. The number of tail vertebrae is unknown and could well have varied between individuals but probably numbered at least forty. Sue was mounted with forty-seven of such caudal vertebrae. The neck of \"T. rex\" formed a natural S-shaped curve like that of other theropods. Compared to these, it was exceptionally short, deep and muscular to support the massive head. The second vertebra, the axis, was especially short. The remaining neck vertebrae were weakly opisthocoelous, i.e. with a convex front of the vertebral body and a concave rear. The vertebral bodies had single pleurocoels, pneumatic depressions created by air sacs, on their sides. The vertebral bodies of the torso were robust but with a narrow waist. Their undersides were keeled. The front sides were concave with a deep vertical trough. They had large pleurocoels. Their neural spines had very rough front and rear sides for the attachment of strong tendons. The sacral vertebrae were fused to each other, both in their vertebral bodies and neural spines. They were pneumatized. They were connected to the pelvis by transverse processes and sacral ribs. The tail was heavy and moderately long, in order to balance the massive head and torso and to provide space for massive locomotor muscles that attached to the thighbones. The thirteenth tail vertebra formed the transition point between the deep tail base and the middle tail that was stiffened by a rather long front articulation processes. The underside of the trunk was covered by eighteen or nineteen pairs of segmented belly ribs.\nThe shoulder girdle was longer than the entire forelimb. The shoulder blade had a narrow shaft but was exceptionally expanded at its upper end. It connected via a long forward protrusion to the coracoid, which was rounded. Both shoulder blades were connected by a small furcula. The paired breast bones possibly were made of cartilage only.\nThe forelimb or arm was very short. The upper arm bone, the humerus, was short but robust. It had a narrow upper end with an exceptionally rounded head. The lower arm bones, the ulna and radius, were straight elements, much shorter than the humerus. The second metacarpal was longer and wider than the first, whereas normally in theropods the opposite is true. The forelimbs had only two clawed fingers, along with an additional splint-like small third metacarpal representing the remnant of a third digit.\nThe pelvis was a large structure. Its upper bone, the ilium, was both very long and high, providing an extensive attachment area for hindlimb muscles. The front pubic bone ended in an enormous pubic boot, longer than the entire shaft of the element. The rear ischium was slender and straight, pointing obliquely to behind and below.\nIn contrast to the arms, the hindlimbs were among the longest in proportion to body size of any theropod. In the foot, the metatarsus was \"arctometatarsalian\", meaning that the part of the third metatarsal near the ankle was pinched. The third metatarsal was also exceptionally sinuous. Compensating for the immense bulk of the animal, many bones throughout the skeleton were hollowed, reducing its weight without significant loss of strength.\nClassification.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\" is the type genus of the superfamily Tyrannosauroidea, the family Tyrannosauridae, and the subfamily Tyrannosaurinae; in other words it is the standard by which paleontologists decide whether to include other species in the same group. Other members of the tyrannosaurine subfamily include the North American \"Daspletosaurus\" and the Asian \"Tarbosaurus\", both of which have occasionally been synonymized with \"Tyrannosaurus\".\nTyrannosaurids were once commonly thought to be descendants of earlier large theropods such as megalosaurs and carnosaurs, although more recently they were reclassified with the generally smaller coelurosaurs. The earliest tyrannosaur group were the crested proceratosaurids, while later and more derived members belong to the Pantyrannosauria. Tyrannosaurs started out as small theropods; however at least some became larger by the Early Cretaceous. It is quite likely that tyrannosauroids rose to prominence after the decline in allosauroid and megalosauroid diversity seen during the early stages of the Late Cretaceous.\nTyrannosauroids are characterized by their fused nasals and dental arrangement. Pantyrannosaurs are characterized by unique features in their hips as well as an enlarged foramen in the quadrate, a broad postorbital and hourglass shaped nasals. Some of the more derived pantyrannosaurs lack nasal pneumaticity and have a lower humerus to femur ratio with their arms starting to see some reduction. Some pantyrannosaurs started developing an arctometatarsus. Eutyrannosaurs have a rough texture on their nasal bones and their mandibular fenestra is reduced externally. Tyrannosaurids lack kinetic skulls or special crests on their nasal bones, and have a lacrimal with a distinctive process on it. Tyrannosaurids also have an interfenestral strut that is less than half as big as the maxillary fenestra.\nMany phylogenetic analyses have found \"Tarbosaurus bataar\" to be the sister taxon of \"T. rex\". The discovery of the tyrannosaurid \"Lythronax\" further indicates that \"Tarbosaurus\" and \"Tyrannosaurus\" are closely related, forming a clade with fellow Asian tyrannosaurid \"Zhuchengtyrannus\", with \"Lythronax\" being their sister taxon. A further study from 2016 by Steve Brusatte, Thomas Carr and colleagues, also indicates that \"Tyrannosaurus\" may have been an immigrant from Asia, as well as a possible descendant of \"Tarbosaurus\".\nBelow is the cladogram of Tyrannosauridae based on the phylogenetic analysis conducted by Loewen and colleagues in 2013.\nIn their 2024 description of \"Tyrannosaurus mcraeensis\", Dalman et al. recovered similar results to previous analyses, with \"Tyrannosaurus\" as the sister taxon to the clade formed by \"Tarbosaurus\" and \"Zhuchengtyrannus\", called the Tyrannosaurini. They also found support for a monophyletic clade containing \"Daspletosaurus\" and \"Thanatotheristes\", typically referred to as the Daspletosaurini.\nAdditional species.\nIn 1955, Soviet paleontologist Evgeny Maleev named a new species, \"Tyrannosaurus bataar\", from Mongolia. By 1965, this species was renamed as a distinct genus, \"Tarbosaurus bataar\". While most palaeontologists continue to maintain the two as distinct genera, some authors such as Thomas Holtz, Kenneth Carpenter, and Thomas Carr argue that the two species are similar enough to be considered members of the same genus, restoring the Mongolian taxon's original binomial name.\nSome specimens from the Late Cretaceous deposits of China have been described as new species of \"Tyrannosaurus\": \"T. lanpingensis\" based on isolated lateral tooth from the red beds of Yunnan in 1975; \"T. turpanensis\" from the Subashi Formation, Turpan Basin, Xinjiang in 1978; and \"T. luanchuanensis\" from the Quiba Formation, Tantou Basin, Henan Province in 1979\u20131980. All these taxa were published without detailed descriptions and were later accepted as junior synonyms of \"Tarbosaurus bataar\" by Holtz in 2004.\nVGI, no. 231/3, a large phalanx bone, assigned to \"Tyrannosaurus\" sp. by Yarkov in 2000, was found in the Lower Maastrichtian of Bereslavka, Russia. In 2004, Averianov and Yarkov reinterpreted it as a metacarpal I or metatarsal I that possibly belongs to ceratosaur. In their 2023 overview, Averianov and Lopatin mention this specimen as well as a single tooth from the same site only as Theropoda indet.\nIn 2001, various tyrannosaurid teeth and a metatarsal unearthed in a quarry near Zhucheng, China, were assigned by Chinese paleontologist Hu Chengzhi to the newly erected species \"Tyrannosaurus zhuchengensis\". However, in a nearby site, a right maxilla and left jawbone were assigned to the newly erected tyrannosaurid genus \"Zhuchengtyrannus\" in 2011. It is possible that \"T. zhuchengensis\" is synonymous with \"Zhuchengtyrannus\". In any case, \"T. zhuchengensis\" is considered to be a \"nomen dubium\" as the holotype lacks diagnostic features below the level Tyrannosaurinae.\nIn 2006, a fragmentary tyrannosaurid lacrimal (CM 9401) from the Judith River Formation of Fergus County, Montana, was described as ?\"Tyrannosaurus\" sp. This isolated right lacrimal was originally collected alongside the holotype specimen of \"Deinosuchus rugosus\", a giant crocodylian, and remained undescribed until its re-identification as belonging to a tyrannosaurid theropod in the 1980s by paleontologist Dale Russell. The lacrimal closely resembles those of \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" in both size and morphology. Notably, it lacks the \"lacrimal horn\" typically present in earlier tyrannosaurids like \"Albertosaurus\" and \"Gorgosaurus\", instead exhibiting a distinct rugosity along the dorsal surface\u2014consistent with \"T. rex\" and its Asian relative \"Tarbosaurus\". The specimen's considerable size places it within the range of known \"T. rex\" individuals, suggesting the presence of large tyrannosaurids during the Campanian stage (~75 million years ago), a temporal range earlier than the established Maastrichtian age (~68\u201366 Ma) for \"Tyrannosaurus rex\". However, the exact age and provenance of CM 9401 remain uncertain due to a lack of detailed field documentation.\nIn 2018, a paper describing tyrannosaurid teeth from the Two Medicine Formation noted a premaxillary tooth (YPM VPPU 023469) had a strong resemblance to the teeth of Sue to the exclusion of any Campanian tyrannosaurid. Additionally, the authors of this paper suggested that CM 9401 also comes from the Two Medicine Formation, as there were preservational similarities between its locality and the Willow Creek anticline, which is where the tooth was found. Notably, this would place both specimens in the Flag Butte Member of the Two Medicine Formation, which dates from 77 to 76.3 Ma, far older than any other \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimen, and directly contemporaneous with \"Daspletosaurus.\" In 2025, these specimens, with their old geologic age, were used as evidence by Charlie Scherer to suggest that the Tyrannosaurini did not evolve directly from \"Daspletosaurus\".\n\"Tyrannosaurus imperator\" and \"Tyrannosaurus regina\".\nIn a 2022 study, Gregory S. Paul and colleagues argued that \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", as traditionally understood, actually represents three species: the type species \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", and two previously unrecognized species: \"T. imperator\" (meaning \"tyrant lizard emperor\") and \"T. regina\" (meaning \"tyrant lizard queen\"). The holotype of the former (\"T. imperator\") is the Sue specimen, and the holotype of the latter (\"T. regina\") is Wankel rex. The division into multiple species was primarily based on the high degree of variation in the proportions and robusticity of the femur (and other skeletal elements) across \"T. rex\" specimens. Presumed robust and gracile morphotypes and the number of small incisiform teeth in the dentary were also used as a line of evidence. Paul and colleagues categorized the species as follows: \"T. rex\" demonstrates robust anatomy, a moderate ratio of femur length vs circumference, and the possession of a singular slender incisiform dentary tooth, \"T. imperator\" is robust with a small femur length to circumference ratio and two of the slender teeth, and \"T. regina\" is more gracile with a high femur ratio and one of the slender teeth.\nHowever, several leading paleontologists, including Stephen Brusatte, Thomas Carr, Thomas Holtz, David Hone, Jingmai O'Connor, and Lindsay Zanno, criticized the study or expressed skepticism of its conclusions when approached by various media outlets for comment. Their criticism was subsequently published in a technical paper. Holtz and Zanno both remarked that it was plausible that more than one species of \"Tyrannosaurus\" existed, but felt the new study was insufficient to support the species it proposed. Holtz remarked that, even if \"Tyrannosaurus imperator\" represented a distinct species from \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", it may represent the same species as \"Nanotyrannus lancensis\" and would need to be called \"Tyrannosaurus lancensis\". O'Connor, a curator at the Field Museum, where the \"T. imperator\" holotype Sue is displayed, regarded the new species as too poorly-supported to justify modifying the exhibit signs. Brusatte, Carr, and O'Connor viewed the distinguishing features proposed between the species as reflecting natural variation within a species. Both Carr and O'Connor expressed concerns about the study's inability to determine which of the proposed species several well-preserved specimens belonged to. Another paleontologist, Philip J. Currie, originally co-authored the study but withdrew from it as he did not want to be involved in naming the new species.\nIn a subsequent paper published in 2025, Paul maintained the validity of \"T. imperator\" and \"T. regina\", arguing that these proposed species could be further distinguished by the shape of their postorbital bosses (bony rugosities behind the eyes).\n\"Tyrannosaurus mcraeensis\".\nIn 2024, Dalman and colleagues described the remains of a tyrannosaur discovered in 1983 in the Campanian-early Maastrichtian Hall Lake Formation in New Mexico. Reposited at the New Mexico Museum of Natural History and Science, the fossil material (NMMNH P-3698) consists of the right postorbital, right squamosal, left palatine, and an incomplete maxilla from the skull, the left dentary, right splenial, right prearticular, right angular and right articular from the lower jaws, isolated teeth, and chevrons. Some of the bones were briefly mentioned in 1984 as belonging to \"T. rex\", and described in 1986.\nLehman and Carpenter (1990) suggested that NMMNH P-3698 belonged to a new tyrannosaurid genus, while Carr and Williamson (2000) disagreed with their claim. Sullivan and Lucas (2015) argued that there is little evidence to support NMMNH P-3698 as a specimen of \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", so they tentatively classified it as cf. \"Tyrannosaurus\" sp.; they also considered that the McRae tyrannosaur lived before the Lancian (before 67 million years ago) based on its probable association with the \"Alamosaurus\" fossil.\nDalman et al. (2024) proposed the new name \"Tyrannosaurus mcraeensis\" for the holotype (NMMNH P-3698), referencing the McRae Group, the rock layers to which the Hall Lake Formation belongs. The holotype of \"T. mcraeensis\" is found in the strata that are around a few million years older than the accepted range of \"T. rex\", which existed at the end of the Maastrichtian. The rock layers were initially estimated to date to between 72.7 and 70.9 Ma, correlating to the latest Campanian or earliest Maastrichtian. However, in a 2024 conference abstracts, the specific stratigraphic layer which yielded \"T. mcraeensis\" was estimated to be younger than 69.0 \u00b1 0.4 Ma and older than 66.0 Ma based on the sandstone from the same fossil locality, which would suggest that the age of \"T. mcraeensis\" is much closer to \"T. rex\" than previously thought. \"T. mcraeensis\" was estimated at long, which is similar to the size of an adult \"T. rex\". The two are distinguished by characters of the skull. Amongst these, the dentary of \"T. mcraeensis\" is proportionately longer and possesses a less prominent chin, and the lower jaw shallower than that of \"T. rex\", suggesting a weaker bite. The teeth are likewise blunter and more laterally compressed, while the post orbital crests are less prominent. Likewise, the skeletal anatomy showcases shared characteristics with \"Tarbosaurus\" and \"Zhuchengtyrannus\".\nThe validity of \"T. mcraeensis\" was subsequently questioned by other researchers in 2025. Morrison and colleagues noted the uncertainty in the previous age estimate of \"T. mcraeensis\". The authors argued that the inclusion of the titanosaurian fossil (cf. \"Alamosaurus\") as a biostratigraphic marker of the Hall Lake Formation fauna makes the dating problematic due to the fossil having a huge variability in assumed sedimentation rates. The study also suggested the uncertainty in the morphology of \"T. mcraeensis\" holotype being reliably outside the known variation of \"T. rex\". Regardless of the age and validity of \"T. mcraeensis\", the authors concluded that the genus \"Tyrannosaurus\" still most likely originated from Laramidia and that the ancestors of this genus possibly migrated from Asia. Later that year, Voris and colleagues regarded \"T. mcraeensis\" as a junior synonym of \"T. rex\", agreeing with the problematic stratigraphic data and finding all of the proposed diagnostic characters of \"T. mcraeensis\" to be in the known \"T. rex\" specimen range of variation. In his study of the \"T. rex\" holotype skull, Carr also did not regard \"T. mcraeensis\" as a valid species, agreeing with the proposed characters of the \"T. mcraeensis\" holotype being visible throughout the hypodigm of \"T. rex\".\n\"Nanotyrannus\".\nOther tyrannosaurid fossils found in the same formations as \"T. rex\" were originally classified as separate taxa, including \"Aublysodon\" and \"Albertosaurus megagracilis\", the latter being named \"Dinotyrannus megagracilis\" in 1995. These fossils are now universally considered to belong to juvenile \"T. rex\". A small but nearly complete skull from Montana, long, is an exception. This skull, CMNH 7541, was originally classified as a species of \"Gorgosaurus\" (\"G. lancensis\") by Charles W. Gilmore in 1946. In 1988, the specimen was re-described by Robert T. Bakker, Michael Williams, then the curator of paleontology at the Cleveland Museum of Natural History, and Phil Currie, where the original specimen was housed and is now on display. Their initial research indicated that the skull bones were fused, and that it therefore represented an adult specimen. In light of this, Bakker and colleagues assigned the skull to a new genus named \"Nanotyrannus\" (meaning \"dwarf tyrant\", for its apparently small adult size). However, in 1999, a detailed analysis by Thomas Carr revealed the specimen to be a juvenile, leading Carr and many other paleontologists to consider it a juvenile \"T. rex\" individual.\nIn 2001, a more complete juvenile tyrannosaur (nicknamed \"Jane\", accession number BMRP 2002.4.1), suggested to belong to the same species as the original \"Nanotyrannus\" specimen, was uncovered. This discovery prompted a conference on tyrannosaurs focused on the issues of the validity of \"Nanotyrannus\", held at the Burpee Museum of Natural History in 2005. Several paleontologists who had previously published opinions that \"N. lancensis\" was a valid species, including Currie and Williams, saw the discovery of \"Jane\" as a confirmation that \"Nanotyrannus\" was, in fact, a juvenile \"T. rex\". Peter Larson continued to support the hypothesis that \"Nanotyrannus lancensis\" was a separate but closely related species, and also argued that \"Stygivenator\" (LACM 28471), which is generally considered to be a juvenile of \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", could be a younger specimen of \"Nanotyrannus\".\nIn late 2011, news reports about a 2006 discovery of a new, virtually complete theropod specimen found alongside a ceratopsid were made. The specimens were studied by Robert Bakker and Peter Larson on-site, who identified the ceratopsian as \"Triceratops\" and the theropod as \"Nanotyrannus\". It was impossible to determine whether the theropod specimen, nicknamed \"Bloody Mary\", was distinct from \"T. rex\", as the specimen remained in private hands until 2020, when the ownership of the specimen was decided by the Montana Supreme Court to be given to the land-owners Mary Anne and Lige Murray, who agreed to sell the paired fossils to a U.S.-based museum. The fossil was acquired by the North Carolina Museum of Natural Sciences in 2020, after which the museum built an additional research lab space in which to prepare, study, and display the specimens. In 2025, paleontologists Lindsay Zanno and James Napoli published an initial description of the \"Bloody Mary\" specimen as part of an extensive revision of the genus \"Nanotyrannus\". They identified this specimen as a skeletally mature individual of \"Nanotyrannus\" and provided several lines of evidence supporting the validity of this genus. They also described a second species, \"N. lethaeus\", based on the Jane specimen due to notable differences between it and \"N. lancensis\".\nPaleobiology.\nLife history.\nThe identification of several specimens as juvenile \"T. rex\" has allowed scientists to document ontogenetic changes in the species, estimate the lifespan, and determine how quickly the animals would have grown. The \"Stygivenator\" holotype (LACM 28471, the \"Jordan theropod\"), possibly a juvenile \"T. rex\", is estimated to have weighed only , while the largest adults, such as FMNH PR2081 (Sue) most likely weighed about . Histologic analysis of \"T. rex\" bones showed LACM 28471 had aged only 2 years when it died. Sue was initially estimated at 28 years old, an age which was at the time considered close to the maximum for the species, but the most recent studies estimate Sue's age at 27\u201333 years. Similarly, Trix (RGM 792.000) is estimated to have been at least 30 years old at time of death.\nHistology has also allowed the age of other specimens to be determined. Growth curves can be developed when the ages of different specimens are plotted on a graph along with their mass. A \"T. rex\" growth curve is S-shaped, with juveniles remaining under until approximately 14 years of age, when body size began to increase dramatically. During this rapid growth phase, a young \"T. rex\" would gain an average of a year for the next four years. At 18 years of age, the curve plateaus again, indicating that growth slowed dramatically. For example, only separated the 28-year-old Sue from a 22-year-old Canadian specimen (RTMP 81.12.1). A 2004 histological study performed by different workers corroborates these results, finding that rapid growth began to slow at around 16 years of age.\nA study by Hutchinson and colleagues in 2011 corroborated the previous estimation methods in general, but their estimation of peak growth rates is significantly higher; it found that the \"maximum growth rates for T. rex during the exponential stage are 1790 kg/year\". Although these results were much higher than previous estimations, the authors noted that these results significantly lowered the great difference between its actual growth rate and the one which would be expected of an animal of its size. The sudden change in growth rate at the end of the growth spurt may indicate physical maturity, a hypothesis which is supported by the discovery of medullary tissue in the femur of a 16 to 20-year-old \"T. rex\" from Montana (MOR 1125, also known as B-rex). Medullary tissue is found only in female birds during ovulation, indicating that B-rex was of reproductive age. Further study indicates an age of 18 for this specimen. In 2016, it was finally confirmed by Mary Higby Schweitzer and Lindsay Zanno and colleagues that the soft tissue within the femur of MOR 1125 was medullary tissue. This also confirmed the identity of the specimen as a female. The discovery of medullary bone tissue within \"Tyrannosaurus\" may prove valuable in determining the sex of other dinosaur species in future examinations, as the chemical makeup of medullary tissue is unmistakable. Other tyrannosaurids exhibit extremely similar growth curves, although with lower growth rates corresponding to their lower adult sizes.\nAn additional study published in 2020 by Woodward and colleagues, for the journal \"Science Advances\" indicates that during their growth from juvenile to adult, \"Tyrannosaurus\" was capable of slowing down its growth to counter environmental factors such as lack of food. The study, focusing on two juvenile specimens between 13 and 15 years old housed at the Burpee Museum in Illinois, indicates that the rate of maturation for \"Tyrannosaurus\" was dependent on resource abundance. This study also indicates that in such changing environments, \"Tyrannosaurus\" was particularly well-suited to an environment that shifted yearly in regards to resource abundance, hinting that other midsize predators might have had difficulty surviving in such harsh conditions and explaining the niche partitioning between juvenile and adult tyrannosaurs. The study further suggested that \"Tyrannosaurus\" and \"Nanotyrannus\" are synonymous, due to analysis of the growth rings in the bones of the two specimens studied.\nOver half of the known \"T. rex\" specimens appear to have died within six years of reaching sexual maturity, a pattern which is also seen in other tyrannosaurs and in some large, long-lived birds and mammals today. These species are characterized by high infant mortality rates, followed by relatively low mortality among juveniles. Mortality increases again following sexual maturity, partly due to the stresses of reproduction. One study suggests that the rarity of juvenile \"T. rex\" fossils is due in part to low juvenile mortality rates; the animals were not dying in large numbers at these ages, and thus were not often fossilized. This rarity may also be due to the incompleteness of the fossil record or to the bias of fossil collectors towards larger, more spectacular specimens. In a 2013 lecture, Thomas Holtz Jr. suggested that dinosaurs \"lived fast and died young\" because they reproduced quickly whereas mammals have long lifespans because they take longer to reproduce. Gregory S. Paul also writes that \"Tyrannosaurus\" reproduced quickly and died young but attributes their short lifespans to the dangerous lives they lived.\nSkin and possible filamentous feathering.\nThe discovery of feathered dinosaurs led to debate regarding whether, and to what extent, \"Tyrannosaurus\" might have been feathered. Filamentous structures, which are commonly recognized as the precursors of feathers, have been reported in the small-bodied, basal tyrannosauroid \"Dilong paradoxus\" from the Early Cretaceous Yixian Formation of China in 2004. Because integumentary impressions of larger tyrannosauroids known at that time showed evidence of scales, the researchers who studied \"Dilong\" speculated that insulating feathers might have been lost by larger species due to their smaller surface-to-volume ratio. The subsequent discovery of the giant species \"Yutyrannus huali\", also from the Yixian, showed that even some large tyrannosauroids had feathers covering much of their bodies, casting doubt on the hypothesis that they were a size-related feature. A 2017 study reviewed known skin impressions of tyrannosaurids, including those of a \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimen nicknamed \"Wyrex\" (HMNS 2006.1743.01, formerly known as BHI 6230) which preserves patches of mosaic scales on the tail, hip, and neck. The study concluded that feather covering of large tyrannosaurids such as \"Tyrannosaurus\" was, if present, limited to the upper side of the trunk.\nA conference abstract published in 2016 posited that theropods such as \"Tyrannosaurus\" had their upper teeth covered in lips, instead of bare teeth as seen in crocodilians. This was based on the presence of enamel, which according to the study needs to remain hydrated, an issue not faced by aquatic animals like crocodilians. However, there has been criticism where it favors the idea for lips, with the 2017 analytical study proposing that tyrannosaurids had large, flat scales on their snouts instead of lips, as modern crocodiles do. But crocodiles possess rather cracked keratinized skin, not flat scales; by observing the hummocky rugosity of tyrannosaurids, and comparing it to extant lizards, researchers have found that tyrannosaurids had squamose scales rather than a crocodillian-like skin.\nIn 2023, Cullen and colleagues supported the idea that theropods like tyrannosaurids had lips based on anatomical patterns, such as those of the foramina on their face and jaws, more similar to those of modern squamates such as monitor lizards or marine iguanas than those of modern crocodilians like alligators. Comparison of the teeth of \"Daspletosaurus\" and American alligators shows that the enamel of tyrannosaurids had no significant wear and that the teeth of modern crocodilians were eroded on the labial side and were substantially worn. This suggests that it is likely that theropod teeth were kept wet by lips. On the basis of the relationship between hydration and wear resistance, the authors argued that it is unlikely that the teeth of theropods, including tyrannosaurids, would have remained unworn when exposed for a long time, because it would have been hard to maintain hydration. The authors also performed regression analyses to demonstrate the relationship between tooth height and skull length, and found that varanids like the crocodile monitor had substantially greater ratios of tooth height to skull length than those of \"Tyrannosaurus\", indicating that the teeth of theropods were not too big to be covered by extraoral tissues when the mouth was closed.\nSexual dimorphism.\nAs the number of known specimens increased, scientists began to analyze the variation between individuals and discovered what appeared to be two distinct body types, or \"morphs\", similar to some other theropod species. As one of these morphs was more solidly built, it was termed the 'robust' morph while the other was termed \". Several morphological differences associated with the two morphs were used to analyze sexual dimorphism in \"T. rex\", with the 'robust' morph usually suggested to be female. For example, the pelvis of several 'robust' specimens seemed to be wider, perhaps to allow the passage of eggs. It was also thought that the 'robust' morphology correlated with a reduced chevron on the first tail vertebra, also ostensibly to allow eggs to pass out of the reproductive tract, as had been erroneously reported for crocodiles.\nIn recent years, evidence for sexual dimorphism has been weakened. A 2005 study reported that previous claims of sexual dimorphism in crocodile chevron anatomy were in error, casting doubt on the existence of similar dimorphism between \"T. rex\" sexes. A full-sized chevron was discovered on the first tail vertebra of Sue, an extremely robust individual, indicating that this feature could not be used to differentiate the two morphs anyway. As \"T. rex\" specimens have been found from Saskatchewan to New Mexico, differences between individuals may be indicative of geographic variation rather than sexual dimorphism. The differences could also be age-related, with 'robust' individuals being older animals.\nOnly a single \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimen has been conclusively shown to belong to a specific sex. Examination of B-rex demonstrated the preservation of soft tissue within several bones. Some of this tissue has been identified as a medullary tissue, a specialized tissue grown only in modern birds as a source of calcium for the production of eggshell during ovulation. As only female birds lay eggs, medullary tissue is only found naturally in females, although males are capable of producing it when injected with female reproductive hormones like estrogen. This strongly suggests that B-rex was female and that she died during ovulation. Recent research has shown that medullary tissue is never found in crocodilians, which are thought to be the closest living relatives of dinosaurs. The shared presence of medullary tissue in birds and other theropod dinosaurs is further evidence of the close evolutionary relationship between the two.\nPosture.\nLike many bipedal dinosaurs, \"T. rex\" was historically depicted as a 'living tripod', with the body at 45 degrees or less from the vertical and the tail dragging along the ground, similar to a kangaroo. This concept dates from Joseph Leidy's 1865 reconstruction of \"Hadrosaurus\", the first to depict a dinosaur in a bipedal posture. In 1915, convinced that the creature stood upright, Henry Fairfield Osborn, former president of the American Museum of Natural History, further reinforced the notion in unveiling the first complete \"T. rex\" skeleton arranged this way. It stood in an upright pose for 77 years, until it was dismantled in 1992.\nBy 1970, scientists realized this pose was incorrect and could not have been maintained by a living animal, as it would have resulted in the dislocation or weakening of several joints, including the hips and the articulation between the head and the spinal column. The inaccurate AMNH mount inspired similar depictions in many films and paintings (such as Rudolph Zallinger's famous mural \"The Age of Reptiles\" in Yale University's Peabody Museum of Natural History) until the 1990s, when films such as \"Jurassic Park\" introduced a more accurate posture to the general public. Modern representations in museums, art, and film show \"T. rex\" with its body approximately parallel to the ground with the tail extended behind the body to balance the head.\nTo sit down, \"Tyrannosaurus\" may have settled its weight backwards and rested its weight on a pubic boot, the wide expansion at the end of the pubis in some dinosaurs. With its weight rested on the pelvis, it may have been free to move the hindlimbs. Getting back up again might have involved some stabilization from the diminutive forelimbs. The latter known as Newman's pushup theory has been debated. Nonetheless, \"Tyrannosaurus\" was probably able to get up if it fell, which only would have required placing the limbs below the center of gravity, with the tail as an effective counterbalance. Healed stress fractures in the forelimbs have been put forward both as evidence that the arms cannot have been very useful and as evidence that they were indeed used and acquired wounds, like the rest of the body.\nArms.\nWhen \"T. rex\" was first discovered, the humerus was the only element of the forelimb known. For the initial mounted skeleton as seen by the public in 1915, Osborn substituted longer, three-fingered forelimbs like those of \"Allosaurus\". A year earlier, Lawrence Lambe described the short, two-fingered forelimbs of the closely related \"Gorgosaurus\". This strongly suggested that \"T. rex\" had similar forelimbs, but this hypothesis was not confirmed until the first complete \"T. rex\" forelimbs were identified in 1989, belonging to MOR 555 (the \"Wankel rex\"). The remains of Sue also include complete forelimbs. \"T. rex\" arms are very small relative to overall body size, measuring only long, and some scholars have labelled them as vestigial. However, the bones show large areas for muscle attachment, indicating considerable strength. This was recognized as early as 1906 by Osborn, who speculated that the forelimbs may have been used to grasp a mate during copulation. Newman (1970) suggested that the forelimbs were used to assist \"Tyrannosaurus\" in rising from a prone position. Since then, other functions have been proposed, although some scholars find them implausible. Padian (2022) argued that the reduction of the arms in tyrannosaurids did not serve a particular function but was a secondary adaptation, stating that as tyrannosaurids developed larger and more powerful skulls and jaws, the arms got smaller to avoid being bitten or torn by other individuals, particularly during group feedings.\nAnother possibility is that the forelimbs held struggling prey while it was killed by the tyrannosaur's enormous jaws. This hypothesis may be supported by biomechanical analysis. \"T. rex\" forelimb bones exhibit extremely thick cortical bone, which has been interpreted as evidence that they were developed to withstand heavy loads. The biceps brachii muscle of an adult \"T. rex\" was capable of lifting by itself; other muscles such as the brachialis would work along with the biceps to make elbow flexion even more powerful. The M. biceps muscle of \"T.\u00a0rex\" was 3.5 times as powerful as the human equivalent. A \"T. rex\" forearm had a limited range of motion, with the shoulder and elbow joints allowing only 40 and 45 degrees of motion, respectively. In contrast, the same two joints in \"Deinonychus\" allow up to 88 and 130 degrees of motion, respectively, while a human arm can rotate 360 degrees at the shoulder and move through 165 degrees at the elbow. The heavy build of the arm bones, strength of the muscles, and limited range of motion may indicate a system evolved to hold fast despite the stresses of a struggling prey animal. In the first detailed scientific description of \"Tyrannosaurus\" forelimbs, paleontologists Kenneth Carpenter and Matt Smith dismissed notions that the forelimbs were useless or that \"Tyrannosaurus\" was an obligate scavenger.\nThe idea that the arms served as weapons when hunting prey have also been proposed by Steven M. Stanley, who suggested that the arms were used for slashing prey, especially by using the claws to rapidly inflict long, deep gashes to its prey. This was dismissed by Padian, who argued that Stanley based his conclusion on incorrectly estimated forelimb size and range of motion.\nThermoregulation.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\", like most dinosaurs, was long thought to have an ectothermic (\"cold-blooded\") reptilian metabolism. The idea of dinosaur ectothermy was challenged by scientists like Robert T. Bakker and John Ostrom in the early years of the \"Dinosaur Renaissance\", beginning in the late 1960s. \"T. rex\" itself was claimed to have been endothermic (\"warm-blooded\"), implying a very active lifestyle. Since then, several paleontologists have sought to determine the ability of \"Tyrannosaurus\" to regulate its body temperature. Histological evidence of high growth rates in young \"T. rex\", comparable to those of mammals and birds, may support the hypothesis of a high metabolism. Growth curves indicate that, as in mammals and birds, \"T. rex\" growth was limited mostly to immature animals, rather than the indeterminate growth seen in most other vertebrates.\nOxygen isotope ratios in fossilized bone are sometimes used to determine the temperature at which the bone was deposited, as the ratio between certain isotopes correlates with temperature. In one specimen, the isotope ratios in bones from different parts of the body indicated a temperature difference of no more than between the vertebrae of the torso and the tibia of the lower leg. This small temperature range between the body core and the extremities was claimed by paleontologist Reese Barrick and geochemist William Showers to indicate that \"T. rex\" maintained a constant internal body temperature (homeothermy) and that it enjoyed a metabolism somewhere between ectothermic reptiles and endothermic mammals. Other scientists have pointed out that the ratio of oxygen isotopes in the fossils today does not necessarily represent the same ratio in the distant past, and may have been altered during or after fossilization (diagenesis). Barrick and Showers have defended their conclusions in subsequent papers, finding similar results in another theropod dinosaur from a different continent and tens of millions of years earlier in time (\"Giganotosaurus\"). Ornithischian dinosaurs also showed evidence of homeothermy, while varanid lizards from the same formation did not. In 2022, Wiemann and colleagues used a different approach\u2014the spectroscopy of lipoxidation signals, which are byproducts of oxidative phosphorylation and correlate with metabolic rates\u2014to show that various dinosaur genera including \"Tyrannosaurus\" had endothermic metabolisms, on par with that of modern birds and higher than that of mammals. They also suggested that such a metabolism was ancestrally common to all dinosaurs.\nEven if \"T. rex\" does exhibit evidence of homeothermy, it does not necessarily mean that it was endothermic. Such thermoregulation may also be explained by gigantothermy, as in some living sea turtles. Similar to contemporary crocodilians, openings (dorsotemporal fenestrae) in the skull roofs of \"Tyrannosaurus\" may have aided thermoregulation.\nSoft tissue.\nIn the March 2005 issue of \"Science\", Mary Higby Schweitzer of North Carolina State University and colleagues announced the recovery of soft tissue from the marrow cavity of a fossilized leg bone from a \"T. rex\". The bone had been intentionally, though reluctantly, broken for shipping and then not preserved in the normal manner, specifically because Schweitzer was hoping to test it for soft tissue. Designated as the Museum of the Rockies specimen 1125, or MOR 1125, the dinosaur was previously excavated from the Hell Creek Formation. Flexible, bifurcating blood vessels and fibrous but elastic bone matrix tissue were recognized. In addition, microstructures resembling blood cells were found inside the matrix and vessels. The structures bear resemblance to ostrich blood cells and vessels. Whether an unknown process, distinct from normal fossilization, preserved the material, or the material is original, the researchers do not know, and they are careful not to make any claims about preservation. If it is found to be original material, any surviving proteins may be used as a means of indirectly guessing some of the DNA content of the dinosaurs involved, because each protein is typically created by a specific gene. The absence of previous finds may be the result of people assuming preserved tissue was impossible, therefore not looking. Since the first, two more tyrannosaurs and a hadrosaur have also been found to have such tissue-like structures. Research on some of the tissues involved has suggested that birds are closer relatives to tyrannosaurs than other modern animals. The original endogenous chemistry was also found in MOR 1125 based on preservation of elements associated with bone remodeling and redeposition (sulfur, calcium, zinc), which showed that the bone cortices are similar to those of extant birds.\nIn studies reported in \"Science\" in April 2007, Asara and colleagues concluded that seven traces of collagen proteins detected in purified \"T. rex\" bone most closely match those reported in chickens, followed by frogs and newts. The discovery of proteins from a creature tens of millions of years old, along with similar traces the team found in a mastodon bone at least 160,000 years old, upends the conventional view of fossils and may shift paleontologists' focus from bone hunting to biochemistry. Until these finds, most scientists presumed that fossilization replaced all living tissue with inert minerals. Paleontologist Hans Larsson of McGill University in Montreal, who was not part of the studies, called the finds \"a milestone\", and suggested that dinosaurs could \"enter the field of molecular biology and really slingshot paleontology into the modern world\".\nThe presumed soft tissue was called into question by Thomas Kaye of the University of Washington and his co-authors in 2008. They contend that what was really inside the tyrannosaur bone was slimy biofilm created by bacteria that coated the voids once occupied by blood vessels and cells. The researchers found that what previously had been identified as remnants of blood cells, because of the presence of iron, were actually framboids, microscopic mineral spheres bearing iron. They found similar spheres in a variety of other fossils from various periods, including an ammonite. In the ammonite, they found the spheres in a place where the iron they contain could not have had any relationship to the presence of blood. Schweitzer has strongly criticized Kaye's claims and argues that there is no reported evidence that biofilms can produce branching, hollow tubes like those noted in her study. San Antonio, Schweitzer and colleagues published an analysis in 2011 of what parts of the collagen had been recovered, finding that it was the inner parts of the collagen coil that had been preserved, as would have been expected from a long period of protein degradation. Other research challenges the identification of soft tissue as biofilm and confirms finding \"branching, vessel-like structures\" from within fossilized bone.\nSpeed.\nFemur (thigh bone)\nTibia (shin bone)\nMetatarsals (foot bones)\nDewclaw\nPhalanges (toe bones)\nSkeletal anatomy of a \"T. rex\" right leg\nScientists have produced a wide range of possible maximum running speeds for \"Tyrannosaurus\": mostly around , but as low as and as high as , though it running this speed is very unlikely. \"Tyrannosaurus\" was a bulky and heavy carnivore so it is unlikely to run very fast at all compared to other theropods like \"Carnotaurus\" or \"Giganotosaurus\". Researchers have relied on various estimating techniques because, while there are many tracks of large theropods walking, none showed evidence of running.\nA 2002 report used a mathematical model (validated by applying it to three living animals: alligators, chickens, and humans; and eight more species, including emus and ostriches) to gauge the leg muscle mass needed for fast running (over ). Scientists who think that \"Tyrannosaurus\" was able to run point out that hollow bones and other features that would have lightened its body may have kept adult weight to a mere or so, or that other animals like ostriches and horses with long, flexible legs are able to achieve high speeds through slower but longer strides. Proposed top speeds exceeded for \"Tyrannosaurus\", but were deemed infeasible because they would require exceptional leg muscles of approximately 40\u201386%\u00a0of total body mass. Even moderately fast speeds would have required large leg muscles. If the muscle mass was less, only for walking or jogging would have been possible. Holtz noted that tyrannosaurids and some closely related groups had significantly longer distal hindlimb components (shin plus foot plus toes) relative to the femur length than most other theropods, and that tyrannosaurids and their close relatives had a tightly interlocked metatarsus (foot bones). The third metatarsal was squeezed between the second and fourth metatarsals to form a single unit called an arctometatarsus. This ankle feature may have helped the animal to run more efficiently. Together, these leg features allowed \"Tyrannosaurus\" to transmit locomotory forces from the foot to the lower leg more effectively than in earlier theropods. \nAdditionally, a 2020 study indicates that \"Tyrannosaurus\" and other tyrannosaurids were exceptionally efficient walkers. Studies by Dececchi et al., compared the leg proportions, body mass, and the gaits of more than 70 species of theropod dinosaurs including \"Tyrannosaurus\" and its relatives. The research team then applied a variety of methods to estimate each dinosaur's top speed when running as well as how much energy each dinosaur expended while moving at more relaxed speeds such as when walking. Among smaller to medium-sized species such as dromaeosaurids, longer legs appear to be an adaptation for faster running, in line with previous results by other researchers. But for theropods weighing over , top running speed is limited by body size, so longer legs instead were found to have correlated with low-energy walking. The results further indicate that smaller theropods evolved long legs as a means to both aid in hunting and escape from larger predators while larger theropods that evolved long legs did so to reduce the energy costs and increase foraging efficiency, as they were freed from the demands of predation pressure due to their role as apex predators. Compared to more basal groups of theropods in the study, tyrannosaurs like \"Tyrannosaurus\" itself showed a marked increase in foraging efficiency due to reduced energy expenditures during hunting or scavenging. This in turn likely resulted in tyrannosaurs having a reduced need for hunting forays and requiring less food to sustain themselves as a result. Additionally, the research, in conjunction with studies that show tyrannosaurs were more agile than other large-bodied theropods, indicates they were quite well-adapted to a long-distance stalking approach followed by a quick burst of speed to go for the kill. Analogies can be noted between tyrannosaurids and modern wolves as a result, supported by evidence that at least some tyrannosaurids were hunting in group settings.\nA study published in 2021 by Pasha van Bijlert et al., calculated the preferred walking speed of \"Tyrannosaurus\", reporting a speed of . While walking, animals reduce their energy expenditure by choosing certain step rhythms at which their body parts resonate. The same would have been true for dinosaurs, but previous studies did not fully account for the impact the tail had on their walking speeds. According to the authors, when a dinosaur walked, its tail would slightly sway up and down with each step as a result of the interspinous ligaments suspending the tail. Like rubber bands, these ligaments stored energy when they are stretched due to the swaying of the tail. Using a 3-D model of \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimen Trix, muscles and ligaments were reconstructed to simulate the tail movements. This results in a rhythmic, energy-efficient walking speed for \"Tyrannosaurus\" similar to that seen in living animals such as humans, ostriches and giraffes.\nA 2017 study estimated the top running speed of \"Tyrannosaurus\" as , speculating that \"Tyrannosaurus\" exhausted its energy reserves long before reaching top speed, resulting in a parabola-like relationship between size and speed. Another 2017 study hypothesized that an adult \"Tyrannosaurus\" was incapable of running due to high skeletal loads. Using a calculated weight estimate of 7\u00a0tons, the model showed that speeds above would have probably shattered the leg bones of \"Tyrannosaurus\". The finding may mean that running was also not possible for other giant theropod dinosaurs like \"Giganotosaurus\", \"Mapusaurus\" and \"Acrocanthosaurus\".\nHowever, studies by Eric Snively and colleagues\",\" published in 2019 indicate that \"Tyrannosaurus\" and other tyrannosaurids were more maneuverable than allosauroids and other theropods of comparable size due to low rotational inertia compared to their body mass combined with large leg muscles. As a result, it is hypothesized that \"Tyrannosaurus\" was capable of making relatively quick turns and could likely pivot its body more quickly when close to its prey, or that while turning, the theropod could \"pirouette\" on a single planted foot while the alternating leg was held out in a suspended swing during a pursuit. The results of this study potentially could shed light on how agility could have contributed to the success of tyrannosaurid evolution.\nPossible footprints.\nTwo isolated fossilized footprints have been tentatively assigned to \"T. rex\". The first was discovered at Philmont Scout Ranch, New Mexico, in 1983 by American geologist Charles Pillmore. Originally thought to belong to a hadrosaurid, examination of the footprint revealed a large 'heel' unknown in ornithopod dinosaur tracks, and traces of what may have been a hallux, the dewclaw-like fourth digit of the tyrannosaur foot. The footprint was published as the ichnogenus \"Tyrannosauripus pillmorei\" in 1994, by Martin Lockley and Adrian Hunt. Lockley and Hunt suggested that it was very likely the track was made by a \"T. rex\", which would make it the first known footprint from this species. The track was made in what was once a vegetated wetland mudflat. It measures long by wide.\nA second footprint that may have been made by a \"Tyrannosaurus\" was first reported in 2007 by British paleontologist Phil Manning, from the Hell Creek Formation of Montana. This second track measures long, shorter than the track described by Lockley and Hunt. Whether or not the track was made by \"Tyrannosaurus\" is unclear, though \"Tyrannosaurus\" is the only large theropod known to have existed in the Hell Creek Formation.\nA set of footprints in Glenrock, Wyoming dating to the Maastrichtian stage of the Late Cretaceous and hailing from the Lance Formation were described by Scott Persons, Phil Currie and colleagues in 2016, and are believed to belong to either a juvenile \"T. rex\" or \"Nanotyrannus lancensis\". From measurements and based on the positions of the footprints, the animal was believed to be traveling at a walking speed of around 2.8 to 5 miles per hour and was estimated to have a hip height of . A follow-up paper appeared in 2017, increasing the speed estimations by 50\u201380%.\nRare fossil footprints and trackways found in New Mexico and Wyoming that are assigned to the ichnogenus \"Tyrannosauripus\" have been attributed to being made by \"Tyrannosaurus\", based on the stratigraphic age of the rocks they are preserved in. The first specimen, found in 1994 was described by Lockley and Hunt and consists of a single, large footprint. Another pair of ichnofossils, described in 2021, show a large tyrannosaurid rising from a prone position by rising up using its elbows in conjunction with the pads on their feet to stand. These two unique sets of fossils were found in Ludlow, Colorado and Cimarron, New Mexico. Another ichnofossil described in 2018, perhaps belonging to a juvenile \"Tyrannosaurus\" or \"Nanotyrannus\" was uncovered in the Lance Formation of Wyoming. The trackway itself offers a rare glimpse into the walking speed of tyrannosaurids, and the trackmaker is estimated to have been moving at a speed of , significantly faster than previously assumed for estimations of walking speed in tyrannosaurids.\nBrain and senses.\nA study conducted by Lawrence Witmer and Ryan Ridgely of Ohio University found that \"Tyrannosaurus\" shared the heightened sensory abilities of other coelurosaurs, highlighting relatively rapid and coordinated eye and head movements; an enhanced ability to sense low frequency sounds, which would allow tyrannosaurs to track prey movements from long distances; and an enhanced sense of smell. A study published by Kent Stevens concluded that \"Tyrannosaurus\" had keen vision. By applying modified perimetry to facial reconstructions of several dinosaurs including \"Tyrannosaurus\", the study found that \"Tyrannosaurus\" had a binocular range of 55 degrees, surpassing that of modern hawks. Stevens estimated that \"Tyrannosaurus\" had 13 times the visual acuity of a human and surpassed the visual acuity of an eagle, which is 3.6 times that of a person. Stevens estimated a limiting far point (that is, the distance at which an object can be seen as separate from the horizon) as far as away, which is greater than the that a human can see.\nThomas Holtz Jr. would note that high depth perception of \"Tyrannosaurus\" may have been due to the prey it had to hunt, noting that it had to hunt ceratopsians such as \"Triceratops\", ankylosaurs such as \"Ankylosaurus\", and hadrosaurs. He would suggest that this made precision more crucial for \"Tyrannosaurus\" enabling it to, \"get in, get that blow in and take it down.\" In contrast, \"Acrocanthosaurus\" had limited depth perception because they hunted large sauropods, which were relatively rare during the time of \"Tyrannosaurus\".\nThough no \"Tyrannosaurus\" sclerotic ring has been found, Kenneth Carpenter estimated its size based on that of \"Gorgosaurus\". The inferred sclerotic ring for the Stan specimen is ~ in diameter with an internal aperture diameter of ~. Based on eye proportions in living reptiles, this implies a pupil diameter of about , an iris diameter about that of the sclerotic ring, and an eyeball diameter of . Carpenter also estimated an eyeball depth of ~. Based on these calculations, the f-number for Stan's eye is 3\u20133.8; since diurnal animals have f-numbers of 2.1 or higher, this would indicate that \"Tyrannosaurus\" had poor low-light vision and hunted during the day.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\" had very large olfactory bulbs and olfactory nerves relative to their brain size, the organs responsible for a heightened sense of smell. This suggests that the sense of smell was highly developed, and implies that tyrannosaurs could detect carcasses by scent alone across great distances. The sense of smell in tyrannosaurs may have been comparable to modern vultures, which use scent to track carcasses for scavenging. Research on the olfactory bulbs has shown that \"T. rex\" had the most highly developed sense of smell of 21 sampled non-avian dinosaur species.\nSomewhat unusually among theropods, \"T.\u00a0rex\" had a very long cochlea. The length of the cochlea is often related to hearing acuity, or at least the importance of hearing in behavior, implying that hearing was a particularly important sense to tyrannosaurs. Specifically, data suggests that \"T. rex\" heard best in the low-frequency range, and that low-frequency sounds were an important part of tyrannosaur behavior. A 2017 study by Thomas Carr and colleagues found that the snout of tyrannosaurids was highly sensitive, based on a high number of small openings in the facial bones of the related \"Daspletosaurus\" that contained sensory neurons. The study speculated that tyrannosaurs might have used their sensitive snouts to measure the temperature of their nests and to gently pick up eggs and hatchlings, as seen in modern crocodylians. \nAnother study published in 2021 further suggests that \"Tyrannosaurus\" had an acute sense of touch, based on neurovascular canals in the front of its jaws, which it could utilize to better detect and consume prey. The study, published by Kawabe and Hittori et al., suggests that \"Tyrannosaurus\" could also accurately sense slight differences in material and movement, allowing it to utilize different feeding strategies on different parts of its prey's carcasses depending on the situation. The sensitive neurovascular canals of \"Tyrannosaurus\" also likely were adapted to performing fine movements and behaviors such as nest building, parental care, and other social behavior such as intraspecific communication. The results of this study also align with results made in studying the related tyrannosaurid \"Daspletosaurus horneri\" and the allosauroid \"Neovenator\", which have similar neurovascular adaptations, suggesting that the faces of theropods were highly sensitive to pressure and touch. However, a more recent study reviewing the evolution of the trigeminal canals among sauropsids notes that a much denser network of neurovascular canals in the snout and lower jaw is more commonly encountered in aquatic or semiaquatic taxa (e.g., \"Spinosaurus\", \"Halszkaraptor\", \"Plesiosaurus\"), and taxa that developed a rhamphotheca (e.g., \"Caenagnathasia\"), while the network of canals in \"Tyrannosaurus\" appears simpler, though still more derived than in most ornithischians, and overall \nterrestrial taxa such as tyrannosaurids and \"Neovenator\" may have had average facial sensitivity for non-edentulous terrestrial theropods, although further research is needed. The neurovascular canals in \"Tyrannosaurus\" may instead have supported soft tissue structures for thermoregulation or social signaling, the latter of which could be confirmed by the fact that the neurovascular network of canals may have changed during ontogeny.\nA study by Grant R. Hurlburt, Ryan C. Ridgely and Lawrence Witmer obtained estimates for Encephalization Quotients (EQs), based on reptiles and birds, as well as estimates for the ratio of cerebrum to brain mass. The study concluded that \"Tyrannosaurus\" had the relatively largest brain of all adult non-avian dinosaurs with the exception of certain small maniraptoriforms (\"Bambiraptor\", \"Troodon\" and \"Ornithomimus\"). The study found that \"Tyrannosaurus\"'s relative brain size was still within the range of modern reptiles, being at most 2 standard deviations above the mean of non-avian reptile EQs. The estimates for the ratio of cerebrum mass to brain mass would range from 47.5 to 49.53 percent. According to the study, this is more than the lowest estimates for extant birds (44.6 percent), but still close to the typical ratios of the smallest sexually mature alligators which range from 45.9\u201347.9 percent. Other studies, such as those by Steve Brusatte, indicate the encephalization quotient of \"Tyrannosaurus\" was similar in range (2.0\u20132.4) to a chimpanzee (2.2\u20132.5), though this may be debatable as reptilian and mammalian encephalization quotients are not equivalent.\nSocial behavior.\nPhilip J. Currie suggested that Tyrannosaurus may have been pack hunters, comparing \"T. rex\" to related species \"Tarbosaurus bataar\" and \"Albertosaurus sarcophagus\", citing fossil evidence that may indicate gregarious (describing animals that travel in herds or packs) behavior. A find in South Dakota where three \"T. rex\" skeletons were in close proximity may suggest the formation of a pack. Cooperative pack hunting may have been an effective strategy for subduing prey with advanced anti-predator adaptations which pose potential lethality such as \"Triceratops\" and \"Ankylosaurus\".\nCurrie's pack-hunting \"T. rex\" hypothesis has been criticized for not having been peer-reviewed, but rather was discussed in a television interview and book called \"Dino Gangs\". The Currie theory for pack hunting by \"T. rex\" is based mainly by analogy to a different species, \"Tarbosaurus bataar\". Evidence of gregariousness in \"T. bataar\" itself has not been peer-reviewed, and to Currie's own admission, can only be interpreted with reference to evidence in other closely related species. According to Currie gregariousness in \"Albertosaurus sarcophagus\" is supported by the discovery of 26 individuals with varied ages in the Dry Island bonebed. He ruled out the possibility of a predator trap due to the similar preservation state of individuals and the near absence of herbivores.\nAdditional support of tyrannosaurid gregariousness can be found in fossilized trackways from the Upper Cretaceous Wapiti Formation of northeastern British Columbia, Canada, left by three tyrannosaurids traveling in the same direction. According to scientists assessing the Dino Gangs program, the evidence for pack hunting in \"Tarbosaurus\" and \"Albertosaurus\" is weak and based on group skeletal remains for which alternate explanations may apply (such as drought or a flood forcing dinosaurs to die together in one place). Others researchers have speculated that instead of large theropod social groups, some of these finds represent behavior more akin to Komodo dragon-like mobbing of carcasses, even going as far as to say true pack-hunting behavior may not exist in any non-avian dinosaurs due to its rarity in modern predators. Pathologies of \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimens have been suggested as evidence of conspecific attack, including \"Wyrex\" with a hole penetrating its jugual and severe trauma on its tail that shows signs of bone remodeling (not regrowth).\nDiet and feeding behavior.\nMost paleontologists accept that \"Tyrannosaurus\" was both an active predator and a scavenger like most large carnivores. By far the largest carnivore in its environment, \"T. rex\" was most likely an apex predator, preying upon hadrosaurs, armored herbivores like ceratopsians and ankylosaurs, and possibly sauropods. Enamel \u03b444/42Ca values also suggest the possibility that \"T. rex\" occasionally fed on carcasses of marine reptiles and fish washed up on the shores of the Western Interior Seaway. A study in 2012 by Karl Bates and Peter Falkingham found that \"Tyrannosaurus\" had the most powerful bite of any terrestrial animal that has ever lived, finding an adult \"Tyrannosaurus\" could have exerted 35,000 to 57,000 N (7,868 to 12,814 lbf) of force in the back teeth. Even higher estimates were made by Mason B. Meers in 2003. This allowed it to crush bones during repetitive biting and fully consume the carcasses of large dinosaurs. Stephan Lautenschlager and colleagues calculated that \"Tyrannosaurus\" was capable of a maximum jaw gape of around 80 degrees, a necessary adaptation for a wide range of jaw angles to power the creature's strong bite.\nA debate exists, however, about whether \"Tyrannosaurus\" was primarily a predator or a pure scavenger. The debate originated in a 1917 study by Lambe which argued that large theropods were pure scavengers because \"Gorgosaurus\" teeth showed hardly any wear. This argument disregarded the fact that theropods replaced their teeth quite rapidly. Ever since the first discovery of \"Tyrannosaurus\" most scientists have speculated that it was a predator; like modern large predators it would readily scavenge or steal another predator's kill if it had the opportunity.\nPaleontologist Jack Horner has been a major proponent of the view that \"Tyrannosaurus\" was not a predator at all but instead was exclusively a scavenger. He has put forward arguments in the popular literature to support the pure scavenger hypothesis:\nOther evidence suggests hunting behavior in \"Tyrannosaurus\". The eye sockets of tyrannosaurs are positioned so that the eyes would point forward, giving them binocular vision slightly better than that of modern hawks. It is not obvious why natural selection would have favored this long-term trend if tyrannosaurs had been pure scavengers, which would not have needed the advanced depth perception that stereoscopic vision provides. In modern animals, binocular vision is found mainly in predators.\nA skeleton of the hadrosaurid \"Edmontosaurus annectens\" has been described from Montana with healed tyrannosaur-inflicted damage on its tail vertebrae. The fact that the damage seems to have healed suggests that the \"Edmontosaurus\" survived a tyrannosaur's attack on a living target, i.e. the tyrannosaur had attempted active predation. Despite the consensus that the tail bites were caused by \"Tyrannosaurus\", there has been some evidence to show that they might have been created by other factors. For example, a 2014 study suggested that the tail injuries might have been due to \"Edmontosaurus\" individuals stepping on each other, while another study in 2020 backs up the hypothesis that biomechanical stress is the cause for the tail injuries. There is also evidence for an aggressive interaction between a \"Triceratops\" and a \"Tyrannosaurus\" in the form of partially healed tyrannosaur tooth marks on a \"Triceratops\" brow horn and squamosal (a bone of the neck frill); the bitten horn is also broken, with new bone growth after the break. It is not known what the exact nature of the interaction was, though: either animal could have been the aggressor. Since the \"Triceratops\" wounds healed, it is most likely that the \"Triceratops\" survived the encounter and managed to overcome the \"Tyrannosaurus\". In a battle against a bull \"Triceratops\", the \"Triceratops\" would likely defend itself by inflicting fatal wounds to the \"Tyrannosaurus\" using its sharp horns. Studies of Sue found a broken and healed fibula and tail vertebrae, scarred facial bones and a tooth from another \"Tyrannosaurus\" embedded in a neck vertebra, providing evidence for aggressive behavior. Studies on hadrosaur vertebrae from the Hell Creek Formation that were punctured by the teeth of what appears to be a late-stage juvenile \"Tyrannosaurus\" indicate that despite lacking the bone-crushing adaptations of the adults, young individuals were still capable of using the same bone-puncturing feeding technique as their adult counterparts.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\" may have had infectious saliva used to kill its prey, as proposed by William Abler in 1992. Abler observed that the &lt;dfn id=\"\"&gt;serrations&lt;/dfn&gt; (tiny protuberances) on the cutting edges of the teeth are closely spaced, enclosing little chambers. These chambers might have trapped pieces of carcass with bacteria, giving \"Tyrannosaurus\" a deadly, infectious bite much like the Komodo dragon was thought to have. Jack Horner and Don Lessem, in a 1993 popular book, questioned Abler's hypothesis, arguing that \"Tyrannosaurus\"'s tooth serrations as more like cubes in shape than the serrations on a Komodo monitor's teeth, which are rounded.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\", and most other theropods, probably primarily processed carcasses with lateral shakes of the head, like crocodilians. The head was not as maneuverable as the skulls of allosauroids, due to flat joints of the neck vertebrae.\nEvidence also strongly suggests that tyrannosaurs were at least occasionally cannibalistic. \"Tyrannosaurus\" itself has strong evidence pointing towards it having been cannibalistic in at least a scavenging capacity based on tooth marks on the foot bones, humerus, and metatarsals of one specimen.\nParenting.\nWhile there is no direct evidence of \"Tyrannosaurus\" raising their young (the rarity of juvenile and nest Tyrannosaur fossils has left researchers guessing), it has been suggested by some that like its closest living relatives, modern archosaurs (birds and crocodiles) \"Tyrannosaurus\" may have protected and fed its young. Crocodilians and birds are often suggested by some paleontologists to be modern analogues for dinosaur parenting. Direct evidence of parental behavior exists in other dinosaurs such as \"Maiasaura peeblesorum\", the first dinosaur to have been discovered to raise its young, as well as more closely related Oviraptorids, the latter suggesting parental behavior in theropods.\nPathology.\nIn 2001, Bruce Rothschild and others published a study examining evidence for stress fractures and tendon avulsions in theropod dinosaurs and the implications for their behavior. Since stress fractures are caused by repeated trauma rather than singular events they are more likely to be caused by regular behavior than other types of injuries. Of the 81 \"Tyrannosaurus\" foot bones examined in the study, one was found to have a stress fracture, while none of the 10 hand bones were found to have stress fractures. The researchers found tendon avulsions only among \"Tyrannosaurus\" and \"Allosaurus\". An avulsion injury left a divot on the humerus of Sue the \"T.\u00a0rex\", apparently located at the origin of the deltoid or teres major muscles. The presence of avulsion injuries being limited to the forelimb and shoulder in both \"Tyrannosaurus\" and \"Allosaurus\" suggests that theropods may have had a musculature more complex than and functionally different from those of birds. The researchers concluded that Sue's tendon avulsion was probably obtained from struggling prey. The presence of stress fractures and tendon avulsions, in general, provides evidence for a \"very active\" predation-based diet rather than obligate scavenging.\nA 2009 study showed that smooth-edged holes in the skulls of several specimens might have been caused by \"Trichomonas\"-like parasites that commonly infect birds. According to the study, seriously infected individuals, including \"Sue\" and MOR 980 (\"Peck's Rex\"), might therefore have died from starvation after feeding became increasingly difficult. Previously, these holes had been explained by the bacterious bone infection Actinomycosis or by intraspecific attacks. A subsequent study found that while trichomoniasis has many attributes of the model proposed (osteolytic, intra oral) several features make the assumption that it was the cause of death less supportable by evidence. For example, the observed sharp margins with little reactive bone shown by the radiographs of \"Trichomonas\"-infected birds are dissimilar to the reactive bone seen in the affected \"T. rex\" specimens. Also, trichomoniasis can be very rapidly fatal in birds (14 days or less) albeit in its milder form, and this suggests that if a \"Trichomonas\"-like protozoan is the culprit, trichomoniasis was less acute in its non-avian dinosaur form during the Late Cretaceous. Finally, the relative size of this type of lesions is much larger in small bird throats, and may not have been enough to choke a \"T. rex\". A more recent study examining the pathologies concluded that the osseous alteration observed most closely resembles those around healing human cranial trepanations and healing fractures in the Triassic reptile \"Stagonolepis,\" in the absence of infection. The possible cause may instead have been intraspecific combat.\nOne study of \"Tyrannosaurus\" specimens with tooth marks in the bones attributable to the same genus was presented as evidence of cannibalism. Tooth marks in the humerus, foot bones and metatarsals, may indicate opportunistic scavenging, rather than wounds caused by combat with another \"T. rex\". Other tyrannosaurids may also have practiced cannibalism.\nPaleoecology.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\" lived during what is referred to as the Lancian faunal stage (Maastrichtian age) at the end of the Late Cretaceous. \"Tyrannosaurus\" ranged from Canada in the north to at least New Mexico in the south of Laramidia.\nSeveral notable \"Tyrannosaurus\" remains have been found in the Hell Creek Formation. During the Maastrichtian this area was subtropical, with a warm and humid climate. The flora consisted mostly of angiosperms, but also included trees like dawn redwood (\"Metasequoia\"). Archosaurs discovered from this formation include the ceratopsians \"Leptoceratops\", \"Torosaurus\", and \"Triceratops\", the hadrosaurid \"Edmontosaurus annectens\", the parksosaurid \"Thescelosaurus\", the ankylosaurs \"Ankylosaurus\" and \"Denversaurus\", the pachycephalosaurs \"Pachycephalosaurus\", \"Platytholus\" and \"Sphaerotholus\", the paravian theropods \"Acheroraptor\" and \"Pectinodon\", other maniraptoran theropods \"Anzu\", \"Eoneophron\", \"Trierarchuncus\" and indeterminate ornithomimids, the tyrannosauroid \"Nanotyrannus\", and the azhdarchid pterosaur \"Infernodrakon\". \nAnother formation with \"Tyrannosaurus\" remains is the Lance Formation of Wyoming. This has been interpreted as a bayou environment similar to today's Gulf Coast. The fauna was very similar to Hell Creek, but with \"Struthiomimus\" replacing its relative \"Ornithomimus\". The small ceratopsian \"Leptoceratops\" also lived in the area.\nIn its southern range, specifically based on remains discovered from the North Horn Formation of Utah, \"Tyrannosaurus rex\" lived alongside the titanosaur \"Utetitan\", the ceratopsid \"Torosaurus\" and the indeterminate troodontids and hadrosaurids. \"Tyrannosaurus mcraeensis\" from the McRae Group of New Mexico coexisted with the ceratopsid \"Sierraceratops\" and possibly the titanosaur \"Alamosaurus\". Potential remains identified as cf. \"Tyrannosaurus\" have also been discovered from the Javelina Formation of Texas, where the remains of the titanosaur (either \"Alamosaurus\" or \"Utetitan\"), the ceratopsid \"Bravoceratops\", the pterosaurs \"Quetzalcoatlus\" and \"Wellnhopterus\", and possible species of troodontids and hadrosaurids are found. Its southern range is thought to have been dominated by semi-arid inland plains, following the probable retreat of the Western Interior Seaway as global sea levels fell.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\" may have also inhabited Mexico's Lomas Coloradas Formation in Sonora. Though skeletal evidence is lacking, six shed and broken teeth from the fossil bed have been thoroughly compared with other theropod genera and appear to be identical to those of \"Tyrannosaurus\". If true, the evidence indicates the range of \"Tyrannosaurus\" was possibly more extensive than previously believed. It is possible that tyrannosaurs were originally Asian species, migrating to North America before the end of the Cretaceous period. \nPopulation estimates.\nAccording to studies published in 2021 by Charles Marshall et al., the total population of adult \"Tyrannosaurus\" at any given time was perhaps 20,000 individuals, with computer estimations also suggesting a total population no lower than 1,300 and no higher than 328,000. The authors themselves suggest that the estimate of 20,000 individuals is probably lower than what should be expected, especially when factoring in that disease pandemics could easily wipe out such a small population. Over the span of the genus' existence, it is estimated that there were about 127,000 generations and that this added up to a total of roughly 2.5 billion animals until their extinction.\nIn the same paper, it is suggested that in a population of \"Tyrannosaurus\" adults numbering 20,000, the number of individuals living in an area the size of California could be as high as 3,800 animals, while an area the size of Washington D.C. could support a population of only two adult \"Tyrannosaurus\". The study does not take into account the number of juvenile animals in the genus present in this population estimate due to their occupation of a different niche than the adults, and thus it is likely the total population was much higher when accounting for this factor. Simultaneously, studies of living carnivores suggest that some predator populations are higher in density than others of similar weight (such as jaguars and hyenas, which are similar in weight but have vastly differing population densities). Lastly, the study suggests that in most cases, only one in 80 million \"Tyrannosaurus\" would become fossilized, while the chances were likely as high as one in every 16,000 of an individual becoming fossilized in areas that had more dense populations.\nMeiri (2022) questioned the reliability of the estimates, citing uncertainty in metabolic rate, body size, sex and age-specific survival rates, habitat requirements and range size variability as shortcomings Marshall et al. did not take into account. The authors of the original publication replied that while they agree that their reported uncertainties were probably too small, their framework is flexible enough to accommodate uncerainty in physiology, and that their calculations do not depend on short-term changes in population density and geographic range, but rather on their long-term averages. Finally, they remark that they did estimate the range of reasonable survivorship curves and that they did include uncertainty in the time of onset of sexual maturity and in the growth curve by incorporating the\nuncertainty in the maximum body mass.\nCultural significance.\n\"Tyrannosaurus\" is the most widely known dinosaur in popular culture. Science writer Riley Black states, \"In all of prehistory, there is no animal that commands our attention quite like \"Tyrannosaurus rex\", the king of the tyrant lizards. Since the time this dinosaur was officially named in 1905, the enormous carnivore has stood as the ultimate dinosaur.\" Paleontologist David Hone notes the popularity of \"Tyrannosaurus\" models and skeletal displays in museums and writes that films like \"Jurassic Park\" and \"King Kong\" \"would not have been the same without it.\" \"T. rex\" is the only dinosaur that is commonly known to the general public by its full scientific name (binomial name) and the scientific abbreviation \"T.\u00a0rex\" has also come into wide usage. Robert T. Bakker notes this in \"The Dinosaur Heresies\" and explains that, \"a name like '\"T. rex\"' is just irresistible to the tongue.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30468", "revid": "4490355", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30468", "title": "Tollund Man", "text": "Iron Age bog body from Denmark\nThe Tollund Man (died 405\u2013384 BC) is a naturally mummified corpse of a man who lived during the 5th century BC, during the period characterised in Scandinavia as the Pre-Roman Iron Age. He was found in 1950, preserved as a bog body near Silkeborg on the Jutland peninsula in Denmark. The man's physical features were so well preserved that he was mistaken for a recent murder victim. Twelve years before his discovery, another bog body, Elling Woman, was found in the same bog.\nThe cause of death has been determined to be by hanging. There is insufficient evidence to determine if the reason for the killing was a ritual sacrifice or a punitive execution.\nDiscovery.\nOn 8 May 1950, peat cutters Viggo and Emil Hojgaard discovered a corpse in the peat layer of the Bj\u00e6ldskovdal peat bog, west of Silkeborg, Denmark, which was so well preserved that they at first believed they had discovered a recent murder victim.\nThe Tollund Man lay away from firm ground, buried under of peat, his body arranged in a fetal position. He wore a pointed skin cap of sheepskin and wool, fastened under his chin by a hide thong, and a smooth hide belt around his waist. Additionally, a noose made of plaited animal hide was drawn tight around his neck and trailed down his back. Other than these, the body was naked. His hair was cropped so short as to be almost entirely hidden by his cap. There was short stubble ( in length) on his chin and upper lip, suggesting that he was usually clean-shaven, but had not shaved on the day of his death. The Tollund Man was approximately 40 years old. The Tollund Man's last meal consisted of a porridge with barley, flax, wild weed seeds, and fish.\nScientific examination and conclusions.\nRadiocarbon dating of Tollund Man indicated that he died circa 405\u2013380 BC. The preserved tender soft tissues of his body are the consequence of the acid in the peat, along with the lack of oxygen underneath the surface and the cold climate of the Nordic countries. The acid in the peat, needed for the preservation of a human body, is caused by a bryophyte named \"Sphagnum\". \"Sphagnum\" fights against degradation due to resistant phenolic compounds contained in their cell walls. Due to the acidity of peat, bones are typically dissolved rather than preserved.\nScientists conducted an isotope analysis of the element strontium to measure the exact quantities to get an accurate idea of where he may have travelled before his death. They took samples from his femur and hair to compare. They were only able to measure up to a year because of his hair being short. The results contained only small differences in strontium isotope proportions, suggesting that he spent his final year in Denmark, and that he may have moved at least in his last six months.\nExaminations and X-rays showed that the man's head was undamaged, and his heart, lungs and liver were well preserved. The Silkeborg Museum estimated his age as approximately 40 years and height at , a relatively short stature even for the time. It is likely that the body had shrunk in the bog.\nOn the initial autopsy report in 1950, doctors concluded that Tollund Man died by hanging rather than strangulation. The rope left visible furrows in the skin beneath his chin and at the sides of his neck. There was no mark, however, at the back of the neck where the knot of the noose would have been located. After a re-examination in 2002, forensic scientists found further evidence to support these initial findings. Although the cervical vertebrae were undamaged (these vertebrae are often damaged as a result of hanging), radiography showed that the tongue was distended\u2014an indication of death by hanging.\nThe stomach and intestines were examined and tests were carried out on their contents in the 1950s and subsequently on stored samples with improved methodology. The man's last meal was identified as porridge or gruel made from grains and seeds, both cultivated and wild. Fragments of charred seeds identified in the 2020s also support the idea of porridge. Approximately 40 kinds of seeds were identified from seed fragments, but the porridge was primarily composed of three types: six-rowed barley, pale persicaria and flax. Very small amounts of other species were identified including corn spurrey, false flax and marshland plants. Quantitative analysis in the 2020s indicated that barley formed the major component, accompanied by other grass species and around 1% knotweed. Eggs of the parasites whipworm, tapeworm and mawworm were also recorded as present in his digestive system. Detailed chemical analysis of the samples recorded the presence of steroids and proteins from fish.\nFrom the stage of digestion it was concluded that the man had eaten 12 to 24 hours prior to his death. Porridges were common for people of this time. Although fish has been identified in this last meal, there was no evidence of fresh fruit, so the meal may have been eaten in winter or early spring when this item was not available. The presence of weed seeds, and sand, that would be cleaned from the barley at the final stage of harvesting, suggests that threshing waste was added into his food. This has been recorded in other bog bodies, so may have a ritual origin, or might be culinary for flavour.\nBoth feet and the right thumb, being well conserved by the peat, were also preserved in formalin for later examination. In 1976, the Danish police made a fingerprint analysis, making Tollund Man's thumbprint one of the oldest prints on record.\nCause of death.\nThe reason for Tollund Man's death has not been definitively determined. Some scholars believe the man was a ritual sacrifice because of the special treatment of the body: the arranged position of his body, the eyes and mouth being closed and the special meal that had been ingested. However, other scholars believe that his death may have been an execution, in part because Germanic tribes buried traitors under piles of sticks.\nDisplay.\nThe body is displayed at the Silkeborg Museum in Denmark, although only the head is original. Because conservation techniques for organic material were insufficiently advanced in the early 1950s for the entire body to be preserved, the forensic examiners suggested the head be severed and the rest of the body remain unpreserved. Subsequently, the body was desiccated and the tissue disappeared. In 1987, the Silkeborg Museum reconstructed the body using the skeletal remains as a base. As displayed today, the original head is attached to a replica of the body.\nOther bodies.\nIn Denmark, more than 500 bog bodies and skeletal remains dating to the Iron Age have been recovered. Specimens from Jutland include the relatively well-preserved Borremose bodies, Huldremose Woman, and Grauballe Man, on display at Moesgaard Museum near Aarhus, and the similarly-conserved Haraldsk\u00e6r Woman. Approximately 30 of these bog bodies are housed and/or displayed in Danish museums for continued research.\nIn popular culture.\nNobel Prize-winning Irish poet Seamus Heaney wrote a series of poems inspired by P. V. Glob's study of the mummified Iron Age bodies found in Jutland's peat bogs, finding contemporary political relevance in the relics of the ritualistic killings. Heaney's poem \"The Tollund Man\", published in his \"Wintering Out\" collection, compares the ritual sacrifice to those who died in the sectarian violence of \"the Troubles\". Heaney wrote an excerpt from the poem in the Tollund Man exhibit's guest book in 1973.\nBritish author Margaret Drabble, in her 1989 novel \"A Natural Curiosity\", uses her characters' obsession with the Tollund Man to provide a satirical criticism of Margaret Thatcher's modern England.\nTollund Man is featured in several songs: \"Tollund Man\" (1995) by the American folk band The Mountain Goats and \"Curse of the Tollund Man\" (2004) by the English rock band The Darkness.\nTollund Man was mentioned in the episode \"Mummy in the Maze\" of the American television series \"Bones\" and was also mentioned in the 2016 film \"Sacrifice\" in which a bog body was found in the Shetland Islands.\nHe is the subject of the novel \"Meet Me at the Museum\" by Anne Youngson in which the main characters bond through a shared fascination with the Tollund Man.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30470", "revid": "6379", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30470", "title": "Thor (god)", "text": ""}
{"id": "30472", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30472", "title": "Tomasso Albinoni", "text": ""}
{"id": "30474", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30474", "title": "Trisomy 21", "text": ""}
{"id": "30475", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30475", "title": "Ted Turner", "text": "American media mogul (born 1938)\nRobert Edward Turner III (born November 19, 1938) is an American entrepreneur, television producer, media proprietor, and philanthropist. He founded the Cable News Network (CNN), the first 24-hour cable news channel. In addition, he founded WTBS, which pioneered the superstation concept in cable television, as well as television networks TBS and TNT.\nAs a philanthropist, he gave $1 billion to create the United Nations Foundation, a public charity to broaden U.S. support for the United Nations. Turner serves as Chairman of the United Nations Foundation board of directors. Additionally, in 2001, Turner co-founded the Nuclear Threat Initiative with US senator Sam Nunn (D-GA). NTI is a non-partisan organization dedicated to reducing global reliance on, and preventing the proliferation of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons. He currently serves as co-chairman of the board of directors.\nTurner's media empire began with his father's billboard business, Turner Outdoor Advertising, which he took over in March 1963 after his father's suicide. It was worth $1 million. His purchase of an Atlanta UHF station in 1970 began the Turner Broadcasting System. In 1980 he founded CNN, now one of the most prominent news networks in the world. Turner turned the Atlanta Braves baseball team into a nationally popular franchise (including winning the 1995 World Series under his ownership), and launched the charitable Goodwill Games. He helped revive interest in professional wrestling by purchasing Jim Crockett Promotions which was then rebranded as World Championship Wrestling (WCW).\nTurner's penchant for controversial statements earned him the nicknames \"The Mouth of the South\" and \"Captain Outrageous\". Turner has also devoted his assets to environmental causes. He was the largest private landowner in the United States until John C. Malone surpassed him in 2011. He uses much of his land for ranches to re-popularize bison meat (for his Ted's Montana Grill chain) and has amassed the largest herd in the world. He also created the environmental-themed animated series \"Captain Planet and the Planeteers\".\nEarly life.\nTurner was born on November 19, 1938, in Cincinnati, Ohio, the son of Florence (n\u00e9e Rooney) and Robert Edward Turner II, a billboard magnate. When he was nine, his family moved to Savannah, Georgia, and raised him as an Episcopalian. He attended The McCallie School, a private boys' preparatory school in Chattanooga, Tennessee.\nTurner attended Brown University and was vice-president of the Brown Debating Union and captain of the sailing team. He became a member of Kappa Sigma. Turner initially majored in classics. His father wrote saying that this choice made him \"appalled, even horrified\", and that he \"almost puked\". Turner later changed his major to economics, but before receiving a degree, he was expelled for having a female student in his dormitory room. Turner was awarded an honorary B.A. from Brown University in November 1989 when he returned to campus to give the keynote address for the National Association of College Broadcasters second annual conference.\nExpelled from Brown just as tensions in Vietnam were beginning to heat up, Turner joined the United States Coast Guard Reserve in order to fill his service obligation before he ended up getting drafted. Honored by the United States Navy Memorial with its Lone Sailor Award in 2013, Turner told \"The Washington Post\", \"I liked boats\", and ended up getting \"deployed to some pretty sweet places\u00a0\u2013 Charleston and Fort Lauderdale.\"\nBusiness career.\nWTBS.\nAfter leaving Brown University, Turner returned to the South in late 1960 to become general manager of the Macon, Georgia, branch of his father's business. Following his father's suicide in March 1963, Turner became president and chief executive of Turner Advertising Company when he was 24 and turned the firm into a global enterprise. He joined the Young Republicans, saying he \"felt at ease among these budding conservatives and was merely following in [his father]'s far-right footsteps\", according to \"It Ain't as Easy as It Looks\".\nDuring the Vietnam War era, Turner's business prospered; it had \"virtual monopolies in Savannah, Macon, Columbus, and Charleston\" and was the \"largest outdoor advertising company in the Southeast\", according to \"It Ain't as Easy as It Looks\". The book observed that Turner \"discovered his father had sheltered a substantial amount of taxable income over the years by personally lending it back to the company\" and \"discovered that the billboard business could be a gold mine, a tax-depreciable revenue stream that threw off enormous amounts of cash with almost no capital investment\".\nIn the late 1960s Turner began buying several Southern radio stations. In 1969, he sold his radio stations to buy a struggling television station in Atlanta, UHF Channel 17 WJRJ (now WPCH). At the time, UHF stations did well only in markets without VHF stations, like Fresno, California, or in markets with only one station on VHF. Independent UHF stations were not ratings winners or that profitable even in larger markets, but Turner concluded that this would change as people wanted more than several choices. He changed the call sign to WTCG, erroneously claimed to have stood for \"Watch This Channel Grow\" but in actuality stood for Turner Communications Group. Initially, the station ran old movies from prior decades, along with theatrical cartoons and bygone sitcoms and drama programs. As a better syndicated product fell off the VHF stations, Turner would acquire it for his station at a very low price. WTCG ran mostly second- and even third-hand programming of the time, including fare such as \"Gilligan's Island\", \"I Love Lucy\", \"Star Trek\", \"Hazel\", and \"Bugs Bunny\". Other low-cost content included humorist Bill Tush reading the news at 3 a.m., prompting Turner to jokingly comment that, \"we have a 100% share at this time\". Tush once delivered the news with his \"co-anchor\" Rex, a German Shepherd. The dog (who belonged to an associate) was shown next to Tush on set, wearing a shirt and tie while eating a peanut butter sandwich. Rex appeared only on one episode, but a myth grew where many people thought the dog was a nightly guest. By 1972, WTCG had acquired the rights to telecast Atlanta Braves and Atlanta Hawks games. Turner would go on to purchase UHF Channel 36 WRET (now WCNC) in Charlotte, North Carolina, and ran it with a format similar to WTCG.\nIn 1976, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) allowed WTCG to use a satellite to transmit content to local cable television providers around the nation. On December 17, 1976, the rechristened WTCG-TV Super-Station began to broadcast old movies, situation comedy reruns, cartoons, and sports nationwide to cable-television subscribers. As cable systems developed, many carried his station to free their schedules, which increased his viewers and advertising. The number of subscribers eventually reached 2 million and Turner's net worth rose to $100 million. He bought a plantation in Jacksonboro, South Carolina, for $2 million.\nIn 1976, Turner bought the Atlanta Braves, and in 1977, he bought the Atlanta Hawks, partially to provide programming for WTCG. Using the rechristened WTBS superstation's status to broadcast Braves games into nearly every home in North America, Turner turned the Braves into a household name even before their run of success in the 1990s and early 2000s. At one point, he suggested to pitcher Andy Messersmith, who wore number 17, that he change his surname to \"Channel\" to promote the television station.\nIn 1978, Turner struck a deal with a student-operated radio station at MIT, Technology Broadcasting System (now WMBR), to obtain the rights to the WTBS call sign for $50,000. Such a move allowed Turner to strengthen the branding of his \"Super-Station\" using the initials TBS. Turner Communications Group was renamed Turner Broadcasting System and WTCG was renamed WTBS.\nIn 1986, Turner founded the Goodwill Games with the goal of easing tensions between capitalist and communist countries. Broadcasting the events of these games also provided his superstation the ability to provide Olympic-style sports programming.\nTurner Field, first used for the 1996 Summer Olympics as Centennial Olympic Stadium and then converted into a baseball-only facility for the Braves, was named after him.\nCNN.\nIn 1978, Turner contacted media executive Reese Schonfeld about his plans to launch a 24-hour news channel (Schonfeld had previously approached Turner with the proposition in 1977 but was rebuffed). Schonfeld responded that it could be done with a staff of 300 if they used an all electronic newsroom and satellites for all transmissions. It would require an initial investment of $15 million\u2013$20 million and several million dollars per month to operate.\nIn 1979, Turner sold his North Carolina station, WRET, to fund the transaction and established its headquarters in lower-cost, non-union Atlanta. Schonfeld was appointed first president and chief executive of the then-named Cable News Network (CNN). CNN hired Jim Kitchell, former general manager of news at NBC as vice president of production and operations; Sam Zelman as vice president of news and executive producer; Bill MacPhail as head of sports, Ted Kavanau as director of personnel, and Burt Reinhardt as vice president of the network. In 1982, Schonfeld was succeeded as CEO by Turner after a dispute over Schonfeld's firing of Sandi Freeman; and was succeeded as president by CNN's executive vice president, Burt Reinhardt.\nTurner Doomsday Video.\nTurner famously stated before CNN debuted: \"We won't be signing off until the world ends. We'll be on, and we will cover the end of the world, live, and that will be our last event... we'll play the National Anthem only one time, on the 1st of June [the network's debut on June 1, 1980], and when the end of the world comes, we'll play 'Nearer, My God, to Thee' before we sign off.\" Reportedly, Turner plans to make good on that promise. He commissioned a video recording of a military marching band playing the hymn. Turner has sometimes played the tape for reporters, noting the reason he made it. In 2015, the video was found in CNN's database and leaked. The video was tagged in the database as \"[Hold for release] till end of world confirmed\".\nOther ventures.\nIn 1981, Turner Broadcasting System acquired Brut Productions from Faberge Inc.\nAfter a failed attempt to acquire CBS, Turner purchased the film studio MGM/UA Entertainment Co. from Kirk Kerkorian in 1986 for $1.5 billion. Following the acquisition, Turner had amassed enormous debt and sold parts of the acquisition; Kerkorian bought back MGM/UA Entertainment. The MGM/UA Studio lot in Culver City was sold to Lorimar/Telepictures. Turner kept MGM's pre-May 1986 and pre-merger film and television library.\nTurner Entertainment was established in August 1986 to oversee film and television properties owned by Turner thanks to the deal with Kerkorian.\nHaving acquired MGM's library of 2,200 films that were made before 1986, Turner syndicated them to television stations across the country. When broadcasting some older films originally filmed in black-and-white, he aired colorized versions of them. Opposition to Turner's colorization arose among cinephiles, film critics, actors, and directors. Film critic Roger Ebert wrote that broadcasting a colorized \"Casablanca\" \"will be one of the saddest days in the history of the movies. It is sad because it demonstrates that there is no movie that Turner will spare, no classic however great that is safe from the vulgarity of his computerized graffiti gangs.\" Due in part to Turner's colorization, the Library of Congress established the National Film Registry with the aim to preserve American films in their original formats.\nIn 1988, Turner purchased Jim Crockett Promotions. He renamed it World Championship Wrestling (WCW), which became the main competitor to Vince McMahon's World Wrestling Federation (WWF). This rivalry became known as the Monday Night War, and would last throughout the 1990s. In 2001, under AOL Time Warner, WCW was sold to the WWF.\nAlso in 1988, Turner introduced Turner Network Television (TNT) with \"Gone with the Wind.\" TNT, initially showing older movies and television shows, added original programs and newer reruns. Turner would later create Turner Classic Movies (TCM) in 1994, airing Turner's pre-1986 MGM library of films alongside those of Warner Bros. made before 1950, though it has expanded its library since.\nIn 1989, Turner created the Turner Tomorrow Fellowship for fiction offering positive solutions to global problems. The winner, from 2500 entries worldwide, was Daniel Quinn's \"Ishmael.\"\nIn 1990, he created the Turner Foundation, which focuses on philanthropic grants concerning issues pertaining to the environment and overpopulation. In the same year he created Captain Planet, an environmental superhero. Turner produced the television series \"Captain Planet and the Planeteers\" and its later sequel series with Captain Planet as the featured character.\nIn 1992, the pre-May 1986 MGM library, which also included Warner Bros. properties including the early \"Looney Tunes\" and \"Merrie Melodies\" libraries and also the Fleischer Studios and Famous Studios \"Popeye\" cartoons from Paramount (and then United Artists), became the core of Cartoon Network. A year before, Turner's companies purchased Hanna-Barbera Productions (whose longtime parent, Taft/Great American Broadcasting, had been headquartered in Turner's original hometown of Cincinnati), beating out several other bidders including MCA Inc. (whose subsidiaries included Universal Pictures and Universal Destinations &amp; Experiences) and Hallmark Cards. With the 1996 Time Warner merger, the channel's archives gained the later Warner Bros. cartoon library as well as other Time Warner-owned cartoons.\nIn 1993, Turner and Russian journalist Eduard Sagalajev founded the Moscow Independent Broadcasting Corporation (MIBC). This corporation operated the sixth frequency in Russian television and founded the Russian channel TV-6. The company was later purchased by Russian businessman Boris Berezovsky and an unknown group of private persons. In 2007 the license for TV-6 had expired and there was no application for renewal.\nIn 1993, Turner also considered acquiring Paramount Pictures, but withdrew from this endeavor following a meeting with then-QVC head Barry Diller.\nTime Warner merger.\nTurner Broadcasting System merged with Time Warner on October 10, 1996, with Turner as vice chairman and head of Time Warner and Turner's cable networks division. Turner was dropped as head of cable networks by CEO Gerald Levin but remained as Vice Chairman of Time Warner. He would be succeeded in March 2001 as head of Turner Broadcasting by Jamie Kellner, who was also greatly responsible for cancelling WCW's television contracts on networks which Turner previously ran. He resigned as AOL Time Warner vice chairman in 2003 and then from the Time Warner board of directors in 2006.\nOn January 11, 2001, Time Warner was purchased by America Online (AOL) to become AOL Time Warner, a merger which Turner initially supported. However, the burst of the dot-com bubble hurt the growth and profitability of the AOL division, which in turn dragged down AOL Time Warner's performance and stock price. At a board meeting in fall 2001, Turner's outburst against AOL Time Warner CEO Gerald Levin eventually led to Levin's announced resignation effective in early 2002, being replaced by Richard Parsons. In contrast to Levin, who as CEO isolated Turner from important company matters, Parsons invited Turner back to provide strategic advice, although Turner never received an operational role that he sought. Time Warner dropped \"AOL\" from its name in October 2003. In December 2009, AOL was spun off from the Time Warner conglomerate as a separate company.\nTurner was Time Warner's biggest individual shareholder. It is estimated he lost as much as $7 billion when the stock collapsed in the wake of the merger. When asked about buying back his former assets, he replied that he \"can't afford them now\". In June 2014, Rupert Murdoch's 21st Century Fox made a bid for Time Warner valuing it at $80 billion. The Time Warner board rejected the offer and it was formally withdrawn on August 5, 2014.\nRivalry with Murdoch.\nTurner had a long-running feud with fellow cable magnate Rupert Murdoch for years. This originated in 1983 when a Murdoch-sponsored yacht collided with the yacht skippered by Turner, \"Condor\", during the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race, causing it to run aground from the finish line. At the post-race dinner, a drunken Turner verbally assaulted Murdoch, afterward challenging him to a televised fistfight in Las Vegas.\nMurdoch's Fox News, established in 1996, became a rival to Turner's CNN, a channel that Murdoch regarded with disdain for its \"liberal slant\" in news coverage. Time Warner declined to carry it on their New York City cable network in response, who in the midst of a merger, Turner said would \"squash Rupert Murdoch like a bug.\"\nIn 2003, Turner challenged Murdoch to another fistfight, and later on accused Murdoch of being a \"warmonger\" for his support and backing of President George W. Bush's invasion of Iraq.\nHowever, revealing in an interview with \"Variety\" in 2019, Turner said he and Murdoch have since made amends.\nAtlanta Braves.\nFor most of his first decade as owner of the Braves, Turner was a very hands-on owner. This peaked in 1977, his second year as owner.\nTurner was suspended for one year by Commissioner of Baseball Bowie Kuhn on January 3, 1977, for his actions while pursuing the signing of free agent outfielder Gary Matthews from the San Francisco Giants. Matthews signed a five-year, $1.875 million contract with the Braves on November 18, 1976. Kuhn's actions stemmed from remarks made by Turner to then-Giants owner Bob Lurie during the 1976 World Series. In addition, the Braves were also stripped of their first-round selections in the June 1978 draft of high school and college players. Turner, however, successfully appealed the suspension and Kuhn relented and reinstated the draft selections, one of which would turn out to be Bob Horner from Arizona State University.\nOn May 11, 1977, with the team mired in a 16-game losing streak, Turner sent manager Dave Bristol on a 10-day \"scouting trip\" and Turner himself took over as interim manager \u2013 the first owner/manager in the majors since Connie Mack. He ran the team for one game (a loss to the Pittsburgh Pirates) before National League president Chub Feeney ordered him to stop running the team. Feeney cited major league rules which bar managers and players from owning stock in their clubs. Turner appealed to Commissioner of Baseball Bowie Kuhn, and showed up to manage the Braves when they returned home. However, Kuhn turned down the appeal, citing Turner's \"lack of familiarity with game operations.\"\nIn the mid-1980s Turner began leaving day-to-day operations to the baseball operations staff, and the team (still under Turner's ownership) won the 1995 World Series.\nThe Atlanta Braves were sold by Time Warner (which had assumed control after the merger with Turner Broadcasting System) to Liberty Media in 2007.\nAwards and honors.\nEmmy Awards\nSports\nMedia\nHalls of Fame\nOrganizational\nPolitics.\nOn September 19, 2006, in a Reuters Newsmaker conference, Turner said of Iran's nuclear position: \"They're a sovereign state. We have 28,000. Why can't they have 10? We don't say anything about Israel\u200d\u2014\u200cthey've got 100 of them approximately\u200d\u2014\u200cor India or Pakistan or Russia.\"\nA proponent of healthcare reform bills, Turner has said: \"We\u2019re the only first-world country that doesn't have universal healthcare and it's a disgrace.\"\nIn 2010, during the wake of both the devastating Deepwater Horizon environmental disaster and the Upper Big Branch Mine disaster that killed 29 miners in West Virginia, Turner stated on CNN that \"I'm just wondering if God is telling us he doesn't want to drill offshore. And right before that, we had that coal mine disaster in West Virginia where we lost 29 miners\u00a0... Maybe the Lord's tired of having the mountains of West Virginia, the tops knocked off of them so they may get more coal. I think maybe we ought to just leave the coal in the ground and go with solar and wind power and geothermals\u00a0...\"\nTurner endorsed Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton in the run-up for the 2016 U.S. presidential election. In 2018 he revealed he had once considered a run for president when he was married to Jane Fonda, who told him she would leave him if he did.\nCurbing population growth.\nAlong with advocating for clean water and improved stewardship of the land, Turner established the Turner Foundation to address ways to curb population growth. Turner has put $125 million of his own money into the foundation and has set aside $6 million per year to address population growth rates. Addressing the issue at a Montana gathering in 1996 he said \"I'm not talking about getting rid of anybody here, I've got 5 children myself.\" He went on to discuss hunger and poverty and ways to address those issues.\nIn 2009 Turner met with other business moguls to include Oprah Winfrey, Bill Gates, George Soros and David Rockefeller to address issues ranging from the environment to healthcare. The group also addressed population growth with discussion of vaccines and immunization efforts being criticized due to the perception that decision making and public policy could be directed by a handful of elites. Although no formal statement was released, the event was covered by Paul Harris for \"The Guardian\".\nControversial comments.\nTurner once called observers of Ash Wednesday \"Jesus freaks\", though he apologized, and dubbed opponents of abortion \"bozos\".\nIn 1999, Turner made a joke about Polish mine detectors when asked about Pope John Paul II. After a harsh response from the Polish deputy foreign minister Radek Sikorski, Turner apologized.\nIn 2002, Turner accused Israel of terror: \"The Palestinians are fighting with human suicide bombers, that's all they have. The Israelis ... they've got one of the most powerful military machines in the world. The Palestinians have nothing. So who are the terrorists? I would make a case that both sides are involved in terrorism.\" He apologized for that and the remarks in 2011 about the 9/11 hijackers, but also defended himself: \"Look, I'm a very good thinker, but I sometimes grab the wrong word ... I mean, I don't type my speeches, then sit up there and read them off the teleprompter, you know. I wing it.\"\nAlso in 2008, Turner asserted on PBS's \"Charlie Rose\" that if steps are not taken to address global warming, most people would die and \"the rest of us will be cannibals\". Turner also said in the interview that he advocated Americans having no more than two children. In 2010, he stated that China's one-child policy should be implemented.\nTurner Enterprises.\nTurner Enterprises, Inc. (TEI) is a private American company that was founded in 1976 and manages the business interests, land holdings and investments of Ted Turner, including the oversight of Turner's 24 properties across the United States and Argentina. At two million acres of personal and ranch land, Turner is the second-largest landowner in North America. He owned 19 ranches \u2013 16 in the western U.S. and three in Argentina. In January 2016, the Osage Nation bought Turner's 43,000 acre (170\u00a0km2) Bluestem Ranch in Osage County, Oklahoma. Turner had purchased the property in 2001 primarily to raise bison.\nThrough Turner Enterprises, he owns ranches in Colorado, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, and South Dakota. Totaling , his land-holdings across America make Turner one of the largest individual landowners in North America (by acreage). According to the Flatwater Free Press, a Nebraska non-profit newspaper, Turner is the largest owner of Nebraska farmland.\nTEI ranches are primarily used for bison ranching. His bison herd, approximately 51,000 animals on 15 ranches, is the largest private herd in the world. The company's mission statement is \"To manage Turner lands in an economically sustainable and ecologically sensitive manner while promoting the conservation of native species.\" Other important wildlife species on the property include whitetail deer, wild turkey and bobwhite quail. In addition to bison ranching, TEI ranches are also used for commercial fishing and hunting, as well as limited sustainable timber harvesting, as well as eco-tourism on the New Mexico ranches. His biggest ranch is Vermejo Reserve in New Mexico. At , it is the largest privately owned, contiguous tract of land in the United States.\nTEI works closely with Turner's philanthropic and charitable interests, including the founding and ongoing operations of the United Nations Foundation, Nuclear Threat Initiative, Turner Foundation, Captain Planet Foundation, and the Turner Endangered Species Fund. Turner Enterprises is headquartered in the Turner Building (formerly the Bona Allen Office Building) in Atlanta, Georgia, also home to the Ted's Montana Grill restaurant chain, Ted Turner Reserves and Turner Renewable Energy. In 2011, Ted Turner and TEI completed construction of a 25-panel solar array in the company's parking lot, which provides solar power to the Turner Building and its businesses\nChaired by Turner, TEI's executive leadership also includes CEO &amp; President S. Taylor Glover.\nPersonal life.\nTurner has been married and divorced three times: to Judy Nye (1960\u20131964), Jane Shirley Smith (1965\u20131988), and actress Jane Fonda (1991\u20132001). He has five children. In a television interview with Piers Morgan on May 3, 2012, Turner said he had four girlfriends, which he acknowledged was complicated but nonetheless easier than being married. One of Turner's children, Robert Edward \"Teddy\" Turner IV, announced on January 23, 2013, that he intended to run in the South Carolina Republican primary for the open Congressional seat vacated by Tim Scott who was appointed to the US Senate. Turner's son came in 4th, receiving 7.90% of the vote.\nIn 2010, Turner joined Warren Buffett's and Bill Gates's The Giving Pledge, vowing to donate the majority of his fortune to charity upon his death.\nIn the 1993 biography \"It Ain't As Easy as It Looks\" by Porter Bibb, Turner discussed his use of lithium and struggles with mental illness. The 1981 biography \"Lead, Follow or Get Out of the Way\" by Christian Williams chronicles the founding of CNN. In 2008, Turner wrote \"Call Me Ted,\" which documents his career and personal life.\nIn an interview on \"CBS Sunday Morning\" in 2018, Turner revealed his diagnosis of Lewy body dementia.\nSailing.\nWhen Turner was 26, he entered sailing competitions at the Savannah Yacht Club and competed in Olympic trials in 1964. He first attempted to win the America's Cup in 1974, losing in the defender's trials, aboard 12 Metre class yacht US\u201325 \"Mariner\". Turner was defeated by Ted Hood aboard US\u201326 \"Courageous\".\nTurner was asked to join the 1977 America's Cup defense syndicate formed by Hood and Lee Loomis for the New York Yacht Club. That group still owned the \"Courageous\" but decided to design and construct a new 12 Metre - US\u201328 \"Independence\" - to defend the 1974 America's Cup victory. However, in the trials, with Turner as skipper aboard the 3-year-old \"Courageous\" proved to be the faster than Hood and \"Independence\" and was selected to race in the 1977 races.\nFrom 13 to 18 September 1977 \"Courageous\", with Turner in command, defeated the challenger \"Australia\", skippered by Noel Robins, in a four-race sweep. \"Courageous\"' greatest winning margin out of all four races was 2 minutes and 23 seconds. \nIn the 1979 Fastnet Race, in a storm that killed 15 participants, he skippered the S&amp;S-designed 61-footer \"Tenacious\" to a corrected-time victory.\nTurner appeared on the cover of \"Sports Illustrated\" on July 4, 1977, after winning 1977 America's Cup.\nTurner was inducted into the America's Cup Hall of Fame in 1993, and the National Sailing Hall of Fame in 2011.\nLegacy.\nTurner has been regarded as one of the entrepreneurs who transformed the cable industry and being referred to as \"the Alexander the Great of broadcasting\" by Slate magazine:\nWhile Turner has been described as a \"valiant liberator\" and cast the networks as oppressive scoundrels, in content his programming fell short of inspiring. His network was built on sitcom reruns, old movies, cartoons, and Atlanta Braves games. He found an audience for classics of a bygone time, along with slightly down-market content like professional wrestling. Nonetheless, he would find glorious terms even for retreads and junk, claiming to be pulling America back to television's golden age: \"I want to get it back to the principles\" he once said, \"that made us good.\" Nostalgic, Manichean, and boot-strappy: like programmer, like programming\nThe cable industry boomed in the late 1970s and early 1980s, as nearly a dozen cable networks launched based on the Turner model. They include much of what we now consider the staples of cable TV, including ESPN, MTV, Bravo, Showtime, BET, the Discovery Channel, and the Weather Channel. Those are the better-known channels only by virtue of having survived; others, such as ARTS, CBS Cable, and the Satellite News Channel, folded or were acquired by other companies\nBob Hope, who is co-owner and president of Hope-Beckham, an independent agency based in Atlanta that previously worked for Turner in his networks, has described that \"Ted Turner was special. His vision and his determination and his unwillingness to quit were infectious. He was willing to start small and had the persistence and patience to make his ideas grow\". Hope also further reiterated that \"In some ways, he was outrageous, but in most ways he was remarkable. He had great passion for doing what was right for the world. He stated his dream of using communication to bring peace, to tell both sides of any story, that 'one man's terrorist is another man\u2019s freedom fighter.' If he could get people to understand each other, there would be no wars. His vision was bold and infectious. His Goodwill Games, his creation of the UN Foundation, and his approach to news on the original CNN were passions for peace\".\nProfessional wrestling promoter and former Senior Vice President of WCW second in charge after Turner, Eric Bischoff praised Turner claiming \"He was an inspirational leader, he was a risk taker, he appreciated people who took risks, he was not afraid of failure while most people are. Ted was not afraid to fail, he was more afraid of not trying and not conquering that next horizon.\u201d\nOn June 24, 1999, Vince McMahon stated on \"Late Night with Conan O'Brien\": \"All I'll say about Ted is he's a son-of-a-bitch, other than that, he's probably not a bad guy, but I don't like him at all\". Later in 2021, when asked about the upstart AEW in comparison to Turner's WCW, McMahon dismissed AEW, stating that \"it certainly is not a situation where 'rising tides' because that was when Ted Turner was coming after us with all of Time Warner's assets as well\".\nIn 2010 Turner was named a Georgia Trustee, an honor given by the Georgia Historical Society, in conjunction with the Governor of Georgia, to individuals whose accomplishments and community service reflect the ideals of the founding body of Trustees, which governed the Georgia colony from 1732 to 1752.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30476", "revid": "1295314117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30476", "title": "Tanka", "text": "Genre of classical Japanese poetry\n is a genre of classical Japanese poetry and one of the major genres of Japanese literature.\nEtymology.\nOriginally, in the time of the influential poetry anthology (latter half of the eighth century AD), the term \"tanka\" was used to distinguish \"short poems\" from the longer . In the ninth and tenth centuries, however, notably with the compilation of the \"Kokinsh\u016b\", the short poem became the dominant form of poetry in Japan, and the originally general word became the standard name for this form. Japanese poet and critic Masaoka Shiki revived the term \"tanka\" in the early twentieth century for his statement that \"waka should be renewed and modernized\". \"Haiku\" is also a term of his invention, used for his revision of standalone Hokku, with the same idea.\nForm.\nTanka consist of five units (often treated as separate lines when romanized or translated) usually with the following pattern of \"on\" (often treated as, roughly, the number of syllables per unit or line):\n5-7-5-7-7.\nThe 5-7-5 is called the , and the 7-7 is called the . Sometimes the distinction between Waka and Tanka are drawn on where the division is placed, either after the first couplet or after the first tercet, but sources disagree. Even in early classical compilations of these poems, such as the \"Ogura Hyakunin Isshu\", the form is often broken to suit the poet's preferences.\nHistory.\nModern.\nDuring the Kojiki and Nihonshoki periods the tanka retained a well defined form, but the history of the mutations of the tanka itself forms an important chapter in haiku history,\nuntil the modern revival of tanka began with several poets who began to publish literary magazines, gathering their friends and disciples as contributors.\nYosano Tekkan and the poets that were associated with his \"My\u014dj\u014d\" magazine were one example, but that magazine was fairly short-lived (Feb. 1900\u00a0\u2013 Nov. 1908). A young high school student, Otori You (later known as Akiko Yosano), and Ishikawa Takuboku contributed to \"My\u014dj\u014d\". In 1980 the \"New York Times\" published a representative work:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse transliteration-translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMasaoka Shiki's (1867\u20131902) poems and writing (as well as the work of his friends and disciples) have had a more lasting influence. The magazine \"Hototogisu\", which he founded, still publishes.\nIn the Meiji period (1868\u20131912), Shiki claimed the situation with waka should be rectified, and waka should be modernized in the same way as other things in the country. He praised the style of as manly, as opposed to the style of \"Kokin Wakash\u016b\", the model for waka for a thousand years, which he denigrated and called feminine. He praised Minamoto no Sanetomo, the third \"sh\u014dgun\" of the Kamakura shogunate, who was a disciple of Fujiwara no Teika and composed waka in a style much like that in the .\nFollowing Shiki's death, in the Taish\u014d period (1912\u201326), Mokichi Sait\u014d and his friends began publishing a magazine, \"Araragi\", which praised the . Using their magazine they spread their influence throughout the country. Their modernization aside, in the court the old traditions still prevailed. The court continues to hold many \"utakai\" (waka reading parties) both officially and privately. The utakai that the Emperor holds on the first of the year is called \"Utakai Hajime\" and it is an important event for waka poets; the Emperor himself releases a single tanka for the public's perusal.\nAfter World War II, waka began to be considered out-of-date, but since the late 1980s it has revived under the example of contemporary poets, such as Machi Tawara. With her 1987 bestselling collection \"Salad Anniversary\", the poet has been credited with revitalising the tanka for modern audiences.\nToday there are many circles of tanka poets. Many newspapers have a weekly tanka column, and there are many professional and amateur tanka poets; Makoto \u014coka's poetry column was published seven days a week for more than 20 years on the front page of \"Asahi Shimbun.\" As a parting gesture, outgoing PM Jun'ichir\u014d Koizumi wrote a tanka to thank his supporters.\nThe Japanese imperial family continue to write tanka for the New Year.\nPoetic culture.\nIn ancient times, it was a custom between two writers to exchange waka instead of letters in prose. In particular, it was common between lovers. Reflecting this custom, five of the twenty volumes of the Kokin Wakash\u016b gathered waka for love. In the Heian period the lovers would exchange waka in the morning when lovers met at the woman's home. The exchanged waka were called \"Kinuginu\" (\u5f8c\u671d), because it was thought the man wanted to stay with his lover and when the sun rose he had almost no time to put on his clothes on which he had lain instead of a mattress (it being the custom in those days). Works of this period, \"The Pillow Book\" and \"The Tale of Genji\" provide us with such examples in the life of aristocrats. Murasaki Shikibu uses 795 waka in her \"The Tale of Genji\" as waka her characters made in the story. Some of these are her own, although most are taken from existing sources. Shortly, making and reciting waka became a part of aristocratic culture. They recited a part of appropriate waka freely to imply something on an occasion.\nMuch like with tea, there were a number of rituals and events surrounding the composition, presentation, and judgment of waka. There were two types of waka party that produced occasional poetry: \"Utakai\" and \"Uta-awase\". Utakai was a party in which all participants wrote a waka and recited them. Utakai derived from Shikai, Kanshi party and was held in occasion people gathered like seasonal party for the New Year, some celebrations for a newborn baby, a birthday, or a newly built house. \"Utaawase\" was a contest in two teams. Themes were determined and a chosen poet from each team wrote a waka for a given theme. The judge appointed a winner for each theme and gave points to the winning team. The team which received the largest sum was the winner. The first recorded Utaawase was held in around 885. At first, Utaawase was playful and mere entertainment, but as the poetic tradition deepened and grew, it turned into a serious aesthetic contest, with considerably more formality.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30479", "revid": "48557933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30479", "title": "Thomas More", "text": "English politician, author and philosopher (1478\u20131535)\nSir Thomas More (7 February 1478 \u2013 6 July 1535), venerated in the Catholic Church as Saint Thomas More, was an English lawyer, judge, social philosopher, author, statesman, theologian, and noted Renaissance humanist. He also served Henry VIII as Lord Chancellor from October 1529 to May 1532. He wrote \"Utopia\", published in 1516, which describes the political system of an imaginary island state.\nMore opposed the Protestant Reformation, directing polemics against the theology of Martin Luther, Huldrych Zwingli and William Tyndale. More also opposed Henry VIII's separation from the Catholic Church, refusing to acknowledge Henry as supreme head of the Church of England and the annulment of his marriage to Catherine of Aragon. After refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy, he was convicted of treason on what he stated was false evidence, and was executed. At his execution, he was reported to have said: \"I die the King's good servant, and God's first.\"\nPope Pius XI canonised More in 1935 as a martyr. Pope John Paul II in 2000 declared him the patron saint of statesmen and politicians. In his proclamation the pope stated: \"It can be said that he demonstrated in a singular way the value of a moral conscience... even if, in his actions against heretics, he reflected the limits of the culture of his time\".\nEarly life.\nBorn in the City of London, on 7 February 1478, Thomas More was the son of Sir John More (a successful lawyer and later a judge) and his wife Agnes (\"n\u00e9e\" Graunger). John More lived most of his life in Milk Street, London and, from this, many biographers (starting in the seventeenth century with More's great-grandson Cresacre More (1572\u20131649), the youngest son and eventual heir of Thomas More II) have asserted, without confirmation, that this was the place of Thomas More's birth. No contemporary biographer recorded this. He was the second of six children. More was educated at St. Anthony's School, then considered one of London's best schools. From 1490 to 1492, More served John Morton, the Archbishop of Canterbury and Lord Chancellor of England, as a household page.\nMorton enthusiastically supported the \"New Learning\" (scholarship which was later known as \"humanism\" or \"London humanism\"), and thought highly of the young More. Believing that More had great potential, Morton nominated him for a place at the University of Oxford, either in St. Mary Hall or Canterbury College, both now defunct.\nMore began his studies at Oxford in 1492. He received a classical education studying under Thomas Linacre and William Grocyn, and he became proficient in both Latin and Greek. More left Oxford after only two years\u2014at his father's insistence\u2014to begin legal training in London at New Inn, one of the Inns of Chancery. In 1496, More became a student at Lincoln's Inn, one of the Inns of Court, where he remained until 1502, when he was called to the bar.\nA noted linguist, More could speak and banter in Latin with the same facility as in English, and had competency in Greek and several other languages. He wrote and translated poetry. He was particularly influenced by Pico della Mirandola and translated the \"Life of Pico\" into English.\nSpiritual life.\nAccording to his friend, the theologian Desiderius Erasmus of Rotterdam, More once seriously contemplated abandoning his legal career to become a monk. Between 1503 and 1504 More lived near the Carthusian monastery outside the walls of London and joined in the monks' spiritual exercises. Although he deeply admired their piety, More ultimately decided to remain a layman, standing for election to Parliament in 1504 and marrying the following year.\nMore continued ascetic practices for the rest of his life, such as wearing a hair shirt next to his skin and occasionally engaging in self-flagellation. A tradition of the Third Order of Saint Francis honours More as a member of that Order on their calendar of saints.\nFamily life.\nMore married Joanna \"Jane\" Colt, the eldest daughter of John Colt of Essex in 1505. In that year he leased a portion of a house known as the Old Barge (originally there had been a wharf nearby serving the Walbrook river) on Bucklersbury, St Stephen Walbrook parish, London. Eight years later he took over the rest of the house and in total he lived there for almost 20 years, until his move to Chelsea in 1525. Erasmus reported that More wanted to give his young wife a better education than she had previously received at home, and tutored her in music and literature. The couple had four children: Margaret, Elizabeth, Cecily, and John. Jane died in 1511. \nGoing \"against friends' advice and common custom,\" within 30 days, More had married one of the many eligible women among his wide circle of friends. He chose Alice Middleton, a widow, to head his household and care for his small children. The speed of the marriage was so unusual that More had to get a dispensation from the banns of marriage, which, due to his good public reputation, he easily obtained.\nMore had no children from his second marriage, although he raised Alice's daughter from her previous marriage as his own. More also became the guardian of two young girls: Anne Cresacre, who would eventually marry his son John More, and Margaret Giggs (later Clement), the orphaned daughter of his biological daughter's wet nurse. An affectionate father, More wrote letters to his children whenever he was away on legal or government business, and encouraged them to write to him often.\nMore insisted upon giving his daughters the same classical education as his son, an unusual attitude at the time. His eldest daughter, Margaret, attracted much admiration for her erudition, especially her fluency in Greek and Latin. More told his daughter of his pride in her academic accomplishments in September 1522, after he showed the bishop a letter she had written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMore's decision to educate his daughters set an example for other noble families. Even Erasmus became much more favourable once he witnessed their accomplishments.\nA large portrait of More and his extended family, \"Sir Thomas More and Family\", was painted by Hans Holbein the Younger; however, it was lost in a fire in the 18th century. More's grandson commissioned a copy, of which two versions survive. The Nostell copy of the portrait shown above also includes the family's two pet dogs and monkey.\nMusical instruments such as a lute and viol feature in the background of the extant copies of Holbein's family portrait. More played the recorder and viol, and made sure his wives could join in the family consort.\nPersonality according to Erasmus.\nConcerning More's personality, Erasmus gave a consistent portrait over a period of 35 years.\nSoon after meeting the young lawyer More, who became his best friend and invited Erasmus into his household, Erasmus reported in 1500 \"Did nature ever invent anything kinder, sweeter or more harmonious than the character of Thomas More?\". In 1519, he wrote that More was \"born and designed for friendship; no one is more open-hearted in making friends or more tenacious in keeping them.\" In 1535, after More's execution, Erasmus wrote that More \"never bore ill-intent towards anyone\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We are 'together, you and I, a crowd'; that is my feeling, and I think I could live happily with you in any wilderness. Farewell, dearest Erasmus, dear as the apple of my eye.\u2014\u200a\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;When More died I seem to have died myself: because we were a single soul as Pythagoras once said. But such is the flux of human affairs.\u2014\u200a\nIn a 1532 letter, Erasmus wrote \"such is the kindliness of his disposition, or rather, to say it better, such is his piety and wisdom, that whatever comes his way that cannot be corrected, he comes to love just as wholeheartedly as if nothing better could have happened to him.\"\nIn a 1533 letter, Erasmus described More's character as \u2013 commanding, far-ruling, not at all timid.\nFor his part, More was an \"unflagging apologist\" for Erasmus during the course of their lives.\nEarly political career.\nIn 1504, More was elected to Parliament to represent Great Yarmouth, and in 1510 began representing London.\nMore first attracted public attention by his conduct in the parliament of 1504, by his daring opposition to the King's demand for money. King Henry VII was entitled, according to feudal laws, to a grant on occasion of his daughter Margaret Tudor's marriage to James IV of Scotland. But he came to the House of Commons for a much larger sum than he intended to give with his daughter. The members, unwilling as they were to vote the money, were afraid to offend the King, until the silence was broken by More, whose speech is said to have moved the house to reduce the subsidy of three-fifteenths which the Government had demanded to \u00a330,000. One of the chamberlains went and told his master that he had been thwarted by a beardless boy. Henry never forgave the audacity; but, for the moment, the only revenge he could take was upon More's father, whom upon some pretext he threw into the Tower, and he only released him upon payment of a fine of \u00a3100. Thomas More even found it advisable to withdraw from public life into obscurity.\nHenry died in 1509 and was succeeded by his son, who became King Henry VIII.\nFrom 1510, More served as one of the two undersheriffs of the City of London, a position of considerable responsibility in which he earned a reputation as an honest and effective public servant. Interested in public health, he became a Commissioner for Sewers in 1514. More became Master of Requests in 1514, the same year in which he was appointed as a Privy Counsellor. After undertaking a diplomatic mission to the Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V, accompanying Thomas Wolsey, Cardinal Archbishop of York, to Calais (for the Field of the Cloth of Gold) and Bruges, More was knighted and made under-treasurer of the Exchequer in 1521.\nAs secretary and personal adviser to Henry VIII, More became increasingly influential: welcoming foreign diplomats, drafting official documents, attending the court of the Star Chamber for his legal prowess but delegated to judge in the under-court for 'poor man's cases' and serving as a liaison between the King and Lord Chancellor Wolsey. More later served as High Steward for the Universities of Oxford and Cambridge.\nIn 1523, More was elected as knight of the shire (MP) for Middlesex and, on Wolsey's recommendation, the House of Commons elected More its Speaker. In 1525, More became Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, with executive and judicial responsibilities over much of northern England.\nChancellorship.\nAfter Wolsey fell, More succeeded to the office of Lord Chancellor (the chief government minister) in 1529; this was the highest official responsible for equity and common law, including contracts and royal household cases, and some misdemeanour appeals. He dispatched cases with unprecedented rapidity. Putting into effect his proposals for public sanitation that he had first suggested in \"Utopia\", in 1532 he was responsible for introducing into law the Statute of Sewers (23 Henry VIII, cap.5).\nAs Lord Chancellor he was a member (and probably the Presiding Judge at the court when present, who spoke last and cast the deciding vote in case of ties) of the Court of the Star Chamber, an appeals court on civil and criminal matters, including riot and sedition, that was the final appeal in dissenter's trials.\nNo foreign wars were fought in the time he was Lord Chancellor.\nCampaign against the Protestant Reformation.\nMore supported the Catholic Church and saw the Protestant Reformation as heresy, a threat to the unity of both church and society. More believed in the theology, argumentation, and ecclesiastical laws of the church, and \"heard Luther's call to destroy the Catholic Church as a call to war.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Heresy was the single most time-consuming issue Thomas More dealt with in his chancellorship, and probably in the whole of the last ten years of his life.\u2014\u200a\nMore wrote a series of books and pamphlets in English and Latin to respond to Protestants, and in his official capacities took action against the illegal book trade, notably fronting a diplomatically-sensitive raid in 1525 of the Hanseatic Merchants in the Steelyard in his role as chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster and given his diplomatic experience negotiating with the Hanse.\nDebates with Tyndale.\nMore wrote several books against the first edition of William Tyndale's English translation of the New Testament. More wrote the \"Dialogue concerning Heresies\" (1529), Tyndale responded with \"An Answer to Sir T. More's Dialogue\" (1530), and More replied with his \"Confutation of Tyndale's Answer\" (1532). More also wrote or contributed to several other anti-Lutheran books.\nOne of More's criticisms of the initial Tyndale translation was that despite claiming to be in the vernacular, Tyndale had employed numerous neologisms: for example, \"Jehovah\", \"scapegoat\", \"Passover\", \"atonement\", \"mercy seat\", \"shewbread\". More also accused Tyndale of deliberately avoiding common translations in favour of biased words: such as using the emotion \"love\" instead of the practical action \"charity\" for Greek , using the neologism \"senior\" instead of \"priest\" for the Greek (Tyndale changed this to \"elder\"), and the Latinate \"congregation\" instead of \"church\". Tyndale's Bibles include text other than the scriptures: some of Tyndale's prefaces were direct translations of Martin Luther, and it included marginal glosses which challenged Catholic doctrine.\nOne notable exchange occurred over More's attack on Tyndale's use of \"congregation\". Tyndale pointed out that he was following \"your darling\" Erasmus' Latin translation of into . More replied that Erasmus needed to coin because there was no good Latin word, while English had the perfectly fine \"church\", but that the intent and theology under the words were all important:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I have not contended with Erasmus my darling, because I found no such malicious intent with Erasmus my darling, as I find with Tyndale. For had I found with Erasmus my darling the cunning intent and purpose that I find in Tyndale: Erasmus my darling should be no more my darling. But I find in Erasmus my darling that he detests and abhors the errors and heresies that Tyndale plainly teaches and abides by and therefore Erasmus my darling shall be my dear darling still. And surely if Tyndale had either never taught them, or yet had the grace to revoke them: then should Tyndale be my dear darling too. But while he holds such heresies still I cannot take for my darling him that the devil takes for his darling.\u2014\u200a\nResignation.\nAs the conflict over supremacy between the papacy and the king reached its peak, More continued to remain steadfast in supporting the supremacy of the Pope as Successor of Peter over that of the King of England. Parliament's reinstatement of the charge of praemunire in 1529 had made it a crime to support in public or office the claim of any authority outside the realm (such as the papacy) to have a legal jurisdiction superior to the king's.\nIn 1530, More refused to sign a letter by the leading English churchmen and aristocrats asking Pope Clement VII to annul Henry's marriage to Catherine of Aragon, and also quarrelled with Henry VIII over the heresy laws. In 1531, a royal decree required the clergy to take an oath acknowledging the King as Supreme Head of the Church of England. The bishops at the Convocation of Canterbury in 1532 agreed to sign the Oath but only under threat of prosecution for praemunire and only after these words were added: \"as far as the law of Christ allows\".\nThis was considered to be the final Submission of the Clergy. Cardinal John Fisher and some other clergy refused to sign. Henry purged most clergy who supported the papal stance from senior positions in the church. More continued to refuse to sign the Oath of Supremacy and did not agree to support the annulment of Henry's marriage to Catherine. However, he did not openly reject the King's actions and kept his opinions private.\nOn 16 May 1532, More resigned from his role as Chancellor but remained in Henry's favour despite his refusal. His decision to resign was caused by the decision of the convocation of the English Church, which was under intense royal threat, on the day before.\nControversy on extent of prosecution of heretics.\nThere is considerable variation in opinion on the extent and nature of More's prosecution of heretics: witness the difference in portrayals of More in \"A Man for All Seasons\" as an urbane hero of conscience and in \"Wolf Hall\" as a \"mere dessicated [sic] fanatic.\" The English establishment initially regarded Protestants (and Anabaptists) as akin to the Lollards and Hussites whose heresies fed their sedition. Ambassador to Charles V Cuthbert Tunstall called Lutheranism the \"foster-child\" of the Wycliffite heresy that had underpinned Lollardy.\nHistorian Richard Rex wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTorture allegations.\nTorture was not officially legal in England, except in pre-trial discovery phase of kinds of extreme cases that the King had allowed, such as seditious heresy. It was regarded as unsafe for evidence, and was not an allowed punishment.\nStories emerged in More's lifetime regarding persecution of the Protestant \"heretics\" during his time as Lord Chancellor, and he denied them in detail in his (1533).\nMany stories were later published by the 16th-century English Protestant historian John Foxe in his polemical \"Book of Martyrs.\" Foxe was instrumental in publicizing accusations of torture, alleging that More had often personally used violence or torture while interrogating heretics. Later Protestant authors such as Brian Moynahan and Michael Farris cite Foxe when repeating these allegations. Biographer Peter Ackroyd also lists claims from Foxe's \"Book of Martyrs\" and other post-Reformation sources that More \"tied heretics to a tree in his Chelsea garden and whipped them\", that \"he watched as 'newe men' were put upon the rack in the Tower and tortured until they confessed\", and that \"he was personally responsible for the burning of several of the 'brethren' in Smithfield.\"\nHistorian John Guy commented that \"such charges are unsupported by independent proof.\" Modern historian Diarmaid MacCulloch finds no evidence that More was directly involved in torture. Richard Marius records a similar claim, which tells about James Bainham, and writes that \"the story Foxe told of Bainham's whipping and racking at More's hands is universally doubted today\".\nMore himself denied these allegations:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Stories of a similar nature were current even in More's lifetime and he denied them forcefully. He admitted that he did imprison heretics in his house \u2013 'theyr sure kepynge' \u2013 he called it \u2013 but he utterly rejected claims of torture and whipping... 'as help me God.'\nMore instead claimed in his \"Apology\" (1533) that he only applied corporal punishment to two \"heretics\": a child servant in his household who was caned (the customary punishment for children at that time) for repeating a heresy regarding the Eucharist, and a \"feeble-minded\" man who was whipped for disrupting the mass by raising women's skirts over their heads at the moment of consecration, More taking the action to prevent a lynching.\nExecutions.\nBurning at the stake was the standard punishment by the English state for obstinate or relapsed, major seditious or proselytizing heresy, and continued to be used by both Catholics and Protestants during the religious upheaval of the following decades. In England, following the Lollard uprisings, heresy had been linked to sedition (see and Suppression of Heresy Act 1414.)\nAckroyd and MacCulloch agree that More zealously approved of burning. Richard Marius maintained that in office More did everything in his power to bring about the extermination of heretics. Yet Catholic historian Eamon Duffy notes that \"He never presided at a heresy trial (no layman could) and he never condemned anyone to death for their religious beliefs.\" \nDuring More's chancellorship, six people were burned at the stake for heresy, the same rate as under Wolsey: they were Thomas Hitton, Thomas Bilney, Richard Bayfield, John Tewkesbury, Thomas Dusgate, and James Bainham. However, the court of the Star Chamber, of which More as Lord Chancellor was the presiding judge, could not impose the death sentence: it was a kind of appellate supreme court.\nMore took a personal interest in the three London cases:\nHistorian Brian Moynahan alleged that More influenced the eventual execution of William Tyndale in the Duchy of Brabant, as English agents had long pursued Tyndale. Historian Richard Rex argues that linking the execution to More was \"bizarre\". Moynihan named Henry Phillips, a student at the University of Louvain and follower of Bishop Stokesley, as the man More commissioned to befriend Tyndale and then betray him. However, the execution took place on 6 October 1536, sixteen months after More himself had been executed, and in a different jurisdiction.\nModern treatment.\nModern commentators have been divided over More's character and actions.\nSome biographers, including Peter Ackroyd, have taken a relatively tolerant or even positive view of More's campaign against Protestantism by placing his actions within the turbulent religious climate of the time and the threat of deadly catastrophes such as the German Peasants' Revolt, which More blamed on Luther, as did many others, such as Erasmus.\nOthers have been more critical, such as writer Richard Marius, an American scholar of the Reformation, believing that such persecutions were a betrayal of More's earlier humanist convictions, including More's zealous and well-documented advocacy of extermination for heretics. This supposed contradiction has been called \"schizophrenic.\" He has been called a \"zealous legalist[...] [with an] itchy finesse of cruelty\".\nPope John Paul II honoured him by making More patron saint of statesmen and politicians in October 2000, stating: \"It can be said that he demonstrated in a singular way the value of a moral conscience[...] even if, in his actions against heretics, he reflected the limits of the culture of his time\".\nAustralian High Court judge and President of the International Commission of Jurists, Justice Michael Kirby has noted:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;More's resignation as Lord Chancellor demonstrates also a recognition of the fact that, so long as he held office, he was obliged to conform to the King's law. It is often the fact that judges and lawyers must perform acts which they do not particularly like. In Utopia, for example, More had written that he believed capital punishment to be immoral, reprehensible and unjustifiable. Yet as Lord Chancellor and as councillor to the King, he certainly participated in sending hundreds of people to their death, a troubling thought. Doubtless he saw himself, as many judges before and since have done, as a mere instrument of the legal power of the State.\u2014\u200a\nIndictment, trial and execution.\nIn 1533, More refused to attend the coronation of Anne Boleyn as Queen of England. Technically, this was not an act of treason, as More had written to Henry seemingly acknowledging Anne's queenship and expressing his desire for the King's happiness and the new Queen's health. Despite this, his refusal to attend was widely interpreted as a snub against Anne, and Henry took action against him. Shortly thereafter, More was charged with accepting bribes, but the charges had to be dismissed for lack of any evidence.\nIn early 1534, More was accused by Thomas Cromwell of having given advice and counsel to the \"Holy Maid of Kent,\" Elizabeth Barton, a nun who had prophesied that the King had ruined his soul and would come to a quick end for having divorced Queen Catherine. This was a month after Barton had confessed, which was possibly done under royal pressure, and was said to be concealment of treason. Though it was dangerous for anyone to have anything to do with Barton, More had met her and was impressed by her fervour. However, More was prudent and told her not to interfere with state matters. More was called before a committee of the Privy Council to answer these charges of treason and, after his respectful answers, the matter seemed to have been dropped.\nOn 13 April 1534, More was asked to appear before a commission and swear his allegiance to the parliamentary Act of Succession. More accepted Parliament's right to declare Anne Boleyn the legitimate Queen of England, though he refused \"the spiritual validity of the King's second marriage\" and, holding fast to the teaching of papal supremacy, he steadfastly refused to take the oath of supremacy of the Crown in the relationship between the kingdom and the church in England. More also publicly refused to uphold Henry's annulment from Catherine. John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, refused the oath along with More. The oath reads in part:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By reason whereof the Bishop of Rome and See Apostolic, contrary to the great and inviolable grants of jurisdictions given by God immediately to emperors, kings and princes in succession to their heirs, hath presumed in times past to invest who should please them to inherit in other men's kingdoms and dominions, which thing we your most humble subjects, both spiritual and temporal, do most abhor and detest...\nIn addition to refusing to support the King's annulment or supremacy, More refused to sign the 1534 Oath of Succession confirming Anne's role as queen and the rights of their children to succession. More's fate was sealed. While he had no argument with the basic concept of succession as stated in the Act, the preamble of the Oath repudiated the authority of the Pope.\nIndictment.\nMore's enemies had enough evidence to have the King arrest him on a charge of treason. Four days later, Henry had More imprisoned in the Tower of London. There More prepared a devotional, \"Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation\". While More was imprisoned in the Tower, Thomas Cromwell made several visits, urging More to take the oath, which he continued to refuse.\nIn his unfinished \"History of the Passion\", written in the Tower to his daughter Meg, he wrote of feeling favoured by God: \"For methinketh God maketh me a wanton, and setteth me on his lap and dandleth me.\"\nThe charges of high treason related to More's violating the statutes as to the King's supremacy (malicious silence) and conspiring with Bishop John Fisher in this respect (malicious conspiracy) and, according to some sources, included asserting that Parliament did not have the right to proclaim the King's Supremacy over the English Church. One group of scholars believes that the judges dismissed the first two charges (malicious acts) and tried More only on the final one, but others strongly disagree.\nRegardless of the specific charges, the indictment related to violation of the Treasons Act 1534 which declared it treason to speak against the King's Supremacy:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If any person or persons, after the first day of February next coming, do maliciously wish, will or desire, by words or writing, or by craft imagine, invent, practise, or attempt any bodily harm to be done or committed to the king's most royal person, the queen's, or their heirs apparent, or to deprive them or any of them of their dignity, title, or name of their royal estates[...] That then every such person and persons so offending[...] shall have and suffer such pains of death and other penalties, as is limited and accustomed in cases of high treason.\nTrial.\nThe trial was held on 1 July 1535, before a panel of judges that included the new Lord Chancellor Sir Thomas Audley, as well as Anne Boleyn's uncle Thomas Howard, 3rd Duke of Norfolk, her father Thomas Boleyn, and her brother George Boleyn. Norfolk offered More the chance of the King's \"gracious pardon\" should he \"reform his[...] obstinate opinion\". More responded that, although he had not taken the oath, he had never spoken out against it either and that his silence could be accepted as his \"ratification and confirmation\" of the new statutes.\nThus More was relying upon legal precedent and the maxim (\"one who keeps silent seems to consent\"), understanding that he could not be convicted as long as he did not explicitly deny that the King was Supreme Head of the Church, and he therefore refused to answer all questions regarding his opinions on the subject.\nThomas Cromwell, at the time the most powerful of the King's advisors, brought forth Solicitor General Richard Rich to testify that More had, in his presence, denied that the King was the legitimate head of the Church. This testimony was characterised by More as being extremely dubious. Witnesses Richard Southwell and Mr. Palmer (a servant to Southwell) were also present and both denied having heard the details of the reported conversation. As More himself pointed out:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe jury took only fifteen minutes to find More guilty.\nAfter the jury's verdict was delivered and before his sentencing, More spoke freely of his belief that \"no temporal man may be the head of the spirituality\" (take over the role of the Pope). According to William Roper's account, More was pleading that the Statute of Supremacy was contrary to Magna Carta, to Church laws and to the laws of England, attempting to void the entire indictment against him. He was sentenced to be hanged, drawn, and quartered (the usual punishment for traitors who were not of the nobility), but the King commuted this to execution by decapitation.\nExecution.\nThe execution took place on 6 July 1535 at Tower Hill. Biographer Peter Ackroyd reports that family members were excluded from the event, but historian Jaime Goodrich describes how his daughters Margaret More Roper and Margaret Clement were present. When he came to mount the steps to the scaffold, its frame seeming so weak that it might collapse, More is widely quoted as saying (to one of the officials): \"I pray you, master Lieutenant, see me safe up and [for] my coming down, let me shift for my self\"; while on the scaffold he declared that he died \"the king's good servant, and God's first.\" Theologian Scott Hahn notes that the misquoted \"but God's first\" is a line from Robert Bolt's stage play \"A Man For All Seasons\", which differs from More's actual words. After More had finished reciting the while kneeling, the executioner reportedly begged his pardon, then More rose up, kissed him and forgave him.\nRelics.\nAnother comment More is believed to have made to the executioner is that his beard was completely innocent of any crime, and did not deserve the axe; he then positioned his beard so that it would not be harmed. More asked that his adopted daughter Margaret Clement (n\u00e9e Giggs) be given his headless corpse to bury. He was buried at the Tower of London, in the chapel of St Peter ad Vincula in an unmarked grave. His head was fixed upon a pike over London Bridge for a month, according to the normal custom for traitors.\nMore's daughter Margaret Roper (n\u00e9e More) later recovered the severed head. It is believed to rest in the Roper Vault of St Dunstan's Church, Canterbury, perhaps with the remains of Margaret and her husband's family. Some have claimed that the head is buried within the tomb erected for More in Chelsea Old Church.\nAmong other surviving relics is his hair shirt, presented for safe keeping by Margaret Clement. This was long in the custody of the community of Augustinian canonesses who until 1983 lived at the convent at Abbotskerswell Priory, Devon. Some sources, including one from 2004, claimed that the shirt, made of goat hair, was then kept at the Martyr's church on the Weld family's estate in Chideock, Dorset. It is now preserved at Buckfast Abbey, near Buckfastleigh in Devon.\nEpitaph.\nIn 1533, More wrote to Erasmus and included what he intended should be the epitaph on his family tomb:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nScholarly and literary work.\n\"History of King Richard III\".\nBetween 1512 and 1519 More worked on a \"History of King Richard III\", which he never finished but which was published after his death. The \"History\" is a Renaissance biography, remarkable more for its literary skill and adherence to classical precepts than for its historical accuracy. Some consider it an attack on royal tyranny, rather than on Richard III himself or the House of York. More uses a more dramatic writing style than had been typical in medieval chronicles; Richard III is limned as an outstanding, archetypal tyrant\u2014however, More was only seven years old when Richard III was killed at the Battle of Bosworth in 1485, so he had no first-hand knowledge of him.\nThe \"History of King Richard III\" was written and published in both English and Latin, each written separately, and with information deleted from the Latin edition to suit a European readership. It greatly influenced William Shakespeare's play \"Richard III\". Modern historians attribute the unflattering portraits of Richard III in both works to both authors' allegiance to the reigning Tudor dynasty that wrested the throne from Richard III in the Wars of the Roses. According to Caroline Barron, Archbishop John Morton, in whose household More had served as a page &lt;templatestyles src=\"Crossreference/styles.css\" /&gt;, had joined the 1483 Buckingham rebellion against Richard III, and Morton was probably one of those who influenced More's hostility towards the defeated king. Clements Markham asserts that the actual author of the chronicle was, in large part, Archbishop Morton himself and that More was simply copying, or perhaps translating, Morton's original material.\n\"Utopia\".\nMore's best known and most controversial work, \"Utopia\", is a frame narrative written in Latin. More completed the book, and theologian Erasmus published it in Leuven in 1516. It was only translated into English and published in his native land in 1551 (16 years after his execution), and the 1684 translation became the most commonly cited. More (who is also a character in the book) and the narrator/traveller, Raphael Hythlodaeus (whose name alludes both to the healer archangel Raphael, and 'speaker of nonsense', the surname's Greek meaning), discuss modern ills in Antwerp, as well as describe the political arrangements of the imaginary island country of Utopia (a Greek pun on 'ou-topos' [no place] and 'eu-topos' [good place]) among themselves as well as to Pieter Gillis and Hieronymus van Busleyden. Utopia's original edition included a symmetrical \"Utopian alphabet\" omitted by later editions, but which may have been an early attempt or precursor of shorthand.\n\"Utopia\" is structured into two parts, both with much irony: Book I has conversations between friends on various European political issues: the treatment of criminals, the enclosure movement, etc.; Book II is a remembered discourse by Raphael Hythlodaeus on his supposed travels, in which the earlier issues are revisited in fantastical but concrete forms that has been called \"mythical idealism\". For example, the proposition in the Book I \"no republic can be prosperous or justly governed where there is private property and money is the measure of everything.\"\n\"Utopia\" contrasts the contentious social life of European states with the perfectly orderly, reasonable social arrangements of Utopia and its environs (Tallstoria, Nolandia, and Aircastle). In Utopia, there are no lawyers because of the laws' simplicity and because social gatherings are in public view (encouraging participants to behave well), communal ownership supplants private property, men and women are educated alike, and there is almost complete religious toleration (except for atheists, who are allowed but despised).\nMore may have used monastic communalism as his model, although other concepts he presents such as legalising euthanasia remain far outside Church doctrine. Hythlodaeus asserts that a man who refuses to believe in a god or an afterlife could never be trusted, because he would not acknowledge any authority or principle outside himself. A scholar has suggested that More is most interested in the type of citizen Utopia produces.\nSome take the novel's principal message to be the social need for order and discipline rather than liberty. Ironically, Hythlodaeus, who believes philosophers should not get involved in politics, addresses More's ultimate conflict between his humanistic beliefs and courtly duties as the King's servant, pointing out that one day those morals will come into conflict with the political reality.\n\"Utopia\" gave rise to a literary genre, Utopian and dystopian fiction, which features ideal societies or perfect cities, or their opposite. Works influenced by \"Utopia\" included \"New Atlantis\" by Francis Bacon, \"Erewhon\" by Samuel Butler, and \"Candide\" by Voltaire. Although Utopianism combined classical concepts of perfect societies (Plato and Aristotle) with Roman rhetorical finesse (cf. Cicero, Quintilian, epideictic oratory), the Renaissance genre continued into the Age of Enlightenment and survives in modern science fiction.\nEpigrams.\nErasmus in Basel collected and had published a book of More's latin epigrams: the final 1523 edition \"Epigrammata\" contained 253 of the short poems, described by historian Damian Grace as \"Political theory in a poetic idiom.\"\nIn the 1510s, More had the habit of composing these formal paragraphs, variously serious or facetious, for correspondents. Some show a concern about royal tyranny and may suggest a preference for Roman republican government.\nReligious polemics.\nIn 1520 the reformer Martin Luther published three works in quick succession: \"An Appeal to the Christian Nobility of the German Nation\" (Aug.), \"Concerning the Babylonish Captivity of the Church\" (Oct.), and \"On the Liberty of a Christian Man\" (Nov.). In these books, Luther set out his doctrine of salvation through faith alone, rejected certain Catholic practices, and attacked abuses and excesses within the Catholic Church. In 1521, Henry VIII formally responded to Luther's criticisms with the \"Assertio\", written with More's assistance. Pope Leo X rewarded the English king with the title \"Fidei defensor\" (\"Defender of the Faith\") for his work combating Luther's heresies.\nMartin Luther then attacked Henry VIII in print, calling him a \"pig, dolt, and liar\". At the King's request, More composed a rebuttal: the \"Responsio ad Lutherum\" was published at the end of 1523. In the \"Responsio\", More defended papal supremacy, the sacraments, and other Church traditions. More, though considered \"a much steadier personality\", described Luther as an \"ape\", a \"drunkard\", and a \"lousy little friar\" amongst other epithets. Writing under the pseudonym of Gulielmus Rosseus, More tells Luther that:\nfor as long as your reverend paternity will be determined to tell these shameless lies, others will be permitted, on behalf of his English majesty, to throw back into your paternity's shitty mouth, truly the shit-pool of all shit, all the muck and shit which your damnable rottenness has vomited up, and to empty out all the sewers and privies onto your crown divested of the dignity of the priestly crown, against which no less than the kingly crown you have determined to play the buffoon.\nHis saying is followed with a kind of apology to his readers, while Luther possibly never apologized for his sayings. Stephen Greenblatt argues, \"More speaks for his ruler and in his opponent's idiom; Luther speaks for himself, and his scatological imagery far exceeds in quantity, intensity, and inventiveness anything that More could muster. If for More scatology normally expresses a communal disapproval, for Luther, it expresses a deep personal rage.\"\nConfronting Luther confirmed More's theological conservatism. He thereafter avoided any hint of criticism of Church authority. In 1528, More published another religious polemic, \"A Dialogue Concerning Heresies\", that asserted the Catholic Church was the one true church, established by Christ and the Apostles, and affirmed the validity of its authority, traditions and practices. In 1529, the circulation of Simon Fish's \"Supplication for the Beggars\" prompted More to respond with the \"Supplycatyon of Soulys\".\nIn 1531, a year after More's father died, William Tyndale published \"An Answer unto Sir Thomas More's Dialogue\" in response to More's \"Dialogue Concerning Heresies.\" More responded with a half million words: the \"Confutation of Tyndale's Answer\". The \"Confutation\" is an imaginary dialogue between More and Tyndale, with More addressing each of Tyndale's criticisms of Catholic rites and doctrines. More, who valued structure, tradition and order in society as safeguards against tyranny and error, vehemently believed that Lutheranism and the Protestant Reformation in general were dangerous, not only to the Catholic faith but to the stability of society as a whole.\nCorrespondence.\nMost major humanists were prolific letter writers, and Thomas More was no exception. As in the case of his friend Erasmus of Rotterdam, however, only a small portion of his correspondence (about 280 letters) survived. These include everything from personal letters to official government correspondence (mostly in English), letters to fellow humanist scholars (in Latin), several epistolary tracts, verse epistles, prefatory letters (some fictional) to several of More's own works, letters to More's children and their tutors (in Latin), and the so-called \"prison-letters\" (in English) which he exchanged with his oldest daughter Margaret while he was imprisoned in the Tower of London awaiting execution. More also engaged in controversies, most notably with the French poet Germain de Brie, which culminated in the publication of de Brie's \"Antimorus\" (1519). Erasmus intervened, however, and ended the dispute.\nMore also wrote about more spiritual matters. They include: \"A Treatise on the Passion\" (a.k.a. Treatise on the Passion of Christ), \"A Treatise to Receive the Blessed Body\" (a.k.a. Holy Body Treaty), and \"De Tristitia Christi\" (a.k.a. The Agony of Christ). More handwrote the last in the Tower of London while awaiting his execution. This last manuscript, saved from the confiscation decreed by Henry VIII, passed by the will of his daughter Margaret to Spanish hands through Fray Pedro de Soto, dominican confessor of the count of Oropesa ambassador of the Emperor Charles V, that presented to saint Juan de Ribera archbishop of Valencia at that time and founder of Real Colegio Seminario del Corpus Christi and its museum where it remains in the collection.\nVeneration.\nCatholic Church.\nPope Leo XIII beatified Thomas More, John Fisher, and fifty-two other English Martyrs on 29 December 1886. Pius XI canonised More and Fisher on 19 May 1935 pre-eminently for their martyrdom, saying:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;They were, so to speak, the leaders and chieftains of that illustrious band of men who, from all classes of the people and from every part of Great Britain, resisted the new errors with unflinching spirit, and in shedding their blood, testified their loyal devotedness to the Holy See.\u2014\u200a\nThe British press greeted the 1935 canonisation ceremony, which Parliament and universities officially boycotted, with a \"minimal and hostile\" reception.\nMore's feast day was established as 9 July. Since 1970 the General Roman Calendar has celebrated More with St John Fisher on 22 June (the date of Fisher's execution). On 31 October 2000 Pope John Paul II declared More \"the heavenly Patron of Statesmen and Politicians\". More is the patron of the German Catholic youth organisation Katholische Junge Gemeinde.\nAnglican Communion.\nIn 1980, despite their staunch opposition to the English Reformation, More and Fisher were added as martyrs of the reformation to the Church of England's calendar of \"Saints and Heroes of the Christian Church\", to be commemorated every 6 July (the date of More's execution) as \"Thomas More, scholar, and John Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, Reformation Martyrs, 1535\". The annual remembrance of 6 July is recognised by all Anglican Churches in communion with Canterbury, including Australia, Brazil, Canada and South Africa.\nIn an essay examining the events around the addition to the Anglican calendar, scholar Bill Sheils links the reasoning for More's recognition to a \"long-standing tradition hinted at in Rose Macaulay's ironic debating point of 1935 about More's status as an 'unschismed Anglican', a tradition also recalled in the annual memorial lecture held at St. Dunstan's Church in Canterbury, where More's head is said to be buried.\" Sheils also noted the influence of the 1960s play and film \"A Man for All Seasons\", which gave More a \"reputation as a defender of the right of conscience\". Thanks to the play's depiction, this \"brought his life to a broader and more popular audience\" with the film \"extending its impact worldwide following the Oscar triumphs\". Around this time the atheist Oxford historian and intellectual Hugh Trevor-Roper held More up as \"the first great Englishman whom we feel that we know, the most saintly of Humanists...the universal man of our cool northern Renaissance.\" In 1978, the quincentenary of More's birth, Trevor-Roper wrote an essay putting More in the Renaissance Platonist tradition, claiming his reputation was \"quite independent of his Catholicism.\" Only later did a more critical view arise in academia, led by Professor Sir Geoffrey Elton, which \"challenged More's reputation for saintliness by focusing on his dealings with heretics, the ferocity of which, in fairness to him, More did not deny. In this research, More's role as a prosecutor, or persecutor, of dissidents has been at the centre of the debate.\"\nLegacy.\nThe steadfastness and courage with which More maintained his religious convictions, and his dignity during his imprisonment, trial, and execution, contributed much to More's posthumous reputation, particularly among Roman Catholics. His friend Erasmus defended More's character as \"more pure than any snow\" and described his genius as \"such as England never had and never again will have.\" Upon learning of More's execution, Emperor Charles V said: \"Had we been master of such a servant, we would rather have lost the best city of our dominions than such a worthy councillor.\"\nG. K. Chesterton, a Roman Catholic convert from the Church of England, predicted More \"may come to be counted the greatest Englishman, or at least the greatest historical character in English history.\" He wrote \"the mind of More was like a diamond that a tyrant threw away into a ditch, because he could not break it.\"\nHistorian Hugh Trevor-Roper called More \"the first great Englishman whom we feel that we know, the most saintly of humanists, the most human of saints, the universal man of our cool northern renaissance.\"\nJonathan Swift, an Anglican, wrote that More was \"a person of the greatest virtue this kingdom ever produced\". Some consider this quote to be of Samuel Johnson, although it is not found in Johnson's writings. Swift put More in the company of Socrates, Brutus, Epaminondas and Junius.\nThe metaphysical poet John Donne, also honoured in their calendar by Anglicans, was More's great-great-nephew.\nUS Senator Eugene McCarthy had a portrait of More in his office.\nMarxist theoreticians such as Karl Kautsky considered More's \"Utopia\" a critique of economic and social exploitation in pre-modern Europe and More is claimed to have influenced the development of socialist ideas.\nIn 1963, \"Moreana\", an academic journal focusing on analysis of More and his writings, was founded.\nIn 2002, More was placed at number 37 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.\nLegal.\nMore debated the lawyer and pamphleteer Christopher St. Germain through various books: while agreeing on various issues on equity, More disagreed with secret witnesses, the admissibility of hearsay, and found St Germain's criticism of religious courts superficial or ignorant. More and St Germain's views on equity owed in part to the 15th-century humanist theologian, Jean Gerson, who taught that consideration of the individual circumstances should be the norm not the exception.\nBefore More, English Lord Chancellors tended to be clerics (with a role as Keeper of the King's Conscience); from More on, they tended to be lawyers.\nA 1999 poll of legal British professionals nominated More as the person who most embodies the virtues of the law needed at the close of the millennium. The virtues were More's views on the primacy of conscience and his role in the practical establishment of the principle of equity in English secular law through the Court of Chancery.\nIn literature and popular culture.\nWilliam Roper's biography of More (his father-in-law) was one of the first biographies in Modern English.\n\"Sir Thomas More\" is a play written circa 1592 in collaboration between Henry Chettle, Anthony Munday, William Shakespeare, and others, or with multiple script-doctors in view of the dangerous topic. In it More is portrayed as a wise and honest statesman. The original manuscript has survived as a handwritten text that shows many revisions by its several authors, as well as the censorious influence of Edmund Tylney, Master of the Revels in the government of Queen Elizabeth I. The script has since been published and has had several productions. One of the verses in the manuscript in Shakespeare's hand has a small soliloquy of More that includes:\n&lt;poem&gt;\n... But More, the more that thou hast \nEither of honour, office, wealth, and calling,\nWhich might accite thee to embrace and hug them,\nThe more do thou e'en serpent's natures think them:\nFear their gay skins, with thought of their stings...\n&lt;/poem&gt;\nIn Europe in the two centuries after his death, there were at least 50 Neo-Latin school plays written about More, performed at Jesuit schools.\nIn 1941, the 20th-century British author Elizabeth Goudge (1900\u20131984) wrote a short story, \"The King's Servant\", based on the last few years of Thomas More's life, seen through his family, and especially his adopted daughter, Anne Cresacre More.\nThe 20th-century agnostic playwright Robert Bolt portrayed Thomas More as the tragic hero of his 1960 play \"A Man for All Seasons\".\nMore is a man of an angel's wit, and singular learning. I know not his fellow. For where is the man of that gentleness, lowliness and affability? And, as time requireth, a man of marvelous mirth and pastimes, and sometime of as sad gravity. A man for all seasons.\nThis passage is derived from an exercise in Robert Whittington's 1520 Latin grammar \"Vulgaria\" (which may have some provenance from \"vir omnium horarum\" \u2014 \"man for all hours\" \u2014 in Erasmus's dedication to More of his 1511 essay \"Moriae Encomium\") that called the student to translate:\nMoore is a man of an aungel's wyt and synglar lernyng. He is a man of many excellent vertues (yf I shold say as it is) I knowe not his felowe. For where is the man (in whome is so many godly vertues) of yt gentylnes, lowlynes and affabylyte? And, as tyme requyreth, a man of merveylous myrth and pastymes, and somtyme of as sad gravyte, as who say: a man for all seasons.\nIn 1966, the play \"A Man for All Seasons\" was adapted into a film with the same title. It was directed by Fred Zinnemann and adapted for the screen by the playwright. It stars Paul Scofield, a noted British actor, who said that the part of Sir Thomas More was \"the most difficult part I played.\" The film won the Academy Award for Best Picture and Scofield won the Best Actor Oscar. In 1988 Charlton Heston starred in and directed a made-for-television film that restored the character of \"the common man\" that had been cut from the 1966 film.\nIn the 1969 film \"Anne of the Thousand Days\", More is portrayed by actor William Squire.\nIn the 1972 BBC TV series \"Henry VIII and his Six Wives\" More was played by Michael Goodliffe.\nCatholic science fiction writer R. A. Lafferty wrote his novel \"Past Master\" as a modern equivalent to More's \"Utopia\", which he saw as a satire. In this novel, Thomas More travels through time to the year 2535, where he is made king of the world \"Astrobe\", only to be beheaded after ruling for a mere nine days. One character compares More favourably to almost every other major historical figure: \"He had one completely honest moment right at the end. I cannot think of anyone else who ever had one.\"\nKarl Zuchardt's novel, \"Stirb du Narr!\" (\"Die you fool!\"), about More's struggle with King Henry, portrays More as an idealist bound to fail in the power struggle with a ruthless ruler and an unjust world.\nIn her 2009 novel \"Wolf Hall\", its 2012 sequel \"Bring Up the Bodies\", and the final book of the trilogy, her 2020 \"The Mirror &amp; the Light\", the novelist Hilary Mantel portrays More (from the perspective of a sympathetically portrayed Thomas Cromwell) as an unsympathetic persecutor of Protestants and an ally of the Habsburg empire. The historical accuracy of the books' portrayal of major figures has been questioned by academics.\nLiterary critic James Wood in his book \"The Broken Estate\", a collection of essays, is critical of More and refers to him as \"cruel in punishment, evasive in argument, lusty for power, and repressive in politics\".\nAaron S. Zelman's non-fiction book \"The State Versus the People\" includes a comparison of \"Utopia\" with Plato's \"Republic\". Zelman is undecided as to whether More was being ironic in his book or was genuinely advocating a police state. Zelman comments, \"More is the only Christian saint to be honoured with a statue at the Kremlin.\" By this Zelman implies that \"Utopia\" influenced Vladimir Lenin's Bolsheviks, despite their brutal repression of religion.\nOther biographers, such as Peter Ackroyd, have offered a more sympathetic picture of More as both a sophisticated philosopher and man of letters, as well as a zealous Catholic who believed in the authority of the Holy See over Christendom.\nThe protagonist of Walker Percy's novels, \"Love in the Ruins\" and \"The Thanatos Syndrome\", is \"Dr Thomas More\", a reluctant Catholic and descendant of More.\nMore is the focus of the Al Stewart song \"A Man For All Seasons\" from the 1978 album \"Time Passages\", and of the Far song \"Sir\", featured on the limited editions and 2008 re-release of their 1994 album \"Quick\". In addition, the song \"So Says I\" by indie rock outfit The Shins alludes to the socialist interpretation of More's \"Utopia\".\nJeremy Northam depicts More in the television series \"The Tudors \"as a peaceful man, as well as a devout Roman Catholic and loving family patriarch.\nIn David Starkey's 2009 documentary series \"\", More is depicted by Ryan Kiggell.\nMore is depicted by Andrew Buchan in the television series \"The Spanish Princess\".\nIn the years 1968\u20132007 the University of San Francisco's Gleeson Library Associates awarded the annual Sir Thomas More Medal for Book Collecting to private book collectors of note, including Elmer Belt, Otto Schaefer, Albert Sperisen, John S. Mayfield and Lord Wardington.\nIn the 2024 video game, \"\", the narrative focuses on a book depicting a fictional utopia written by a character named More.\nCommunism, socialism and anti-communism.\nHaving been praised \"as a Communist hero by Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, and Karl Kautsky\" because of the Communist attitude to property in his \"Utopia\", under Soviet Communism the name of Thomas More was in ninth position from the top of Moscow's Stele of Freedom (also known as the Obelisk of Revolutionary Thinkers), as one of the most influential thinkers \"who promoted the liberation of humankind from oppression, arbitrariness, and exploitation.\" This monument was erected in 1918 in Aleksandrovsky Garden near the Kremlin at Lenin's suggestion.\n\"The Great Soviet Encyclopedia\"'s English translation (1979) described More as \"the founder of Utopian socialism\", the first person \"to describe a society in which private property ... had been abolished\" (a society in which the family was \"a cell for the communist way of life\"), and a thinker who \"did not believe that the ideal society would be achieved through revolution\", but who \"greatly influenced reformers of subsequent centuries, especially Morelly, G. Babeuf, Saint-Simon, C. Fourier, E. Cabet, and other representatives of Utopian socialism.\"\n\"Utopia\" also inspired socialists such as William Morris.\nMany see More's communism or socialism as purely satirical. In 1888, while praising More's communism, Karl Kautsky pointed out that \"perplexed\" historians and economists often saw the name \"Utopia\" (which means \"no place\") as \"a subtle hint by More that he himself regarded his communism as an impracticable dream\".\nAleksandr Solzhenitsyn, the Russian Nobel Prize-winning, anti-Communist author of \"The Gulag Archipelago\", argued that Soviet communism needed enslavement and forced labour to survive, and that this had been \" ...foreseen as far back as Thomas More, the great-grandfather of socialism, in his \"Utopia\"\".\nIn 2008, More was portrayed on stage in Hong Kong as an allegorical symbol of the pan-democracy camp resisting the Chinese Communist Party in a translated and modified version of Robert Bolt's play \"A Man for All Seasons\".\nHistoric sites.\nWestminster Hall.\nA plaque in the middle of the floor of London's Westminster Hall commemorates More's trial for treason and condemnation to execution in that original part of the Palace of Westminster. The building, which houses Parliament, would have been well known to More, who served several terms as a member and became Speaker of the House of Commons before his appointment as England's Lord Chancellor.\nBeaufort House.\nAs More's royal duties frequently required his attendance at the King's Thames-side palaces in both Richmond and Greenwich, it was convenient to select a riverside property situated between them (the common method of transport being by boat) for his home. In about 1520 he purchased a parcel of land comprising \"undisturbed wood and pasture\", stretching from the Thames in Chelsea to the present-day King's Road. There he caused to be built a dignified red-brick mansion (known simply as More's house or Chelsea House) in which he lived until his arrest in 1534. In the bawdy poem \"The Twelve Mery Jestes of Wyddow Edyth\", written in 1525 by a member of More's household (or even by More himself) using the pseudonym of \"Walter Smith\", the widow arrives by boat at \"Chelsay...where she had best cheare of all/in the house of Syr Thomas More.\"\nUpon More's arrest the estate was confiscated, coming into the possession of the Comptroller of the Royal Household, William Paulet.\nIn 1682, the property was renamed \"Beaufort House\" after 1st Duke of Beaufort, a new owner.\nCrosby Hall.\nIn June 1523 More bought the \"very large and beautiful\" Crosby Place (Crosby Hall) in Bishopsgate, London, but this was not a simple transaction: eight months later he sold the property (never having lived there) at a considerable profit to his friend and business partner Antonio Bonvisi who, in turn, leased it back to More's son-in-law William Roper and nephew William Rastell; possibly this was an agreed means of dealing with a debt between More and Bonvisi. Because of this the Crown did not confiscate the property after More's execution.\nChelsea Old Church.\nAcross a small park and Old Church Street from Crosby Hall is Chelsea Old Church, an Anglican church whose southern chapel More commissioned and in which he sang with the parish choir. Except for his chapel, the church was largely destroyed in the Second World War and rebuilt in 1958. The capitals on the medieval arch connecting the chapel to the main sanctuary display symbols associated with More and his office. On the southern wall of the sanctuary is the tomb and epitaph he erected for himself and his wives, detailing his ancestry and accomplishments in Latin, including his role as peacemaker between the various Christian European states as well as a curiously altered portion about his curbing heresy. When More served Mass, he would leave by the door just to the left of it. He is not, however, buried here, nor is it entirely certain which of his family may be. It is open to the public at specific times. Outside the church, facing the River Thames, is a statue by British Sculptor, Leslie Cubitt Bevis erected in 1969, commemorating More as \"saint\", \"scholar\", and \"statesman\"; the back displays his coat-of-arms. Nearby, on Upper Cheyne Row, the Roman Catholic Church of Our Most Holy Redeemer &amp; St. Thomas More honours the martyr.\nTower Hill.\nA plaque and small garden commemorate the famed execution site on Tower Hill, London, just outside the Tower of London, as well as all those executed there, many as religious martyrs or as prisoners of conscience. More's corpse, minus his head, was unceremoniously buried in an unmarked mass grave beneath the Royal Chapel of St. Peter Ad Vincula, within the walls of the Tower of London, as was the custom for traitors executed at Tower Hill. The chapel is accessible to Tower visitors.\nSt Katharine Docks.\nThomas More is commemorated by a stone plaque near St Katharine Docks, just east of the Tower where he was executed. The street in which it is situated was formerly called Nightingale Lane, a corruption of \"Knighten Guild\", derived from the original owners of the land. It is now renamed Thomas More Street in his honour.\nSt Dunstan's Church and Roper House, Canterbury.\nSt Dunstan's Church, an Anglican parish church in Canterbury, possesses More's head, rescued by his daughter Margaret Roper, whose family lived in Canterbury down and across the street from their parish church. A stone immediately to the left of the altar marks the sealed Roper family vault beneath the Nicholas Chapel, itself to the right of the church's sanctuary or main altar. St Dunstan's Church has carefully investigated, preserved and sealed this burial vault. The last archaeological investigation, conducted in 1982, revealed that the suspected head of More rests in a niche separate from the other bodies, possibly from later interference. Displays in the chapel record the archaeological findings in pictures and narratives. Roman Catholics donated stained glass to commemorate the events in More's life. A small plaque marks the former home of William and Margaret Roper; another house nearby and entitled Roper House is now a home for deaf people. In 2025, St Dunstan's Church announced plans to exhume and preserve More's head.\nWorks.\nNote: The reference \"CW\" is to the relevant volume of the \"Yale Edition of the Complete Works of St. Thomas More\" (New Haven and London 1963\u20131997)\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30481", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30481", "title": "The Seventeenth Amendment", "text": ""}
{"id": "30482", "revid": "4897226", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30482", "title": "Tierra del Fuego", "text": "Archipelago off the south of South America\nTierra del Fuego (; ; ), also rarely called Fireland in English, is an archipelago off the southernmost tip of the South American mainland, across the Strait of Magellan. \nThe archipelago consists of the main island, Isla Grande de Tierra del Fuego, with an area of , along with numerous smaller islands, including Cape Horn and Diego Ram\u00edrez Islands. The western part of the Tierra del Fuego archipelago, about two-thirds including its many islands, is part of Chile, and the eastern part is part of Argentina. The southernmost extent of the archipelago, Cape Horn, lies just north of 56\u00b0 south.\nThe earliest-known human settlement in Tierra del Fuego dates to c.\u20098,000 BC. Europeans first explored the islands during Ferdinand Magellan's expedition of 1520. ('Land of Fire') and similar names stem from sightings of the many fires that the inhabitants built along the coastline and possibly even in their canoes for warmth and signaling.\nSettlement by those of European descent and the displacement of the native populations did not begin until the second half of the nineteenth century, at the height of the Patagonian sheep farming boom and of the local gold rush. Today, petroleum extraction dominates economic activity in the north of Tierra del Fuego, while tourism, manufacturing, and Antarctic logistics are important in the south.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nThe earliest human settlement occurred approximately 8,000 BC. The Yahgan were some of the earliest known humans to settle in Tierra del Fuego. Archaeological sites with characteristics of their culture have been found at locations such as Navarino Island.\nEuropean exploration.\nThe name \"Tierra del Fuego\" was given by the Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan while sailing for the Spanish Crown in 1520; he was the first European to visit these lands. He believed he was seeing the many fires (\"fuego\" is Spanish for \"fire\") of the Indigenous inhabitants, which were visible from the sea, and that the \"Indians\" were waiting in the forests to ambush his armada.\nIn 1525, Francisco de Hoces was the first to speculate that Tierra del Fuego was one or more islands rather than part of what was then called Terra Australis. Francis Drake in 1578 and a Dutch East India Company expedition in 1616 learned more about the geography. The latter expedition named Cape Horn at Hornos Island.\nOn his first voyage with in 1830, Robert FitzRoy picked up four native Fuegians, including \"Jemmy Button\" (\"Orundellico\") and Yokcushlu, and brought them to England. The three who survived the voyage were taken to London to meet the king and queen and were, for a time, celebrities. They returned to Tierra del Fuego in the \"Beagle\" with FitzRoy and Charles Darwin, who made extensive notes about his visit to the islands.\nEuropean colonization and extinction of Native Americans (1860\u20131910).\nDuring the second half of the nineteenth century, Salesian Catholic missions were established in R\u00edo Grande and Dawson Island.\nAnglican missionaries, who had established missions on Keppel Island in 1855, established new missions in 1870 at Ushuaia. These missions continued to operate through the nineteenth century. Missionary Thomas Bridges (1842\u20131898) learned the native language and compiled a 30,000-word Yaghan grammar and dictionary while he worked at Ushuaia. It was published in the 20th century and is considered an important ethnological work.\nAn 1879 Chilean expedition led by Ram\u00f3n Serrano Montaner reported large amounts of placer gold in the streams and river beds of Tierra del Fuego. This prompted massive immigration to the main island between 1883 and 1909. Numerous Argentines, Chileans, and Croatians settled on the main island, leading to increased conflicts with native Selk\u02bcnam. These late nineteenth century gold rushes led to the founding of numerous small settlements by immigrants, such as the Argentine settlements of Ushuaia and R\u00edo Grande and the Chilean settlements of Porvenir and Puerto Toro.\nJulius Popper, a Romanian explorer, was one of the most successful entrepreneurs in the region. Granted rights by the Argentine government to exploit any gold deposits he found in Tierra del Fuego, Popper has been identified as a central figure in the Selk\u02bcnam genocide.\nFollowing contact with Europeans, the native Selk\u02bcnam and Yaghan populations were greatly reduced by unequal conflict and persecution by settlers, by infectious diseases to which the Indigenous people had no immunity, and by mass transfer to the Salesian mission of Dawson Island. Despite the efforts of the missionaries, many natives died. Today, only a few Selk\u02bcnam remain. Some of the few remaining Yaghan have settled in Villa Ukika in Navarino Island; others have scattered throughout Chile and Argentina.\nFollowing the signing of the Boundary Treaty of 1881, Tierra del Fuego was divided between Argentina and Chile; previously, it had been claimed in its entirety by both countries.\nRecent history (1940\u2013present).\nIn 1945, a division of Chilean CORFO (Spanish acronym for Production Development Corporation), engaged in oil exploration, discovered oil in northern Tierra del Fuego. Extraction began in 1949 and, in 1950, the Chile state-owned ENAP (National Petroleum Company)[]. Until 1960, most oil extracted in Chile came from Tierra del Fuego. During the 1940s Chile and Argentina lodged their Antarctic claims. In the 1950s, the Chilean military founded Puerto Williams. In the 1960s and 1970s, sovereignty claims by Argentina over Picton, Lennox, and Nueva Islands in Tierra del Fuego led the two countries to the brink of war. In 1986, the Argentine congress decided that the Argentine part of Tierra del Fuego should be a new province; the split was effected on 26 April 1990.\nGeography.\nThe archipelago consists of a main island, Isla Grande de Tierra del Fuego, often simply called Tierra del Fuego or Isla Grande, with an area of , and a group of smaller islands. Of the main island the westernmost 29,484.7\u00a0km2 (11,384sq mi, 61.43%) belongs to Chile, and 18,507.3\u00a0km2 (7,146sq mi, 38.57%) belongs to Argentina. The archipelago is divided by an east\u2013west channel, the Beagle Channel, immediately south of the main island. The largest islands south of the Beagle Channel are Hoste and Navarino.\nThe western part of the main island, and almost all the other islands, belong to Chile. They are part of the Magallanes y Ant\u00e1rtica Chilena Region, the capital and chief town of which is Punta Arenas, situated on the mainland across the strait. The largest Chilean towns are Porvenir, capital of the Chilean Province of Tierra del Fuego, located on the main island, and, on Navarino Island, Puerto Williams, which is the capital of the Ant\u00e1rtica Chilena Province. \nPuerto Toro lies a few kilometers south of Puerto Williams. Arguably, it is the southernmost village in the world. The mostly uninhabited islands north and west of the main island are part of Magallanes Province.\nThe eastern part of the main island and a few small islands in the Beagle Channel belong to Argentina. They are part of the Tierra del Fuego, Antarctic Territory and South Atlantic Islands Province, whose capital is Ushuaia. The other important city in the region is R\u00edo Grande on the Atlantic coast, the largest in the archipelago.\nThe Cordillera Darwin in the southwestern part of the main island contains many glaciers that reach the ocean. While Mount Darwin had previously been thought to be the tallest mountain in the archipelago, this distinction now belongs to the unofficially named Monte Shipton at .\nThe topography of Tierra del Fuego can be divided into four regions: an outer archipelago region () to the south and west, a mountainous region in the south (), a plains region () plus a sub-Andean zone in-between the last two zones ().\nGeology.\nThe geology of the archipelago is influenced by the effects of the Andean orogeny and the repeated Pleistocene glaciations. The geology of the island can be divided into large east\u2013west-oriented units. The southwestern islands of the archipelago, including Cape Horn, are part of the South Patagonian Batholith, while the Cordillera Darwin and the area around the Beagle Channel form the principal mountain range hosting the highest mountains. The Magallanes fold and thrust belt extends north of Almirantazgo Fjord and Fagnano Lake, and north of this lies the Magallanes foreland, an old sedimentary basin that hosts hydrocarbon reserves. Orthogneiss dated at 525 million years is known to underlie some of the oil wells in northern Tierra del Fuego.\nThe Magallanes\u2013Fagnano Fault, a sinistral strike slip fault crosses the southern part of the main island from west to east. It is an active fault, located inside and parallel to the Fuegian fold and thrust belt, and marks the boundary between a southern belt of Paleozoic meta sediments and a northern Mesozoic belt of sedimentary sequences. Fagnano Lake occupies a glacier-carved depression in a pull-apart basin that has developed along the Magallanes-Fagnano Fault zone.\nPodzols and inceptisols occur beneath \"Nothofagus betuloides\" forests in Tierra del Fuego.\nClimate.\nThe Tierra del Fuego region has a subpolar oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfc\") with short, cool summers and long, wet, moderately mild winters: the precipitation averages a year in the far west, but precipitation decreases rapidly towards the eastern side. Temperatures are steady throughout the year: in Ushuaia they hardly surpass in summers and average in winters. Snowfall can occur in summer. The cold and wet summers help preserve the ancient glaciers. The southernmost islands possess a sub-antarctic climate typical of tundra that makes the growth of trees impossible. Some areas in the interior have a polar climate. Regions in the world with similar climates to southern Tierra del Fuego are: the Aleutian islands, Iceland, the Alaska Peninsula, the Faroe Islands, Macquarie Island, and the Heard and McDonald Islands.\nFlora.\nOnly 30% of the islands have forests, which are classified as Magellanic subpolar. The northeastern portion of the region is made up of steppe and cool semi-desert.\nSix species of tree are found in Tierra del Fuego: canelo or winter's bark (\"Drimys winteri\"); \"Maytenus magellanica\"; \"Pilgerodendron uviferum\", the southernmost conifer in the world; and three kinds of southern beech: \"Nothofagus antarctica\"; \"Nothofagus pumilio\"; and the evergreen \"Nothofagus betuloides\". Several kinds of fruit grow in open spaces in these forests, such as beach strawberry (\"Fragaria chiloensis\" var. \"chiloensis\" forma \"chiloensis\") and calafate (\"Berberis buxifolia\"), which have long been gathered by both Native Americans and residents of European descent.\nThey are the only forests in the world to have developed in a climate with such cold summers. Tree cover extends very close to the southernmost tip of South America. Winds are so strong that trees in wind-exposed areas grow into twisted shapes, inspiring people to call them \"flag-trees\". Tree vegetation extends to the southern tip of the region, Isla Hornos, although the Wollaston Islands are mostly covered by subantarctic tundra except in wind sheltered areas where the trees can survive.\nForests from Tierra del Fuego have expanded beyond local importance. These forests have been a source of trees that have been transplanted abroad in places with similar climate, but which originally were devoid of trees, such as the Faroe Islands and nearby archipelagos. Most species were gathered from the coldest places in Tierra del Fuego, mainly sites with tundra borders. This effort resulted in positive changes, as the heavy winds and cool summers in the Faroe Islands did not allow the growth of trees from other regions in the world. The imported trees are used ornamentally, as curtains against wind, and to fight erosion caused by storms and grazing in the Faroe Islands.\nFauna.\nAmong the most notable animals in the archipelago are austral parakeets, gulls, guanacos, South American foxes, kingfishers, Andean condors, king penguins, owls, and firecrown hummingbirds. Isla Grande de Tierra del Fuego is also home to the lizard with the world's southernmost distribution, \"Liolaemus magellanicus\".\nNorth American beavers, introduced during the 1940s, have proliferated and caused considerable damage to the island forests. The governments have established a wide-reaching program to trap and kill beavers in Tierra del Fuego.\nLike the mainland of Chile and Argentina to the north, this archipelago boasts some of the finest trout fishing in the world. Sea-run brown trout often exceed , particularly in rivers such as the Rio Grande and the San Pablo, and in the Lago Fagnano. \nWaters adjacent to Tierra del Fuego are very rich in cetacean diversity. Sightings of southern right whales in Tierra del Fuego have increased in the 2000s, humpbacks, and some others such as blue whales, southern fins, southern seis, and southern minkes. Beagle Channel is a prominent area to watch rare, endemic dolphins, and the less-studied pygmy right whales.\nPinnipeds inhabiting the areas include South American sea lions (\"Otaria flavescens\"), South American fur seals (\"Arctophoca australis\"), the carnivorous and seal-eating leopard seals (\"Hydrurga leptonyx\"), and gigantic southern elephant seals (\"Mirounga leonine\")\u00a0\u2013 the largest extant marine mammal that is not a cetacean.\nIslands.\nThe following table lists islands over 1 km2. Area figures are from the USGS unless otherwise specified.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEconomy.\nToday, the main economic activities of the archipelago are fishing, extraction of natural gas and oil, sheep farming, and ecotourism. Tourism is gaining increasing importance as it attracts numerous upmarket visitors. Much of the tourism is based on \"southernmost\" claims: for example, both Ushuaia and Puerto Williams claim to be the \"southernmost city in the world\". On the Argentine side of Tierra del Fuego, the government has promoted the establishment of several electronic companies via tax exemptions, particularly in the city of R\u00edo Grande.\nEnergy production is a crucial economic activity. On the Argentine side of Tierra del Fuego during the period 2005\u20132010, petroleum and natural gas extraction contributed 20% of the region's economic output.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30483", "revid": "15926788", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30483", "title": "The Hitchhikers Guide To The Galaxy", "text": ""}
{"id": "30488", "revid": "12978", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30488", "title": "Theodulf", "text": ""}
{"id": "30490", "revid": "3492060", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30490", "title": "Thought control", "text": ""}
{"id": "30492", "revid": "50527222", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30492", "title": "The Sims (video game)", "text": "2000 video game\nThe Sims is a 2000 social simulation video game developed by Maxis and published by Electronic Arts. The game allows players to create and control virtual people, called \"Sims\", and manage their daily lives in a suburban setting. The game features open-ended gameplay where players can choose their own goals and objectives, and customize their Sims' appearance, personality, skills, relationships, and environment. A series of expansion packs were also released that add new content and features to the game, such as new careers, items, locations, and scenarios.\nThe game's development was led by Will Wright, and the game was a follow-up to Wright's earlier \"SimCity\" series. Wright was inspired to create the game by Christopher Alexander's 1977 book \"A Pattern Language\", and Scott McCloud's 1993 book \"Understanding Comics\" later played a role in the game's design. Seven expansion packs were released from 2000 to 2003, each of which added new items, characters, skins, and features.\nUpon release, \"The Sims\" garnered widespread critical acclaim and was described by Wright as being successful in attracting casual male and female gamers. The game is regarded as one of the most influential and greatest games of all time. It won several awards and placed 31st on \"Time\"'s list of \"The 50 Best Video Games of All Time\". The game has also been commercially successful, having sold more than 41 million copies worldwide across the original game and its expansions by 2004. Currently the Sims has sold a estimated 70 million copies worldwide making it one of the best-selling PC games of all time. Several sequels in \"The Sims\" series have been released \u2014\"The Sims 2\" in 2004, \"The Sims 3\" in 2009, and \"The Sims 4\" in 2014. The game was re-released on Steam and EA desktop in January 2025 to coincide with the 25th anniversary of \"The Sims\" series.\nGameplay.\nThe structure of the game is an artificial life program that is agent-based. The presentation of the game's artificial intelligence is advanced, and the Sims will respond to outside conditions independently, although often the player's intervention is necessary to keep the Sims on the right track. \"The Sims\" technically has unlimited replay value, in that there is no way to truly win the game, and the player can play indefinitely. It has been described as more like a toy than a game.\nSims are influenced by the player to interact with objects or other Sims. Sims may receive guests at their home lot, invited or not, from other playable lots, or from unhoused non-player character (NPC) Sims. If enabled in the game's options, Sims have a certain amount of free will, allowing them to autonomously interact with their world; however, the player can override most of these autonomous actions by canceling them in the action queue at the top of the screen. Unlike the simulated environments in games such as \"SimCity\", \"SimEarth\", or \"SimLife\", Sims are not fully autonomous. They are unable to take certain actions without specific commands, such as paying bills, finding a job, exercising, and conceiving children. Sims communicate in a fictional language called Simlish, which is mostly composed of blowing raspberries and saying nonsense.\nThe player can make decisions about time spent in skill development, such as exercise, reading, creativity, and logic by adding activities to Sims' daily agenda. Daily needs such as hygiene and eating can and must also be scheduled. Although Sims can autonomously perform these actions, they may not prioritize them effectively and can suffer consequences for neglecting their own needs. In addition, Sims must maintain balanced budgets and usually supplement an income by obtaining a job. Sims may earn promotions by fulfilling skills and maintaining friendships with others for each level, which lead to new job titles, increased wages, and different work hours. Alternatively, Sims may create and sell various artwork and items at home.\nWhile there is no eventual objective to the game, states of failure do exist in \"The Sims\". One is that Sims may die, either by starvation, drowning, fire, or electrocution (or from natural causes/age in certain versions). When a Sim dies, a tombstone or an urn will appear (in later expansion packs, the Grim Reaper will appear first), and the ghost of the deceased Sim may haunt the building where it died. In addition, Sims can leave the game for good and never return. If two adult Sims with a bad relationship brawl often, it may result in one of them moving out. Children will be sent away to military school if they fail their classes. Lastly, not fulfilling a baby Sim's needs will result in a social care worker permanently taking the baby away from the household.\nBuilding tools.\nWhen the \"Live\" mode occurs in the game, the player may enter \"Build\" mode or \"Buy\" mode to pause time and renovate the house or lot. When the game begins, each family starts off with 20,000 \"simoleons\" (regardless of its number of members). These funds can be used to purchase a small house or vacant lot on the neighborhood screen. After purchasing a lot, a user may construct or remodel a house in Build mode or purchase or move furniture in Buy mode. All architectural and customizable features and furnishings in Build and Buy modes follow a square-tile system in which items must be placed on a tile. Walls and fences extend along the edge of a tile and can follow the edge of the tile or cross it diagonally, but furniture items cannot be placed on either side of a crossed tile. The base game contains over 150 items, including furniture and architectural elements.\nIn addition, the game includes an architecture system. The game was originally designed solely as an architecture simulator, with the Sims there only to evaluate the houses, but during development, it was decided that the Sims were more interesting than originally anticipated, and their once-limited role in the game was developed further. Players have a broad choice of objects that their respective Sims may purchase. Objects fall into one of eight broad categories: seating, surfaces, decorations, electronics, appliances, plumbing, lighting, and miscellaneous.\nDevelopment.\nThe original inspiration for \"The Sims\" was Christopher Alexander's 1977 book on architecture and urban design, \"A Pattern Language\". Game designer Will Wright was inspired by the book's focus on functionality in architecture, as Alexander based his design principles on structural usability rather than aesthetic values. Wright wanted to create a simulation game about enabling human behavior and interaction through design. Scott McCloud's 1993 book \"Understanding Comics\" became a big influence on the design of \"The Sims\" later on, as it advocates a certain type of \"collaboration\" between designer and consumer and outlines the value of abstraction for getting readers or players involved with a story.\nWill Wright started working on \"The Sims\" after releasing \"SimAnt\" in 1991. It was during that same year that he lost his home during the Oakland firestorm of 1991, and he incorporated his experience of rebuilding his life into the game; however, the game's concept was very poorly received by a focus group, so Wright had difficulty getting the project off the ground. He managed to convince his company to let him work on the project (codenamed \"Project X\" at the time) in the background while developing \"SimCity 2000\" and \"SimCopter\". He was lent one programmer for the project, Jamie Doornbos, who went on to become the lead programmer for \"The Sims\". During the first few years of the project, Wright and Doornbos were primarily developing an open-ended system of character behavior. As the project continued, Wright found that the social aspect of the game turned out to be highly engaging, and the team started to focus more on the characters of the game, such as by letting Sims visit one another's houses and by implementing long-term relationships.\nWright has mentioned playing \"Little Computer People\" and receiving valuable feedback on \"The Sims\" from several people involved with the game including its designer, Rich Gold. A demo of the game was presented at the 1999 Electronic Entertainment Expo. During a displaying in front of the press, two female characters at an in-game wedding fell in love and kissed each other. After the event, the relationship mechanics were further modified so the character's sexual orientation was set depending on the player's actions. \"The Sims\" uses a combination of 3D and 2D graphics techniques. The Sims themselves are rendered in 3D, whereas the house and all its objects are pre-rendered and displayed diametrically. For the game's Japanese release, the game was renamed to SimPeople (\u30b7\u30e0\u30d4\u30fc\u30d7\u30eb) to match the naming conventions of the other \"Sim\" games from Maxis.\nMusic.\nThe game music was composed by Jerry Martin, Marc Russo, Kirk R. Casey, and Dix Bruce, with additional participation from jazz pianist John R. Burr for the songs used in the game's Build Mode. The game disc contains 37 tracks, of which 15 were published in 2007 as an official soundtrack album. Most of the tracks contain no vocals, but some of them feature Simlish lyrics.\nIn recent years, critics have praised and noted the game's use of new age and jazz music.\nModding scene.\n\"The Sims\" is credited with opening up modding to a new demographic, making it easy enough for \"casual modders\" to modify the game. \"The Sims\" was designed in a way that it would be easy to add user-created content (also known as custom content or \"CC\") to the game, with Will Wright stating in an interview that he wanted to put the player in the design role. Websites for downloading CCs and mods include The Sims Resource and Mod The Sims. Maxis released modding tools for \"The Sims\" before the game itself, resulting in a suite of fan-created mods being available at launch.\nExpansion packs.\n\"The Sims\" had a total of seven expansion packs released in its lifecycle. Each expansion generally adds new items, neighborhoods, characters, skins, and features.\nReception.\nCritical reception.\n\"The Sims\" received \"universal acclaim\" according to review aggregator Metacritic, which assigned the game a score of 92%. The game received praise for its open-ended gameplay allowing players to choose their own goals and objectives, as well as its sound design, \"crisp\" graphics, and humor. Reviewers positively compared \"The Sims\" to Maxis' 1999 title \"SimCity 3000\". GameSpot assigned a review of 9.1/10, describing it as \"highly detailed\". \"IGN\" gave the game a score of 9.4/10, and praised its easy-to-use user interface. Jeff Lundrigan reviewed the PC version of the game for \"Next Generation\", rating it four stars out of five and saying: \"Do not miss. Run do not walk. And set aside lots of time.\"\nWill Wright, the game's designer, said the game has been a success in many ways\u2014attracting casual gamers and female gamers (the latter making up almost 60% of players). In 2012, the game was one of 14 video games selected by the Museum of Modern Art as the basis for an intended collection of 40 games. The PlayStation 2, Xbox, and GameCube ports received scores ranging from 81.05% to 85.80% on GameRankings.\nAwards.\n\"The Sims\" has won numerous awards, including \"GameSpot\"'s \"Game of the Year Award\" for 2000. During the 3rd Annual Interactive Achievement Awards (since 2013 known as the D.I.C.E. Awards), \"The Sims\" won \"Game of the Year\", \"Outstanding Achievement in Game Design\", and \"Outstanding Achievement in Game Play Engineering\" (along with nominations for \"Computer Family Entertainment Title of the Year\" and \"Outstanding Achievement in Art Direction\"). \"Game Informer\" ranked it the 80th best game ever made in its 100th issue in 2001. In 2005, \"The Sims\" was inducted into \"GameSpot\"'s list of the greatest games of all time. In 2016, The Strong National Museum of Play inducted \"The Sims\" to its World Video Game Hall of Fame. In August 2016, \"The Sims\" placed 31st on \"Time\"'s \"50 Best Video Games of All Time\" list. In 2019, it was ranked 17th on \"The Guardian\"'s \"50 Best Video Games of the 21st Century\" list.\nSales.\n\"The Sims\" was released on February 4, 2000, and became a best-seller shortly after launch. In the United States, it was the best-selling computer game of 2000, with domestic sales of 1.77\u00a0million units and revenues of $72.9\u00a0million. It remained the country's No. 1 computer title in 2001, when it sold an additional 1.48\u00a0million units and earned another $60.4\u00a0million in revenue. In 2002, \"The Sims\" became the top-selling PC game in history at the time, displacing \"Myst\" by selling more than 6.3\u00a0million copies worldwide.\nBy September 2004, the game and its expansions had sold 41 million copies worldwide. By July 2006, the console versions of \"The Sims\" series had sold a combined 3.5\u00a0million units in the United States. \"Next Generation\" ranked \"The Sims\" as the 45th highest-selling game launched for the PlayStation 2, Xbox, or GameCube between January 2000 and July 2006 in the United States. To date, the Sims had sold more than 70 million copies worldwide making it one of the best selling video games of all time.\nSequels and legacy.\n\"The Sims\" was followed by the sequels \"The Sims 2\" (2004), \"The Sims 3\" (2009), and \"The Sims 4\" (2014). The console versions of \"The Sims\" were each followed by a sequel, \"The Sims Bustin' Out\" (2003), and a spin-off game, \"\" (2004). These versions incorporate some features of later PC expansion packs, and \"Bustin' Out\" adds a multiplayer mode supporting two simultaneous players. When completing the game, Will Wright dedicated \"The Sims\" to the late Danielle Bunten Berry, an influential trans game designer known for her innovation and contributions to multiplayer gaming.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30493", "revid": "911914855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30493", "title": "Thermodynamic", "text": ""}
{"id": "30494", "revid": "50034649", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30494", "title": "Turbomolecular pump", "text": "Pump designed to create and maintain high vacuum\nA turbomolecular pump is a type of vacuum pump, superficially similar to a turbopump, used to obtain and maintain high vacuum. These pumps work on the principle that gas molecules can be given momentum in a desired direction by repeated collision with a moving solid surface. In a turbomolecular pump, a rapidly spinning fan rotor 'hits' gas molecules from the inlet of the pump towards the exhaust in order to create or maintain a vacuum.\nOperating principles.\nMost turbomolecular pumps employ multiple stages, each consisting of a quickly rotating rotor blade and stationary stator blade pair. The system is an axial compressor that puts energy into the gas, rather than a turbine, which takes energy out of a moving fluid to create rotary power, thus \"turbomolecular pump\" is a misnomer. Gas captured by the upper stages is pushed into the lower stages and successively compressed to the level of the fore-vacuum (backing pump) pressure.\nAs the gas molecules enter through the inlet, the rotor, which has a number of angled blades, hits the molecules. Thus the mechanical energy of the blades is transferred to the gas molecules. With this newly acquired momentum, the gas molecules enter into the gas transfer holes in the stator. This leads them to the next stage where they again collide with the rotor surface, and this process is continued, finally leading them outwards through the exhaust.\nBecause of the relative motion of rotor and stator, molecules preferentially hit the lower side of the blades. Because the blade surface looks down, most of the scattered molecules will leave it downwards. The surface is rough, so no reflection will occur. A blade needs to be thick and stable enough for high pressure operation and as thin as possible and slightly bent for maximum compression. For high compression ratios the throat between adjacent rotor blades (as shown in the image) is pointing as much as possible in the forward direction. For high flow rates the blades are at 45\u00b0 and reach close to the axis.\nBecause the compression of each stage is \u224810, each stage closer to the outlet is considerably smaller than the preceding inlet stages. This has two consequences. The geometric progression tells us that infinite stages could ideally fit into a finite axial length. The finite length in this case is the full height of the housing as the bearings, the motor, and controller and some of the coolers can be installed inside on the axis. Radially, to grasp as much of the thin gas at the entrance, the inlet-side rotors would ideally have a larger radius, and correspondingly higher centrifugal force; ideal blades would get thinner towards their tips. However, because the average speed of a blade affects pumping so much this is done by increasing the root diameter rather than the tip diameter where practical.\nTurbomolecular pumps must operate at very high speeds, and the heat buildup due to friction imposes design limitations. Some turbomolecular pumps use magnetic bearings to reduce friction and oil contamination. Because the magnetic bearings and the temperature cycles allow for only a limited clearance between rotor and stator, the blades at the high pressure stages are somewhat degenerated into a single helical foil each. Laminar flow cannot be used for pumping, because laminar turbines stall when not used at the designed flow. The pump can be cooled down to improve the compression, but should not be so cold as to condense ice on the blades.\nWhen a turbopump is stopped, the oil from the backing vacuum may backstream through the turbopump and contaminate the chamber. One way to prevent this is to introduce a laminar flow of nitrogen through the pump. The transition from vacuum to nitrogen and from a running to a still turbopump has to be synchronized precisely to avoid mechanical stress to the pump and overpressure at the exhaust. A thin membrane and a valve at the exhaust should be added to protect the turbopump from excessive back pressure (e.g. after a power failure or leaks in the backing vacuum).\nThe rotor is stabilized in all of its six degrees of freedom. One degree is governed by the electric motor. Minimally, this degree must be stabilized electronically (or by a diamagnetic material, which is too unstable to be used in a precision pump bearing). Another way (ignoring losses in magnetic cores at high frequencies) is to construct this bearing as an axis with a sphere at each end. These spheres are inside hollow static spheres. On the surface of each sphere is a checkerboard pattern of inwards and outwards going magnetic field lines. As the checkerboard pattern of the static spheres is rotated, the rotor rotates. In this construction no axis is made stable on the cost of making another axis unstable, but all axes are neutral and the electronic regulation is less stressed and will be more dynamically stable. Hall effect sensors can be used to sense the rotational position and the other degrees of freedom can be measured capacitively.\nMaximum pressure.\nAt atmospheric pressure, the mean free path of air is about 70\u00a0nm. A turbomolecular pump can work only if those molecules hit by the moving blades reach the stationary blades before colliding with other molecules on their way. To achieve that, the gap between moving blades and stationary blades must be close to or less than the mean free path. From a practical construction standpoint, a feasible gap between the blade sets is on the order of 1\u00a0mm, so a turbopump will stall (no net pumping) if exhausted directly to the atmosphere. Since the mean free path is inversely proportional to pressure, a turbopump will pump when the exhaust pressure is less than about where the mean free path is about 0.7\u00a0mm.\nMost turbopumps have a Holweck pump (or molecular drag pump) as their last stage to increase the maximum backing pressure (exhaust pressure) to about 1\u201310\u00a0mbar. Theoretically, a centrifugal pump, a side channel pump, or a regenerative pump could be used to back to atmospheric pressure directly, but currently there is no commercially available turbopump that exhausts directly to atmosphere. In most cases, the exhaust is connected to a mechanical backing pump (usually called roughing pump) that produces a pressure low enough for the turbomolecular pump to work efficiently. Typically, this backing pressure is below 0.1\u00a0mbar and commonly about 0.01\u00a0mbar. The backing pressure is rarely below 10\u22123\u00a0mbar (mean free path \u2248 70\u00a0mm) because the flow resistance of the vacuum pipe between the turbopump and the roughing pump becomes significant.\nThe turbomolecular pump can be a very versatile pump. It can generate many degrees of vacuum from intermediate vacuum (\u224810\u22122 Pa) up to ultra-high vacuum levels (\u224810\u22128 Pa).\nMultiple turbomolecular pumps in a lab or manufacturing-plant can be connected by tubes to a small backing pump. Automatic valves and diffusion pump like injection into a large buffer-tube in front of the backing pump prevents any overpressure from one pump to stall another pump.\nPractical considerations.\nLaws of fluid dynamics do not provide good approximations for the behavior of individual, highly separated, non-interacting gas molecules, like those found in high vacuum environments. The maximum compression varies linearly with circumferential rotor speed. In order to obtain extremely low pressures down to 1 micropascal, rotation rates of 20,000 to 90,000 revolutions per minute are often necessary. Unfortunately, the compression ratio varies exponentially with the square root of the molecular weight of the gas. Thus, heavy molecules are pumped much more efficiently than light molecules. Most gases are heavy enough to be well pumped but it is difficult to pump hydrogen and helium efficiently.\nAn additional drawback stems from the high rotor speed of this type of pump: very high grade bearings are required, which increase the cost.\nBecause turbomolecular pumps only work in molecular flow conditions, a pure turbomolecular pump will require a very large backing pump to work effectively. Thus, many modern pumps have a molecular drag stage such as a Holweck or Gaede mechanism near the exhaust to reduce the size of backing pump required.\nMuch of recent turbo pump development has been focused on improvement of the effectiveness of the drag stages. As gas is removed from a pumped space, the lighter gases hydrogen and helium become a larger proportion of the remaining gas load. In recent years it has been demonstrated that the precise design of the surface geometry of the drag stages can have a marked effect on pumping of these light gases, improving compression ratios by up to two orders of magnitude for given pumping volume. As a result, it is possible to use much smaller backing pumps than would be required by pure turbomolecular pumps and/or design more compact turbomolecular pumps.\nHistory.\nThe turbomolecular pump was invented in 1958 by W. Becker, based on the older molecular drag pumps developed by Wolfgang Gaede in 1913, Fernand Holweck in 1923 and Manne Siegbahn in 1944.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30497", "revid": "20836525", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30497", "title": "Totally ordered set", "text": ""}
{"id": "30498", "revid": "1102976", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30498", "title": "Tour de France", "text": "Multi-stage cycling race\nThe Tour de France () is an annual men's multiple-stage road cycling race held primarily in France. It is the oldest and most prestigious of the three Grand Tours, which include the Giro d'Italia and the Vuelta a Espa\u00f1a.\nThe race was first organized in 1903 to increase sales for the newspaper \"L'Auto\" (which was an ancestor of \"L'\u00c9quipe\") and has been held annually since, except when it was not held from 1915 to 1918 and 1940 to 1946 due to the two World Wars. As the Tour gained prominence and popularity, the race was lengthened and gained more international participation. The Tour is a UCI World Tour event, which means that the teams that compete in the race are mostly UCI WorldTeams, with the exception of the teams that the organizers invite.\nTraditionally, the bulk of the race is held in July. While the route changes every year, the format of the race stays the same and includes time trials, passage through the mountain chains of the Pyrenees and the Alps, and, from 1975 to 2023, a finish on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris. The modern editions of the Tour de France consist of 21 day-long stages over a 23- or 24-day period and cover approximately total. Each year, the race alternates between clockwise and counterclockwise circuits of France.\nTwenty to twenty-three teams of eight riders usually compete. All of the stages are timed to the finish, and the riders' times are compounded with their previous stage times. The rider with the lowest cumulative time is the leader of the race and wears the yellow jersey. While the general classification attracts the most attention, there are other contests held within the Tour: the points classification for the sprinters (green jersey), the mountains classification for the climbers (polka-dot jersey), young rider classification for riders under the age of 26 (white jersey), and the team classification, based on the first three finishers from each team on each stage. Achieving a stage win also provides prestige, often accomplished by a team's sprint specialist or a rider taking part in a breakaway.\nA similar race for women was held under various names between 1984 and 2009. Following criticism by campaigners and the professional women's peloton, a one/two-day race (La Course by Le Tour de France) was held between 2014 and 2021. The first Tour de France Femmes was held in 2022.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nThe Tour de France was created in 1903. The roots of the Tour de France trace back to the emergence of two rival sports newspapers in the country. On one hand was \"Le V\u00e9lo\", the first and the largest daily sports newspaper in France, on the other was \"L'Auto\", which had been set up by journalists and businesspeople including Comte Jules-Albert de Dion, Adolphe Cl\u00e9ment, and \u00c9douard Michelin in 1899. The rival paper emerged following disagreements over the Dreyfus Affair. De Dion, Cl\u00e9ment and Michelin were particularly concerned with \"Le V\u00e9lo\"\u2014which reported more than cycling\u2014because its financial backer was one of their commercial rivals, the Darracq company. De Dion believed \"Le V\u00e9lo\" gave Darracq too much attention and him too little. De Dion was rich and could afford to indulge his whims. The new newspaper appointed Henri Desgrange as the editor. He was a prominent cyclist and owner with Victor Goddet of the velodrome at the Parc des Princes.\n\"L'Auto\" sales were lower than the rival it was intended to surpass, leading to a crisis meeting on 20 November 1902 on the middle floor of \"L'Auto\"'s office at 10 Rue du Faubourg Montmartre, Paris. The last to speak was the chief cycling journalist, a 26-year-old named G\u00e9o Lef\u00e8vre. Lef\u00e8vre suggested a six-day race of the sort popular on the track but all around France. Long-distance cycle races were a popular means to sell more newspapers, but nothing of the length that Lef\u00e8vre suggested had been attempted.\nThe first Tour de France (1903).\nThe first Tour de France was staged in 1903. The plan was a five-stage race from 31 May to 5 July, starting in Paris and stopping in Lyon, Marseille, Bordeaux, and Nantes before returning to Paris. Toulouse was added later to break the long haul across southern France from the Mediterranean to the Atlantic. Stages would go through the night and finish the next afternoon, with rest days before riders set off again, but this proved too daunting and the costs too great for most and only 15 competitors had entered. Desgrange had never been wholly convinced and he came close to dropping the idea. Instead, he cut the length to 19 days, changed the dates to 1 to 19 July, and offered a daily allowance to those who averaged at least on all the stages, equivalent to what a rider would have expected to earn each day had he worked in a factory. He also cut the entry fee from 20 to 10 francs and set the first prize at 12,000 francs and the prize for each day's winner at 3,000 francs. The winner would thereby win six times what most workers earned in a year. That attracted between 60 and 80 entrants\u00a0\u2013 the higher number may have included serious inquiries and some who dropped out\u00a0\u2013 among them not just professionals but amateurs, some unemployed, and some simply adventurous.\nThe first Tour de France started almost outside the Caf\u00e9 Reveil-Matin at the junction of the Melun and Corbeil roads in the village of Montgeron. It was waved away by the starter, Georges Abran, at 3:16\u00a0p.m. on 1 July 1903. \"L'Auto\" hadn't featured the race on its front page that morning.\nAmong the competitors were the eventual winner, Maurice Garin, his well-built rival Hippolyte Aucouturier, the German favourite Josef Fischer, and a collection of adventurers, including one competing as \"Samson\".\nMany riders dropped out of the race after completing the initial stages, as the physical effort the tour required was just too much. Only a mere 24 entrants remained at the end of the fourth stage. The race finished on the edge of Paris at Ville d'Avray, outside the Restaurant du P\u00e8re Auto, before a ceremonial ride into Paris and several laps of the Parc des Princes. Garin dominated the race, winning the first and last two stages, at . The last rider, Ars\u00e8ne Millocheau, finished 64h 57m 8s behind him.\n\"L'Auto\"'s mission was accomplished, as circulation of the publication doubled throughout the race, making the race something much larger than Desgrange had ever hoped for.\n1904\u20131939.\nSuch was the passion that the first Tour created in spectators and riders that Desgrange said the 1904 Tour de France would be the last. Cheating was rife, and riders were beaten up by rival fans as they neared the top of the col de la R\u00e9publique, sometimes called the col du Grand Bois, outside St-\u00c9tienne. The leading riders, including the winner Maurice Garin, were disqualified, though it took the Union V\u00e9locip\u00e8dique de France until 30 November to make the decision. McGann says the UVF waited so long \"...well aware of the passions aroused by the race.\" Desgrange's opinion of the fighting and cheating showed in the headline of his reaction in \"L'Auto\": THE END.\nBy the following spring, Desgrange was planning a longer Tour with 11 stages instead of 6, and this time all the stages would take place during daylight hours to make cheating more noticeable. In 1905, stages started between 3:00 AM and 7:30 AM. The race captivated audiences and returned after a hiatus during World War I, continuing to grow in popularity.\nDesgrange and his Tour invented bicycle stage racing. Desgrange experimented with different ways of judging the winner. Initially he used total accumulated time (as used in the modern Tour de France) but from 1906 to 1912 by points for placings each day. Desgrange saw problems in judging both by time and by points. By time, a rider coping with a mechanical problem\u2014which the rules insisted he repair alone\u2014could lose so much time that it cost him the race. Equally, riders could finish so separated that time gained or lost on one or two days could decide the whole race. Judging the race by points removed over-influential time differences but discouraged competitors from riding hard. It made no difference whether they finished fast or slow or separated by seconds or hours, so they were inclined to ride together at a relaxed pace until close to the line, only then disputing the final placings that would give them points.\nThe format changed over time. The Tour originally ran around the perimeter of France. Cycling was an endurance sport, and the organisers realised the sales they would achieve by creating supermen of the competitors. Night riding was dropped after the second Tour in 1904, when there had been persistent cheating when judges could not see riders. That reduced the daily and overall distance, but the emphasis remained on endurance. The first mountain stages (in the Pyrenees) appeared in 1910. Early tours had long multi-day stages, with the format settling on 15 stages from 1910 until 1924. After this, stages were gradually shortened, such that by 1936 there were as many as three stages in a single day.\nDesgrange initially preferred to see the Tour as a race of individuals. The first Tours were open to whoever wanted to compete. Most riders were in teams that looked after them. The private entrants were called \"touriste-routiers\u2014\"tourists of the road\u2014from 1923 and were allowed to take part provided they make no demands on the organisers. Some of the Tour's most colourful characters have been touriste-routiers. One finished each day's race and then performed acrobatic tricks in the street to raise the price of a hotel. Until 1925, Desgrange forbade team members from pacing each other. The 1927 and 1928 Tours, however, consisted mainly of team time-trials, an unsuccessful experiment which sought to avoid a proliferation of sprint finishes on flat stages.\nUntil 1930, Desgrange demanded that riders mend their bicycles without help and that they use the same bicycle from start to end. Exchanging a damaged bicycle for another was allowed only in 1923. Desgrange stood against the use of multiple gears, and for many years insisted riders use wooden rims, fearing the heat of braking while coming down mountains would melt the glue that held the tires on metal rims (however, they were finally allowed in 1937).\nBy the end of the 1920s, Desgrange believed he could not beat what he believed were the underhand tactics of bike factories. When in 1929 the Alcyon team contrived to get Maurice De Waele to win even though he was sick, he said, \"My race has been won by a corpse\". In 1930, Desgrange again attempted to take control of the Tour from teams, insisting competitors enter in national teams rather than trade teams and that competitors ride plain yellow bicycles that he would provide, without a maker's name. There was no place for individuals in the post-1930s teams, and so Desgrange created regional teams, generally from France, to take in riders who would not otherwise have qualified. The original touriste-routiers mostly disappeared, but some were absorbed into regional teams.\nDesgrange died at home on the Mediterranean coast on 16 August 1940. The race was taken over by his deputy, Jacques Goddet. The Tour was again disrupted by War after 1939, and did not return until 1947.\n1947\u20131969.\nIn 1944, \"L'Auto\" was closed\u2014its doors nailed shut\u2014and its belongings, including the Tour, sequestrated by the state for publishing articles too close to the Germans. Rights to the Tour were therefore owned by the government. Jacques Goddet was allowed to publish another daily sports paper, \"L'\u00c9quipe\", but there was a rival candidate to run the Tour: a consortium of \"Sports\" and \"Miroir Sprint\". Each organised a candidate race. \"L'\u00c9quipe\" and \"Le Parisien Lib\u00e9r\u00e9\" had La Course du Tour de France, while \"Sports\" and \"Miroir Sprint\" had La Ronde de France. Both were five stages, the longest the government would allow because of shortages. \"L'\u00c9quipe\"'s race was better organised and appealed more to the public because it featured national teams that had been successful before the war, when French cycling was at a high. \"L'\u00c9quipe\" was given the right to organise the 1947 Tour de France. However, \"L'\u00c9quipe\"'s finances were never sound, and Goddet accepted an advance by \u00c9milion Amaury, who had supported his bid to run the postwar Tour. Amaury was a newspaper magnate whose sole condition was that his sports editor, F\u00e9lix L\u00e9vitan, should join Goddet for the Tour. The two worked together\u2014with Goddet running the sporting side, and L\u00e9vitan the financial.\nOn the Tour's return, the format of the race settled on between 20 and 25 stages. Most stages would last one day, but the scheduling of 'split' stages continued well into the 1980s. 1953 saw the introduction of the Green Jersey 'Points' competition. National teams contested the Tour until 1961. The teams were of different sizes. Some nations had more than one team, and some were mixed in with others to make up the number. National teams caught the public imagination but had a snag: that riders might normally have been in rival trade teams the rest of the season. The loyalty of riders was sometimes questionable, within and between teams. Sponsors were always unhappy about releasing their riders into anonymity for the biggest race of the year, as riders in national teams wore the colours of their country and a small cloth panel on their chest that named the team for which they normally rode. The situation became critical at the start of the 1960s. Sales of bicycles had fallen, and bicycle factories were closing. There was a risk, the trade said, that the industry would die if factories were not allowed the publicity of the Tour de France. The Tour returned to trade teams in 1962. In the same year, \u00c9milion Amaury, owner of \"le Parisien Lib\u00e9r\u00e9\", became financially involved in the Tour. He made F\u00e9lix L\u00e9vitan co-organizer of the Tour, and it was decided that Levitan would focus on the financial issues, while Jacques Goddet was put in charge of sporting issues. The Tour de France was meant for professional cyclists, but in 1961 the organisation started the Tour de l'Avenir, the amateur version.\nTwice, in 1949 and 1952, Italian rider Fausto Coppi won the Giro d'Italia and the Tour de France in the same year, the first rider to do so.\nLouison Bobet was the first great French rider of the post-war period and the first rider to win the Tour in three successive years, 1953, 1954 and 1955.\nJacques Anquetil became the first cyclist to win the Tour de France five times, in 1957 and from 1961 to 1964. He stated before the 1961 Tour that he would gain the yellow jersey on day one and wear it all through the tour, a tall order with two previous winners in the field\u2014Charly Gaul and Federico Bahamontes\u2014but he did it. His victories in stage races such as the Tour were built on an exceptional ability to ride alone against the clock in individual time trial stages, which lent him the name \"Monsieur Chrono\". Anquetil enjoyed a rivalry with Raymond Poulidor, who was known as \"The Eternal Second\", because he never won the Tour, despite finishing in second place three times, and in third place five times (including his final Tour at the age of 40).\nDoping had become a serious problem, culminating in the death of Tom Simpson in 1967, after which riders went on strike, although the organisers suspected sponsors provoked them. The Union Cycliste Internationale introduced limits to daily and overall distances, imposed rest days, and tests were introduced for riders. It was then impossible to follow the frontiers, and the Tour increasingly zig-zagged across the country, sometimes with unconnected days' races linked by train, while still maintaining some sort of loop. The Tour returned to national teams for 1967 and 1968 as \"an experiment\". The Tour returned to trade teams in 1969 with a suggestion that national teams could come back every few years, but this has not happened since.\n1969\u20131987.\nIn the early 1970s, the race was dominated by Eddy Merckx, who won the General Classification five times, the Mountains Classification twice, the Points Classification three times and held the record for the most stage victories (34) until overtaken by Mark Cavendish in 2024. Merckx's dominating style earned him the nickname \"The Cannibal\". In 1969, he already had a commanding lead when he launched a long-distance solo attack in the mountains which none of the other elite riders could answer, resulting in an eventual winning margin of nearly eighteen minutes. In 1973 he did not win because he did not enter the Tour; instead, his great rival Luis Oca\u00f1a won. Merckx's winning streak came to an end when he finished 2nd to Bernard Th\u00e9venet in 1975.\nDuring this era, race director Felix L\u00e9vitan began to recruit additional sponsors, sometimes accepting prizes in kind if he could not get cash. In 1975, the polka-dot jersey was introduced for the winner of the Mountains Classification. This same year Levitan also introduced the finish of the Tour at the Avenue des Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. Since then, this stage has been largely ceremonial and is generally only contested as a prestigious sprinters' stage. (See 'Notable Stages' below for examples of non-ceremonial finishes to this stage.) Occasionally, a rider will be given the honor of leading the rest of the peloton onto the circuit finish in their final Tour, as was the case for Jens Voigt and Sylvain Chavanel, among others.\nFrom the late 1970s and into the early 1980s, the Tour was dominated by Frenchman Bernard Hinault, who would become the third rider to win five times. Hinault was defeated by Joop Zoetemelk in 1980 when he withdrew, and only once in his Tour de France career was he soundly defeated, and this was by Laurent Fignon in 1984. In 1986, Hinault, who had won the year before with American rider Greg LeMond supporting him, publicly pledged to ride in support of LeMond. Several attacks during the race cast doubt on the sincerity of his promise, leading to a rift between the two riders and the entire La Vie Claire team, before LeMond prevailed. It was the first ever victory for a rider from outside of Europe. The 1986 Tour is widely considered to be one of the most memorable in the history of the sport due to the battle between LeMond and Hinault.\nThe 1987 edition was more uncertain than past editions, as previous winners Hinault and Zoetemelk had retired, LeMond was absent, and Fignon was suffering from a lingering injury. As such, the race was highly competitive, and the lead changed hands eight times before Stephen Roche won. When Roche won the World Championship Road Race later in the season, he became only the second rider (after Merckx) to win cycling's Triple Crown, which meant winning the Giro d'Italia, the Tour and the Road World Cycling Championship in one calendar year.\nL\u00e9vitan helped drive an internationalization of the Tour de France, and cycling in general. Roche was the first winner from Ireland; however, in the years leading up to his victory, cyclists from numerous other countries began joining the ranks of the peloton. In 1982, Sean Kelly of Ireland (points) and Phil Anderson of Australia (young rider) became the first winners of any Tour classifications from outside cycling's Continental Europe heartlands, while L\u00e9vitan was influential in facilitating the participation in the 1983 Tour by amateur riders from the Eastern Bloc and Colombia. In 1984, for the first time, the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 du Tour de France organized the Tour de France F\u00e9minin, a version for women. It was run in the same weeks as the men's version, and it was won by Marianne Martin.\nWhile the global awareness and popularity of the Tour grew during this time, its finances became stretched. Goddet and L\u00e9vitan continued to clash over the running of the race. L\u00e9vitan launched the Tour of America as a precursor to his plans to take the Tour de France to the US. The Tour of America lost much money, and it appeared to have been cross-financed by the Tour de France. In the years before 1987, L\u00e9vitan's position had always been protected by \u00c9milien Amaury, the then owner of ASO, but \u00c9milien Amaury would soon retire and leave son Philippe Amaury responsible. When L\u00e9vitan arrived at his office on 17 March 1987, he found that his doors were locked and he was fired. The organisation of the 1987 Tour de France was taken over by Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Naquet-Radiguet. He was not successful in acquiring more funds, and was fired within one year.\n1988\u20131997.\nMonths before the start of the 1988 Tour, director Jean-Fran\u00e7ois Naquet-Radiguet was replaced by Xavier Louy. In 1988, the Tour was organised by Jean-Pierre Courcol, the director of \"L'\u00c9quipe\", then in 1989 by Jean-Pierre Carenso and then by Jean-Marie Leblanc, who in 1989 had been race director. The former television presenter Christian Prudhomme\u2014he commentated on the Tour among other events\u2014replaced Leblanc in 2007, having been assistant director for three years. In 1993 ownership of \"L'\u00c9quipe\" moved to the Amaury Group, which formed Amaury Sport Organisation (ASO) to oversee its sports operations, although the Tour itself is operated by its subsidiary the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 du Tour de France.\n1988 onward was arguably the beginning of what can be referred to as the doping era. A new drug, erythropoietin (EPO), began to be used; it could not be detected by drug tests of the time. Pedro Delgado won the 1988 Tour de France by a considerable margin, and in 1989 and 1990 LeMond returned from injury and won back-to-back Tours, with the 1989 edition still standing as the closest two-way battle in TDF history, with LeMond claiming an 8-second victory on the final time trial to best Laurent Fignon.\nThe early 1990s was dominated by Spaniard Miguel Indur\u00e1in, who won five Tours from 1991 to 1995, the fourth, and last, to win five times, and the only five-time winner to achieve those victories consecutively. He wore the race leader's yellow jersey in the Tour de France for 60 days. He holds the record for the most consecutive Tour de France wins and shares the record for most wins with Jacques Anquetil, Bernard Hinault and Eddy Merckx. Indur\u00e1in was a strong time trialist, gaining on rivals and riding defensively in the climbing stages. Indur\u00e1in won only two Tour stages that were not individual time trials: mountain stages to Cauterets (1989) and Luz Ardiden (1990) in the Pyrenees. These superior abilities in the discipline fit perfectly with the time trial heavy Tours of the era, with many featuring between 150 and 200\u00a0km of time trialling vs the more common 50\u201380\u00a0km today.\nThe influx of more international riders continued through this period, as in 1996 the race was won for the first time by a rider from Denmark, Bjarne Riis, who ended Miguel Indur\u00e1in's reign with an attack on Hautacam. On 25 May 2007, Bjarne Riis admitted that he placed first in the Tour de France using banned substances, and he was no longer considered the winner by the Tour's organizers. In July 2008, the Tour reconfirmed his victory but with an asterisk label to indicate his doping offences. In 2013 Jan Ullrich, the first German rider to win the Tour (in 1997), admitted to blood doping.\n1998\u20132011.\nDuring the 1998 Tour de France, a doping scandal known as the Festina Affair shook the sport to its core when it became apparent that there was systematic doping going on in the sport. Numerous riders and a handful of teams were either thrown out of the race, or left of their own free will, and in the end Marco Pantani survived to win his lone Tour in a decimated main field. The 1999 Tour de France was billed as the \u2018Tour of Renewal\u2019 as the sport tried to clean up its image following the doping fiasco of the previous year. Initially it seemed to be a Cinderella story when cancer survivor Lance Armstrong stole the show on Sestriere and kept on riding to the first of his astonishing seven consecutive Tour de France victories; however, in retrospect, 1999 was just the beginning of the doping problem getting far worse. Following Armstrong's retirement in 2005, the 2006 edition saw his former teammate Floyd Landis finally get the chance to win the Tour in the final time trial with a stunning and improbable solo breakaway in Stage 17. Not long after the Tour was over, however, Landis admitted to doping and had his Tour win revoked.\nOver the next few years, a new star in Alberto Contador came onto the scene; however, during the 2007 edition, a veteran Danish rider, Michael Rasmussen, was in the maillot jaune late in the Tour, in position to win, when his own team sacked him for a possible doping infraction; this allowed the rising star Contador to ride mistake-free for the remaining stages to win his first. 2008 saw a Tour where so many riders were doping that, when it went ten days without a single doping incident, it became news. It was during this Tour that a UCI official was quoted as saying, \"These guys are crazy, and the sooner they start learning, the better.\" Roger Legeay, a Directeur Sportif for one of the teams noted how riders were secretly and anonymously buying doping products on the internet. Like Greg LeMond at the beginning of the EPO era, 2008 winner Carlos Sastre was a rider who went his entire career without a single doping incident and between approximately 1994 and 2011 this was the only Tour to have a winner with a clear biological passport. 2009 saw the return of Lance Armstrong and, strangely, after Contador was able to defeat his teammate, the Danish National Anthem was mistakenly played. No Danish rider was in contention in 2009, and Rasmussen, the only Danish rider capable of winning the Tour during this era, was not even in the race. Another rider absent was Floyd Landis, who had asked Armstrong to get him back on a team to ride the Tour once more, but Armstrong refused because Landis was a convicted doper. Landis joined OUCH, an American continental team, and not long after this initiated contact with USADA to discuss Armstrong.\nIn 2011, Cadel Evans became the first Australian to win the Tour after coming up just short several times in the previous few editions. The 2012 Tour de France was won by the first British rider to ever win the Tour, Bradley Wiggins, while finishing on the podium just behind him was Chris Froome, who along with Contador became the next big stars to attempt to contest the giants of Anquetil, Merckx, Hinault, Indurain and Armstrong.\nOvershadowing the entire sport at this time, however, was the Lance Armstrong doping case, which finally revealed much of the truth about doping in cycling. As a result, the UCI decided that each of Armstrong's seven wins would be revoked. This decision cleared the names of many people, including lesser-known riders, reporters, team medical staff, and even the wife of a rider who had their reputations tarnished or had been forced from the sport due to pressure from Armstrong and his support staff. Much of this only became possible after Floyd Landis came forward to USADA. Also around this time, an investigation by the French government into doping in cycling revealed that way back during the 1998 Tour, close to 90% of the riders who were tested, retroactively tested positive for EPO. The result of these doping scandals being that in the case of Landis in 2006, and Contador in 2010, new winners were declared in \u00d3scar Pereiro and Andy Schleck, respectively; however, in the case of the seven Tours revoked from Armstrong, no alternative winner was ever named.\nSince 2012.\nTeam Sky dominated the event for several years, with wins for Bradley Wiggins, Chris Froome (four times) and Geraint Thomas before Egan Bernal became the first Colombian winner in 2019. The streak was interrupted only by Vincenzo Nibali's 2014 win.\nDue to the COVID-19 outbreak, the 2020 Tour started in late August, the first time since the end of World War II that the Tour was not held in July. This saw the first of two successive victories for Tadej Poga\u010dar of UAE Team Emirates, who was the first Slovenian winner, and the second youngest (at 21) after Henri Cornet in 1904. He also won the mountain and youth classifications, becoming the first rider since Eddy Merckx in 1972 to win three jerseys in a single Tour. Poga\u010dar repeated this triple in 2021. On stage 13 of this Tour, sprinter Mark Cavendish tied the record of Eddy Merckx for all time stage wins with 34.\nDanish rider Jonas Vingegaard, second in 2021, won in both 2022 and 2023, with Poga\u010dar coming second both times. The 2022 race was followed by the Tour de France Femmes, the first official Tour de France for women since 1989.\nIn 2024, Poga\u010dar took back the Tour title, winning by more than six minutes over Vingegaard while Tour debutant, Remco Evenepoel, rounded out the podium. Poga\u010dar won six stages, including five of the last eight stages. With his win, he became only the eighth rider, and the first since Marco Pantani in 1998, to win the Giro d'Italia and the Tour de France in the same calendar year. On stage 5 of the race, sprinter Mark Cavendish won his 35th overall Tour stage win, breaking the tie between him and Eddy Merckx, who held the record for 49 years, for the all-time stage wins record in the Tour.\nClassifications.\nThe oldest and main competition in the Tour de France is known as the \"general classification\", for which the yellow jersey is awarded; the winner of this is said to have won the race. A few riders from each team aim to win overall, but there are three further competitions to draw riders of all specialties: points, mountains, and a classification for young riders with general classification aspirations. The leader of each of the aforementioned classifications wears a distinctive jersey, with riders leading multiple classifications wearing the jersey of the most prestigious that he leads. In addition to these four classifications, there are several minor and discontinued classifications that are competed for during the race.\nGeneral classification.\nThe oldest and most sought-after classification in the Tour de France is the general classification. All of the stages are timed to the finish. The riders' times are compounded with their previous stage times; so the rider with the lowest aggregate time is the leader of the race. The leader is determined after each stage's conclusion: he gains the privilege to wear the yellow jersey, presented on a podium in the stage's finishing town, for the next stage. If he is leading more than one classification that awards a jersey, he wears the yellow one, since the general classification is the most important one in the race. Between 1905 and 1912 inclusive, in response to concerns about rider cheating in the 1904 race, the general classification was awarded according to a point-based system based on their placings in each stage, and the rider with the lowest total of points after the Tour's conclusion was the winner.\nThe leader in the first Tour de France was awarded a green armband. The yellow jersey (the color was chosen as the newspaper that created the Tour, \"L'Auto\", was printed on yellow paper), was added to the race in the 1919 edition and it has since become a symbol of the Tour de France. The first rider to wear the yellow jersey was Eug\u00e8ne Christophe. Riders usually try to make the extra effort to keep the jersey for as long as possible in order to get more publicity for the team and its sponsors. Eddy Merckx wore the yellow jersey for 96 stages, which is more than any other rider in the history of the Tour. Four riders have won the general classification five times in their career: Jacques Anquetil, Eddy Merckx, Bernard Hinault, and Miguel Indur\u00e1in.\nMountains classification.\nThe mountains classification is the second-oldest jersey awarding classification in the Tour de France. The mountains classification was added to the Tour de France in the 1933 edition and was first won by Vicente Trueba. Prizes for the classification were first awarded in 1934. During stages of the race containing climbs, points are awarded to the first riders to reach the top of each categorized climb, with points available for up to the first 10 riders, depending on the classification of the climb. Climbs are classified according to the steepness and length of that particular hill, with more points available for harder climbs. The classification was preceded by the \"meilleur grimpeur\" () which was awarded by the organising newspaper \"L'Auto\" to a cyclist who completed each race.\nThe classification awarded no jersey to the leader until the 1975 Tour de France, when the organizers decided to award a distinctive white jersey with red dots to the leader. This is colloquially referred to in English as the \"polka dot\" jersey. The climbers' jersey is worn by the rider who, at the start of each stage, has the largest number of climbing points. If the race leader is also leading the Mountains classification, the polka dot jersey will be worn by the next eligible rider in the Mountains standings. At the end of the Tour, the rider holding the most climbing points wins the classification. Some riders may race with the aim of winning this particular competition, while others who gain points early on may shift their focus to the classification during the race. The Tour has five categories for ranking the mountains the race covers. The scale ranges from category 4, the easiest, to hors cat\u00e9gorie, the hardest. During his career Richard Virenque won the mountains classification a record seven times.\nThe point distribution for the mountains in the 2019 event was:\nPoints classification.\nThe points classification is the third oldest of the currently awarded jersey classifications. It was introduced in the 1953 Tour de France and was first won by Fritz Sch\u00e4r. The classification was added to draw the participation of the sprinters as well as celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Tour. Points are given to the first 15 riders to finish a stage, with an additional set of points given to the first 15 riders to cross a pre-determined 'sprint' point during the route of each stage. The point classification leader green jersey is worn by the rider who at the start of each stage, has the greatest number of points.\nIn the first years, the cyclist received penalty points for not finishing with a high place, so the cyclist with the fewest points was awarded the green jersey. From 1959 on, the system was changed so the cyclists were awarded points for high place finishes (with first place getting the most points, and lower placings getting successively fewer points), so the cyclist with the most points was awarded the green jersey. The number of points awarded varies depending on the type of stage, with flat stages awarding the most points at the finish and time trials and high mountain stages awarding the fewest points at the finish. This increases the likelihood of a sprinter winning the points classification, though other riders can be competitive for the classification if they have a sufficient number of high-place finishes.\nThe winner of the classification is the rider with the most points at the end of the Tour. In case of a tie, the leader is determined by the number of stage wins, then the number of intermediate sprint victories, and finally, the rider's standing in the general classification. The classification has been won a record seven times by Peter Sagan.\nThe first year the points classification was used it was sponsored by La Belle Jardini\u00e8re, a lawn mower producer, and the jersey was made green. In 1968 the jersey was changed to red to please the sponsor. However, the color was changed back the following year. For almost 25 years the classification was sponsored by Pari Mutuel Urbain, a state betting company. However they announced in November 2014 that they would not be continuing their sponsorship, and in March 2015 it was revealed that the green jersey would now be sponsored by Czech automaker \u0160koda brand (part of German group Volkswagen AG).\nAs of 2015, the points awarded are:\nYoung rider classification.\nThe leader of the classification is determined the same way as the general classification, with the riders' times being added up after each stage and the eligible rider with lowest aggregate time is dubbed the leader. The Young rider classification is restricted to the riders that will stay under the age of 26 in the calendar year the race is held. Originally the classification was restricted to neo-professionals \u2013 riders that are in their first three years of professional racing \u2013 until 1983. In 1983, the organizers made it so that only first time riders were eligible for the classification. In 1987, the organizers changed the rules of the classification to what they are today.\nThis classification was added to the Tour de France in the 1975 edition, with Francesco Moser being the first to win the classification after placing seventh overall. The Tour de France awards a white jersey to the leader of the classification, although this was not done between 1989 and 2000. Six riders have won both the young rider classification and the general classification in the same year: Laurent Fignon (1983), Jan Ullrich (1997), Alberto Contador (2007), Andy Schleck (2010), Egan Bernal (2019) and Tadej Poga\u010dar (2020 and 2021). Three riders have won the young rider classification three times in their respective careers: Jan Ullrich, Andy Schleck and Tadej Poga\u010dar.\nAs of 2015 Jersey sponsor is Optician company Krys, replacing \u0160koda who moved to the Green Jersey.\nMinor classifications and prizes.\nThe \"prix de la combativit\u00e9\" goes to the rider who most animates the day, usually by trying to break clear of the field. The most combative rider wears a number printed white-on-beige instead of black-on-white next day. An award goes to the most aggressive rider throughout the Tour. Already in 1908 a sort of combativity award was offered, when \"Sports Populaires\" and \"L'\u00c9ducation Physique\" created \"Le Prix du Courage\", 100 francs and a silver gilt medal for \"the rider having finished the course, even if unplaced, who is particularly distinguished for the energy he has used.\" The modern competition started in 1958. In 1959, a Super Combativity award for the most combative cyclist of the Tour was awarded. It was initially not awarded every year, but since 1981 it has been given annually. Eddy Merckx has the most wins (4) for the overall award.\nThe team classification is assessed by adding the time of each team's best three riders each day. The competition does not have its own jersey but since 2006 the leading team has worn numbers printed black-on-yellow. Until 1990, the leading team would wear yellow caps. As of 2012, the riders of the leading team wear yellow helmets. During the era of national teams, France and Belgium won 10 times each. From 1973 up to 1988, there was also a team classification based on points (stage classification); members of the leading team would wear green caps.\nHistorical classifications.\nThere has been an intermediate sprints classification, which from 1984 awarded a red jersey for points awarded to the first three to pass intermediate points during the stage. These sprints also scored points towards the points classification and bonuses towards the general classification. The intermediate sprints classification with its red jersey was abolished in 1989, but the intermediate sprints have remained, offering points for the points classification and, until 2007, time bonuses for the general classification.\nFrom 1968 there was a combination classification, scored on a points system based on standings in the general, points and mountains classifications. The design was originally white, then a patchwork with areas resembling each individual jersey design. This was also abolished in 1989.\nLanterne rouge.\nThe rider who has taken most time is called the \"lanterne rouge\" (\"red lantern, as in the red light at the back of a vehicle so it can be seen in the dark\") and in past years sometimes carried a small red light beneath his saddle. Such was sympathy that he could command higher fees in the races that previously followed the Tour. In 1939 and 1948 the organisers excluded the last rider every day, to encourage more competitive racing.\nPrizes.\nPrize money has always been awarded. From 20,000 francs the first year, prize money has increased each year, although from 1976 to 1987 the first prize was an apartment offered by a race sponsor. The first prize in 1988 was a car, a studio-apartment, a work of art, and 500,000 francs in cash. Prizes only in cash returned in 1990.\nPrizes and bonuses are awarded for daily placings and final placings at the end of the race. In 2009, the winner received \u20ac450,000, while each of the 21 stage winners won \u20ac8,000 (\u20ac10,000 for the team time-trial stage). The winners of the points classification and mountains classification each win \u20ac25,000, the young rider competition and the combativity prize \u20ac20,000 ; the winner of the team classification (calculated by adding the cumulative times of the best three riders in each team) receives \u20ac50 000 .\nThe Souvenir Henri Desgrange, in memory of the founder of the Tour, is awarded to the first rider over the Col du Galibier where his monument stands, or to the first rider over the highest col in the Tour. A similar award, the Souvenir Jacques Goddet, is made at the summit of the Col du Tourmalet, at the memorial to Jacques Goddet, Desgrange's successor.\nTrophy.\nThe winner of general classification is the recipient of \"Coupe Omnisports\", presented by the president of the French Republic. The Trophy is realized by the Manufacture nationale de S\u00e8vres and has been awarded since 1975, the first time the Tour finished on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es.\nSince 2011, \u0160koda, the green jersey sponsor, have given a glass trophy in green to the winner of that competition. More recently, similar trophies in clear glass have been awarded to the other jersey winners.\nAfter every stage, the general classification leader receives the yellow jersey, and, since 1987, a toy lion offered by the yellow jersey sponsor, Cr\u00e9dit Lyonnais.\nStages.\nThe modern tour typically has 21 stages, one per day.\nMass-start stages.\nThe Tour directors categorise mass-start stages into 'flat', 'hilly', or 'mountain'. This affects the points awarded in the sprint classification, whether the 3 kilometer rule is operational, and the permitted disqualification time in which riders must finish (which is the winners' time plus a pre-determined percentage of that time). Time bonuses of 10, 6, and 4 seconds are awarded to the first three finishers, though this was not done from 2008 to 2014. Bonuses were previously also awarded to winners of intermediate sprints.\nTime trials.\nThe first time trial in the Tour was between La Roche-sur-Yon and Nantes (80\u00a0km) in 1934. The first stage in modern Tours is often a short trial, a \"prologue\", to decide who wears yellow on the opening day. The first prologue was in 1967. The 1988 event, at La Baule, was called \"la pr\u00e9face\". There are usually two or three time trials. The final time trial has sometimes been the final stage, more recently often the penultimate stage.\nNotable stages.\nSince 1975 the race has usually finished with laps of the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es. As the peloton arrives in downtown Paris the French Air Force does a three-jet flyover with the three colors of the French flag in smoke behind them. This stage rarely challenges the leader because it is flat and the leader usually has too much time in hand to be denied. In modern times, there tends to be a gentlemen's agreement: while the points classification is still contended if possible, the overall classification is not fought over; because of this, it is not uncommon for the \"de facto\" winner of the overall classification to ride into Paris holding a glass of champagne. The only time the maillot jaune was attacked in a manner that lasted all the way through the end of this stage was during the 1979 Tour de France. In 1987, Pedro Delgado vowed to attack during the stage to challenge the 40-second lead held by Stephen Roche. He was unsuccessful and he and Roche finished in the peloton. In 2005, controversy arose when Alexander Vinokourov attacked and won the stage, in the process taking fifth place overall from Levi Leipheimer. This attack was not a threat to the overall lead, but was a long-shot at the Podium standings, as Vinokourov was about five minutes behind third place.\nIn 1989, the last stage was a time trial. Greg LeMond overtook Laurent Fignon to win by eight seconds, the closest margin in the Tour's history. The final stage has since only been held as a time trial once, in 2024.\nThe 2024 Tour finished with an individual time trial and ended in Nice owing to preparations for the Paris 2024 Olympic and Paralympic Games, which started on 26 July.\nThe climb of Alpe d'Huez has become one of the more noted mountain stages. During the 2004 Tour de France it was the scene of a mountain time trial on the 16th stage. Riders complained of abusive spectators who threatened their progress up the climb. On this stage it is not uncommon for a low end estimate of the spectators in attendance to number 300,000. During a famous head-to-head battle between Anquetil and Raymond Poulidor on Puy de D\u00f4me it was estimated that at least a half a million people were on hand. Mont Ventoux is often claimed to be the hardest in the Tour because of the harsh conditions. Another notable mountain stage frequently featured climbs the Col du Tourmalet, the most visited mountain in the history of the Tour. Col du Galibier is the most visited mountain in the Alps. The 2011 Tour de France stage to Galibier marked the 100th anniversary of the mountain in the Tour and also boasted the highest finish altitude ever: . Some mountain stages have become memorable because of the weather. An example is a stage in 1996 Tour de France from Val-d'Is\u00e8re to Sestriere. A snowstorm at the start area led to a shortening of the stage from to just . During the 2019 Tour de France multiple landslides and hail storms forced two critical mountain stages to be considerably shortened. Authorities made every effort to plow the road and make the course safe, but the volume of hail, mud and debris proved too much.\nDeciding the route.\nTo host a stage start or finish brings prestige and business to a town. The prologue and first stage (Grand D\u00e9part) are particularly prestigious. The race may start with a prologue (too short to go between towns) in which case the start of the next day's racing, which would be considered stage 1, usually in the same town. In 2007 director Christian Prudhomme said that \"in general, for a period of five years we have the Tour start outside France three times and within France twice.\" Towns and cities pay ASO around \u20ac100,000 to \u20ac150,000 to have a stage start or finish.\nIn the local towns and cities that the Tour visits for stage starts and finishes, it is a spectacle that usually shuts these towns down for the day, resulting in a very festive atmosphere, and these events usually require months of planning and preparation. ASO employs around 70 people full-time, in an office facing\u2014but not connected to\u2014\"L'\u00c9quipe\" in the Issy-les-Moulineaux area of outer western Paris. That number expands to about 220 during the race itself, not including the 500-odd contractors employed to move barriers, erect stages, signpost the route, and other work. ASO now also operates several other major bike races throughout the year.\nAdvertising caravan.\nWith the switch to the use of national teams in 1930, the costs of accommodating riders fell to the organizers instead of the sponsors and Henri Desgrange raised the money by allowing advertisers to precede the race. The procession of often colourfully decorated trucks and cars became known as the publicity caravan. It formalised an existing situation, companies having started to follow the race. The first to sign to precede the Tour was the chocolate company, Menier, one of those who had followed the race. Its head of publicity, Paul Th\u00e9venin, had first put the idea to Desgrange. It paid 50,000 francs. Preceding the race was more attractive to advertisers because spectators gathered by the road long before the race or could be attracted from their houses. Advertisers following the race found that many who had watched the race had already gone home. Menier handed out tons of chocolate in that first year of preceding the race, as well as 500,000 policemen's hats printed with the company's name. The success led to the caravan's existence being formalised the following year.\nThe caravan was at its height between 1930 and the mid-1960s, before television and especially television advertising was established in France. Advertisers competed to attract public attention. Motorcycle acrobats performed for the Cinzano ap\u00e9ritif company and a toothpaste maker, and an accordionist, Yvette Horner, became one of the most popular sights as she performed on the roof of a Citro\u00ebn Traction Avant. The modern Tour restricts the excesses to which advertisers are allowed to go but at first anything was allowed. The writer Pierre Bost lamented: \"This caravan of 60 gaudy trucks singing across the countryside the virtues of an ap\u00e9ritif, a make of underpants or a dustbin is a shameful spectacle. It bellows, it plays ugly music, it's sad, it's ugly, it smells of vulgarity and money.\"\nAdvertisers pay the Soci\u00e9t\u00e9 du Tour de France approximately \u20ac150,000 to place three vehicles in the caravan. Some have more. On top of that come the more considerable costs of the commercial samples that are thrown to the crowd and the cost of accommodating the drivers and the staff\u2014frequently students\u2014who throw them. The number of items has been estimated at 11\u00a0million, each person in the procession giving out 3,000 to 5,000 items a day. A bank, GAN, gave out 170,000 caps, 80,000 badges, 60,000 plastic bags, and 535,000 copies of its race newspaper in 1994. Together, they weighed . The vehicles also have to be decorated on the morning of each stage and, because they must return to ordinary highway standards, disassembled after each stage. Numbers vary but there are normally around 250 vehicles each year. Their order on the road is established by contract, the leading vehicles belonging to the largest sponsors.\nThe procession sets off two hours before the start and then regroups to precede the riders by an hour and a half. It spreads and takes 40 minutes to pass at between and . Vehicles travel in groups of five. Their position is logged by GPS and from an aircraft and organised on the road by the caravan director\u2014Jean-Pierre Lachaud\u2014an assistant, three motorcyclists, two radio technicians, and a breakdown and medical crew. Six motorcyclists from the Garde R\u00e9publicaine, the \u00e9lite of the gendarmerie, ride with them.\nIn 2019, around 30 members of the French National Assembly criticized the plastic pollution produced by the Tour de France caravan. In response, the Tour de France Director affirmed that \"for five years now, we have been working with our partners to reduce plastic in the gifts that sponsors give the public [...] We have included in the specifications and standards that we impose on our partners, the obligation to be part of a process to reduce the use of plastic.\" However, environemental groups have continued to criticize the Tour de France caravan for its environmental impact and for providing a platform for greenwashing the image of fossil fuels companies and plastics polluters. \nPolitics.\nThe first three Tours, from 1903 to 1906, stayed within France. The 1907 race went into Alsace-Lorraine, which was annexed by the German Empire after the Franco-Prussian War. Passage was secured through a meeting at Metz between Desgrange's collaborator, Alphonse Stein\u00e8s, and the German governor.\nIn 1939, because of international tensions, not least the Spanish Civil War, teams from Italy, Germany, and Spain did not compete. Following the breakout of the Second World War, Henri Desgrange planned a Tour for 1940. The route, approved by military authorities, went along the Maginot Line. Teams would have been drawn from military units in France, including the British, who would have been organised by a journalist, Bill Mills. After the German invasion of France, Desgrange's Tour was cancelled, and there was no official race until 1947 (see Tour de France during the Second World War). German teams would not compete again until 1960, though individual Germans rode in mixed teams. Since the end of the war, the Tour has started in Germany four times: in Cologne in 1965, in Frankfurt in 1980, in West Berlin on the city's 750th anniversary in 1987, and in D\u00fcsseldorf in 2017. Plans to enter East Germany in 1987 were abandoned.\nCorsica.\nPrior to 2013, the Tour de France had visited every region of Metropolitan France except Corsica. Jean-Marie Leblanc, when he was organiser, said the island had never asked for a stage start there. It would be difficult to find accommodation for 4,000 people, he said. The spokesman of the Corsican nationalist party Party of the Corsican Nation, Fran\u00e7ois Alfonsi, said: \"The organisers must be afraid of terrorist attacks. If they are really thinking of a possible terrorist action, they are wrong. Our movement, which is nationalist and in favour of self-government, would be delighted if the Tour came to Corsica.\" The opening three stages of the 2013 Tour de France were held on Corsica as part of the celebrations for the 100th edition of the race.\nAccusations of sportswashing and greenwashing.\nThe Tour de France has been accused of sportswashing, including greenwashing. Environmental critiques have focused on the prominence of private and public fossil fuels producers among the sponsors. In the 2025 Tour de France, seven of the 23 teams were sponsored by companies or states tied to the production of fossil fuels and in June 2025, \u201cthe French oil giant TotalEnergies announced it had signed an official three-year partnership with the Tour de France, starting in 2026. The company is also the main sponsor of one of the participating teams, which bears its name\u201d, Team TotalEnergies. \nHuman rights groups have also pointed at countries with \"questionable records on civil liberties\", like Bahrain, Kazakhstan and the United Arab Emirates sponsoring teams participating in the Tour. In 2020, Minky Worden, director of global initiatives at Human Rights Watch, stated that \u201cmore and more bad actors on human rights are laundering their reputations with international sport events. [\u2026] The UAE, Bahrain and Kazakhstan all have a chokehold on civil society. They all have serious abuses against LGBTQ people. They all have serious labor rights abuses. And they all repress the media and peaceful critics. [\u2026] These are countries that all have very questionable human rights records and the purpose of sponsoring Tour de France teams has a name: it\u2019s sportswashing\u201d.\nFor the occasion of the 2019 Tour de France, 12 human rights and sporting organizations presented a letter to president of UCI protesting the Bahrain-Merida team\u2019s participation in the Tour de France and other professional cycling competitions. The Director of Advocacy at the Bahrain Institute for Rights and Democracy (BIRD) stated that \"Bahrain-Merida\u2019s participation in the Tour de France, one of the world\u2019s most iconic sporting events, provides a major opportunity for the government of Bahrain to sportswash their tarnished international reputation. With a long history of persecuting professional athletes, including credible allegations of torture, Bahrain is a totally unsuitable partner for an international sporting team\". The following year, in 2020, the non-governmental organization Americans for Democracy &amp; Human Rights in Bahrain (ADHRB) continued protesting against the team\u2019s participation at the 2020 Tour de France: \u201cby running a team in the Tour de France, Bahrain is joining a long line of countries with diminished human rights records as they attempt to distract from continued abuses with flashy events such as the Olympics, the World Cup, or Formula 1, or as they rebrand themselves by associating their names with those of beloved teams\".\nSportswashing accusations have also focused on the participation of the Israel-Premier Tech team, both before and after the 7 October 2023 attacks, and recently in relation to the Gaza genocide. In early 2025, the Palestinian movement Boycott, Divestment and Sanctions (BDS) called for \"peaceful protests\" at the 2025 Tour de France against the participation of Israel\u2013Premier Tech. During the 2025 Tour de France (5\u201327 July 2025), protests over the genocide in Gaza and calls for the exclusion of Israel-Premier Tech from the competition continued. Notably, on stage 11 of the Tour of 16 July 2025, a protestor ran onto the final straight of the stage, but was tackled and beaten by the Tour's manager for stage finishes, before being arrested. The protestor later defended his actions explaining \"we have reached a point where we are forced to choose new spaces to express ourselves. The world of sport has not done its job and has not shown its opposition to what is happening in the Middle East\".\nConcerns have also been raised over the Tour de France\u2019s role in sportswashing \u201cdebt-bonded workers at manufacturing sites in Asia\u201d linked to cycling brands such as Giant, Trek, Scott and Shimano. \u00a0\nStart and finish of the Tour.\nMost stages are in mainland France, although since the mid-1950s it has become common to visit nearby countries. The Tour has visited thirteen different countries in its history: Andorra, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Monaco, the Netherlands, San Marino, Spain, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom, all of which have hosted stages or part of a stage. Since 1975 the finish has been on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es in Paris; from 1903 to 1967 the race finished at the Parc des Princes stadium in western Paris and from 1968 to 1974 at the Piste Municipale south of the capital. In the 111th edition, because of the 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris, the race ended outside Paris for the first time, on the Place Mass\u00e9na in Nice.\nThe right to host the Grand D\u00e9part is highly sought after, with cities bidding to host, and has been shown to increase economic activity as well as interest in cycling in the host area. In recent years, cities outside France have paid organisers Amaury Sport Organisation around \u20ac6 million to host the start of the race. French cities pay less, with Brest paying \u20ac3.6 million in 2021 and Lille paying \u20ac4.2 million in 2025.\nF\u00e9lix Levitan, race organizer in the 1980s, was keen to host stages in the United States, but these proposals have never been developed.\nStarts abroad.\nThe following editions of the Tour started outside France:\nBroadcasting.\nThe Tour was first followed only by journalists from \"L'Auto\", the organisers. The race was founded to increase sales of a floundering newspaper and its editor, Desgrange, saw no reason to allow rival publications to profit.\nThe first time papers other than \"L'Auto\" were allowed was 1921, when 15 press cars were allowed for regional and foreign reporters.\nThe Tour was shown first on cinema newsreels a day or more after the event. The first live radio broadcast was in 1929, when Jean Antoine and Alex Virot of the newspaper \"L'Intransigeant\" broadcast for Radio Cit\u00e9. They used telephone lines. In 1932 they broadcast the sound of riders crossing the col d'Aubisque in the Pyrenees on 12 July, using a recording machine and transmitting the sound later.\nThe first television pictures were shown a day after a stage. The national TV channel used two 16mm cameras, a Jeep, and a motorbike. Film was flown or taken by train to Paris, where it was edited and then shown the following day.\nThe first live broadcast, and the second of any sport in France, was the finish at the Parc des Princes in Paris on 25 July 1948. Rik Van Steenbergen of Belgium led in the bunch after a stage of from Nancy. The first live coverage from the side of the road was from the Aubisque on 8 July 1958. Proposals to cover the whole race were abandoned in 1962 after objections from regional newspapers whose editors feared the competition. The dispute was settled, but not in time for the race, and the first complete coverage was the following year in 1963. In 1958 the first mountain climbs were broadcast live on television for the first time, and in 1959 helicopters were first used for the television coverage.\nThe leading television commentator in France was a former rider, Robert Chapatte. At first he was the only commentator. He was joined in following seasons by an analyst for the mountain stages and by a commentator following the competitors by motorcycle.\nBroadcasting in France was largely a state monopoly until 1982, when the socialist president Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand allowed private broadcasters and privatised the leading television channel. Competition between channels raised the broadcasting fees paid to the organisers from 1.5 per cent of the race budget in 1960 to more than a third by the end of the century. Broadcasting time also increased as channels competed to secure the rights. The two largest channels to stay in public ownership, Antenne 2 and FR3, combined to offer more coverage than its private rival, TF1. The two stations, renamed France 2 and France 3, still hold the domestic rights and provide pictures for broadcasters around the world.\nThe stations use a staff of 300 with four helicopters, two aircraft, two motorcycles, 35 other vehicles including trucks, and 20 podium cameras.\nFrench aviation company H\u00e9licopt\u00e8res de France (HdF) has provided aerial filming services for the Tour since 1999. HdF operates Eurocopter AS355 \u00c9cureuil 2 and AS350 \u00c9cureuil helicopters for this purpose, and the pilots undergo training along the course for six months before the race.\nDomestic television covers the most important stages of the Tour, such as those in the mountains, from mid-morning until early evening. Coverage typically starts with a survey of the day's route, interviews along the road, discussions of the difficulties and tactics ahead, and a 30-minute archive feature. The biggest stages are shown live from start to end, followed by interviews with riders and others and features such an edited version of the stage seen from beside a team manager following and advising riders from his car. Radio covers the race in updates throughout the day, particularly on the national news channel, France Info, and some stations provide continuous commentary on long wave. The 1979 Tour was the first to be broadcast in the United States.\nIn the United Kingdom, ITV obtained the rights to the Tour de France in 2002, replacing Channel 4 as the UK terrestrial broadcaster. Channel 4 coverage had been broadcast for the previous 15 years with episodes introduced with a theme written by Pete Shelley. The coverage is shown on ITV4, having aired in previous years on ITV2 and ITV3. Initially, live coverage was only broadcast at the weekend but since the 2010 Tour de France, ITV4 has broadcast daily live coverage of every stage except the final which is shown on ITV1, ITV4 have the nightly highlights show.\nIt was reported in January 2025 that the 2025 Tour de France would be the last to be broadcast on ITV, and the last to be broadcast live on free-to-air television in the UK, with Warner Bros. Discovery (WBD)'s pay television channel group TNT Sports having acquired the Tour's UK broadcasting rights from 2026 onwards. As part of the change, the highlights show would move to WBD's free-to-air channel Quest.\nIn the United States, the Tour de France has been broadcast by the NBC Sports Group since 1999, under a contract most recently renewed in 2023 to last through 2029. Currently, all stages stream exclusively on its streaming platform Peacock, with selected stages simulcast on the NBC broadcast network. The rights were first acquired by Outdoor Life Network (OLN) in 1999; buoyed by Lance Armstrong's performance in the race, OLN considered the Tour to be its flagship program, and its coverage helped expand the then-fledging cable channel to over 60 million households. However, critics raised concerns over the extensive focus OLN placed on Armstrong during its coverage, with some jokingly stating that \"OLN\" stood for \"Only Lance Network\". The Tour would remain part of its programming through OLN's relaunch as mainstream sports channel Versus, and became integrated with NBC Sports after Versus parent company Comcast acquired NBC Universal (rebranding Versus as the NBC Sports Network afterward),\nThe combination of unprecedented rigorous doping controls and almost no positive tests helped restore fans' confidence in the 2009 Tour de France. This led directly to an increase in global popularity of the event. The most watched stage of 2009 was stage 20, from Mont\u00e9limar to Mont Ventoux in Provence, with a global total audience of 44\u00a0million, making it the 12th most watched sporting event in the world in 2009.\nCulture.\nThe Tour is an important cultural event for fans in Europe. Millions line the route, some having camped for a week to get the best view.\nThe Tour de France appealed from the start not just for the distance and its demands but because it played to a wish for national unity, a call to what Maurice Barr\u00e8s called the France \"of earth and deaths\" or what Georges Vigarello called \"the image of a France united by its earth\".\nThe image had been started by the 1877 travel/school book . It told of two boys, Andr\u00e9 and Julien, who \"in a thick September fog left the town of Phalsbourg in Lorraine to see France at a time when few people had gone far beyond their nearest town\".\nThe book sold six million copies by the time of the first Tour de France, the biggest selling book of 19th-century France (other than the Bible). It stimulated a national interest in France, making it \"visible and alive\", as its preface said. There had already been a car race called the Tour de France but it was the publicity behind the cycling race, and Desgrange's drive to educate and improve the population, that inspired the French to know more of their country.\nThe academic historians Jean-Luc Boeuf and Yves L\u00e9onard say most people in France had little idea of the shape of their country until began publishing maps of the race.\nArts.\nThe Tour has inspired several popular songs in France, notably (1932), (1936) and (1950). German electronic group Kraftwerk composed \"Tour de France\" in 1983\u00a0\u2013 described as a minimalistic \"melding of man and machine\"\u00a0\u2013 and produced an album \"Tour de France Soundtracks\" in 2003, the centenary of the Tour.\nIn 1963, Rene Goscinny published the Asterix comic band \"Asterix and the Banquet\" (Asterix et le tour de Gaule) which featured many cultural references to France and the various regions, along with its culture. The plot of the comic was deeply inspired by the Tour de France bicycle race.\nThe Tour and its first Italian winner, Ottavio Bottecchia, are mentioned at the end of Ernest Hemingway's \"The Sun Also Rises\".\nFrom 2011 to 2015, American letterpress studio Lead Graffiti experimented with handset wood and metal type to print same-day posters documenting events of each stage of the Tour de France. The designers called the project \"endurance letterpress\". A 2013 article on the poster series appeared in \"Sports Illustrated\" magazine's \"Sports in Media\" issue. In 2014 the British Library celebrated the Tour's fourth \"Grand D\u00e9part\" from the U.K. with an exhibition of \"Tour de Lead Graffiti\" posters.\nIn films, the Tour was background for \"Five Red Tulips\" (1949) by Jean Stelli, in which five riders are murdered. A burlesque in 1967, by Alex Joff\u00e9, with Bourvil and Monique Tarb\u00e8s, also featured it. Footage of the 1970 Tour de France is shown in Jorgen Leth's experimental short \"Eddy Merckx in the Vicinity of a Cup of Coffee\". Patrick Le Gall made (1996). The comedy, (2001), featured the Tour of 1974.\nIn 2005, three films chronicled a team. The German , translated as \"Hell on Wheels\", recorded 2003 from the perspective of Team Telekom. The film was directed by Pepe Danquart, who won an Academy Award for live-action short film in 1993 for \"Black Rider\" (). The Danish film \"Overcoming\" by T\u00f3mas Gislason recorded the 2004 Tour from the perspective of Team CSC.\n\"Wired to Win\" chronicles Fran\u00e7aise des Jeux riders Baden Cooke and Jimmy Caspar in 2003. By following their quest for the points classification, won by Cooke, the film looks at the working of the brain. The film, made for IMAX theaters, appeared in December 2005. It was directed by Bayley Silleck, who was nominated for an Academy Award for documentary short subject in 1996 for \"Cosmic Voyage\".\nA fan, Scott Coady, followed the 2000 Tour with a handheld video camera to make \"The Tour Baby!\" which raised $160,000 to benefit the Lance Armstrong Foundation, and made a 2005 sequel, \"Tour Baby Deux!\"\n by Louis Malle is an 18-minute short of 1962. The 1965 Tour was filmed by Claude Lelouch in . This 30-minute documentary has no narration and relies on sights and sounds of the Tour.\nIn fiction, the 2003 animated feature (\"The Triplets of Belleville\") ties into the Tour de France.\nNetflix, partnered with the organizer Amaury Sport Organisation, has produced a documentary series about the eight major teams across the 2022 Tour de France named \"\". It was released in June 2023.\nPost-Tour criteriums.\nAfter the Tour de France there are criteriums in the Netherlands and Belgium. These races are public spectacles where thousands of people can see their heroes from the Tour de France race. The budget of a criterium is over 100,000 euros, with most of the money going to the riders. Jersey winners or big-name riders earn between 20 and 60 thousand euros per race in start money.\nDoping.\nAllegations of doping have plagued the Tour almost since it began in 1903. Early riders consumed alcohol and used ether to dull the pain. Over the years they began to increase performance and the Union Cycliste Internationale and governments enacted policies to combat the practice.\nIn 1924, Henri P\u00e9lissier and his brother Charles told the journalist Albert Londres they used strychnine, cocaine, chloroform, aspirin, \"horse ointment\" and other drugs. The story was published in \"Le Petit Parisien\" under the title \"Les For\u00e7ats de la Route\" ('The Convicts of the Road')\nOn 13 July 1967, British cyclist Tom Simpson died climbing Mont Ventoux after taking amphetamine.\nIn 1998, the \"Tour of Shame\", Willy Voet, soigneur for the Festina team, was arrested with erythropoietin (EPO), growth hormones, testosterone and amphetamine. Police raided team hotels and found products in the possession of the cycling team TVM. Riders went on strike. After mediation by director Jean-Marie Leblanc, police limited their tactics and riders continued. Some riders had dropped out and only 96 finished the race. It became clear in a trial that management and health officials of the Festina team had organised the doping.\nFurther measures were introduced by race organisers and the UCI, including more frequent testing and tests for blood doping (transfusions and EPO use). This would lead the UCI to becoming a particularly interested party in an International Olympic Committee initiative, the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA), created in 1999. In 2002, the wife of Raimondas Rum\u0161as, third in the 2002 Tour de France, was arrested after EPO and anabolic steroids were found in her car. Rum\u0161as, who had not failed a test, was not penalised. In 2004, Philippe Gaumont said doping was endemic to his Cofidis team. Fellow Cofidis rider David Millar confessed to EPO after his home was raided. In the same year, Jes\u00fas Manzano, a rider with the Kelme team, alleged he had been forced by his team to use banned substances.\nFrom 1999 to 2005, seven successive tours were declared as having been won by Lance Armstrong. In August 2005, one month after Armstrong's seventh apparent victory, \"L'\u00c9quipe\" published documents it said showed Armstrong had used EPO in the 1999 race. At the same Tour, Armstrong's urine showed traces of a glucocorticosteroid hormone, although below the positive threshold. He said he had used skin cream containing triamcinolone to treat saddle sores. Armstrong said he had received permission from the UCI to use this cream. Further allegations ultimately culminated in the United States Anti Doping Agency (USADA) disqualifying him from all his victories since 1 August 1998, including his seven consecutive Tour de France victories, and a lifetime ban from competing in professional sports. The ASO declined to name any other rider as winner in Armstrong's stead in those years.\nThe 2006 Tour had been plagued by the Operaci\u00f3n Puerto doping case before it began. Favourites such as Jan Ullrich and Ivan Basso were banned by their teams a day before the start. Seventeen riders were implicated. American rider Floyd Landis, who finished the Tour as holder of the overall lead, had tested positive for testosterone after he won stage 17, but this was not confirmed until some two weeks after the race finished. On 30 June 2008 Landis lost his appeal to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, and \u00d3scar Pereiro was named as winner.\nOn 24 May 2007, Erik Zabel admitted using EPO during the first week of the 1996 Tour, when he won the points classification. Following his plea that other cyclists admit to drugs, former winner Bjarne Riis admitted in Copenhagen on 25 May 2007 that he used EPO regularly from 1993 to 1998, including when he won the 1996 Tour. His admission meant the top three in 1996 were all linked to doping, two admitting cheating. On 24 July 2007 Alexander Vinokourov tested positive for a blood transfusion (blood doping) after winning a time trial, prompting his Astana team to pull out and police to raid the team's hotel. The next day Cristian Moreni tested positive for testosterone. His Cofidis team pulled out.\nThe same day, leader Michael Rasmussen was removed for \"violating internal team rules\" by missing random tests on 9 May and 28 June. Rasmussen claimed to have been in Mexico. The Italian journalist Davide Cassani told Danish television he had seen Rasmussen in Italy. The alleged lying prompted Rasmussen's firing by Rabobank.\nOn 11 July 2008, Manuel Beltr\u00e1n tested positive for EPO after the first stage. On 17 July 2008, Riccardo Ricc\u00f2 tested positive for continuous erythropoiesis receptor activator, a variant of EPO, after the fourth stage. In October 2008, it was revealed that Ricc\u00f2's teammate and Stage 10 winner Leonardo Piepoli, as well as Stefan Schumacher\u00a0\u2013 who won both time trials\u00a0\u2013 and Bernhard Kohl\u00a0\u2013 third on general classification and King of the Mountains\u00a0\u2013 had tested positive.\nAfter winning the 2010 Tour de France, it was announced that Alberto Contador had tested positive for low levels of clenbuterol on 21 July rest day. On 26 January 2011, the Spanish Cycling Federation proposed a 1-year ban but reversed its ruling on 15 February and cleared Contador to race. Despite a pending appeal by the UCI, Contador finished fifth overall in the 2011 Tour de France, but in February 2012, Contador was suspended and stripped of his 2010 victory.\nDuring the 2012 Tour, the 3rd placed rider from 2011, Fr\u00e4nk Schleck, tested positive for the banned diuretic Xipamide and was immediately disqualified from the Tour.\nIn October 2012, the United States Anti-Doping Agency released a report on doping by the U.S. Postal Service cycling team, implicating, amongst others, Armstrong. The report contained affidavits from riders including Frankie Andreu, Tyler Hamilton, George Hincapie, Floyd Landis, Levi Leipheimer, and others describing widespread use of Erythropoietin (EPO), blood transfusion, testosterone, and other banned practices in several Tours. In October 2012 the UCI acted upon this report, formally stripping Armstrong of all titles since 1 August 1998, including all seven Tour victories, and announced that his Tour wins would not be reallocated to other riders.\nWhile no Tour winner has been convicted, or even seriously accused of doping in order to win the Tour in the past decade, due to the previous era, questions frequently arise when a strong performance exceeds expectations. While four-time champion Froome has been involved in a doping case, it is out of an abundance of caution that modern riders are kept under a microscope with bike inspections to check for \"mechanical doping\" as well as Biological Passports as officials try not to have a repeat of EPO with 'H7379 Haemoglobin Human'. Despite initially beginning as an operation to investigate the winter sport of Nordic Skiing, Operation Aderlass is of particular interest to this sport because it involved people formerly and presently involved in cycling. Including the since vacated 2008 podium finisher Bernhard Kohl, who made accusations that a team doctor instructed riders how to dope, which prompted further investigation into this matter by authorities.\nDeaths.\nCyclists who have died during the Tour de France:\nAnother seven fatal accidents have occurred:\nRecords and statistics.\nOne rider has been King of the Mountains, won the combination classification, combativity award, the points competition, and the Tour in the same year\u2014Eddy Merckx in 1969, which was also the first year he participated. The following year he came close to repeating the feat, but was five points behind the winner in the points classification. The only other riders to come close to this achievement are Bernard Hinault in 1979, who won the overall and points competitions and placed second in the mountains classification, and Tadej Poga\u010dar in 2025, who won the overall and mountains classifications and placed second in the points competition.\nTwice the Tour was won by a racer who never wore the yellow jersey until the race was over. In 1947, Jean Robic overturned a three-minute deficit on the final stage into Paris. In 1968, Jan Janssen of the Netherlands secured his win in the individual time trial on the last day.\nThe Tour has been won three times by racers who led the general classification on the first stage and holding the lead all the way to Paris. Maurice Garin did it during the Tour's first edition, 1903; he repeated the feat the next year, but the results were nullified by the officials as a response to widespread cheating. Ottavio Bottecchia completed a GC start-to-finish sweep in 1924. And in 1928, Nicolas Frantz held the GC for the entire race, and at the end, the podium consisted solely of members of his racing team. While no one has equalled this feat since 1928, four times a racer has taken over the GC lead on the second stage and carried that lead all the way to Paris. Jacques Anquetil predicted he would wear the yellow jersey as leader of the general classification from start to finish in 1961, which he did. That year, the first day had two stages, the first part from Rouen to Versailles and the second part from Versailles to Versailles. Andr\u00e9 Darrigade wore the yellow jersey after winning the opening stage but Anquetil was in yellow at the end of the day after the time trial.\nThe most appearances record is held by Sylvain Chavanel, who rode his 18th and final Tour in 2018. Prior to Chavanel's final Tour, he shared the record with George Hincapie with 17. In light of Hincapie's suspension for use of performance-enhancing drugs, before which he held the mark for most consecutive finishes with sixteen, having completed all but his first, Joop Zoetemelk and Chavanel share the record for the most finishes at 16, with Zoetemelk having completed all 16 of the Tours that he started. Of these 16 Tours Zoetemelk came in the top five 11 times, a record, finished 2nd six times, a record, and won the 1980 Tour de France.\nBetween 1920 and 1985, Jules Deloffre (1885\u20131963) was the record holder for the number of participations in the Tour de France, and even sole holder of this record until 1966, when Andr\u00e9 Darrigade rode in his 14th Tour.\nIn the early years of the Tour, cyclists rode individually, and were sometimes forbidden to ride together. This led to large gaps between the winner and the number two. Since the cyclists now tend to stay together in a peloton, the margins of the winner have become smaller, as the difference usually originates from time trials, breakaways or on mountain top finishes, or from being left behind the peloton. The smallest margins between the winner and the second placed cyclists at the end of the Tour is 8 seconds between winner Greg LeMond and Laurent Fignon in 1989. The largest margin, by comparison, remains that of the first Tour in 1903: 2h 49m 45s between Maurice Garin and Lucien Pothier.\nThe most podium places by a single rider is eight by Raymond Poulidor, followed by Bernard Hinault and Joop Zoetemelk with seven. Poulidor never finished in 1st place and neither Hinault nor Zoetemelk ever finished in 3rd place.\nLance Armstrong finished on the podium eight times, and Jan Ullrich seven times, however they both had results voided and now officially have zero and six podiums respectively.\nThree riders have won 8 stages in a single year: Charles P\u00e9lissier (1930), Eddy Merckx (1970, 1974), and Freddy Maertens (1976). Mark Cavendish has the most mass finish stage wins with 35 as of 2024, ahead of Andr\u00e9 Darrigade and Andr\u00e9 Leducq with 22, Fran\u00e7ois Faber with 19, and Eddy Merckx with 18. The youngest Tour de France stage winner is Fabio Battesini, who was 19 when he won one stage in the 1931 Tour de France.\nThe fastest massed-start stage was in 1999 from Laval to Blois (), won by Mario Cipollini at . The fastest time-trial is Rohan Dennis's stage 1 of the 2015 Tour de France in Utrecht, won at an average of . The fastest stage win was by the 2013 Orica GreenEDGE team in a team time-trial. It completed the in Nice (stage 5) at .\nThe longest successful post-war breakaway by a single rider was by Albert Bourlon in the 1947 Tour de France. In the Carcassonne\u2013Luchon stage, he stayed away for . It was one of seven breakaways longer than , the last being Thierry Marie's escape in 1991. Bourlon finished 16\u00a0m 30s ahead. This is one of the biggest time gaps but not the greatest. That record belongs to Jos\u00e9-Luis Viejo, who beat the peloton by just over 23:00 and the second place rider by 22\u00a0m 50s in the Montgen\u00e8vre-Manosque stage in 1976. He was the fourth and most recent rider to win a stage by more than 20 minutes.\nThe record for total number of days wearing the yellow jersey is 96, held by Eddy Merckx. Bernard Hinault, Miguel Indur\u00e1in, Chris Froome, Jacques Anquetil and Tadej Poga\u010dar are the only other riders who have worn it 50 days or more.\nRecord winners.\nFour riders have won five times: Jacques Anquetil (FRA), Eddy Merckx (BEL), Bernard Hinault (FRA), and Miguel Indur\u00e1in (ESP). Indur\u00e1in achieved the mark with a record five consecutive wins.\nRelated events.\nL'\u00c9tape du Tour (French for 'stage of the Tour') is an organised mass participation cyclosportive event that allows amateur cyclists to race over the same route as a Tour de France stage. First held in 1993, and now organised by the ASO, in conjunction with \"V\u00e9lo Magazine\", it takes place each July, normally on a Tour rest day.\nSeveral different versions of a Tour de France for women were held between the 1980s and 2000s, however these races failed for a variety of reasons such as high costs, lack of sponsorship and inability to use the Tour de France branding.\nFollowing a campaign by the professional women's peloton, La Course by Le Tour de France was launched by ASO in 2014 as a one-day classic held in conjunction with the men's race. The first edition was held on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es prior to the final stage of the men's race, with La Course subsequently using other stages of the Tour prior to the men's race \u2013 with locations such as Pau, Col de la Colombi\u00e8re and Col d'Izoard. The race was part of the UCI Women's World Tour.\nFrom 2022, Tour de France Femmes \u2013 an 8-day stage race in the UCI Women's World Tour \u2013 was held following the Tour, replacing La Course. The Tour de France Femmes had its first stage on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es prior to the final stage of the men's race. The announcement of the race was praised by the professional peloton and campaigners. The first edition was won by Dutch rider Annemiek van Vleuten, completing a Giro \u2013 Tour double in the same year.\nOn the other hand, some events related to Tour de France have been held by ASO, around the world. Tour de France Saitama criterium has been held in Saitama, Japan since 2013. \nAfter the success in Japan, Tour de France Singapore criterium has been held in Singapore since 2022.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "30500", "revid": "4796325", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=30500", "title": "Thiamine", "text": "Chemical compound and essential nutrient\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThiamine, also known as thiamin and vitamin B1, is a vitamin \u2013 an essential micronutrient for humans and animals. It is found in food and commercially synthesized to be a dietary supplement or medication. Phosphorylated forms of thiamine are required for some metabolic reactions, including the breakdown of glucose and amino acids.\nFood sources of thiamine include whole grains, legumes, and some meats and fish. Grain processing removes much of the vitamin content, so in many countries cereals and flours are enriched with thiamine. Supplements and medications are available to treat and prevent thiamine deficiency and the disorders that result from it such as beriberi and Wernicke encephalopathy. They are also used to treat maple syrup urine disease and Leigh syndrome. Supplements and medications are typically taken by mouth, but may also be given by intravenous or intramuscular injection.\nThiamine supplements are generally well tolerated. Allergic reactions, including anaphylaxis, may occur when repeated doses are given by injection. Thiamine is on the World Health Organization's List of Essential Medicines. It is available as a generic medication, and in some countries as a non-prescription dietary supplement. In 2023, it was the 305th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 300,000 prescriptions.\nDefinition.\nThiamine is one of the B vitamins and is also known as vitamin B1. It is a cation that is usually supplied as a chloride salt. It is soluble in water, methanol and glycerol, but practically insoluble in less polar organic solvents. In the body, thiamine can form derivatives; the most well-characterized of which is thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), a coenzyme in the catabolism of sugars and amino acids.\nThe chemical structure consists of an aminopyrimidine and a thiazolium ring linked by a methylene bridge. The thiazole is substituted with methyl and hydroxyethyl side chains. Thiamine is stable at acidic pH, but it is unstable in alkaline solutions and from exposure to heat. It reacts strongly in Maillard-type reactions. Oxidation yields the fluorescent derivative thiochrome, which can be used to determine the amount of the vitamin present in biological samples.\nDeficiency.\nWell-known disorders caused by thiamine deficiency include beriberi, Wernicke\u2013Korsakoff syndrome, optic neuropathy, Leigh's disease, African seasonal ataxia (or Nigerian seasonal ataxia), and central pontine myelinolysis. Symptoms include malaise, weight loss, irritability and confusion.\nIn Western countries, chronic alcoholism is a risk factor for deficiency. Also at risk are older adults, persons with HIV/AIDS or diabetes, and those who have had bariatric surgery. Varying degrees of thiamine insufficiency have been associated with the long-term use of diuretics.\nBiological functions.\nFive natural thiamine phosphate derivatives are known: thiamine monophosphate (ThMP), thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), thiamine triphosphate (ThTP), adenosine thiamine diphosphate (AThDP) and adenosine thiamine triphosphate (AThTP). They are involved in many cellular processes. The best-characterized form is TPP, a coenzyme in the catabolism of sugars and amino acids. While its role is well-known, the non-coenzyme action of thiamine and derivatives may be realized through binding to proteins which do not use that mechanism. No physiological role is known for the monophosphate except as an intermediate in cellular conversion of thiamine to the di- and triphosphates.\nThiamine pyrophosphate.\nThiamine pyrophosphate (TPP), also called thiamine diphosphate (ThDP), participates as a coenzyme in metabolic reactions, including those in which polarity inversion takes place. Its synthesis is catalyzed by the enzyme thiamine diphosphokinase according to the reaction thiamine + ATP \u2192 TPP + AMP (EC 2.7.6.2). However, recent findings reveal that uridine 5\u2032-triphosphate (UTP), rather than ATP, is the preferred substrate for TPP synthesis in cells, with TPK1 showing a ~10-fold higher affinity for UTP. TPP is a coenzyme for several enzymes that catalyze the transfer of two-carbon units and in particular the dehydrogenation (decarboxylation and subsequent conjugation with coenzyme A) of 2-oxoacids (alpha-keto acids). The mechanism of action of TPP as a coenzyme relies on its ability to form an ylide. Examples include:\nThe enzymes transketolase, pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH), and 2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) are important in carbohydrate metabolism. PDH links glycolysis to the citric acid cycle. OGDH catalyzes the overall conversion of 2-oxoglutarate (alpha-ketoglutarate) to succinyl-CoA and CO2 during the citric acid cycle. The reaction catalyzed by OGDH is a rate-limiting step in the citric acid cycle. The cytosolic enzyme transketolase is central to the pentose phosphate pathway, a major route for the biosynthesis of the pentose sugars deoxyribose and ribose. The mitochondrial PDH and OGDH are part of biochemical pathways that result in the generation of adenosine triphosphate (ATP), which is the main energy transfer molecule for the cell. In the nervous system, PDH is also involved in the synthesis of myelin and the neurotransmitter acetylcholine.\nThiamine triphosphate.\nThTP is implicated in chloride channel activation in the neurons of mammals and other animals, although its role is not well understood. ThTP has been found in bacteria, fungi and plants, suggesting that it has other cellular roles. In \"Escherichia coli\", it is implicated in the response to amino acid starvation.\nAdenosine derivatives.\nAThDP exists in small amounts in vertebrate liver, but its role remains unknown.\nAThTP is present in \"E. coli\", where it accumulates as a result of carbon starvation. In this bacterium, AThTP may account for up to of total thiamine. It also exists in lesser amounts in yeast, roots of higher plants and animal tissue.\nMedical uses.\nDuring pregnancy, thiamine is sent to the fetus via the placenta. Pregnant women have a greater requirement for the vitamin than other adults, especially during the third trimester. Pregnant women with hyperemesis gravidarum are at an increased risk of thiamine deficiency due to losses when vomiting. In lactating women, thiamine is delivered in breast milk even if it results in thiamine deficiency in the mother.\nThiamine is important not only for mitochondrial membrane development, but also for synaptic membrane function. It has also been suggested that a deficiency hinders brain development in infants and may be a cause of sudden infant death syndrome.\nDietary recommendations.\nThe US National Academy of Medicine updated the Estimated Average Requirements (EARs) and Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for thiamine in 1998. The EARs for thiamine for women and men aged 14 and over are 0.9\u00a0mg/day and 1.1\u00a0mg/day, respectively; the RDAs are 1.1 and 1.2\u00a0mg/day, respectively. RDAs are higher than EARs to provide adequate intake levels for individuals with higher than average requirements. The RDA during pregnancy and for lactating females is 1.4\u00a0mg/day. For infants up to the age of 12 months, the Adequate Intake (AI) is 0.2\u20130.3\u00a0mg/day and for children aged 1\u201313 years the RDA increases with age from 0.5 to 0.9\u00a0mg/day.\nThe European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) refers to the collective set of information as Dietary Reference Values, with Population Reference Intakes (PRIs) instead of RDAs, and Average Requirements instead of EARs. For women (including those pregnant or lactating), men and children the PRI is 0.1\u00a0mg thiamine per megajoule (MJ) of energy in their diet. As the conversion is 1 MJ = 239 kcal, an adult consuming 2390 kilocalories ought to be consuming 1.0\u00a0mg thiamine. This is slightly lower than the US RDA.\nNeither the National Academy of Medicine nor EFSA have set an upper intake level for thiamine, as there is no human data for adverse effects from high doses.\nSafety.\nThiamine is generally well tolerated and non-toxic when administered orally. There are rare reports of adverse side effects when thiamine is given intravenously, including allergic reactions, nausea, lethargy, and impaired coordination.\nLabeling.\nFor US food and dietary supplement labeling purposes, the amount in a serving is expressed as a percent of Daily Value. Since 27 May 2016, the Daily Value has been 1.2\u00a0mg, in line with the RDA.\nSources.\nThiamine is found in a wide variety of processed and whole foods, including lentils, peas, whole grains, pork, and nuts. A typical daily prenatal vitamin product contains around 1.5\u00a0mg of thiamine.\nFood fortification.\nSome countries require or recommend fortification of grain foods such as wheat, rice or maize (corn) because processing lowers vitamin content. As of February 2022, 59 countries, mostly in North and Sub-Saharan Africa, require food fortification of wheat, rice or maize with thiamine or thiamine mononitrate. The amounts stipulated range from 2.0 to 10.0\u00a0mg/kg. An additional 18 countries have a voluntary fortification program. For example, the Indian government recommends 3.5\u00a0mg/kg for \"maida\" (white) and \"atta\" (whole wheat) flour.\nSynthesis.\nBiosynthesis.\nThiamine biosynthesis occurs in bacteria, some protozoans, plants, and fungi. The thiazole and pyrimidine moieties are biosynthesized separately and are then combined to form ThMP by the action of thiamine-phosphate synthase.\nThe pyrimidine ring system is formed in a reaction catalysed by phosphomethylpyrimidine synthase (ThiC), an enzyme in the radical SAM superfamily of iron\u2013sulfur proteins, which use S-adenosyl methionine as a cofactor.\nThe starting material is 5-aminoimidazole ribotide, which undergoes a rearrangement reaction via radical intermediates which incorporate the blue, green and red fragments shown into the product.\nThe thiazole ring is formed in a reaction catalysed by thiazole synthase (EC 2.8.1.10). The ultimate precursors are 1-deoxy-D-xylulose 5-phosphate, 2-iminoacetate and a sulfur carrier protein called ThiS. An additional protein, ThiG, is also required to bring together all the components of the ring at the enzyme active site.\nThe final step to form ThMP involves decarboxylation of the thiazole intermediate, which reacts with the pyrophosphate derivative of phosphomethylpyrimidine, itself a product of a kinase, phosphomethylpyrimidine kinase.\nThe biosynthetic pathways differ among organisms. In \"E. coli\" and other enterobacteriaceae, ThMP is phosphorylated to the cofactor TPP by a thiamine-phosphate kinase (ThMP + ATP \u2192 TPP + ADP). In most bacteria and in eukaryotes, ThMP is hydrolyzed to thiamine and then pyrophosphorylated to TPP by thiamine diphosphokinase (thiamine + ATP \u2192 TPP + AMP).\nThe biosynthetic pathways are regulated by riboswitches. If there is sufficient thiamine present in the cell then the thiamine binds to the mRNAs for the enzymes that are required in the pathway and prevents their translation. If there is no thiamine present then there is no inhibition, and the enzymes required for the biosynthesis are produced. The specific riboswitch, the TPP riboswitch, is the only known riboswitch found in both eukaryotic and prokaryotic organisms.\nLaboratory synthesis.\nIn the first total synthesis in 1936, ethyl 3-ethoxypropanoate was treated with ethyl formate to give an intermediate dicarbonyl compound which when reacted with acetamidine formed a substituted pyrimidine. Conversion of its hydroxyl group to an amino group was carried out by nucleophilic aromatic substitution, first to the chloride derivative using phosphorus oxychloride, followed by treatment with ammonia. The ethoxy group was then converted to a bromo derivative using hydrobromic acid. In the final stage, thiamine (as its dibromide salt) was formed in an alkylation reaction using 4-methyl-5-(2-hydroxyethyl)thiazole.\nIndustrial synthesis.\nMerck &amp; Co. adapted the 1936 laboratory-scale synthesis, allowing them to manufacture thiamine in Rahway in 1937. However, an alternative route using the intermediate Grewe diamine (5-(aminomethyl)-2-methyl-4-pyrimidinamine), first published in 1937, was investigated by Hoffman La Roche and competitive manufacturing processes followed. Efficient routes to the diamine have continued to be of interest. In the European Economic Area, thiamine is registered under REACH regulation and between 100 and 1,000 tonnes per annum are manufactured or imported there.\nSynthetic analogues.\nMany vitamin B1 analogues, such as Benfotiamine, fursultiamine, and sulbutiamine, are synthetic derivatives of thiamine. Most were developed in Japan in the 1950s and 1960s as forms that were intended to improve absorption compared to thiamine. Some are approved for use in some countries as a drug or non-prescription dietary supplement for treatment of diabetic neuropathy or other health conditions.\nAbsorption, metabolism and excretion.\nIn the upper small intestine, thiamine phosphate esters present in food are hydrolyzed by alkaline phosphatase enzymes. At low concentrations (&lt;2 \u03bcmol l\u22121), the absorption process is carrier-mediated. At higher concentrations, absorption also occurs via passive diffusion. Active transport can be inhibited by alcohol consumption or by folate deficiency.\nThe majority of thiamine in serum is circulating bound to albumin, with over () in erythrocytes (red blood cells), and is delivered to cells with high metabolic needs\u2014particularly those in the brain, liver, pancreas, heart, and skeletal and smooth muscles, including cardiac muscle cells. A specific binding protein called thiamine-binding protein has been identified in rat serum and is believed to be a hormone-regulated carrier protein important for tissue distribution of thiamine. Uptake of thiamine by cells of the blood and other tissues occurs via active transport and passive diffusion. Two members of the family of transporter proteins encoded by the genes SLC19A2 and SLC19A3 are capable of thiamine transport. In some tissues, thiamine uptake and secretion appear to be mediated by a Na+-dependent transporter and a transcellular proton gradient.\nHuman storage of thiamine is about 25 to 50\u00a0mg, with the greatest concentrations in liver, skeletal muscle, heart, brain, and kidneys. ThMP and free (unphosphorylated) thiamine are present in plasma, milk, cerebrospinal fluid, and, it is presumed, all extracellular fluid. Unlike the highly phosphorylated forms of thiamine, ThMP and free thiamine are capable of crossing cell membranes. Calcium and magnesium have been shown to affect the distribution of thiamine in the body and magnesium deficiency has been shown to aggravate thiamine deficiency. Thiamine contents in human tissues are less than those of other species. The half-life of thiamine content stored in tissues of human body is about 9-18 days, while after intake in high doses, the half-life of thiamine in circulating blood is about one to 12 hours. Additionally, thiamine pyrophosphate derived from pyrimidines supports lipid synthesis and adipogenesis, highlighting its role in energy storage and cellular differentiation.\nThiamine and its metabolites (2-methyl-4-amino-5-pyrimidine carboxylic acid, 4-methyl-thiazole-5-acetic acid, and others) are excreted principally in the urine.\nInterference.\nThe bioavailability of thiamine in foods can be interfered with in a variety of ways. Sulfites, added to foods as a preservative, will attack thiamine at the methylene bridge, cleaving the pyrimidine ring from the thiazole ring. The rate of this reaction is increased under acidic conditions. Thiamine is degraded by thermolabile thiaminases present in some species of fish, shellfish and other foods. The pupae of an African silk worm, \"Anaphe venata\", is a traditional food in Nigeria. Consumption leads to thiamine deficiency. Older literature reported that in Thailand, consumption of fermented, uncooked fish caused thiamine deficiency, but either abstaining from eating the fish or heating it first reversed the deficiency. In ruminants, intestinal bacteria synthesize thiamine and thiaminases. The bacterial thiaminases are cell surface enzymes that must dissociate from the cell membrane before being activated; the dissociation can occur in ruminants under acidotic conditions. In dairy cows, over-feeding with grain causes subacute ruminal acidosis and increased ruminal bacteria thiaminase release, resulting in thiamine deficiency.\nFrom reports on two small studies conducted in Thailand, chewing slices of areca nut wrapped in betel leaves and chewing tea leaves reduced food thiamine bioavailability by a mechanism that may involve tannins.\nBariatric surgery for weight loss is known to interfere with vitamin absorption. A meta-analysis reported that of people who underwent bariatric surgeries experience vitamin B1 deficiency.\nHistory.\nThiamine was the first of the water-soluble vitamins to be isolated. The earliest observations in humans and in chickens had shown that diets of primarily polished white rice caused beriberi, but did not attribute it to the absence of a previously unknown essential nutrient.\nIn 1884, Takaki Kanehiro, a surgeon general in the Imperial Japanese Navy, rejected the previous germ theory for beriberi and suggested instead that the disease was due to insufficiencies in the diet. Switching diets on a navy ship, he discovered that replacing a diet of white rice only with one also containing barley, meat, milk, bread, and vegetables, nearly eliminated beriberi on a nine-month sea voyage. However, Takaki had added many foods to the successful diet and he incorrectly attributed the benefit to increased protein intake, as vitamins were unknown at the time. The Navy was not convinced of the need for such an expensive program of dietary improvement, and many men continued to die of beriberi, even during the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u201305. Not until 1905, after the anti-beriberi factor had been discovered in rice bran (removed by polishing into white rice) and in barley bran, was Takaki's experiment rewarded. He was made a baron in the Japanese peerage system, after which he was affectionately called \"Barley Baron\".\nThe specific connection to grain was made in 1897 by Christiaan Eijkman, a military doctor in the Dutch East Indies, who discovered that fowl fed on a diet of cooked, polished rice developed paralysis that could be reversed by discontinuing rice polishing. He attributed beriberi to the high levels of starch in rice being toxic. He believed that the toxicity was countered in a compound present in the rice polishings. An associate, Gerrit Grijns, correctly interpreted the connection between excessive consumption of polished rice and beriberi in 1901: He concluded that rice contains an essential nutrient in the outer layers of the grain that is removed by polishing. Eijkman was eventually awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology and Medicine in 1929, because his observations led to the discovery of vitamins.\nIn 1910, a Japanese agricultural chemist of Tokyo Imperial University, Umetaro Suzuki, isolated a water-soluble thiamine compound from rice bran, which he named \"aberic acid\". (He later renamed it \"Orizanin\".) He described the compound as not only an anti-beriberi factor, but also as being essential to human nutrition; however, this finding failed to gain publicity outside of Japan, because a claim that the compound was a new finding was omitted in translation of his publication from Japanese to German. In 1911 a Polish biochemist Casimir Funk isolated the substance from rice bran (the modern thiamine) that he called a \"vitamine\" (on account of its containing an amino group). However, Funk did not completely characterize its chemical structure. Dutch chemists, Barend Coenraad Petrus Jansen and his closest collaborator Willem Frederik Donath, went on to isolate and crystallize the active agent in 1926, whose structure was determined by Robert Runnels Williams, in 1934. Thiamine was named by the Williams team as a portmanteau of \"thio\" (meaning sulfur-containing) and \"vitamin\". The term \"vitamin\" coming indirectly, by way of Funk, from the amine group of thiamine itself (although by this time, vitamins were known to not always be amines, for example, vitamin C). Thiamine was also synthesized by the Williams group in 1936.\nSir Rudolph Peters, in Oxford, used pigeons to understand how thiamine deficiency results in the pathological-physiological symptoms of beriberi. Pigeons fed exclusively on polished rice developed opisthotonos, a condition characterized by head retraction. If not treated, the animals died after a few days. Administration of thiamine after opisthotonos was observed led to a complete cure within 30 minutes. As no morphological modifications were seen in the brain of the pigeons before and after treatment with thiamine, Peters introduced the concept of a biochemical-induced injury. In 1937, Lohmann and Schuster showed that the diphosphorylated thiamine derivative, TPP, was a cofactor required for the oxidative decarboxylation of pyruvate.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
