{"id": "33509", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33509", "title": "Walking", "text": "Gait of locomotion among legged animals\nWalking (also known as ambulation) is one of the main gaits of terrestrial locomotion among legged animals. Walking is typically slower than running and other gaits. Walking is defined as an \"inverted pendulum\" gait in which the body vaults over the stiff limb or limbs with each step. This applies regardless of the usable number of limbs\u2014even arthropods, with six, eight, or more limbs, walk. In humans, walking has health benefits including improved mental health and reduced risk of cardiovascular disease and death.\nDifference from running.\nThe word \"walk\" is descended from the Old English \"wealcan\" 'to roll'. In humans and other bipeds, walking is generally distinguished from running in that only one foot at a time leaves contact with the ground and there is a period of double-support. In contrast, running begins when both feet leave the ground during each step. This distinction has the status of a formal requirement in competitive walking events. For quadrupedal species, there are numerous gaits which may be termed walking or running, and distinctions based upon the presence or absence of a suspended phase or the number of feet in contact any time do not yield mechanically correct classification. The most effective method to distinguish walking from running is to measure the height of a person's centre of mass using motion capture or a force plate at mid-stance. During walking, the centre of mass reaches a maximum height at mid-stance, while running, it is then at a minimum. This distinction, however, only holds true for locomotion over level or approximately level ground. For walking up grades above 10%, this distinction no longer holds for some individuals. Definitions based on the percentage of the stride during which a foot is in contact with the ground (averaged across all feet) of greater than 50% contact corresponds well with identification of 'inverted pendulum' mechanics and are indicative of walking for animals with any number of limbs; however, this definition is incomplete. Running humans and animals may have contact periods greater than 50% of a gait cycle when rounding corners, running uphill or carrying loads.\nSpeed is another factor that distinguishes walking from running. Although walking speeds can vary greatly depending on many factors, such as height, weight, age, terrain, surface, load, culture, effort, and fitness, the average human walking speed at crosswalks is about 5.0 kilometres per hour (km/h), or about 1.4 meters per second (m/s), or about 3.1 miles per hour (mph). Specific studies have found pedestrian walking speeds at crosswalks ranging from for older individuals and from for younger individuals; a brisk walking speed can be around . In Japan, the standard measure for walking speed is 80\u00a0m/min (4.8\u00a0km/h).\nChampion racewalkers can average more than over a distance of .\nAn average human child achieves independent walking ability at around 11 months old.\nHealth benefits.\nRegular, brisk exercise can improve confidence, stamina, energy, weight control and may reduce stress. Scientific studies have also shown that walking may be beneficial for the mind, improving memory skills, learning ability, concentration, mood, creativity, and abstract reasoning. Sustained walking sessions for a minimum period of thirty to sixty minutes a day, five days a week, with the correct walking posture may improve health.\nThe Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's fact sheet on the \"Relationship of Walking to Mortality Among U.S. Adults with Diabetes\" states that those with diabetes who walked for two or more hours a week lowered their mortality rate from all causes by 39 percent. Women who took 4,500 steps to 7,500 steps a day seemed to have fewer premature deaths compared to those who only took 2,700 steps a day. \"Walking lengthened the life of people with diabetes regardless of age, sex, race, body mass index, length of time since diagnosis and presence of complications or functional limitations.\" One limited study found preliminary evidence of a relationship between the speed of walking and health, and that the best results are obtained with a speed of more than .\nEven a light walk after a meal offers benefits in reducing postprandial glucose spikes in people with or at risk for type 2 diabetes.\nA 2023 study by the \"European Journal of Preventive Cardiology\", the largest study to date, found that walking at least 2,337 steps a day reduced the risk of dying from cardiovascular diseases, and that 3,967 steps a day reduced the risk of dying from any cause. Benefits continued to increase with more steps. James Leiper, associate medical director at the British Heart Foundation, said that if the benefits of walking could be sold as a medicine \"we would be hailing it as a wonder drug\".\nOrigins.\nIt is theorized that \"walking\" among tetrapods originated underwater with air-breathing fish that could \"walk\" underwater, giving rise (potentially with vertebrates like \"Tiktaalik\") to the plethora of land-dwelling life that walk on four or two limbs. While terrestrial tetrapods are theorised to have a single origin, arthropods and their relatives are thought to have independently evolved walking several times, specifically in hexapods, myriapods, chelicerates, tardigrades, onychophorans, and crustaceans. Little skates, members of the demersal fish community, can propel themselves by pushing off the ocean floor with their pelvic fins, using neural mechanisms which evolved as early as 420 million years ago, before vertebrates set foot on land.\nHominin.\nData in the fossil record indicate that among hominin ancestors, bipedal walking was one of the first defining characteristics to emerge, predating other defining characteristics of \"Hominidae\". Judging from footprints discovered on a former shore in Kenya, it is thought possible that ancestors of modern humans were walking in ways very similar to the present activity as long as 3 million years ago.\nToday, the walking gait of humans is unique and differs significantly from bipedal or quadrupedal walking gaits of other primates, like chimpanzees. It is believed to have been selectively advantageous in hominin ancestors in the Miocene due to metabolic energy efficiency. Human walking has been found to be slightly more energy efficient than travel for a quadrupedal mammal of a similar size, like chimpanzees. The energy efficiency of human locomotion can be accounted for by the reduced use of muscle in walking, due to an upright posture which places ground reaction forces at the hip and knee. When walking bipedally, chimpanzees take a crouched stance with bent knees and hips, forcing the quadriceps muscles to perform extra work, which costs more energy. Comparing chimpanzee quadrupedal travel to that of true quadrupedal animals has indicated that chimpanzees expend one-hundred and fifty percent of the energy required for travel compared to true quadrupeds.\nA 2007 study further explored the origin of human bipedalism, using chimpanzee and human energetic costs of locomotion. They found that the energy spent in moving the human body is less than what would be expected for an animal of similar size and approximately seventy-five percent less costly than that of chimpanzees. Chimpanzee quadrupedal and bipedal energy costs are found to be relatively equal, with chimpanzee bipedalism costing roughly ten percent more than quadrupedal. The same 2007 study found that among chimpanzee individuals, the energy costs for bipedal and quadrupedal walking varied significantly, and those that flexed their knees and hips to a greater degree and took a more upright posture, closer to that of humans, were able to save more energy than chimpanzees that did not take this stance. Further, compared to other apes, humans have longer legs and short dorsally oriented ischia (hipbone), which result in longer hamstring extensor moments, improving walking energy economy. Longer legs also support lengthened Achilles tendons which are thought to increase energy efficiency in bipedal locomotor activities. It was thought that hominins like \"Ardipithecus ramidus,\" which had a variety of both terrestrial and arboreal adaptions would not be as efficient walkers, however, with a small body mass \"A. ramidus\" had developed an energy efficient means of bipedal walking while still maintaining arboreal adaptations. Humans have long femoral necks, meaning that while walking, hip muscles do not require as much energy to flex while moving. These slight kinematic and anatomic differences demonstrate how bipedal walking may have developed as the dominant means of locomotion among early hominins because of the energy saved.\nBiomechanics.\nHuman walking is accomplished with a strategy called the double pendulum. During forward motion, the leg that leaves the ground swings forward from the hip. This sweep is the first pendulum. Then the leg strikes the ground with the heel and rolls through to the toe in a motion described as an inverted pendulum. The motion of the two legs is coordinated so that one foot or the other is always in contact with the ground. While walking, the muscles of the calf contract, raising the body's center of mass, and during muscle contraction, potential energy is stored. Then gravity pulls the body forward and down onto the other leg and the potential energy is then transformed into kinetic energy. The process of human walking can save approximately sixty-five percent of the energy used by utilizing gravity in forward motion.\nWalking differs from a running gait in a number of ways. The most obvious is that during walking one leg always stays on the ground while the other is swinging. In running there is typically a ballistic phase where the runner is airborne with both feet in the air (for bipedals).\nAnother difference concerns the movement of the centre of mass of the body. In walking the body \"vaults\" over the leg on the ground, raising the centre of mass to its highest point as the leg passes the vertical, and dropping it to the lowest as the legs are spread apart. Essentially kinetic energy of forward motion is constantly being traded for a rise in potential energy. This is reversed in running where the centre of mass is at its lowest as the leg is vertical. This is because the impact of landing from the ballistic phase is absorbed by bending the leg and consequently storing energy in muscles and tendons. In running there is a conversion between kinetic, potential, and elastic energy.\nThere is an absolute limit on an individual's speed of walking (without special techniques such as those employed in speed walking) due to the upwards acceleration of the centre of mass during a stride \u2013 if it is greater than the acceleration due to gravity the person will become airborne as they vault over the leg on the ground. Typically, however, animals switch to a run at a lower speed than this due to energy efficiencies.\nBased on the 2D inverted pendulum model of walking, there are at least five physical constraints that place fundamental limits on walking like an inverted pendulum. These constraints are: take-off constraint, sliding constraint, fall-back constraint, steady-state constraint, and high step-frequency constraint.\nLeisure activity.\nMany people enjoy walking as a recreation in the mainly urban modern world, and it is one of the best forms of exercise. For some, walking is a way to enjoy nature and the outdoors; and for others the physical, sporting and endurance aspect is more important.\nThere are a variety of different kinds of walking, including bushwalking, racewalking, beach walking, hillwalking, volksmarching, Nordic walking, trekking, dog walking and hiking. Some people prefer to walk indoors on a treadmill, or in a gym, and fitness walkers and others may use a pedometer to count their steps. Hiking is the usual word used in Canada, the United States and South Africa for long vigorous walks; similar walks are called tramps in New Zealand, or hill walking or just walking in Australia, the UK and the Irish Republic. In the UK, rambling is also used. Australians also bushwalk. In English-speaking parts of North America, the term walking is used for short walks, especially in towns and cities. Snow shoeing is walking in snow; a slightly different gait is required compared with regular walking.\nTourism.\nIn terms of tourism, the possibilities range from guided walking tours in cities, to organized trekking holidays in the Himalayas. In the UK the term walking tour also refers to a multi-day walk or hike undertaken by a group or individual. Well-organized systems of trails exist in many other European countries, as well as Canada, United States, New Zealand, and Nepal. Systems of lengthy waymarked walking trails now stretch across Europe from Norway to Turkey, Portugal to Cyprus. Many also walk the traditional pilgrim routes, of which the most famous is El Camino de Santiago, The Way of St. James.\nNumerous walking festivals and other walking events take place each year in many countries. The world's largest multi-day walking event is the International Four Days Marches Nijmegen in the Netherlands. The \"Vierdaagse\" (Dutch for \"Four day Event\") is an annual walk that has taken place since 1909; it has been based at Nijmegen since 1916. Depending on age group and category, walkers have to walk 30, 40 or 50 kilometers each day for four days. Originally a military event with a few civilians, it now is a mainly civilian event. Numbers have risen in recent years, with over 40,000 now taking part, including about 5,000 military personnel. Due to crowds on the route, since 2004 the organizers have limited the number of participants. In the U.S., there is the annual Labor Day walk on Mackinac Bridge, Michigan, which draws over 60,000 participants; it is the largest single-day walking event; while the Chesapeake Bay Bridge Walk in Maryland draws over 50,000 participants each year. There are also various walks organised as charity events, with walkers sponsored for a specific cause. These walks range in length from two miles (3\u00a0km) or five km to 50 miles (80\u00a0km). The MS Challenge Walk is an 80\u00a0km or 50-mile walk which raises money to fight multiple sclerosis, while walkers in the Oxfam Trailwalker cover 100\u00a0km or 60 miles.\nRambling.\nIn Britain, The Ramblers, a registered charity, is the largest organisation that looks after the interests of walkers, with some 100,000 members. Its \"Get Walking Keep Walking\" project provides free route guides, led walks, as well as information for people new to walking. The Long Distance Walkers Association in the UK is for the more energetic walker, and organizes lengthy challenge hikes of 20 or even 50 miles (30 to 80\u00a0km) or more in a day. The LDWA's annual \"Hundred\" event, entailing walking 100 miles or 160\u00a0km in 48 hours, takes place each British Spring Bank Holiday weekend.\nWalkability.\nThere has been a recent focus among urban planners in some communities to create pedestrian-friendly areas and roads, allowing commuting, shopping and recreation to be done on foot. The concept of walkability has arisen as a measure of the degree to which an area is friendly to walking. Some communities are at least partially car-free, making them particularly supportive of walking and other modes of transportation. In the United States of America, the active living network is an example of a concerted effort to develop communities more friendly to walking and other physical activities.\nAn example of such efforts to make urban development more pedestrian friendly is the pedestrian village. This is a compact, pedestrian-oriented neighborhood or town, with a mixed-use village center. Shared-use lanes for pedestrians and those using bicycles, Segways, wheelchairs, and other small rolling conveyances that do not use internal combustion engines. Generally, these lanes are in front of the houses and businesses, and streets for motor vehicles are always at the rear. Some pedestrian villages might be nearly car-free with cars either hidden below the buildings or on the periphery of the village. Venice, Italy is essentially a pedestrian village with canals. The canal district in Venice, California, on the other hand, combines the front lane/rear street approach with canals and walkways, or just walkways.\nWalking is also considered to be a clear example of a sustainable mode of transport, especially suited for urban use and/or relatively shorter distances. Non-motorized transport modes such as walking, but also cycling, small-wheeled transport (skates, skateboards, push scooters and hand carts) or wheelchair travel are often key elements of successfully encouraging clean urban transport. A large variety of case studies and good practices (from European cities and some worldwide examples) that promote and stimulate walking as a means of transportation in cities can be found at Eltis, Europe's portal for local transport.\nThe development of specific rights of way with appropriate infrastructure can promote increased participation and enjoyment of walking. Examples of types of investment include pedestrian malls, and foreshoreways such as oceanways and also river walks.\nThe first purpose-built pedestrian street in Europe is the Lijnbaan in Rotterdam, opened in 1953. The first pedestrianised shopping centre in the United Kingdom was in Stevenage in 1959. A large number of European towns and cities have made part of their centres car-free since the early 1960s. These are often accompanied by car parks on the edge of the pedestrianised zone, and, in the larger cases, park and ride schemes. Central Copenhagen is one of the largest and oldest: It was converted from car traffic into pedestrian zone in 1962.\nIn robotics.\nGenerally, the first successful walking robots had six legs. As microprocessor technology advanced, the number of legs could be reduced and there are now robots that can walk on two legs. One, for example, is ASIMO. Although there has been significant advances, robots still do not walk nearly as well as human beings as they often need to keep their knees bent permanently in order to improve stability.\nIn 2009, Japanese roboticist Tomotaka Takahashi developed a robot that can jump three inches off the ground. The robot, named Ropid, is capable of getting up, walking, running, and jumping.\nMany other robots have also been able to walk over the years like a bipedal walking robot.\nMathematical models.\nMultiple mathematical models have been proposed to reproduce the kinematics observed in walking. These may be broadly broken down into four categories: rule-based models based on mechanical considerations and past literature, weakly coupled phase oscillators models, control-based models which guide simulations to maximize some property of locomotion, and phenomenological models which fit equations directly to the kinematics.\nRule-based models.\nThe rule-based models integrate the past literature on motor control to generate a few simple rules which are presumed to be responsible for walking (e.g. \"loading of the left leg triggers unloading of right leg\"). Such models are generally most strictly based on the past literature and when they are based on a few rules can be easy to interpret. However, the influence of each rule can be hard to interpret when these models become more complex. Furthermore, the tuning of parameters is often done in an ad hoc way, revealing little intuition about why the system may be organized in this way. Finally, such models are typically based fully on sensory feedback, ignoring the effect of descending and rhythm generating neurons, which have been shown to be crucial in coordinating proper walking.\nCoupled oscillator models.\nDynamical system theory shows that any network with cyclical dynamics may be modeled as a set of weakly coupled phase oscillators, so another line of research has been exploring this view of walking. Each oscillator may model a muscle, joint angle, or even a whole leg, and is coupled to some set of other oscillators. Often, these oscillators are thought to represent the central pattern generators underlying walking. These models have rich theory behind them, allow for some extensions based on sensory feedback, and can be fit to kinematics. However, they need to be heavily constrained to fit to data and by themselves make no claims on which gaits allow the animal to move faster, more robustly, or more efficiently.\nControl based models.\nControl-based models start with a simulation based on some description of the animal's anatomy and optimize control parameters to generate some behavior. These may be based on a musculoskeletal model, skeletal model, or even simply a ball and stick model. As these models generate locomotion by optimizing some metric, they can be used to explore the space of optimal locomotion behaviors under some assumptions. However, they typically do not generate plausible hypotheses on the neural coding underlying the behaviors and are typically sensitive to modeling assumptions.\nStatistical models.\nPhenomenological models model the kinematics of walking directly by fitting a dynamical system, without postulating an underlying mechanism for how the kinematics are generated neurally. Such models can produce the most realistic kinematic trajectories and thus have been explored for simulating walking for computer-based animation. However, the lack of underlying mechanism makes it hard to apply these models to study the biomechanical or neural properties of walking.\nAnimals.\nHorses.\nThe walk is a four-beat gait that averages about . When walking, a horse's legs follow this sequence: left hind leg, left front leg, right hind leg, right front leg, in a regular 1-2-3-4 beat. At the walk, the horse will always have one foot raised and the other three feet on the ground, save for a brief moment when weight is being transferred from one foot to another. A horse moves its head and neck in a slight up and down motion that helps maintain balance.\nIdeally, the advancing rear hoof oversteps the spot where the previously advancing front hoof touched the ground. The more the rear hoof oversteps, the smoother and more comfortable the walk becomes. Individual horses and different breeds vary in the smoothness of their walk. However, a rider will almost always feel some degree of gentle side-to-side motion in the horse's hips as each hind leg reaches forward.\nThe fastest \"walks\" with a four-beat footfall pattern are actually the lateral forms of ambling gaits such as the running walk, singlefoot, and similar rapid but smooth intermediate speed gaits. If a horse begins to speed up and lose a regular four-beat cadence to its gait, the horse is no longer walking but is beginning to either trot or pace.\nElephants.\nElephants can move both forwards and backwards, but cannot trot, jump, or gallop. They use only two gaits when moving on land, the walk and a faster gait similar to running. In walking, the legs act as pendulums, with the hips and shoulders rising and falling while the foot is planted on the ground. With no \"aerial phase\", the fast gait does not meet all the criteria of running, although the elephant uses its legs much like other running animals, with the hips and shoulders falling and then rising while the feet are on the ground. Fast-moving elephants appear to 'run' with their front legs, but 'walk' with their hind legs and can reach a top speed of . At this speed, most other quadrupeds are well into a gallop, even accounting for leg length.\nWalking fish.\nWalking fish (or ambulatory fish) are fish that are able to travel over land for extended periods of time. The term may also be used for some other cases of nonstandard fish locomotion, e.g., when describing fish \"walking\" along the sea floor, as the handfish or frogfish.\nInsects.\nInsects must carefully coordinate their six legs during walking to produce gaits that allow for efficient navigation of their environment. Interleg coordination patterns have been studied in a variety of insects, including locusts (\"Schistocerca gregaria\"), cockroaches (\"Periplaneta americana\"), stick insects (\"Carausius morosus\"), and fruit flies (\"Drosophila melanogaster\"). Different walking gaits have been observed to exist on a speed dependent continuum of phase relationships. Even though their walking gaits are not discrete, they can often be broadly categorized as either a metachronal wave gait, tetrapod gait, or tripod gait.\nIn a metachronal wave gait, only one leg leaves contact with the ground at a time. This gait starts at one of the hind legs, then propagates forward to the mid and front legs on the same side before starting at the hind leg of the contralateral side. The wave gait is often used at slow walking speeds and is the most stable, since five legs are always in contact with the ground at a time.\nIn a tetrapod gait, two legs swing at a time while the other four legs remain in contact with the ground. There are multiple configurations for tetrapod gaits, but the legs that swing together must be on contralateral sides of the body. Tetrapod gaits are typically used at medium speeds and are also very stable.\nA walking gait is considered tripod if three of the legs enter the swing phase simultaneously, while the other three legs make contact with the ground. The middle leg of one side swings with the hind and front legs on the contralateral side. Tripod gaits are most commonly used at high speeds, though it can be used at lower speeds. The tripod gait is less stable than wave-like and tetrapod gaits, but it is theorized to be the most robust. This means that it is easier for an insect to recover from an offset in step timing when walking in a tripod gait. The ability to respond robustly is important for insects when traversing uneven terrain.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33511", "revid": "27335766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33511", "title": "Wikification", "text": "Wikification may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33512", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33512", "title": "Wikify", "text": ""}
{"id": "33514", "revid": "6278275", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33514", "title": "War of the Polish Succession", "text": "18th century Succession wars for the Polish Commonwealth\nThe War of the Polish Succession (; 1733\u201335) was a major European conflict sparked by a civil war in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth over the succession to Augustus II the Strong, which the other European powers widened in pursuit of their own national interests. France and Spain, the two Bourbon powers, tested the power of the Austrian Habsburgs in Western Europe, as did the Kingdom of Prussia, whilst Saxony and Russia mobilized to support the eventual victor. The fighting in Poland\u2013Lithuania resulted in the accession of Augustus III, who in addition to Russia and Saxony, was politically supported by the Habsburgs.\nThe war's major military campaigns and battles occurred outside the borders of Poland\u2013Lithuania. The Bourbons, supported by Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia, moved against isolated Habsburg territories. In the Rhineland, France successfully took the Duchy of Lorraine, and in Italy, Spain regained control over the kingdoms of Naples and Sicily lost in the War of the Spanish Succession, while territorial gains in northern Italy were limited despite bloody campaigning. Great Britain's unwillingness to support Habsburg Austria demonstrated the infirmity of the Anglo-Austrian Alliance.\nAlthough a preliminary peace was reached in 1735, the Treaty of Vienna (1738) ended the war formally, which confirmed Augustus III as king of Poland and his opponent Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski was awarded the Duchy of Lorraine and Duchy of Bar, then both fiefs of the Holy Roman Empire. Francis Stephen, the duke of Lorraine, was given the Grand Duchy of Tuscany in compensation for losing Lorraine. The Duchy of Parma went to Austria whereas Charles of Parma took the crowns of Naples and Sicily. The Bourbons won most territorial gains, as the Duchies of Lorraine and Bar went from being the Holy Roman Empire's fiefs to those of France, while the Spanish Bourbons gained two new kingdoms: Naples and Sicily. For their part, the Austrian Habsburgs received two Italian duchies in return, though Parma would soon revert to the Bourbons. Tuscany would be held by the Habsburgs until the Napoleonic era.\nThe war proved disastrous for Polish\u2013Lithuanian independence, and re-affirmed that the affairs of the Poland\u2013Lithuania, including the election of its ruler, were controlled by the other great powers of Europe. After August III, there would only be one more king of Poland, Stanis\u0142aw August Poniatowski, himself a Russian puppet, and ultimately Poland\u2013Lithuania would be divided up by its neighbors and cease to exist as a sovereign state by the end of the 18th century. Poland\u2013Lithuania also surrendered claims to Livonia and direct control over the Duchy of Courland and Semigallia, which, although remaining its fief, was not integrated into it and fell under strong Russian influence that only ended with the fall of the Russian Empire in 1917.\nBackground.\nAfter the death of Sigismund II Augustus in 1572, the King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania was elected by the \"szlachta\", a body composed of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian nobility, in a specially called election sejm. The Sejm, the legislative body of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, increasingly restricted royal power. In turn, the Sejm was often paralyzed by the \"liberum veto\", the right of any member to block its decisions. The Commonwealth's neighbors often influenced the Sejm, and by the early 18th century the democratic system was in decline. From this point, certain foreign powers, especially Russia, became increasingly involved in Polish affairs.\nIn 1697, Augustus II became king due to Austrian and Russian backing. Deposed by Stanis\u0142aw Leszczy\u0144ski in 1705, he returned four years later and Stanis\u0142aw fled to France, where his daughter Marie Leszczy\u0144ska against all odds married Louis XV in 1725. Augustus failed in an attempt to settle the Polish crown on his son, Augustus III, leading to a contest for the throne when he died in 1733. In the secret 1732 Treaty of the Three Black Eagles, Russia, Austria and Prussia agreed to oppose the election of either Stanislaus or Augustus III and to support Manuel of Portugal instead.\nThe dispute coincided with the breakdown of the Anglo-French Alliance that dominated Europe since 1714. The Peace of Utrecht ensured the separation of France and Spain despite the close relationship between Louis XV and his uncle Philip V of Spain and the two countries were opponents in the War of the Quadruple Alliance (1718\u20131720). When Cardinal Fleury became French chief minister in 1726, he sought a closer relationship with Spain, helped by the birth of Louis, Dauphin of France in 1729, which seemed to ensure that the countries would remain separate.\nFleury supported Stanis\u0142aw, hoping to weaken Austria and secure the Duchy of Lorraine, a strategic possession occupied by France for large parts of the previous century. The current duke Francis Stephen was expected to marry Emperor Charles' heir Maria Theresa, bringing Austria dangerously close to France. Simultaneously, Philip wanted to regain the Italian territories ceded to Austria in 1714, which led to the Franco-Spanish \"Pacte de Famille\" in 1733.\nDeath of Augustus II.\nAugustus II died on 1 February 1733. Throughout the spring and summer of 1733, France built up its forces along its northern and eastern frontiers, while the emperor massed troops on the Commonwealth's borders, reducing garrisons in the Duchy of Milan for the purpose. While the aging Prince Eugene of Savoy had recommended a more warlike posture to the emperor against potential French actions in the Rhine valley and northern Italy, only minimal steps were taken to improve imperial defenses on the Rhine.\nThe Marquis de Monti, France's ambassador in Warsaw, convinced the rival Potocki and Czartoryski families to unite behind Stanis\u0142aw. Teodor Andrzej Potocki, Primate of Poland and interrex following Augustus' death, called a convocation sejm in March 1733. Delegates to this sejm passed a resolution forbidding the candidacy of foreigners; this would explicitly exclude both Emmanuel of Portugal and Augustus II's son, Frederick August II, the Elector of Saxony.\nFrederick August negotiated agreements with Austria and Russia in July 1733. In exchange for Russian support, he agreed to give up any remaining Polish claims to Livonia, and promised to Anna of Russia her choice of successor to the Duchy of Courland, a Polish fief (of which she had been duchess prior to her ascension to the Russian throne) which would have otherwise come under direct Polish rule on the death of the current duke, Ferdinand Kettler, who had no heirs. To the Austrian emperor he promised recognition of the Pragmatic Sanction of 1713, a document designed to guarantee inheritance of the Austrian throne to Maria Theresa, Charles' oldest child.\nIn August, Polish nobles gathered for the election sejm. On 11 August, 30,000 Russian troops under Field Marshal Peter Lacy entered Poland in a bid to influence the sejm's decision. On September 4, France openly declared its support for Leszczy\u0144ski, who was elected king by a sejm of 12,000 delegates on September 12. A group of nobles, led by Lithuanian magnates including Duke Michael Wi\u015bniowiecki (the former Lithuanian grand chancellor nominated by Augustus II), crossed the Vistula river and the protection of Russian troops. This group, numbering about 3,000, elected Frederick August II King of Poland as Augustus III on October 5. Despite the fact that this group was a minority, Russia and Austria, intent on maintaining their influence within Poland, recognised Augustus as king.\nOn 10 October, France declared war on Austria and Saxony. Louis XV was later joined by his uncle, King Philip V of Spain, who hoped to secure territories in Italy for his sons by his second marriage to Elizabeth Farnese. Specifically, he hoped to secure Mantua for the elder son, Don Carlos, who was already Duke of Parma and had the expectation of the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, and the Kingdoms of Naples and Sicily for the younger son, Don Felipe. The two Bourbon monarchs were also joined by Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia, who hoped to secure gains from the Austrian duchies of Milan and Mantua.\nAustrian isolation.\nWhen hostilities finally broke out, the Austrians had hoped for aid from Great Britain and the Dutch Republic. Such expectations quickly dissipated as both the Dutch and the British chose to pursue a policy of neutrality. British Prime Minister Sir Robert Walpole justified British neutrality in the conflict by noting that the Anglo-Austrian Alliance agreed at the 1731 Treaty of Vienna was a purely defensive agreement, while Austria was in this instance the aggressor. This position was attacked by British Austrophiles who wanted to aid the Austrians against France, but Walpole's dominant position ensured that Britain stayed out of the conflict. \nThe Dutch under the leadership of Grand Pensionary Simon van Slingelandt mediated between the parties, but were anxious themselves to not have war on their doorstep again. The heavy toll of the previous wars against France on the Dutch economy was still in fresh memory. In early 1733, it appeared that the Dutch Republic was on the verge of war with Prussia. Emperor Charles VI exerted pressure on Prussia, aiming to align the Republic with Austria. However, this attempt proved unsuccessful as the Dutch chose to remain neutral. The threat of war still forced the Dutch Republic to increase the size of its army, just at a time the Dutch had hoped to be able to reduce it appreciably. The French had no wish to provoke Britain and the Dutch Republic and carefully chose not to campaign in the Austrian Netherlands, where Dutch States Army troops garrisoned several fortresses, while also avoiding the parts of the Holy Roman Empire that might draw either power into the conflict.\nOn Austria's southern border, France in November 1733 negotiated the secret Treaty of Turin with Charles Emmanuel and prepared for military operations in northern Italy. It concluded the (also secret) Treaty of the Escorial with Spain, which included promises of French assistance in the Spanish conquest of Naples and Sicily. France also made diplomatic overtures to Sweden and the Ottoman Empire in a fruitless attempt to draw them into the conflict in support of Stanis\u0142aw.\nThe Austrians were thus left largely without effective external allies on their southern and western frontiers. Their Russian and Saxon allies were occupied with the Polish campaign, and the Emperor distrusted Frederick William I of Prussia, who was willing to provide some aid. Divisions within the empire also affected the raising of troops in 1733, as Charles-Albert of Bavaria, who harbored ambitions to become the next Holy Roman Emperor, signed a secret agreement with France in November 1733, and tried, with limited success, to dissuade other rulers within the empire from the Wittelsbach family from providing troops to the emperor under their treaty obligations. While Britain itself did not provide support, the Electorate of Hanover, where George II also ruled as an Imperial Elector, proved willing to help. On 9 April 1734, a \"Reichskrieg\" (imperial war) was declared against France, obliging all imperial states to participate.\nWar.\nPoland.\nThe Russians, commanded by Peter Lacy, quickly captured the capital city of Warsaw and installed Augustus as potential heir, forcing Stanis\u0142aw to flee to Danzig (present-day Gda\u0144sk), where he was besieged for some time by a Russian-Saxon army that came under the overall command of Field Marshal Burkhard Christoph von M\u00fcnnich. Danzig capitulated in June 1734, and Stanis\u0142aw was forced to flee once more, this time first to the city of K\u00f6nigsberg and eventually to France. This ended major military activity in Poland itself, although it continued to be occupied by foreign troops as Augustus dealt with partisan supporters of Stanis\u0142aw. A group of nobles and aristocrats supporting Stanis\u0142aw formed the Confederation of Dzik\u00f3w in late 1734, and under their commander, Adam Tar\u0142o, tried to fight the Russian and Saxon troops, but their efforts were ineffective. In what became known as the Pacification Sejm, held in June\u2013July 1736, Augustus was confirmed as King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania.\nRhineland.\nFollowing France's 10 October declaration of war, it began military operations three days later, invading the Duchy of Lorraine and besieging the imperial fortress at Kehl, across the Rhine from Strasbourg, gaining control of both objectives in a few weeks. Unable to attack Austria directly, and unwilling to invade the intervening German states for fear of drawing Great Britain and the Dutch into the conflict, France consolidated its position in Lorraine, and withdrew its troops across the Rhine for the winter.\nThe emperor mobilized his active forces in response to the French attacks, and began the process of calling up the Army of the Holy Roman Empire, establishing a defensive line at Ettlingen, near Karlsruhe. In the spring of 1734 French maneuvers successfully flanked this line, and Prince Eugene of Savoy was forced to withdraw these forces to the imperial encampment at Heilbronn. This cleared the way for the French army under the Duke of Berwick to besiege the imperial fort at Philippsburg, which fell after a siege of two months in July 1734. Eugene, who was accompanied by Crown Prince Frederick of Prussia, made some attempts to relieve the siege, but never made any decisive attacks against the besieging army owing to its size and the relatively poor quality of the troops under his command. Berwick was killed by a shell at Philippsburg.\nFrench armies continued to advance along the Rhine, reaching as far as Mainz, but the growing imperial army, which came to include troops from Russia that had assisted with the capture of Danzig, was able to prevent France from establishing a siege there, and Eugene went on the offensive. A force of 30,000 under Friedrich Heinrich von Seckendorff crossed the Rhine and began pushing the French back toward Trier, defeating them at Clausen in October 1735, in one of the last battles before preliminary peace terms were reached.\nNorthern Italy.\nFrench and Savoyard troops numbering over 50,000, under the command of Charles Emmanuel, entered Milanese territory as early as 10 October, against minimal resistance, as the Austrian forces in the duchy numbered only about 12,000. By 3 November, the city of Milan itself had surrendered, although the Austrian governor, Count Wirich Philipp von Daun, still held the fortress. France's great general, the Duke de Villars, joined Charles Emmanuel in Milan on 11 November. While Villars wanted to move immediately against Mantua to secure the Alpine passes against Austrian reinforcements, Charles Emmanuel, mistrustful of his French allies and their dealings with Spain, sought to secure Milan. The army spent the next three months eliminating Austrian opposition from the remaining fortified towns in the duchy. Villars attempted to interest Don Carlos of Parma in joining the expedition against Mantua, but Carlos was focused on the campaign into Naples. Villars began to move against Mantua, but Charles Emmanuel resisted, and the army made little progress. In early May, an Austrian army of 40,000 under Count Claude Florimond de Mercy crossed the Alps and threatened to close in on the French army's rear by a flanking maneuver. Villars responded by abandoning his advance on Mantua and attempted to interrupt the Austrian army's crossing of the Po. Villars, frustrated by Charles Emmanuel's delaying tactics and refusual to cooperate, quit the army on May 27. He fell ill on the way back to France and died in Turin on 17 June.\nMercy's forces made repeated attempts to cross the Parma river in June, but it was not until late in that month that they were able to cross the river and approach the city of Parma, where the allied forces, now under the command of French marshals de Broglie and Coigny, were entrenched. In the Battle of Colorno and in a bloody battle near the village of Crocetta on 29 June, the Austrians were beaten back, Mercy was killed, and Frederick of W\u00fcrttemberg, his second, was wounded. Charles Emmanuel returned the next day to retake command, and resumed his delaying tactics by failing to immediately pursue the retreating Austrians. The Austrians retreated to the Po, where they were reinforced by additional troops and placed under the command of Field Marshal K\u00f6nigsegg. After two months of inaction, during which the armies faced each other across the Secchia river, K\u00f6nigsegg on September 15 took advantage of relaxed security and executed a raid on Coigny's headquarters at Quistello, very nearly capturing Coigny and taking among other prizes Charles Emmanuel's china. Two days later the French withdrew to a position near Guastalla in response to Austrian maneuvers, but one detachment of nearly 3,000 men was surrounded and captured by the advancing Austrians. On 19 September, K\u00f6nigsegg attacked the allied position at Guastalla, and in another bloody encounter, was beaten back, losing among others Frederick of W\u00fcrttemberg. K\u00f6nigsegg retreated across the Po, adopting a defensive position between the Po and the Oglio while Charles Emmanuel again did not capitalize on his victory. When he finally withdrew most of the allied army to Cremona, the Austrians advanced on the north bank of the Po as far as the Adda before both armies entered winter quarters in December 1734.\nSouthern Italy.\nIn southern Italy, the Austrians, choosing a strategy of defending a large number of fortresses, were soundly defeated. Don Carlos assembled an army composed primarily of Spaniards, but also including some troops from France and Savoy. Moving south through the Papal States, his army flanked the frontline Austrian defense at Mignano, forcing them to retreat into the fortress at Capua. He was then practically welcomed into Naples by the city fathers, as the Austrian viceroy had fled toward Bari, and the fortresses held by the Austrians in the city were quickly captured. While maintaining a blockade of the largest Austrian fortresses at Capua and Gaeta, a large portion of the allied army gave chase to the remaining Austrian forces. These finally attempted a stand in late May, and were defeated at Bitonto. Capua and Gaeta were then properly besieged while Austrian fortresses in Sicily were quickly subdued. Gaeta surrendered in August, and Capua held out until November when its commander, Otto Ferdinand von Abensberg und Traun, finally negotiated surrender terms when he ran out of ammunition. The Jacobite pretender's heir, Charles Edward Stuart, who was under 14 then, also participated in the French and Spanish Siege of Gaeta, making his first exposure to battle.\nThe armies in northern Italy suffered significantly over the winter, with significant losses to disease and desertion. For the 1735 campaign the allied forces in northern Italy came under the command of the Duke de Noailles, elevated to Marshal after his successful contributions to the Rhine campaign. They were also joined by Spanish forces in May, now available after the successes in the south. In response to this threat, K\u00f6nigsegg retreated into the Bishopric of Trent, but leaving the fortress city of Mantua well-defended. At this point divisions between the allies became clear, as Spain laid claim to Mantua, and also refused to guarantee Milan to Charles Emmanuel. In response, Charles Emmanuel refused to allow his siege equipment to be used against Mantua. As a result, the Franco-Spanish army was unable to do more than blockade the city. When Charles Emmanuel withdrew his forces from the area, the allies were forced to retreat, and the beleaguered Austrians capitalized, eventually recovering most of Milan against little opposition in November.\nPeace settlement.\nAs early as February 1734 the British and Dutch had offered to mediate peace talks between the various parties of the conflict. By early 1735, proposals were being circulated. As 1735 progressed with the Austrians being in no real position to continue the fight, and the French concerned by the possible arrival of Russian reinforcements on the Rhine (which did eventually occur), negotiations continued through the summer of 1735.\nA preliminary peace was finally concluded in October 1735 and ratified in the Treaty of Vienna in November 1738. Augustus was officially confirmed as king of Poland, Stanis\u0142aw was compensated with Lorraine (which would pass on his death, through his daughter, to the French), while the former Duke of Lorraine, Francis Stephen, was made heir to the Grand Duchy of Tuscany.\nCharles of Parma gave up Parma, which came under Austrian rule, and renounced his rights as heir to the Grand Duchy of Tuscany, but was compensated by being confirmed as king of Naples and Sicily. Charles Emmanuel III of Sardinia received territories in the western part of the Duchy of Milan west of the Ticino, including Novara and Tortona.\nAlthough fighting stopped after the preliminary peace in 1735, the final peace settlement had to wait until the death of the last Medici Grand Duke of Tuscany, Gian Gastone in 1737, to allow the territorial exchanges provided for by the peace settlement to go into effect.\nThe French (and their allies), hoping for d\u00e9tente and good relations with the Austrians, now also recognized the Pragmatic Sanction that would allow Emperor Charles's daughter Maria Theresa to succeed him. This proved a hollow guarantee, however, as the French decided to intervene to partition the Habsburg monarchy after all following the death of Charles in 1740. The acquisition of Lorraine for the former Polish king, however, proved of lasting benefit to France, as it passed under direct French rule with Stanis\u0142aw's death in 1766.\nStanis\u0142aw signed the act of abdication in 1736, while Augustus III pronounced a general amnesty. Micha\u0142 Serwacy Wi\u015bniowiecki was lavishly rewarded: the king made him the Grand Hetman and commander-in-chief of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33516", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33516", "title": "Wave", "text": "Dynamic disturbance in a medium or field\nIn physics, mathematics, engineering, and related fields, a wave is a propagating dynamic disturbance (change from equilibrium) of one or more quantities. \"Periodic waves\" oscillate repeatedly about an equilibrium (resting) value at some frequency. When the entire waveform moves in one direction, it is said to be a travelling wave; by contrast, a pair of superimposed periodic waves traveling in opposite directions makes a \"standing wave\". In a standing wave, the amplitude of vibration has nulls at some positions where the wave amplitude appears smaller or even zero.\nThere are two types of waves that are most commonly studied in classical physics: mechanical waves and electromagnetic waves. In a mechanical wave, stress and strain fields oscillate about a mechanical equilibrium. A mechanical wave is a local deformation (strain) in some physical medium that propagates from particle to particle by creating local stresses that cause strain in neighboring particles too. For example, sound waves are variations of the local pressure and particle motion that propagate through the medium. Other examples of mechanical waves are seismic waves, gravity waves, surface waves and string vibrations. In an electromagnetic wave (such as light), coupling between the electric and magnetic fields sustains propagation of waves involving these fields according to Maxwell's equations. Electromagnetic waves can travel through a vacuum and through some dielectric media (at wavelengths where they are considered transparent). Electromagnetic waves, as determined by their frequencies (or wavelengths), have more specific designations including radio waves, infrared radiation, terahertz waves, visible light, ultraviolet radiation, X-rays and gamma rays.\nOther types of waves include gravitational waves, which are disturbances in spacetime that propagate according to general relativity; heat diffusion waves; plasma waves that combine mechanical deformations and electromagnetic fields; reaction\u2013diffusion waves, such as in the Belousov\u2013Zhabotinsky reaction; and many more. Mechanical and electromagnetic waves transfer energy, momentum, and information, but they do not transfer particles in the medium. In mathematics and electronics waves are studied as signals. On the other hand, some waves have envelopes which do not move at all such as standing waves (which are fundamental to music) and hydraulic jumps.\nA physical wave field is almost always confined to some finite region of space, called its \"domain\". For example, the seismic waves generated by earthquakes are significant only in the interior and surface of the planet, so they can be ignored outside it. However, waves with infinite domain, that extend over the whole space, are commonly studied in mathematics, and are very valuable tools for understanding physical waves in finite domains.\nA \"plane wave\" is an important mathematical idealization where the disturbance is identical along any (infinite) plane normal to a specific direction of travel. Mathematically, the simplest wave is a \"sinusoidal plane wave\" in which at any point the field experiences simple harmonic motion at one frequency. In linear media, complicated waves can generally be decomposed as the sum of many sinusoidal plane waves having different directions of propagation and/or different frequencies. A plane wave is classified as a \"transverse wave\" if the field disturbance at each point is described by a vector perpendicular to the direction of propagation (also the direction of energy transfer); or \"longitudinal wave\" if those vectors are aligned with the propagation direction. Mechanical waves include both transverse and longitudinal waves; on the other hand electromagnetic plane waves are strictly transverse while sound waves in fluids (such as air) can only be longitudinal. That physical direction of an oscillating field relative to the propagation direction is also referred to as the wave's \"polarization\", which can be an important attribute.\nDefinition.\nWhile waves are ubiquitous features of physical systems, no single definition adequately describes the topic. Examples and descriptions of common characteristics are used as an alternative to a single definition. In abstract, waves are the dynamic manifestation of time-dependent field theory analogous to ballistics, the dynamic manifestation of particle mechanics, but this point of view misses the many visually appealing examples of waves like vibrating stringed instruments and fluid ripples.\nViewed microscopically, waves are changes in the value of physical property at a point in space that results from a delayed response to changes in adjacent regions. Examples of properties include pressure, temperature, height, or gravitational force. A physical medium, like vacuum, air, water, or solid rock may exhibit waves in different properties which may or may not be related. Properties like the heights spectators at a sporting event or the level of anxiety among political protestors may also be considered waves when the property depends upon delayed responds to physically adjacent events.\nIn physics, a physical quantity that has a value at points in space is called a field, so a wave is disturbance in a field resulting from delayed response to adjacent disturbances. Viewed macroscopically, a wave is the dynamic response of a field caused by effects that that can only propagate at a finite speed. Rotation of an electric dipole produce electromagnetic waves and the mutual rotation of binary stars produce gravitational waves, each of which propagate at the speed of light.\nPeriodic or sinusoidal waves are useful idealized examples, but the essential neighbor-to-neighbor interaction with delay means wave may propagate in non-linear, granular, or noisy medium which do not produce these ideal results. Temperature waves or chemical reaction waves demonstrate that waves need not be a material displacement.\nMathematical description.\nSingle waves.\nA wave can be described as a number field, namely as a function formula_1 where formula_2 is a position and formula_3 is a time.\nThe value of formula_2 is a point of space, specifically in the region where the wave is defined. In mathematical terms, it is usually a vector in the Cartesian three-dimensional space formula_5. However, in many cases one can ignore one dimension, and let formula_2 be a point of the Cartesian plane formula_7. This is the case, for example, when studying vibrations of a drum skin. One may even restrict formula_2 to a point of the Cartesian line formula_9 \u2013 that is, the set of real numbers. This is the case, for example, when studying vibrations in a violin string or recorder. The time formula_3, on the other hand, is always assumed to be a scalar; that is, a real number.\nThe value of formula_1 can be any physical quantity of interest assigned to the point formula_2 that may vary with time. For example, if formula_13 represents the vibrations inside an elastic solid, the value of formula_1 is usually a vector that gives the current displacement from formula_2 of the material particles that would be at the point formula_2 in the absence of vibration. For an electromagnetic wave, the value of formula_13 can be the electric field vector formula_18, or the magnetic field vector formula_19, or any related quantity, such as the Poynting vector formula_20. In fluid dynamics, the value of formula_1 could be the velocity vector of the fluid at the point formula_2, or any scalar property like pressure, temperature, or density. In a chemical reaction, formula_1 could be the concentration of some substance in the neighborhood of point formula_2 of the reaction medium.\nFor any dimension formula_25 (1, 2, or 3), the wave's domain is then a subset formula_26 of formula_27, such that the function value formula_1 is defined for any point formula_2 in formula_26. For example, when describing the motion of a drum skin, one can consider formula_26 to be a disk (circle) on the plane formula_7 with center at the origin formula_33, and let formula_1 be the vertical displacement of the skin at the point formula_2 of formula_26 and at time formula_3.\nSuperposition.\nWaves of the same type are often superposed and encountered simultaneously at a given point in space and time. The properties at that point are the sum of the properties of each component wave at that point. In general, the velocities are not the same, so the wave form will change over time and space.\nWave families.\nSometimes one is interested in a single specific wave. More often, however, one needs to understand large set of possible waves; like all the ways that a drum skin can vibrate after being struck once with a drum stick, or all the possible radar echoes one could get from an airplane that may be approaching an airport.\nIn some of those situations, one may describe such a family of waves by a function formula_38 that depends on certain parameters formula_39, besides formula_2 and formula_3. Then one can obtain different waves \u2013 that is, different functions of formula_2 and formula_3 \u2013 by choosing different values for those parameters.\nFor example, the sound pressure inside a recorder that is playing a \"pure\" note is typically a standing wave, that can be written as\n formula_44\nThe parameter formula_45 defines the amplitude of the wave (that is, the maximum sound pressure in the bore, which is related to the loudness of the note); formula_46 is the speed of sound; formula_47 is the length of the bore; and formula_48 is a positive integer (1,2,3...) that specifies the number of nodes in the standing wave. (The position formula_2 should be measured from the mouthpiece, and the time formula_3 from any moment at which the pressure at the mouthpiece is maximum. The quantity formula_51 is the wavelength of the emitted note, and formula_52 is its frequency.) Many general properties of these waves can be inferred from this general equation, without choosing specific values for the parameters.\nAs another example, it may be that the vibrations of a drum skin after a single strike depend only on the distance formula_53 from the center of the skin to the strike point, and on the strength formula_54 of the strike. Then the vibration for all possible strikes can be described by a function formula_55.\nSometimes the family of waves of interest has infinitely many parameters. For example, one may want to describe what happens to the temperature in a metal bar when it is initially heated at various temperatures at different points along its length, and then allowed to cool by itself in vacuum. In that case, instead of a scalar or vector, the parameter would have to be a function formula_56 such that formula_57 is the initial temperature at each point formula_2 of the bar. Then the temperatures at later times can be expressed by a function formula_13 that depends on the function formula_56 (that is, a functional operator), so that the temperature at a later time is formula_61\nDifferential wave equations.\nAnother way to describe and study a family of waves is to give a mathematical equation that, instead of explicitly giving the value of formula_1, only constrains how those values can change with time. Then the family of waves in question consists of all functions formula_13 that satisfy those constraints \u2013 that is, all solutions of the equation.\nThis approach is extremely important in physics, because the constraints usually are a consequence of the physical processes that cause the wave to evolve. For example, if formula_1 is the temperature inside a block of some homogeneous and isotropic solid material, its evolution is constrained by the partial differential equation\n formula_65\nwhere formula_66 is the heat that is being generated per unit of volume and time in the neighborhood of formula_2 at time formula_3 (for example, by chemical reactions happening there); formula_69 are the Cartesian coordinates of the point formula_2; formula_71 is the (first) derivative of formula_13 with respect to formula_3; and formula_74 is the second derivative of formula_13 relative to formula_76. (The symbol \"formula_77\" is meant to signify that, in the derivative with respect to some variable, all other variables must be considered fixed.)\nThis equation can be derived from the laws of physics that govern the diffusion of heat in solid media. For that reason, it is called the heat equation in mathematics, even though it applies to many other physical quantities besides temperatures.\nFor another example, we can describe all possible sounds echoing within a container of gas by a function formula_1 that gives the pressure at a point formula_2 and time formula_3 within that container. If the gas was initially at uniform temperature and composition, the evolution of formula_13 is constrained by the formula\n formula_82\nHere formula_83 is some extra compression force that is being applied to the gas near formula_2 by some external process, such as a loudspeaker or piston right next to formula_85.\nThis same differential equation describes the behavior of mechanical vibrations and electromagnetic fields in a homogeneous isotropic non-conducting solid. Note that this equation differs from that of heat flow only in that the left-hand side is formula_86, the second derivative of formula_13 with respect to time, rather than the first derivative formula_71. Yet this small change makes a huge difference on the set of solutions formula_13. This differential equation is called \"the\" wave equation in mathematics, even though it describes only one very special kind of waves.\nWave in elastic medium.\nConsider a traveling transverse wave (which may be a pulse) on a string (the medium). Consider the string to have a single spatial dimension. Consider this wave as traveling\nThis wave can then be described by the two-dimensional functions\nor, more generally, by d'Alembert's formula:\nformula_96\nrepresenting two component waveforms formula_13 and formula_98 traveling through the medium in opposite directions. A generalized representation of this wave can be obtained as the partial differential equation\nformula_99\nGeneral solutions are based upon Duhamel's principle.\nWave forms.\nThe form or shape of \"F\" in d'Alembert's formula involves the argument \"x\" \u2212 \"vt\". Constant values of this argument correspond to constant values of \"F\", and these constant values occur if \"x\" increases at the same rate that \"vt\" increases. That is, the wave shaped like the function \"F\" will move in the positive \"x\"-direction at velocity \"v\" (and \"G\" will propagate at the same speed in the negative \"x\"-direction).\nIn the case of a periodic function \"F\" with period \"\u03bb\", that is, \"F\"(\"x\" + \"\u03bb\" \u2212 \"vt\") = \"F\"(\"x\" \u2212 \"vt\"), the periodicity of \"F\" in space means that a snapshot of the wave at a given time \"t\" finds the wave varying periodically in space with period \"\u03bb\" (the wavelength of the wave). In a similar fashion, this periodicity of \"F\" implies a periodicity in time as well: \"F\"(\"x\" \u2212 \"v\"(\"t\" + \"T\")) = \"F\"(\"x\" \u2212 \"vt\") provided \"vT\" = \"\u03bb\", so an observation of the wave at a fixed location \"x\" finds the wave undulating periodically in time with period \"T\" = \"\u03bb\"/\"v\".\nAmplitude and modulation.\nThe amplitude of a wave may be constant (in which case the wave is a \"c.w.\" or \"continuous wave\"), or may be \"modulated\" so as to vary with time and/or position. The outline of the variation in amplitude is called the \"envelope\" of the wave. Mathematically, the modulated wave can be written in the form:\nformula_100\nwhere formula_101 is the amplitude envelope of the wave, formula_102 is the \"wavenumber\" and formula_103 is the \"phase\". If the group velocity formula_104 (see below) is wavelength-independent, this equation can be simplified as:\nformula_105\nshowing that the envelope moves with the group velocity and retains its shape. Otherwise, in cases where the group velocity varies with wavelength, the pulse shape changes in a manner often described using an \"envelope equation\".\nPhase velocity and group velocity.\nThere are two velocities that are associated with waves, the phase velocity and the group velocity.\nPhase velocity is the rate at which the phase of the wave propagates in space: any given phase of the wave (for example, the crest) will appear to travel at the phase velocity. The phase velocity is given in terms of the wavelength \u03bb (lambda) and period T as\nformula_106\nGroup velocity is a property of waves that have a defined envelope, measuring propagation through space (that is, phase velocity) of the overall shape of the waves' amplitudes\u2014modulation or envelope of the wave.\nSpecial waves.\nPlane waves.\nA plane wave is a kind of wave whose value varies only in one spatial direction. That is, its value is constant on a plane that is perpendicular to that direction. Plane waves can be specified by a vector of unit length formula_107 indicating the direction that the wave varies in, and a wave profile describing how the wave varies as a function of the displacement along that direction (formula_108) and time (formula_3). Since the wave profile only depends on the position formula_110 in the combination formula_108, any displacement in directions perpendicular to formula_107 cannot affect the value of the field.\nPlane waves are often used to model electromagnetic waves far from a source. For electromagnetic plane waves, the electric and magnetic fields themselves are transverse to the direction of propagation, and also perpendicular to each other.\nStanding waves.\nA standing wave, also known as a \"stationary wave\", is a wave whose envelope remains in a constant position. This phenomenon arises as a result of interference between two waves traveling in opposite directions.\nThe \"sum\" of two counter-propagating waves (of equal amplitude and frequency) creates a \"standing wave\". Standing waves commonly arise when a boundary blocks further propagation of the wave, thus causing wave reflection, and therefore introducing a counter-propagating wave. For example, when a violin string is displaced, transverse waves propagate out to where the string is held in place at the bridge and the nut, where the waves are reflected back. At the bridge and nut, the two opposed waves are in antiphase and cancel each other, producing a node. Halfway between two nodes there is an antinode, where the two counter-propagating waves \"enhance\" each other maximally. There is no net propagation of energy over time.\nSolitary waves.\nA soliton or solitary wave is a self-reinforcing wave packet that maintains its shape while it propagates at a constant velocity. Solitons are caused by a cancellation of nonlinear and dispersive effects in the medium. (Dispersive effects are a property of certain systems where the speed of a wave depends on its frequency.) Solitons are the solutions of a widespread class of weakly nonlinear dispersive partial differential equations describing physical systems.\nPhysical properties.\nPropagation.\nWave propagation is any of the ways in which waves travel. With respect to the direction of the oscillation relative to the propagation direction, we can distinguish between longitudinal wave and transverse waves.\nElectromagnetic waves propagate in vacuum as well as in material media. Propagation of other wave types such as sound may occur only in a transmission medium.\nReflection of plane waves in a half-space.\nThe propagation and reflection of plane waves\u2014e.g. Pressure waves (P wave) or Shear waves (SH or SV-waves) are phenomena that were first characterized within the field of classical seismology, and are now considered fundamental concepts in modern seismic tomography. The analytical solution to this problem exists and is well known. The frequency domain solution can be obtained by first finding the Helmholtz decomposition of the displacement field, which is then substituted into the wave equation. From here, the plane wave eigenmodes can be calculated.\nSV wave propagation.\nThe analytical solution of SV-wave in a half-space indicates that the plane SV wave reflects back to the domain as a P and SV waves, leaving out special cases. The angle of the reflected SV wave is identical to the incidence wave, while the angle of the reflected P wave is greater than the SV wave. For the same wave frequency, the SV wavelength is smaller than the P wavelength. This fact has been depicted in this animated picture.\nP wave propagation.\nSimilar to the SV wave, the P incidence, in general, reflects as the P and SV wave. There are some special cases where the regime is different.\nWave velocity.\nWave velocity is a general concept, of various kinds of wave velocities, for a wave's phase and speed concerning energy (and information) propagation. The phase velocity is given as:\nformula_113\nwhere:\nThe phase speed gives you the speed at which a point of constant phase of the wave will travel for a discrete frequency. The angular frequency \"\u03c9\" cannot be chosen independently from the wavenumber \"k\", but both are related through the dispersion relationship:\nformula_114\nIn the special case \u03a9(\"k\") = \"ck\", with \"c\" a constant, the waves are called non-dispersive, since all frequencies travel at the same phase speed \"c\". For instance electromagnetic waves in vacuum are non-dispersive. In case of other forms of the dispersion relation, we have dispersive waves. The dispersion relationship depends on the medium through which the waves propagate and on the type of waves (for instance electromagnetic, sound or water waves).\nThe speed at which a resultant wave packet from a narrow range of frequencies will travel is called the group velocity and is determined from the gradient of the dispersion relation:\nformula_115\nIn almost all cases, a wave is mainly a movement of energy through a medium. Most often, the group velocity is the velocity at which the energy moves through this medium.\nWaves exhibit common behaviors under a number of standard situations, for example:\nTransmission and media.\nWaves normally move in a straight line (that is, rectilinearly) through a \"transmission medium\". Such media can be classified into one or more of the following categories:\nAbsorption.\nWaves are usually defined in media which allow most or all of a wave's energy to propagate without loss. However materials may be characterized as \"lossy\" if they remove energy from a wave, usually converting it into heat. This is termed \"absorption.\" A material which absorbs a wave's energy, either in transmission or reflection, is characterized by a refractive index which is complex. The amount of absorption will generally depend on the frequency (wavelength) of the wave, which, for instance, explains why objects may appear colored.\nReflection.\nWhen a wave strikes a reflective surface, it changes direction, such that the angle made by the incident wave and line normal to the surface equals the angle made by the reflected wave and the same normal line.\nRefraction.\nRefraction is the phenomenon of a wave changing its speed. Mathematically, this means that the size of the phase velocity changes. Typically, refraction occurs when a wave passes from one medium into another. The amount by which a wave is refracted by a material is given by the refractive index of the material. The directions of incidence and refraction are related to the refractive indices of the two materials by Snell's law.\nDiffraction.\nA wave exhibits diffraction when it encounters an obstacle that bends the wave or when it spreads after emerging from an opening. Diffraction effects are more pronounced when the size of the obstacle or opening is comparable to the wavelength of the wave.\nInterference.\nWhen waves in a linear medium (the usual case) cross each other in a region of space, they do not actually interact with each other, but continue on as if the other one were not present. However at any point \"in\" that region the \"field quantities\" describing those waves add according to the superposition principle. If the waves are of the same frequency in a fixed phase relationship, then there will generally be positions at which the two waves are \"in phase\" and their amplitudes \"add\", and other positions where they are \"out of phase\" and their amplitudes (partially or fully) \"cancel\". This is called an interference pattern.\nPolarization.\nThe phenomenon of polarization arises when wave motion can occur simultaneously in two orthogonal directions. Transverse waves can be polarized, for instance. When polarization is used as a descriptor without qualification, it usually refers to the special, simple case of linear polarization. A transverse wave is linearly polarized if it oscillates in only one direction or plane. In the case of linear polarization, it is often useful to add the relative orientation of that plane, perpendicular to the direction of travel, in which the oscillation occurs, such as \"horizontal\" for instance, if the plane of polarization is parallel to the ground. Electromagnetic waves propagating in free space, for instance, are transverse; they can be polarized by the use of a polarizing filter.\nLongitudinal waves, such as sound waves, do not exhibit polarization. For these waves there is only one direction of oscillation, that is, along the direction of travel.\nDispersion.\nDispersion is the frequency dependence of the refractive index, a consequence of the atomic nature of materials.\nA wave undergoes dispersion when either the phase velocity or the group velocity depends on the wave frequency. Dispersion is seen by letting white light pass through a prism, the result of which is to produce the spectrum of colors of the rainbow. Isaac Newton was the first to recognize that this meant that white light was a mixture of light of different colors.\nDoppler effect.\nThe Doppler effect or Doppler shift is the change in frequency of a wave in relation to an observer who is moving relative to the wave source. It is named after the Austrian physicist Christian Doppler, who described the phenomenon in 1842.\nMechanical waves.\nA mechanical wave is an oscillation of matter, and therefore transfers energy through a medium. While waves can move over long distances, the movement of the medium of transmission\u2014the material\u2014is limited. Therefore, the oscillating material does not move far from its initial position. Mechanical waves can be produced only in media which possess elasticity and inertia. There are three types of mechanical waves: transverse waves, longitudinal waves, and surface waves.\nWaves on strings.\nThe transverse vibration of a string is a function of tension and inertia, and is constrained by the length of the string as the ends are fixed. This constraint limits the steady state modes that are possible, and thereby the frequencies.\nThe speed of a transverse wave traveling along a vibrating string (\"v\") is directly proportional to the square root of the tension of the string (\"T\") over the linear mass density (\"\u03bc\"):\n formula_116\nwhere the linear density \"\u03bc\" is the mass per unit length of the string.\nAcoustic waves.\nAcoustic or sound waves are compression waves that propagate through gases, liquids, solids and plasmas. They travel at the speed given by:\n formula_117\nor the square root of the adiabatic bulk modulus divided by the ambient density of the medium (see speed of sound).\nGravity waves.\nGravity waves are waves generated in a fluid medium or at the interface between two media when the force of gravity or buoyancy works to restore equilibrium. Surface waves on water are the most familiar example.\nBody waves.\nBody waves travel through the interior of the medium along paths controlled by the material properties in terms of density and modulus (stiffness). The density and modulus, in turn, vary according to temperature, composition, and material phase. This effect resembles the refraction of light waves. Two types of particle motion result in two types of body waves: Primary and Secondary waves.\nSeismic waves.\nSeismic waves are waves of energy that travel through the Earth's layers, and are a result of earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, magma movement, large landslides and large man-made explosions that give out low-frequency acoustic energy. They include body waves\u2014the primary (P waves) and secondary waves (S waves)\u2014and surface waves, such as Rayleigh waves, Love waves, and Stoneley waves.\nShock waves.\nA shock wave is a type of propagating disturbance. When a wave moves faster than the local speed of sound in a fluid, it is a shock wave. Like an ordinary wave, a shock wave carries energy and can propagate through a medium; however, it is characterized by an abrupt, nearly discontinuous change in pressure, temperature and density of the medium.\nShear waves.\nShear waves are body waves due to shear rigidity and inertia. They can only be transmitted through solids and to a lesser extent through liquids with a sufficiently high viscosity.\nGravitational waves.\nGravitational waves also travel through space. The first observation of gravitational waves was announced on 11 February 2016.\nGravitational waves are disturbances in the curvature of spacetime, predicted by Einstein's theory of general relativity.\nElectromagnetic waves.\nAn electromagnetic wave consists of two waves that are oscillations of the electric and magnetic fields. An electromagnetic wave travels in a direction that is at right angles to the oscillation direction of both fields. In the 19th century, James Clerk Maxwell showed that, in vacuum, the electric and magnetic fields satisfy the wave equation both with speed equal to that of the speed of light. From this emerged the idea that light is an electromagnetic wave. The unification of light and electromagnetic waves was experimentally confirmed by Hertz in the end of the 1880s. Electromagnetic waves can have different frequencies (and thus wavelengths), and are classified accordingly in wavebands, such as radio waves, microwaves, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet, X-rays, and gamma rays. The range of frequencies in each of these bands is continuous, and the limits of each band are mostly arbitrary, with the exception of visible light, which must be visible to the normal human eye.\nQuantum mechanical waves.\nSchr\u00f6dinger equation.\nThe Schr\u00f6dinger equation describes the wave-like behavior of particles in quantum mechanics. Solutions of this equation are wave functions which can be used to describe the probability density of a particle.\nDirac equation.\nThe Dirac equation is a relativistic wave equation detailing electromagnetic interactions. Dirac waves accounted for the fine details of the hydrogen spectrum in a completely rigorous way. The wave equation also implied the existence of a new form of matter, antimatter, previously unsuspected and unobserved and which was experimentally confirmed. In the context of quantum field theory, the Dirac equation is reinterpreted to describe quantum fields corresponding to spin-&lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20442 particles.\nde Broglie waves.\nLouis de Broglie postulated that all particles with momentum have a wavelength\n formula_118\nwhere \"h\" is the Planck constant, and \"p\" is the magnitude of the momentum of the particle. This hypothesis was at the basis of quantum mechanics. Nowadays, this wavelength is called the de Broglie wavelength. For example, the electrons in a CRT display have a de Broglie wavelength of about 10\u221213\u00a0m.\nA wave representing such a particle traveling in the \"k\"-direction is expressed by the wave function as follows:\n formula_119\nwhere the wavelength is determined by the wave vector k as:\n formula_120\nand the momentum by:\n formula_121\nHowever, a wave like this with definite wavelength is not localized in space, and so cannot represent a particle localized in space. To localize a particle, de Broglie proposed a superposition of different wavelengths ranging around a central value in a wave packet, a waveform often used in quantum mechanics to describe the wave function of a particle. In a wave packet, the wavelength of the particle is not precise, and the local wavelength deviates on either side of the main wavelength value.\nIn representing the wave function of a localized particle, the wave packet is often taken to have a Gaussian shape and is called a \"Gaussian wave packet\". Gaussian wave packets also are used to analyze water waves.\nFor example, a Gaussian wavefunction \"\u03c8\" might take the form:\n formula_122\nat some initial time \"t\" = 0, where the central wavelength is related to the central wave vector \"k\"0 as \"\u03bb\"0 = 2\u03c0 / \"k\"0. It is well known from the theory of Fourier analysis, or from the Heisenberg uncertainty principle (in the case of quantum mechanics) that a narrow range of wavelengths is necessary to produce a localized wave packet, and the more localized the envelope, the larger the spread in required wavelengths. The Fourier transform of a Gaussian is itself a Gaussian. Given the Gaussian:\n formula_123\nthe Fourier transform is:\n formula_124\nThe Gaussian in space therefore is made up of waves:\n formula_125\nthat is, a number of waves of wavelengths \"\u03bb\" such that \"k\u03bb\" = 2 \u03c0.\nThe parameter \u03c3 decides the spatial spread of the Gaussian along the \"x\"-axis, while the Fourier transform shows a spread in wave vector \"k\" determined by 1/\"\u03c3\". That is, the smaller the extent in space, the larger the extent in \"k\", and hence in \"\u03bb\" = 2\u03c0/\"k\".\nSee also.\nIn fluids.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nOther specific types of waves.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRelated topics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33518", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33518", "title": "WWW", "text": ""}
{"id": "33519", "revid": "635492", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33519", "title": "Weak", "text": "Weak may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33520", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33520", "title": "Warren G. Harding/Inaugural Address", "text": ""}
{"id": "33521", "revid": "49412307", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33521", "title": "William McKinley", "text": "President of the United States from 1897 to 1901\nWilliam McKinley (January 29, 1843\u00a0\u2013 September 14, 1901) was the 25th president of the United States, serving from 1897 until his assassination in 1901. A member of the Republican Party, he led a realignment that made Republicans largely dominant in the industrial states and nationwide for decades. McKinley successfully led the U.S. in the Spanish\u2013American War and oversaw a period of American expansionism, with the annexations of Hawaii, Puerto Rico, Guam, the Philippines, and American Samoa.\nMcKinley was the last president to have served in the American Civil War; he was the only one to begin his service as an enlisted man and end it as a brevet major. After the war, he settled in Canton, Ohio, where he practiced law and married Ida Saxton. In 1876, McKinley was elected to Congress, where he became the Republican expert on the protective tariff, believing protectionism would bring prosperity. His 1890 McKinley Tariff was highly controversial and, together with a Democratic redistricting aimed at gerrymandering him out of office, led to his defeat in the Democratic landslide of 1890. He was elected governor of Ohio in 1891 and 1893, steering a moderate course between capital and labor interests.\nMcKinley secured the Republican nomination for president in 1896 amid a deep economic depression and defeated his Democratic rival William Jennings Bryan after a front porch campaign in which he advocated \"sound money\" (the gold standard unless altered by international agreement) and promised that high tariffs would restore prosperity. McKinley's presidency saw rapid economic growth. He rejected free silver in favor of keeping the nation on the gold standard, and raised protective tariffs, signing the Dingley Tariff of 1897 to protect manufacturers and factory workers from foreign competition and securing the passage of the Gold Standard Act of 1900. \nMcKinley's foreign policy emulated the era's overseas imperialism of the great powers in Oceania, Asia, and the Caribbean Sea. The United States annexed the independent Republic of Hawaii in 1898, and it became the Territory of Hawaii in 1900. McKinley hoped to persuade Spain to grant independence to rebellious Cuba without conflict. Still, when negotiations failed, he requested and signed Congress's declaration of war to begin the Spanish-American War of 1898, in which the United States saw a quick and decisive victory. As part of the peace settlement, Spain turned over to the United States its main overseas colonies of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines, while Cuba was promised independence but remained under the control of the United States Army until May 20, 1902. In the Philippines, a pro-independence rebellion began; it was eventually suppressed. McKinley acquired what is now American Samoa when his administration partitioned the Samoan Islands with the United Kingdom and the German Empire in the Tripartite Convention, during a period of warming ties between the UK and US known as the Great Rapprochement.\nMcKinley defeated Bryan again in the 1900 presidential election in a campaign focused on imperialism, protectionism, and free silver. His second term ended early when he was shot on September 6, 1901, by Leon Czolgosz, an anarchist. McKinley died eight days later and was succeeded by Vice President Theodore Roosevelt. Historians regard McKinley's 1896 victory as a realigning election in which the political stalemate of the post-Civil War era gave way to the Republican-dominated Fourth Party System, beginning with the Progressive Era. The United States retains control over the major territories McKinley annexed, aside from the Philippines which became independent in 1946. McKinley is generally ranked among the middle tier of presidents.\nEarly life and family.\nWilliam McKinley Jr. was born in 1843 in Niles, Ohio, the seventh of nine children of William McKinley Sr. and Nancy (n\u00e9e Allison) McKinley. The McKinleys were of English and Scots-Irish descent and had settled in western Pennsylvania in the 18th century. Their immigrant ancestor was David McKinley, born in Dervock, County Antrim, in present-day Northern Ireland. William McKinley Sr. was born in Pennsylvania, in Pine Township, Mercer County.\nThe family moved to Ohio when the senior McKinley was a boy, settling in New Lisbon (now Lisbon). He met Nancy Allison there, and they married later. The Allison family was of mostly English descent and among Pennsylvania's earliest settlers. The family trade on both sides was iron making. McKinley senior operated foundries throughout Ohio, in New Lisbon, Niles, Poland, and finally Canton. The McKinley household was, like many from Ohio's Western Reserve, steeped in Whiggish and abolitionist sentiment, the latter based on the family's staunch Methodist beliefs.\nThe younger William also followed in the Methodist tradition, becoming active in the local Methodist church at the age of sixteen. He was a lifelong pious Methodist.\nIn 1852, the family moved from Niles to Poland, Ohio, so that their children could attend its better schools. Graduating from Poland Seminary in 1859, McKinley enrolled the following year at Allegheny College in Meadville, Pennsylvania. He was an honorary member of the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity. He remained at Allegheny for one year, returning home in 1860 after becoming ill and depressed. He also studied at Mount Union College, now the University of Mount Union, in Alliance, Ohio, where he later served as a member of the board of trustees. Although his health recovered, family finances declined, and McKinley was unable to return to Allegheny. He began working as a postal clerk and later took a job teaching at a school near Poland, Ohio.\nCivil War.\nWestern Virginia and Antietam.\nWhen the Confederate states seceded and the American Civil War began in 1861, thousands of men in Ohio volunteered for service. Among them were McKinley and his cousin William McKinley Osbourne, who enlisted as privates in the newly formed Poland Guards in June 1861. The men left for Columbus where they were consolidated with other small units to form the 23rd Ohio Infantry.\nThe men were unhappy to learn that, unlike Ohio's earlier volunteer regiments, they would not be permitted to elect their officers; these would be designated by Ohio's governor, William Dennison. Dennison appointed Colonel William Rosecrans as the commander of the regiment, and the men began training on the outskirts of Columbus. McKinley quickly took to the soldier's life: he wrote a series of letters to his hometown newspaper extolling the army and the Union cause. Delays in issuance of uniforms and weapons again brought the men into conflict with their officers, but Major Rutherford B. Hayes convinced them to accept what the government had issued them; his style in dealing with the men impressed McKinley, beginning an association and friendship that would last until Hayes's death in 1893.\nAfter a month of training, McKinley and the 23rd Ohio, now led by Colonel Eliakim P. Scammon, set out for western Virginia (today part of West Virginia) in July 1861 as a part of the Kanawha Division. McKinley initially thought Scammon was a martinet, but when the regiment entered battle, he came to appreciate the value of their relentless drilling. Their first contact with the enemy came in September when they drove back Confederate troops at Carnifex Ferry in present-day West Virginia. Three days after the battle, McKinley was assigned to duty in the brigade quartermaster office, where he worked both to supply his regiment, and as a clerk. In November, the regiment established winter quarters near Fayetteville (today in West Virginia). McKinley spent the winter substituting for a commissary sergeant who was ill, and in April 1862 he was promoted to that rank. The regiment resumed its advance that spring with Hayes in command (Scammon led the brigade) and fought several minor engagements against the rebel forces.\nThat September, McKinley's regiment was called east to reinforce General John Pope's Army of Virginia at the Second Battle of Bull Run. Delayed in passing through Washington, D.C., the 23rd Ohio did not arrive in time for the battle but joined the Army of the Potomac as it hurried north to cut off Robert E. Lee's Army of Northern Virginia as it advanced into Maryland. The 23rd was the first regiment to encounter the Confederates at the Battle of South Mountain on September 14. After severe losses, Union forces drove back the Confederates and continued to Sharpsburg, Maryland, where they engaged Lee's army at the Battle of Antietam, one of the bloodiest battles of the war. The 23rd was in the thick of the fighting at Antietam, and McKinley came under heavy fire when bringing rations to the men on the line. McKinley's regiment suffered many casualties, but the Army of the Potomac was victorious, and the Confederates retreated into Virginia. McKinley's regiment was detached from the Army of the Potomac and returned by train to western Virginia.\nShenandoah Valley and promotion.\nWhile the regiment went into winter quarters near Charleston, Virginia (present-day West Virginia), McKinley was ordered back to Ohio with some other sergeants to recruit fresh troops. When they arrived in Columbus, Governor David Tod surprised McKinley with a commission as second lieutenant in recognition of his service at Antietam. McKinley and his comrades saw little action until July 1863, when the division skirmished with John Hunt Morgan's cavalry at the Battle of Buffington Island. Early in 1864, the Army command structure in West Virginia was reorganized, and the division was assigned to George Crook's Army of West Virginia. They soon resumed the offensive, marching into southwestern Virginia to destroy salt and lead mines used by the enemy. On May 9, the army engaged Confederate troops at Cloyd's Mountain, where the men charged the enemy entrenchments and drove the rebels from the field. McKinley later said the combat there was \"as desperate as any witnessed during the war\". Following the rout, the Union forces destroyed Confederate supplies and skirmished with the enemy again successfully.\nMcKinley and his regiment moved to the Shenandoah Valley as the armies broke from winter quarters to resume hostilities. Crook's corps was attached to Major General David Hunter's Army of the Shenandoah and soon back in contact with Confederate forces, capturing Lexington, Virginia, on June 11. They continued south toward Lynchburg, tearing up railroad track as they advanced. Hunter believed the troops at Lynchburg were too powerful, however, and the brigade returned to West Virginia. Before the army could make another attempt, Confederate General Jubal Early's raid into Maryland forced their recall to the north.\nEarly's army surprised them at Kernstown on July 24, where McKinley came under heavy fire and the army was defeated. Retreating into Maryland, the army was reorganized again: Major General Philip Sheridan replaced Hunter, and McKinley, who had been promoted to captain after the battle, was transferred to General Crook's staff. By August, Early was retreating south in the valley, with Sheridan's army in pursuit. They fended off a Confederate assault at Berryville, where McKinley had a horse shot out from under him, and advanced to Opequon Creek, where they broke the enemy lines and pursued them farther south. They followed up the victory with another at Fisher's Hill on September 22 and were engaged once more at Cedar Creek on October 19. After initially falling back from the Confederate advance, McKinley helped to rally the troops and turn the tide of the battle.\nAfter Cedar Creek, the army stayed in the vicinity through election day, when McKinley cast his first presidential ballot, for the incumbent Republican, Abraham Lincoln. The next day, they moved north up the valley into winter quarters near Kernstown. In February 1865, Crook was captured by Confederate raiders. Crook's capture added to the confusion as the army was reorganized for the spring campaign, and McKinley served on the staffs of four different generals over the next fifteen days\u2014Crook, John D. Stevenson, Samuel S. Carroll, and Winfield S. Hancock. Finally assigned to Carroll's staff again, McKinley acted as the general's first and only adjutant.\nLee and his army surrendered to General Ulysses S. Grant a few days later, effectively ending the war. McKinley joined a Freemason lodge (later renamed after him) in Winchester, Virginia, before he and Carroll were transferred to Hancock's First Veterans Corps in Washington. Just before the war's end, McKinley received his final promotion, a brevet commission as major. In July, the Veterans Corps was mustered out of service, and McKinley and Carroll were relieved of their duties. Carroll and Hancock encouraged McKinley to apply for a place in the peacetime army, but he declined and returned to Ohio the following month.\nMcKinley, along with Samuel M. Taylor and James C. Howe, co-authored and published a twelve-volume work, \"Official Roster of the Soldiers of the State of Ohio in the War of the Rebellion, 1861\u20131866\", published in 1886.\nLegal career and marriage.\nAfter the war ended in 1865, McKinley decided on a career in the law and began studying in the office of an attorney in Poland, Ohio. The following year, he continued his studies by attending Albany Law School in New York state. After studying there for less than a year, McKinley returned home and in March 1867 was admitted to the bar in Warren, Ohio.\nThat same year, he moved to Canton, the county seat of Stark County, Ohio, and set up a small office. He soon formed a partnership with George W. Belden, an experienced lawyer and former judge. His practice was successful enough for him to buy a block of buildings on Main Street in Canton, which provided him with a small but consistent rental income for decades.\nWhen his Army friend Rutherford B. Hayes was nominated for governor in 1867, McKinley made speeches on his behalf in Stark County, his first foray into politics. The county was closely divided between Democrats and Republicans, but Hayes carried it that year in his statewide victory. In 1869, McKinley ran for the office of prosecuting attorney of Stark County, an office that had historically been held by Democrats, and was unexpectedly elected. When McKinley ran for re-election in 1871, the Democrats nominated William A. Lynch, a prominent local lawyer, and McKinley was defeated by 143 votes.\nAs McKinley's professional career progressed, so too did his social life blossom: he wooed Ida Saxton, a daughter of a prominent Canton family. They were married on January 25, 1871, in the newly built First Presbyterian Church of Canton. Ida soon joined her husband's Methodist church. Their first child, Katherine, was born on Christmas Day 1871. A second daughter, Ida, followed in 1873 but died the same year. McKinley's wife descended into a deep depression at her baby's death and her health, never robust, declined. Two years later, Katherine died of typhoid fever. Ida never recovered from their daughters' deaths, and the McKinleys had no more children. Ida McKinley developed epilepsy around the same time and depended strongly on her husband's presence. He remained a devoted husband and tended to his wife's medical and emotional needs for the rest of his life.\nIda insisted that her husband continue his increasingly successful career in law and politics. He attended the state Republican convention that nominated Hayes for a third term as governor in 1875, and campaigned again for his old friend in the election that fall. The next year, McKinley undertook a high-profile case defending a group of striking coal miners, who were arrested for rioting after a clash with strikebreakers. Lynch, McKinley's opponent in the 1871 election, and his partner, William R. Day, were the opposing counsel, and the mine owners included Mark Hanna, a Cleveland businessman. Taking the case \"pro bono,\" McKinley \nwas successful in getting all but one of the miners acquitted. The case raised McKinley's standing among laborers, a crucial part of the Stark County electorate, and also introduced him to Hanna, who would become his strongest backer in years to come.\nMcKinley's good standing with labor became useful that year as he campaigned for the Republican nomination for Ohio's 17th congressional district. Delegates to the county conventions thought he could attract blue-collar voters, and in August 1876, McKinley was nominated. By that time, Hayes had been nominated for president, and McKinley campaigned for him while running his own congressional campaign. Both were successful. McKinley, campaigning mostly on his support for a protective tariff, defeated the Democratic nominee, Levi L. Lamborn, by 3,300 votes. Hayes won a hotly disputed election to reach the presidency. McKinley's victory came at a personal cost: his income as a congressman would be half of what he earned as a lawyer.\nRising politician (1877\u20131895).\nSpokesman for protection.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n Under free trade the trader is the master and the producer the slave. Protection is but the law of nature, the law of self-preservation, of self-development, of securing the highest and best destiny of the race of man. [It is said] that protection is immoral\u00a0... Why, if protection builds up and elevates 63,000,000 [the U.S. population] of people, the influence of those 63,000,000 of people elevates the rest of the world. We cannot take a step in the pathway of progress without benefiting mankind everywhere. Well, they say, \"Buy where you can buy the cheapest\"\u00a0... Of course, that applies to labor as to everything else. Let me give you a maxim that is a thousand times better than that, and it is the protection maxim: \"Buy where you can pay the easiest.\" And that spot of earth is where labor wins its highest rewards.\nWilliam McKinley, speech made October 4, 1892, Boston, Massachusetts\nMcKinley took his congressional seat in October 1877, when President Hayes summoned Congress into special session. With the Republicans in the minority, McKinley was given unimportant committee assignments, which he undertook conscientiously. McKinley's friendship with Hayes did McKinley little good on Capitol Hill, as the president was not well regarded by many leaders there. The young congressman broke with Hayes on the question of the currency, but it did not affect their friendship. The United States had effectively been placed on the gold standard by the Coinage Act of 1873; when silver prices dropped significantly, many sought to make silver again a legal tender, equally with gold. Such a course would be inflationary, but advocates argued that the economic benefits of the increased money supply would be worth the inflation; opponents warned that \"free silver\" would not bring the promised benefits and would harm the United States in international trade. McKinley voted for the Bland\u2013Allison Act of 1878, which mandated large government purchases of silver for striking into money, and also joined the large majorities in each house that overrode Hayes's veto of the legislation. In so doing, McKinley voted against the position of the House Republican leader, James Garfield, a fellow Ohioan and his friend.\nFrom his first term in Congress, McKinley was a strong advocate of protective tariffs. The primary intention of such imposts was not to raise revenue, but to allow American manufacturing to develop by giving it a price advantage in the domestic market over foreign competitors. McKinley biographer Margaret Leech noted that Canton had become prosperous as a center for the manufacture of farm equipment because of protection, and that this may have helped form his political views. McKinley introduced and supported bills that raised protective tariffs, and opposed those that lowered them or imposed tariffs simply to raise revenue. Garfield's election as president in 1880 created a vacancy on the House Ways and Means Committee; McKinley was selected to fill it, gaining a spot on the most powerful committee after only two terms.\nMcKinley increasingly became a significant figure in national politics. In 1880, he served a brief term as Ohio's representative on the Republican National Committee. In 1884, he was elected a delegate to that year's Republican convention, where he served as chair of the Committee on Resolutions and won plaudits for his handling of the convention when called upon to preside. By 1886, McKinley, Senator John Sherman, and Governor Joseph B. Foraker were considered the leaders of the Republican party in Ohio. Sherman, who had helped to found the Republican Party, ran three times for the Republican nomination for president in the 1880s, each time failing, while Foraker began a meteoric rise in Ohio politics early in the decade. Hanna, once he entered public affairs as a political manager and generous contributor, supported Sherman's ambitions, as well as those of Foraker. The latter relationship broke off at the 1888 Republican National Convention, where McKinley, Foraker, and Hanna were all delegates supporting Sherman. Convinced Sherman could not win, Foraker threw his support to Maine Senator James G. Blaine, the unsuccessful Republican 1884 presidential nominee. When Blaine said he was not a candidate, Foraker returned to Sherman, but the nomination went to former Indiana senator Benjamin Harrison, who was elected president. In the bitterness that followed the convention, Hanna abandoned Foraker. For the rest of McKinley's life, the Ohio Republican Party was divided into two factions, one aligned with McKinley, Sherman, and Hanna, and the other with Foraker. Hanna came to admire McKinley and became a friend and close adviser to him. Although Hanna remained active in business and in promoting other Republicans, in the years after 1888, he spent an increasing amount of time boosting McKinley's political career.\nIn 1889, with the Republicans in the majority, McKinley sought election as Speaker of the House. He failed to gain the post, which went to Thomas B. Reed of Maine; however, Speaker Reed appointed McKinley chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. The Ohioan guided the McKinley Tariff of 1890 through Congress; although McKinley's work was altered through the influence of special interests in the Senate, it imposed a number of protective tariffs on foreign goods.\nGerrymandering and defeat for re-election.\nRecognizing McKinley's potential, the Democrats, whenever they controlled the Ohio legislature, sought to gerrymander or redistrict him out of office. In 1878, McKinley was redistricted to the 16th congressional district; he won anyway, causing Hayes to exult, \"Oh, the good luck of McKinley! He was gerrymandered out and then beat the gerrymander! We enjoyed it as much as he did.\" After the 1882 election, McKinley was unseated on an election contest by a near party-line House vote. Out of office, he was briefly depressed by the setback, but soon vowed to run again. The Democrats again redistricted Stark County for the 1884 election; McKinley was returned to Congress anyway.\nFor 1890, the Democrats gerrymandered McKinley one final time, placing Stark County in the same district as one of the strongest pro-Democrat counties, Holmes, populated by solidly Democratic Pennsylvania Dutch. Based on past results, Democrats thought the new boundaries should produce a Democratic majority of 2,000 to 3,000. The Republicans could not reverse the gerrymander, as legislative elections would not be held until 1891, but they could throw all their energies into the district. The McKinley Tariff was a main theme of the Democratic campaign nationwide, and there was considerable attention paid to McKinley's race. The Republican Party sent its leading orators to Canton, including Blaine (then Secretary of State), Speaker Reed, and President Harrison. The Democrats countered with their best spokesmen on tariff issues. McKinley tirelessly stumped his new district, reaching out to its 40,000 voters to explain that his tariff:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;was framed for the people\u00a0... as a defense to their industries, as a protection to the labor of their hands, as a safeguard to the happy homes of American workingmen, and as a security to their education, their wages, and their investments\u00a0... It will bring to this country a prosperity unparalleled in our own history and unrivalled in the history of the world.\"\nDemocrats ran a strong candidate in former lieutenant governor John G. Warwick. To drive their point home, they hired young partisans to pretend to be peddlers, who went door to door offering 25-cent tinware to housewives for 50 cents, explaining the rise in prices was due to the McKinley Tariff. In the end, McKinley lost by 300 votes, but the Republicans won a statewide majority and claimed a moral victory.\nGovernor of Ohio (1892\u20131896).\nEven before McKinley completed his term in Congress, he met with a delegation of Ohioans urging him to run for governor. Governor James E. Campbell, a Democrat, who had defeated Foraker in 1889, was to seek re-election in 1891. The Ohio Republican party remained divided, but McKinley quietly arranged for Foraker to nominate him at the 1891 state Republican convention, which chose McKinley by acclamation. The former congressman spent much of the second half of 1891 campaigning against Campbell, beginning in his birthplace of Niles. Hanna, however, was little seen in the campaign; he spent much of his time raising funds for the election of legislators pledged to vote for Sherman in the 1892 senatorial election (state legislators still elected US Senators). McKinley won the 1891 election by some 20,000 votes; the following January, Sherman, with considerable assistance from Hanna, turned back a challenge by Foraker to win the legislature's vote for another term in the US Senate.\nOhio's governor had relatively little power\u2014for example, he could recommend legislation, but not veto it\u2014but with Ohio a key swing state, its governor was a major figure in national politics. Although McKinley believed that the health of the nation depended on that of business, he was evenhanded in dealing with labor. He procured legislation that set up an arbitration board to settle work disputes and obtained passage of a law that fined employers who fired workers for belonging to a union.\nPresident Harrison had proven unpopular; there were divisions even within the Republican party as the year 1892 began and Harrison began his re-election drive. Although no declared Republican candidate opposed Harrison, many Republicans were ready to dump the president from the ticket if an alternative emerged. Among the possible candidates spoken of were McKinley, Reed, and the aging Blaine. Fearing that the Ohio governor would emerge as a candidate, Harrison's managers arranged for McKinley to be permanent chairman of the convention in Minneapolis, requiring him to play a public, neutral role. Hanna established an unofficial McKinley headquarters near the convention hall, though no active effort was made to convert delegates to McKinley's cause. McKinley objected to delegate votes being cast for him; nevertheless he finished second, behind the renominated Harrison, but ahead of Blaine, who had sent word he did not want to be considered. Although McKinley campaigned loyally for the Republican ticket, Harrison was defeated by former President Cleveland in the November election. In the wake of Cleveland's victory, McKinley was seen by some as the likely Republican candidate in 1896.\nSoon after Cleveland's return to office, hard times struck the nation with the Panic of 1893. A businessman in Youngstown, Robert Walker, had lent money to McKinley in their younger days; in gratitude, McKinley had often guaranteed Walker's borrowings for his business. The governor had never kept track of what he was signing; he believed Walker a sound businessman. In fact, Walker had deceived McKinley, telling him that new notes were actually renewals of matured ones. Walker was ruined by the recession; McKinley was called upon for repayment in February 1893. The total owed was over $100,000 (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024) and a despairing McKinley initially proposed to resign as governor and earn the money as an attorney. Instead, McKinley's wealthy supporters, including Hanna and Chicago publisher H. H. Kohlsaat, became trustees of a fund from which the notes would be paid. Both William and Ida McKinley placed their property in the hands of the fund's trustees (who included Hanna and Kohlsaat), and the supporters raised and contributed a substantial sum of money. All of the couple's property was returned to them by the end of 1893, and when McKinley, who had promised eventual repayment, asked for the list of contributors, it was refused him. Many people who had suffered in the hard times sympathized with McKinley, whose popularity grew. He was easily re-elected in November 1893, receiving the largest percentage of the vote of any Ohio governor since the Civil War.\nMcKinley campaigned widely for Republicans in the 1894 midterm congressional elections; many party candidates in districts where he spoke were successful. His political efforts in Ohio were rewarded with the election in November 1895 of a Republican successor as governor, Asa Bushnell, and a Republican legislature that elected Foraker to the Senate. McKinley supported Foraker for the Senate and Bushnell (who was of Foraker's faction) for governor; in return, the new senator-elect agreed to back McKinley's presidential ambitions. With party peace in Ohio assured, McKinley turned to the national arena.\nElection of 1896.\nObtaining the nomination.\nIt is unclear when William McKinley began to seriously prepare a run for president. As McKinley biographer Kevin Phillips notes, \"No documents, no diaries, no confidential letters to Mark Hanna (or anyone else) contain his secret hopes or veiled stratagems.\" From the beginning, McKinley's preparations had the participation of Hanna, whose biographer William T. Horner noted, \"What is certainly true is that in 1888 the two men began to develop a close working relationship that helped put McKinley in the White House.\" Sherman did not run for president again after 1888, and so Hanna could support McKinley's ambitions for that office wholeheartedly.\nBacked by Hanna's money and organizational skills, McKinley quietly built support for a presidential bid through 1895 and early 1896. When other contenders such as Speaker Reed and Iowa Senator William B. Allison sent agents outside their states to organize Republicans in support of their candidacies, they found that Hanna's agents had preceded them. According to historian Stanley Jones in his study of the 1896 election:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Another feature common to the Reed and Allison campaigns was their failure to make headway against the tide which was running toward McKinley. In fact, both campaigns from the moment they were launched were in retreat. The calm confidence with which each candidate claimed the support of his own section [of the country] soon gave way to\u00a0... bitter accusations that Hanna by winning support for McKinley in their sections had violated the rules of the game.\nHanna, on McKinley's behalf, met with the eastern Republican political bosses, such as Thomas Platt of New York and Senator Matthew Quay of Pennsylvania, who were willing to guarantee McKinley's nomination in exchange for promises regarding patronage and offices. McKinley, however, was determined to obtain the nomination without making deals, and Hanna accepted that decision. Many of their early efforts were focused on the South; Hanna obtained a vacation home in southern Georgia where McKinley visited and met with Republican politicians from the region. McKinley needed 453\u00bd delegate votes to gain the nomination; he gained nearly half that number from the South and border states. Platt lamented in his memoirs, \"[Hanna] had the South practically solid before some of us awakened.\"\nQuay and Platt still hoped to deny McKinley a first-ballot majority at the convention by boosting support for local favorite son candidates such as Quay himself, New York Governor (and former vice president) Levi P. Morton, and Illinois Senator Shelby Cullom. Delegate-rich Illinois proved a crucial battleground, as McKinley supporters, such as Chicago businessman (and future vice president) Charles G. Dawes, sought to elect delegates pledged to vote for McKinley at the national convention in St. Louis. Cullom proved unable to stand against McKinley despite the support of local Republican machines; at the state convention at the end of April, McKinley completed a near-sweep of Illinois' delegates. Former president Harrison had been deemed a possible contender if he entered the race; when Harrison made it known he would not seek a third nomination, the McKinley organization took control of Indiana with a speed Harrison privately found unseemly. Morton operatives who journeyed to Indiana sent word back that they had found the state alive for McKinley. Wyoming Senator Francis Warren wrote, \"The politicians are making a hard fight against him, but if the masses could speak, McKinley is the choice of at least 75% of the entire [body of] Republican voters in the Union\".\nBy the time the national convention began in St. Louis on June 16, 1896, McKinley had an ample majority of delegates. The former governor, who remained in Canton, followed events at the convention closely by telephone, and was able to hear part of Foraker's speech nominating him over the line. When Ohio was reached in the roll call of states, its votes gave McKinley the nomination, which he celebrated by hugging his wife and mother as his friends fled the house, anticipating the first of many crowds that gathered at the Republican candidate's home. Thousands of partisans came from Canton and surrounding towns that evening to hear McKinley speak from his front porch. The convention nominated Republican National Committee vice chairman Garret Hobart of New Jersey for vice president, a choice actually made, by most accounts, by Hanna. Hobart, a wealthy lawyer, businessman, and former state legislator, was not widely known, but as Hanna biographer Herbert Croly pointed out, \"if he did little to strengthen the ticket he did nothing to weaken it\".\nGeneral election campaign.\nBefore the Republican convention, McKinley had been a \"straddle bug\" on the currency question, favoring moderate positions on silver such as accomplishing bimetallism by international agreement. In the final days before the convention, McKinley decided, after hearing from politicians and businessmen, that the platform should endorse the gold standard, though it should allow for bimetallism through coordination with other nations. Adoption of the platform caused some western delegates, led by Colorado Senator Henry M. Teller, to walk out of the convention. However, compared with the Democrats, Republican divisions on the issue were small, especially as McKinley promised future concessions to silver advocates.\nThe bad economic times had continued and strengthened the hand of forces for free silver. The issue bitterly divided the Democratic Party; President Cleveland firmly supported the gold standard, but an increasing number of rural Democrats wanted silver, especially in the South and West. The silverites took control of the 1896 Democratic National Convention and chose William Jennings Bryan for president; he had electrified the delegates with his Cross of Gold speech. Bryan's financial radicalism shocked bankers\u2014they thought his inflationary program would bankrupt the railroads and ruin the economy. Hanna approached them for support for his strategy to win the election, and they gave $3.5\u00a0million for speakers and over 200\u00a0million pamphlets advocating the Republican position on the money and tariff questions.\nBryan's campaign had at most an estimated $500,000. With his eloquence and youthful energy his major assets in the race, Bryan decided on a whistle-stop political tour by train on an unprecedented scale. Hanna urged McKinley to match Bryan's tour with one of his own; the candidate declined on the grounds that the Democrat was a better stump speaker: \"I might just as well set up a trapeze on my front lawn and compete with some professional athlete as go out speaking against Bryan. I have to \"think\" when I speak.\" Instead of going to the people, McKinley would remain at home in Canton and allow the people to come to him; according to historian R. Hal Williams in his book on the 1896 election, \"it was, as it turned out, a brilliant strategy. McKinley's 'Front Porch Campaign' became a legend in American political history.\"\nMcKinley made himself available to the public every day except Sunday, receiving delegations from the front porch of his home. The railroads subsidized the visitors with low excursion rates\u2014the pro-silver Cleveland \"Plain Dealer\" disgustedly stated that going to Canton had been made \"cheaper than staying at home\". Delegations marched through the streets from the railroad station to McKinley's home on North Market Street. Once there, they crowded close to the front porch\u2014from which they surreptitiously whittled souvenirs\u2014as their spokesman addressed McKinley. The candidate then responded, speaking on campaign issues in a speech molded to suit the interest of the delegation. The speeches were carefully scripted to avoid extemporaneous remarks; even the spokesman's remarks were approved by McKinley or a representative. This was done as the candidate feared an offhand comment by another that might rebound on him, as had happened to Blaine in 1884.\nMost Democratic newspapers refused to support Bryan, the major exception being the New York \"Journal\", controlled by William Randolph Hearst, whose fortune was based on silver mines. In biased reporting and through the sharp cartoons of Homer Davenport, Hanna was viciously characterized as a plutocrat, trampling on labor. McKinley was drawn as a child, easily controlled by big business. Even today, these depictions still color the images of Hanna and McKinley: one as a heartless businessman, the other as a creature of Hanna and others of his ilk.\nThe Democrats had pamphlets too, though not as many. Jones analyzed how voters responded to the education campaigns of the two parties:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;For the people it was a campaign of study and analysis, of exhortation and conviction\u2014a campaign of search for economic and political truth. Pamphlets tumbled from the presses, to be read, reread, studied, debated, to become guides to economic thought and political action. They were printed and distributed by the million\u00a0... but the people hankered for more. Favorite pamphlets became dog-eared, grimy, fell apart as their owners laboriously restudied their arguments and quoted from them in public and private debate.\nMcKinley always thought of himself as a tariff man and expected that the monetary issues would fade away in a month. He was mistaken, silver and gold dominated the campaign.\nThe battleground proved to be the Midwest\u2014the South and most of the West were conceded to Bryan\u2014and the Democrat spent much of his time in those crucial states. The Northeast was considered most likely safe for McKinley after the early-voting states of Maine and Vermont supported him in September. By then, it was clear that public support for silver had receded, and McKinley began to emphasize the tariff issue. By the end of September, the Republicans had discontinued printing material on the silver issue and were entirely concentrating on the tariff question. On November 3, 1896, the voters had their say. McKinley won the entire Northeast and Midwest; he won 51% of the vote and an ample majority in the Electoral College. Bryan had concentrated entirely on the silver issue and had not appealed to urban workers. Voters in cities supported McKinley; the only city outside the South of more than 100,000 population carried by Bryan was Denver, Colorado.\nRealignment of 1896.\nThe 1896 presidential election was a realigning election, in which McKinley's view of a stronger central government building American industry through protective tariffs and a dollar based on gold triumphed. The voting patterns established then displaced the near-deadlock the major parties had seen since the Civil War in the Third Party System. The new Republican dominance began the Fourth Party System that would end in 1932, another realigning election with the ascent of Franklin Roosevelt and the New Deal coalition. Phillips argues that McKinley was probably the only Republican who could have defeated Bryan\u2014he concludes that Eastern candidates would have done badly against the Illinois-born Bryan in the crucial Midwest. While Bryan was popular among rural voters, \"McKinley appealed to a very different industrialized, urbanized America.\"\nPresidency (1897\u20131901).\nInauguration and appointments.\nMcKinley was sworn in as president on March 4, 1897, as his wife and mother looked on. The new president gave a lengthy inaugural address; he urged tariff reform and stated that the currency issue would have to await tariff legislation. He warned against foreign interventions, \"We want no wars of conquest. We must avoid the temptation of territorial aggression.\"\nMcKinley's most controversial Cabinet appointment was that of John Sherman as Secretary of State. Sherman had an outstanding reputation, but old age was fast reducing his abilities. McKinley needed to have Hanna appointed to the Senate, so Senator Sherman was moved up. Sherman's mental faculties were decaying even in 1896; this was widely spoken of in political circles, but McKinley did not believe the rumors. Nevertheless, McKinley sent his cousin, William McKinley Osborne, to have dinner with the 73-year-old senator; he reported back that Sherman seemed as lucid as ever. McKinley wrote once the appointment was announced, \"the stories regarding Senator Sherman's 'mental decay' are without foundation\u00a0... When I saw him last I was convinced both of his perfect health, physically and mentally, and that the prospects of life were remarkably good.\"\nMaine Representative Nelson Dingley Jr. was McKinley's choice for Secretary of the Treasury; he declined it, preferring to remain as chairman of the Ways and Means Committee. Charles Dawes, who had been Hanna's lieutenant in Chicago during the campaign, was considered for the Treasury post but by some accounts Dawes considered himself too young. Dawes eventually became Comptroller of the Currency; he recorded in his published diary that he had strongly urged McKinley to appoint as secretary the successful candidate, Lyman J. Gage, president of the First National Bank of Chicago and a Gold Democrat. The Navy Department was offered to former Massachusetts Congressman John Davis Long, an old friend from the House, on January 30, 1897. Although McKinley was initially inclined to allow Long to choose his own assistant, there was considerable pressure on the President-elect to appoint Theodore Roosevelt, head of the New York City Police Commission and a published naval historian. McKinley was reluctant, stating to one Roosevelt booster, \"I want peace and I am told that your friend Theodore is always getting into rows with everybody.\" Nevertheless, he made the appointment.\nIn addition to Sherman, McKinley made one other ill-advised Cabinet appointment, that of Secretary of War, which fell to Russell A. Alger, former general and Michigan governor. Competent enough in peacetime, Alger proved inadequate once the conflict with Spain began. With the War Department plagued by scandal, Alger resigned at McKinley's request in mid-1899. Vice President Hobart, as was customary at the time, was not invited to Cabinet meetings. However, he proved a valuable adviser both for McKinley and for his Cabinet members. The wealthy Vice President leased a residence close to the White House; the two families visited each other without formality, and the Vice President's wife, Jennie Tuttle Hobart, sometimes substituted as Executive Mansion hostess when Ida McKinley was unwell. For most of McKinley's administration, George B. Cortelyou served as his personal secretary. Cortelyou, who served in three Cabinet positions under Theodore Roosevelt, became a combination press secretary and chief of staff to McKinley.\nCuba crisis and war with Spain.\nFor decades, rebels in Cuba had waged an intermittent campaign for freedom from Spanish colonial rule. By 1895, the conflict had expanded to a war for Cuban independence. As war engulfed the island, Spanish reprisals against the rebels grew ever harsher. American public opinion favored the rebels, and McKinley shared in their outrage against Spanish policies. However while public opinion called for war to liberate Cuba, McKinley favored a peaceful approach, hoping that through negotiation, Spain might be convinced to grant Cuba independence, or at least to allow the Cubans some measure of autonomy. The United States and Spain began negotiations on the subject in 1897, but it became clear that Spain would never concede Cuban independence, while the rebels (and their American supporters) would never settle for anything less.\nIn January 1898, Spain promised some concessions to the rebels, but when American consul Fitzhugh Lee reported riots in Havana, McKinley agreed to send the battleship USS \"Maine\". On February 15, the \"Maine\" exploded and sank with 266 men killed. Public attention focused on the crisis and the consensus was that regardless of who set the bomb, Spain had lost control over Cuba. McKinley insisted that a court of inquiry first determine whether the explosion was accidental. Negotiations with Spain continued as the court considered the evidence, but on March 20, the court ruled that the \"Maine\" was blown up by an underwater mine. As pressure for war mounted in Congress, McKinley continued to negotiate for Cuban independence. Spain refused McKinley's proposals, and on April 11, McKinley turned the matter over to Congress. He did not ask for war, but Congress made the decision and declared war on April 20, with the addition of the Teller Amendment, which disavowed any intention of annexing Cuba. Nick Kapur says that McKinley's actions were based on his values of arbitrationism, pacifism, humanitarianism, and manly self-restraint, and not on external pressures.\nThe expansion of the telegraph and the development of the telephone gave McKinley greater control over the day-to-day management of the war than previous presidents had enjoyed, and he used the new technologies to direct the army's and navy's movements as far as he was able. McKinley found Alger inadequate as Secretary of War, and did not get along with the Army's commanding general, Nelson A. Miles. Bypassing them, he looked for strategic advice first from Miles's predecessor, General John Schofield, and later from Adjutant General Henry Clarke Corbin. The war led to a change in McKinley's cabinet, as the president accepted Sherman's resignation as Secretary of State. William R. Day agreed to serve as secretary until the war's end.\nWithin a fortnight, the navy had its first victory when Commodore George Dewey destroyed the Spanish fleet at the Battle of Manila Bay in the Philippines. Dewey's overwhelming victory expanded the scope of the war from one centered in the Caribbean to one that would determine the fate of all of Spain's Pacific colonies. The next month, McKinley increased the number of troops sent to the Philippines and granted the force's commander, Major General Wesley Merritt, the power to set up legal systems and raise taxes\u2014necessities for a long occupation. By the time the troops arrived in the Philippines at the end of June 1898, McKinley had decided that Spain would be required to surrender the archipelago to the United States. He professed to be open to all views on the subject; however, he believed that as the war progressed, the public would come to demand retention of the islands as a prize of war.\nMeanwhile, in the Caribbean theater, a large force of regulars and volunteers gathered near Tampa, Florida, for an invasion of Cuba. After lengthy delays, the army, led by Major General William Rufus Shafter, on June 22, landed near Santiago de Cuba. Shafter's army engaged the Spanish forces on July 2 in the Battle of San Juan Hill. In an intense day-long battle, the American force was victorious, although both sides suffered heavy casualties. The next day, Spain's Caribbean squadron, which had been sheltering in Santiago's harbor, broke for the open sea and was destroyed by the North Atlantic Squadron in the largest naval battle of the war. Shafter laid siege to the city of Santiago, which surrendered on July 17, placing Cuba under effective American control. McKinley and Miles also ordered an invasion of Puerto Rico, which met little resistance when it landed in July. The distance from Spain and the destruction of the Spanish navy made resupply impossible, and the Spanish government began to look for a way to end the war.\nPeace and territorial gain.\nMcKinley's cabinet agreed with him that Spain must leave Cuba and Puerto Rico, but they disagreed on the Philippines, with some wishing to annex the entire archipelago and some wishing only to retain a naval base in the area. Although public sentiment seemed to favor annexation of the Philippines, several prominent political leaders\u2014including Democrats Bryan, and Cleveland, and the newly formed American Anti-Imperialist League\u2014made their opposition known.\nMcKinley proposed to open negotiations with Spain on the basis of Cuban liberation and Puerto Rican annexation, with the final status of the Philippines subject to further discussion. He stood firmly in that demand even as the military situation in Cuba began to deteriorate when the American army was struck with yellow fever. Spain ultimately agreed to a ceasefire on those terms on August 12, and treaty negotiations began in Paris in September 1898. The talks continued until December 18, when the Treaty of Paris was signed. The United States acquired Puerto Rico and the Philippines as well as the island of Guam, and Spain relinquished its claims to Cuba; in exchange, the United States agreed to pay Spain $20\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024). McKinley had difficulty convincing the Senate to approve the treaty by the requisite two-thirds vote, but his lobbying, and that of Vice President Hobart, eventually saw success, as the Senate voted in favor on February 6, 1899, 57 to 27.\nHawaii.\nDuring the war, McKinley also pursued the annexation of the Republic of Hawaii. The new republic, dominated by business interests, had overthrown the Queen in 1893 when she attempted to restore the powers of the monarchy by nullifying the bayonet constitution. There was strong American support for annexation, and the need for Pacific bases in wartime became clear after the Battle of Manila. McKinley came to office as a supporter of annexation, and lobbied Congress to act, warning that to do nothing would invite a royalist counter-revolution or a Japanese takeover. Foreseeing difficulty in getting two-thirds of the Senate to approve a treaty of annexation, McKinley instead supported the effort of Democratic Representative Francis G. Newlands of Nevada to accomplish the result by joint resolution of both houses of Congress. The resulting Newlands Resolution passed both houses by wide margins, and McKinley signed it into law on July 8, 1898. McKinley biographer H. Wayne Morgan notes, \"McKinley was the guiding spirit behind the annexation of Hawaii, showing\u00a0... a firmness in pursuing it\"; the president told Cortelyou, \"We need Hawaii just as much and a good deal more than we did California. It is manifest destiny.\"\nExpanding influence overseas.\nOpen door in China.\nEven before peace negotiations began with Spain, McKinley asked Congress to set up a commission to examine trade opportunities in Asia and espoused an \"Open Door Policy\", in which all nations would freely trade with China and none would seek to violate that nation's territorial integrity.\nAmerican missionaries were threatened with death when the Boxer Rebellion menaced foreigners in China. Americans and other westerners in Peking were besieged and, in cooperation with other western powers, McKinley ordered 5000 troops to the city in June 1900 in the China Relief Expedition. The westerners were rescued the next month, but several Congressional Democrats objected to McKinley dispatching troops without consulting the legislature. McKinley's actions set a precedent that led to most of his successors exerting similar independent control over the military. After the rebellion ended, the United States reaffirmed its commitment to the Open Door policy, which became the basis of American policy toward China.\nPanama canal.\nCloser to home, McKinley and Hay engaged in negotiations with Britain over the possible construction of a canal across Central America. The Clayton\u2013Bulwer Treaty, which the two nations signed in 1850, prohibited either from establishing exclusive control over a canal there. The war had exposed the difficulty of maintaining a two-ocean navy when the Navy had to sail all the way around South America to reach the Pacific. Now, with American business and military interests even more involved in Asia, a canal seemed more essential than ever, and McKinley pressed for a renegotiation of the treaty. Hay and the British ambassador, Julian Pauncefote, agreed that the United States could control a future canal, provided that it was open to all shipping and not fortified. McKinley was satisfied with the terms, but the Senate rejected them, demanding that the United States be allowed to fortify the canal. Hay was embarrassed by the rebuff and offered his resignation, but McKinley refused it and ordered him to continue negotiations to achieve the Senate's demands. He was successful, and a new treaty was drafted and approved, but not before McKinley's assassination in 1901. The result under Roosevelt was the Panama Canal.\nTariffs and bimetallism.\nMcKinley had built his reputation in Congress on high tariffs, promising protection for American business and well-paid U.S. factory workers. With the Republicans in control of Congress, Ways and Means chairman Dingley introduced the Dingley Act, which would raise tariff rates on wool, sugar, and luxury goods. Congress passed the legislation with McKinley's support, and he signed it into law on July 24, 1897, less than five months into his presidency.\nAmerican negotiators soon concluded a reciprocity treaty with France, and the two nations approached Britain to gauge British enthusiasm for bimetallism. Prime Minister Lord Salisbury and his government showed some interest in the idea and told American envoy Edward O. Wolcott that he would be amenable to reopening the mints in India to silver coinage if the Viceroy's Executive Council there agreed. News of a possible departure from the gold standard stirred up immediate opposition from its partisans, and misgivings by the Indian administration led Britain to reject the proposal. With the international effort a failure, McKinley turned away from silver coinage and embraced the gold standard. Even without the agreement, agitation for free silver eased as prosperity began to return to the United States and gold from recent strikes in the Yukon and Australia increased the monetary supply even without silver coinage. In the absence of international agreement, McKinley favored legislation to formally affirm the gold standard, but was initially deterred by the silver strength in the Senate. By 1900, with another campaign ahead and good economic conditions, McKinley urged Congress to pass such a law, and signed the Gold Standard Act on March 14, 1900, using a gold pen to do so.\nCivil rights.\nIn the wake of McKinley's election in 1896, black people were hopeful of progress towards equality. McKinley had spoken out against lynching while governor, and most black people who could still vote supported him in 1896. McKinley's priority, however, was in ending sectionalism, and they were disappointed by his policies and appointments. Although McKinley made some appointments of black people to low-level government posts, and received some praise for that, the appointments were less than they had received under previous Republican administrations.\nThe McKinley administration's response to racial violence was minimal, causing him to lose black support. When black postmasters at Hogansville, Georgia, in 1897, and at Lake City, South Carolina, the following year, were assaulted, McKinley issued no statement of condemnation. Although black leaders criticized McKinley for inaction, supporters responded by saying there was little that the president could do to intervene. Critics replied by saying that he could at least publicly condemn such events, as Harrison had done.\nWhen a group of white supremacists violently overthrew the duly elected government of Wilmington, North Carolina, on November 10, 1898, in an event that came to be recognized as the Wilmington insurrection of 1898, McKinley refused requests by black leaders to send in federal marshals or federal troops to protect black citizens, and ignored city residents' appeals for help to recover from the widespread destruction of the predominantly black neighborhood of Brooklyn.\nAccording to historian Clarence A. Bacote, \"Before the Spanish\u2013American War, the Negroes, in spite of some mistakes, regarded McKinley as the best friend they ever had.\" Under pressure from black leaders, McKinley required the War Department to commission black officers above the rank of lieutenant. McKinley toured the South in late 1898, promoting sectional reconciliation. He visited Tuskegee Institute and the famous black educator Booker T. Washington. He also visited Confederate memorials. In his tour of the South, McKinley did not mention the racial tensions or violence. Although the president received a rapturous reception from Southern whites, many blacks, excluded from official welcoming committees, felt alienated by the president's words and actions. Gould concluded regarding race, \"McKinley lacked the vision to transcend the biases of his day and to point toward a better future for all Americans\".\n1900 election.\nRepublicans were generally successful in state and local elections around the country in 1899, and McKinley was optimistic about his chances at re-election in 1900. McKinley's popularity in his first term assured him of renomination for a second. The only question about the Republican ticket concerned the vice presidential nomination; McKinley needed a new running mate as Hobart had died in late 1899. McKinley initially favored Elihu Root, who had succeeded Alger as Secretary of War, but McKinley decided that Root was doing too good a job at the War Department to move him. He considered other prominent candidates, including Allison and Cornelius Newton Bliss, but none were as popular as the Republican party's rising star, Theodore Roosevelt. After a stint as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, Roosevelt had resigned and raised a cavalry regiment; they fought bravely in Cuba, and Roosevelt returned home covered in glory. Elected governor of New York on a reform platform in 1898, Roosevelt had his eye on the presidency. Many supporters recommended him to McKinley for the second spot on the ticket, and Roosevelt believed it would be an excellent stepping stone to the presidency in 1904. McKinley remained uncommitted in public, but Hanna was firmly opposed to the New York governor. The Ohio senator considered the New Yorker overly impulsive; his stance was undermined by the efforts of political boss and New York Senator Thomas C. Platt, who, disliking Roosevelt's reform agenda, sought to sideline the governor by making him vice president.\nWhen the Republican convention began in Philadelphia that June, no vice presidential candidate had overwhelming support, but Roosevelt had the broadest range of support from around the country. McKinley affirmed that the choice belonged to the convention, not to him. On June 21, McKinley was unanimously renominated and, with Hanna's reluctant acquiescence, Roosevelt was nominated for vice president on the first ballot. The Democratic convention convened the next month in Kansas City and nominated William Jennings Bryan, setting up a rematch of the 1896 contest.\nThe candidates were the same, but the issues of the campaign had shifted: free silver was still a question that animated many voters, but the Republicans focused on victory in war and prosperity at home as issues they believed favored their party. Democrats knew the war had been popular, even if the imperialism issue was less sure, so they focused on the issue of trusts and corporate power, painting McKinley as the servant of capital and big business. As in 1896, Bryan embarked on a speaking tour around the country while McKinley stayed at home, this time making only one speech, to accept his nomination. Roosevelt emerged as the campaign's primary speaker and Hanna helped the cause by working to settle a coal miners strike in Pennsylvania. Bryan's campaigning failed to excite the voters as it had in 1896, and McKinley never doubted that he would be re-elected. On November 6, 1900, he was proven correct, winning the largest victory for any Republican since 1872. Bryan carried only four states outside the solid South, and McKinley even won Bryan's home state of Nebraska.\nSecond term.\nSoon after his second inauguration on March 4, 1901, William and Ida McKinley undertook a six-week tour of the nation. Traveling mostly by rail, the McKinleys were to travel through the South to the Southwest, and then up the Pacific coast and east again, to conclude with a visit on June 13, 1901, to the Pan-American Exposition in Buffalo, New York. However, the first lady fell ill in California, causing her husband to limit his public events and cancel a series of speeches he had planned to give urging trade reciprocity. He also postponed the visit to the fair until September, planning a month in Washington and two in Canton before the Buffalo visit.\nAssassination.\nAlthough McKinley enjoyed meeting the public, Cortelyou was concerned with his security because of recent assassinations by anarchists in Europe, such as the assassination of King Umberto I of Italy the previous year. Twice he tried to remove a public reception from the president's rescheduled visit to the exposition. McKinley refused, and Cortelyou arranged for additional security for the trip. On September 5, McKinley delivered his address at the fairgrounds before a crowd of 50,000. In his final speech, McKinley urged reciprocity treaties with other nations to assure American manufacturers access to foreign markets. He intended the speech as a keynote to his plans for a second term.\nA man in the crowd named Leon Czolgosz hoped to assassinate McKinley. After hearing a speech by anarchist Emma Goldman in Cleveland, Czolgosz had decided to take action that he believed would advance the cause. He had managed to get close to the presidential podium, but did not fire, uncertain of hitting his target. After his failure to get close enough on September 5, Czolgosz waited until the next day at the Temple of Music on the exposition grounds, where the president was to meet the public. Czolgosz concealed his gun in a handkerchief and, when he reached the head of the line, shot McKinley twice in the abdomen at close range.\nMcKinley urged his aides to break the news gently to Ida, and to call off the mob that had set upon Czolgosz, a request that may have saved his assassin's life. McKinley was taken to the exposition aid station, where the doctor was unable to locate the second bullet. Although a primitive X-ray machine was being exhibited on the exposition grounds, it was not used. McKinley was taken to the home of John G. Milburn, president of the Pan-American Exposition Company.\nIn the days after the shooting, McKinley appeared to improve and doctors issued increasingly optimistic bulletins. Members of the Cabinet, who had rushed to Buffalo on hearing the news, dispersed, and Vice President Roosevelt departed on a camping trip to the Adirondacks. \nLeech wrote: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is difficult to interpret the optimism with which the President's physicians looked for his recovery. There was obviously the most serious danger that his wounds would become septic. In that case, he would almost certainly die, since drugs to control infection did not exist\u00a0... [Prominent New York City physician] Dr. McBurney was by far the worst offender in showering sanguine assurances on the correspondents. As the only big-city surgeon on the case, he was eagerly questioned and quoted, and his rosy prognostications largely contributed to the delusion of the American public.\nOn the morning of September 13, McKinley's condition deteriorated. Specialists were summoned; although at first some doctors hoped that McKinley might survive with a weakened heart, by afternoon they knew that the case was hopeless. Unknown to the doctors, gangrene was growing on the walls of McKinley's stomach and slowly poisoning his blood. McKinley drifted in and out of consciousness all day, but when awake he was a model patient. By evening, McKinley too knew he was dying, \"It is useless, gentlemen. I think we ought to have prayer.\" Relatives and friends gathered around the death bed. The first lady sobbed over him, saying, \"I want to go, too. I want to go, too.\" Her husband replied, \"We are all going, we are all going. God's will be done, not ours\", and with final strength put an arm around her. He may also have sung part of his favorite hymn, \"Nearer, My God, to Thee\", although some other accounts have the first lady singing it softly to him.\nAt 2:15\u00a0a.m. on September 14, 1901, McKinley died. Theodore Roosevelt rushed back to Buffalo and took the oath of office as president. Czolgosz, put on trial for murder nine days after McKinley's death, was found guilty, sentenced to death on September 26 and executed by electric chair on October 29, 1901.\nFuneral, memorials, and legacy.\nFuneral and resting place.\nAccording to Gould, \"The nation experienced a wave of genuine grief at the news of McKinley's passing.\" The stock market, faced with sudden uncertainty, suffered a steep decline that went nearly unnoticed in the mourning. The nation focused its attention on the casket that first lay in the East Room of the Executive Mansion and then lay in state in the Capitol before being transported to Canton by train. Approximately 100,000 people passed by the open casket in the Capitol Rotunda, many having waited hours in the rain. In Canton, an equal number did the same at the Stark County Courthouse on September 18. The following day, a funeral service was held at the First Methodist Church. The casket was next sealed and taken to the McKinley house, where relatives paid their final respects. It was then transported to the receiving vault at West Lawn Cemetery in Canton to await the construction of the memorial to McKinley already being planned.\nThere was a widespread expectation that Ida McKinley would not long survive her husband; one family friend stated, as William McKinley lay dying, that they should be prepared for a double funeral. However, this did not occur, and the former first lady accompanied her husband on the funeral train. Leech noted \"the circuitous journey was a cruel ordeal for the woman who huddled in a compartment of the funeral train, praying that the Lord would take her with her Dearest Love.\" She was thought too weak to attend the services in Washington or Canton, although she listened at the door to the service for her husband in her house on North Market Street. She remained in Canton for the remainder of her life, setting up a shrine in her house and often visiting the receiving vault, until her death at age 59 on May 26, 1907. She died only months before the completion of the large marble monument to her husband in Canton, which was dedicated by President Roosevelt on September 30, 1907. William and Ida McKinley are interred there with their daughters atop a hillside overlooking the city of Canton.\nOther memorials.\nIn addition to the Canton site, many other memorials honor McKinley. The William McKinley Monument stands in front of the Ohio Statehouse in Columbus and a large marble statue of McKinley is situated at his birthplace in Niles. Twenty Ohio schools bear McKinley's name, and several more schools in the United States are named McKinley School. Nearly a million dollars was pledged by contributors or allocated from public funds for the construction of McKinley memorials in the year after his death. McKinley biographer Kevin Phillips suggests that the significant number of major memorials to McKinley in Ohio reflect the expectation among Ohioans in the years after McKinley's death that he would be ranked among the great presidents.\nStatues bearing McKinley's image may be found in more than a dozen states, and his name has been bestowed on streets, civic organizations and libraries. In 1896, a gold prospector gave McKinley's name to Denali, the tallest mountain in North America at . The Alaska Board of Geographic Names reverted the name of the mountain to Denali, its local appellation, in 1975. The Department of the Interior followed suit in August 2015 as a part of a visit to Alaska by President Barack Obama. On January 20, 2025, President Donald Trump issued an executive order to restore McKinley's name to the mountain. Denali National Park was known as Mount McKinley National Park until December 2, 1980, when it was changed by legislation signed by President Jimmy Carter.\nLegacy and historical image.\nMcKinley's biographer H. Wayne Morgan remarks that McKinley died the most beloved president in history. However, the young, enthusiastic Roosevelt quickly captured public attention. The new president made little effort to secure the trade reciprocity that McKinley had intended to negotiate with other nations. Controversy and public interest surrounded Roosevelt throughout the seven and a half years of his presidency as memories of McKinley faded; by 1920, according to Gould, McKinley's administration was deemed no more than \"a mediocre prelude to the vigor and energy of Theodore Roosevelt's.\" Beginning in the 1950s, McKinley received more favorable evaluations; nevertheless, in surveys ranking American presidents, he has generally been placed near the middle, often trailing contemporaries such as Hayes and Cleveland. Morgan suggests that this relatively low ranking is the result of a perception among historians that while many decisions during McKinley's presidency profoundly affected the nation's future, he more followed public opinion than led it, and that McKinley's standing has suffered from altered public expectations of the presidency.\nThere has been broad agreement among historians that McKinley's election occurred at a time of a transition between two political eras, dubbed the Third and Fourth Party Systems. Kenneth F. Warren emphasizes the national commitment to a pro-business, industrial, and modernizing program represented by McKinley. Historian Daniel P. Klinghard argued that McKinley's personal control of the 1896 campaign gave him the opportunity to reshape the presidency\u2014rather than simply follow the party platform\u2014by representing himself as the voice of the people. Republican Karl Rove exalted McKinley as the model for a sweeping political realignment behind George W. Bush in the 2000s\u2014a realignment that did not happen. Historian Michael J. Korzi argued in 2005 that while it is tempting to see McKinley as the key figure in the transition from congressional domination of government to the modern, powerful president, this change was an incremental process through the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nPhillips writes that McKinley's low rating is undeserved, and that he should be ranked just after the great presidents such as Washington and Lincoln. He pointed to McKinley's success at building an electoral coalition that kept the Republicans mostly in power for a generation. Phillips believes that part of McKinley's legacy is the men whom he included in his administration who dominated the Republican Party for a quarter century after his death. These officials included Cortelyou, who served in three Cabinet positions under Roosevelt, and Dawes, who became vice president under Coolidge. Other McKinley appointees who later became major figures include Day, whom Roosevelt elevated to the Supreme Court where he remained nearly 20 years, and William Howard Taft, whom McKinley had made Governor-General of the Philippines and who succeeded Roosevelt as president. After the assassination, the present United States Secret Service came into existence when the Congress deemed it necessary that presidential protection be part of its duties.\nA controversial aspect of McKinley's presidency is territorial expansion and the question of imperialism; with the exception of the Philippines, granted independence in 1946, the United States still retains the territories taken under McKinley. The territorial expansion of 1898 is often seen by historians as the beginning of an American empire. Morgan sees that historical discussion as a subset of the debate over the rise of America as a world power; he expects the debate over McKinley's actions to continue indefinitely without resolution, and notes that however one judges McKinley's actions in American expansion, one of his motivations was to change the lives of Filipinos and Cubans for the better.\nA political conservative, McKinley presided over an administration that pursued conservative policies in relation to foreign policy, civil rights and the economy. In regards to the latter, one historian has argued that \"Concerning government intervention in the economy under McKinley, the approach remained decidedly laissez-faire.\" \nMorgan alludes to the rise of interest in McKinley as part of the debate over the more assertive American foreign policy of recent decades:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;McKinley was a major actor in some of the most important events in American history. His decisions shaped future policies and public attitudes. He usually rises in the estimation of scholars who study his life in detail. Even those who disagree with his policies and decisions see him as an active, responsible, informed participant in charge of decision making. His dignified demeanor and subtle operations keep him somewhat remote from public perception. But he is once again at the center of events, where he started.\nExplanatory notes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nGeneral bibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPhD dissertations.\nFull text available online through academic libraries.\nExternal links.\nOther.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33522", "revid": "45417033", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33522", "title": "William Howard Taft", "text": "President of the United States from 1909 to 1913\nWilliam Howard Taft (September 15, 1857\u00a0\u2013 March 8, 1930) was the 27th president of the United States from 1909 to 1913 and the tenth chief justice of the United States from 1921 to 1930. He is the only person to have held both offices.\nTaft was born in Cincinnati, Ohio. His father, Alphonso Taft, was a U.S. attorney general and secretary of war. Taft attended Yale and joined Skull and Bones, of which his father was a founding member. After becoming a lawyer, Taft was appointed a judge while still in his twenties. He continued a rapid rise, being named solicitor general and a judge of the Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals. In 1901, President William McKinley appointed Taft civilian governor of the Philippines. In 1904, President Theodore Roosevelt made him Secretary of War, and he became Roosevelt's hand-picked successor. Despite his personal ambition to become chief justice, Taft declined repeated offers of appointment to the Supreme Court of the United States, believing his political work to be more important.\nWith Roosevelt's help, Taft had little opposition for the Republican nomination for president in 1908 and easily defeated William Jennings Bryan for the presidency in that November's election. As president, he focused on East Asia more than European affairs and repeatedly intervened to prop up or remove Latin American governments. Taft sought reductions to trade tariffs, then a major source of governmental income, but the resulting bill was heavily influenced by special interests. His administration was filled with conflict between the Republican Party's conservative wing, with which Taft often sympathized, and its progressive wing, toward which Roosevelt moved more and more. Controversies over conservation and antitrust cases filed by the Taft administration served to further separate the two men. The 1912 presidential election was a three-way race, as Roosevelt challenged Taft for renomination. Taft used his control of the party machinery to gain a bare majority of delegates and Roosevelt bolted the party. The split left Taft with little chance of reelection, and he took only Utah and Vermont in his loss to Democratic nominee Woodrow Wilson.\nAfter leaving office, Taft returned to Yale as a professor, continuing his political activity and working against war through the League to Enforce Peace. In 1921, President Warren G. Harding appointed Taft chief justice, an office he had long sought. Chief Justice Taft was a conservative on business issues, and under him there were advances in individual rights. In poor health, he resigned in February 1930, and died the following month. He was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, the first president and first Supreme Court justice to be interred there. Taft is generally listed near the middle in historians' rankings of U.S. presidents.\nEarly life and education.\nWilliam Howard Taft was born September 15, 1857, in Cincinnati, Ohio, to Alphonso Taft and Louise Torrey. The Taft family lived in the suburb of Mount Auburn. Alphonso served as a judge and an ambassador, and was U.S. Secretary of War and Attorney General under President Ulysses S. Grant.\nWilliam Taft was not seen as brilliant as a child, but was a hard worker; his demanding parents pushed him and his four brothers toward success, tolerating nothing less. He attended Woodward High School in Cincinnati. At Yale College, which he entered in 1874, the heavyset, jovial Taft was popular and an intramural heavyweight wrestling champion. One classmate said he succeeded through hard work rather than by being the smartest, and had integrity. He was elected a member of Skull and Bones, the Yale secret society co-founded by his father, one of three future presidents (with George H. W. Bush and George W. Bush) to be a member. In 1878, Taft graduated second in his class of 121. He attended Cincinnati Law School, and graduated with a Bachelor of Laws in 1880. While in law school, he worked on \"The Cincinnati Commercial\" newspaper, edited by Murat Halstead. Taft was assigned to cover the local courts, and also spent time reading law in his father's office; both activities gave him practical knowledge of the law that was not taught in class. Shortly before graduating from law school, Taft went to Columbus to take the bar examination and easily passed.\nRise in government (1880\u20131908).\nOhio lawyer and judge.\nAfter admission to the Ohio bar, Taft devoted himself to his job at the \"Commercial\" full-time. Halstead was willing to take him on permanently at an increased salary if he would give up the law, but Taft declined. In October 1880, Taft was appointed assistant prosecutor for Hamilton County, Ohio, where Cincinnati is. He took office in January 1881. Taft served for a year as assistant prosecutor, trying his share of routine cases. He resigned in January 1882 after President Chester A. Arthur appointed him Collector of Internal Revenue for Ohio's First District, an area centered on Cincinnati. Taft refused to dismiss competent employees who were politically out of favor, and resigned effective in March 1883, writing to Arthur that he wished to begin private practice in Cincinnati. In 1884, Taft campaigned for the Republican candidate for president, Senator James G. Blaine of Maine, who lost to Governor Grover Cleveland of New York.\nIn 1887, Taft, then aged 29, was appointed to a vacancy on the Superior Court of Cincinnati by Governor Joseph B. Foraker. The appointment was good for just over a year, after which he would have to face the voters, and in April 1888, he sought election for the first of three times in his lifetime, the other two being for the presidency. He was elected to a full five-year term. Some two dozen of Taft's opinions as a state judge survive, the most significant being \"Moores &amp; Co. v. Bricklayers' Union No. 1\" (1889) if only because it was used against him when he ran for president in 1908. The case involved bricklayers who refused to work for any firm that dealt with a company called Parker Brothers, with which they were in dispute. Taft ruled that the union's action amounted to a secondary boycott, which was illegal.\nIt is not clear when Taft met Helen Herron (often called Nellie), but it was no later than 1880, when she mentioned in her diary receiving an invitation to a party from him. By 1884, they were meeting regularly, and in 1885, after an initial rejection, she agreed to marry him. The wedding took place at the Herron home on June 19, 1886. William Taft remained devoted to his wife throughout their almost 44 years of marriage. Nellie Taft pushed her husband much as his parents had, and she could be very frank with her criticisms. The couple had three children, of whom the eldest, Robert, became a U.S. senator.\nSolicitor General.\nThere was a seat vacant on the U.S. Supreme Court in 1889, and Governor Foraker suggested President Harrison appoint Taft to fill it. Taft was 32 and his professional goal was always a seat on the Supreme Court. He actively sought the appointment, writing to Foraker to urge the governor to press his case, while stating to others it was unlikely he would get it. Instead, in 1890, Harrison appointed him Solicitor General of the United States. When Taft arrived in Washington in February 1890, the office had been vacant for two months, with the work piling up. He worked to eliminate the backlog, while simultaneously educating himself on federal law and procedure he had not needed as an Ohio state judge.\nNew York senator William M. Evarts, a former secretary of state, had been a classmate of Alphonso Taft at Yale. Evarts called to see his friend's son as soon as Taft took office, and William and Nellie Taft were launched into Washington society. Nellie Taft was ambitious for herself and her husband, and was annoyed when the people he socialized with most were mainly Supreme Court justices, rather than the arbiters of Washington society such as Theodore Roosevelt, John Hay, Henry Cabot Lodge and their wives.\nIn 1891, Taft introduced a new policy: confession of error, by which the U.S. government would concede a case in the Supreme Court that it had won in the court below but that the solicitor general thought it should have lost. At Taft's request, the Supreme Court reversed a murder conviction that Taft said had been based on inadmissible evidence. The policy continues to this day.\nAlthough Taft was successful as Solicitor General, winning 15 of the 18 cases he argued before the Supreme Court, he was glad when in March 1891, the United States Congress created a new judgeship for each of the United States Courts of Appeal and Harrison appointed him to the Sixth Circuit, based in Cincinnati. In March 1892, Taft resigned as Solicitor General to resume his judicial career.\nFederal judge.\nTaft's federal judgeship was a lifetime appointment, and one from which promotion to the Supreme Court might come. Taft's older half-brother Charles, successful in business, supplemented Taft's government salary, allowing William and Nellie Taft and their family to live in comfort. Taft's duties involved hearing trials in the circuit, which included Ohio, Michigan, Kentucky, and Tennessee, and participating with Supreme Court Justice John Marshall Harlan, the circuit justice, and judges of the Sixth Circuit in hearing appeals. Taft spent these years, from 1892 to 1900, in personal and professional contentment.\nAccording to historian Louis L. Gould, \"while Taft shared the fears about social unrest that dominated the middle classes during the 1890s, he was not as conservative as his critics believed. He supported the right of labor to organize and strike, and he ruled against employers in several negligence cases.\" Among these was \"Voight v. Baltimore &amp; Ohio Southwestern Railway Co.\" Taft's decision for a worker injured in a railway accident violated the contemporary doctrine of liberty of contract, and he was reversed by the Supreme Court. On the other hand, Taft's opinion in \"United States v. Addyston Pipe and Steel Co.\" was upheld unanimously by the high court. Taft's opinion, in which he held that a pipe manufacturers' association had violated the Sherman Antitrust Act, was described by Henry Pringle, his biographer, as having \"definitely and specifically revived\" that legislation.\nIn 1896, Taft became dean and Professor of Property at his \"alma mater\", the Cincinnati Law School, a post that required him to prepare and give two hour-long lectures each week. He was devoted to his law school, and was deeply committed to legal education, introducing the case method to the curriculum. As a federal judge, Taft could not involve himself with politics, but followed it closely, remaining a Republican supporter. He watched with some disbelief as the campaign of Ohio Governor William McKinley developed in 1894 and 1895, writing \"I cannot find anybody in Washington who wants him\". By March 1896, Taft realized that McKinley would likely be nominated, and was lukewarm in his support. He landed solidly in McKinley's camp after former Nebraska representative William Jennings Bryan in July stampeded the 1896 Democratic National Convention with his Cross of Gold speech. Bryan, both in that address and in his campaign, strongly advocated free silver, a policy that Taft saw as economic radicalism. Taft feared that people would hoard gold in anticipation of a Bryan victory, but he could do nothing but worry. McKinley was elected; when a place on the Supreme Court opened in 1898, the only one under McKinley, the president named Joseph McKenna.\nFrom the 1890s until his death, Taft played a major role in the international legal community. He was active in many organizations, was a leader in the worldwide arbitration movement, and taught international law at the Yale Law School. Taft advocated the establishment of a world court of arbitration supported by an international police force and is considered a major proponent of \"world peace through law\" movement. One of the reasons for his bitter break with Roosevelt in 1910\u201312 was Roosevelt's insistence that arbitration was na\u00efve and that only war could decide major international disputes.\nPhilippine years.\nIn January 1900, Taft was called to Washington to meet with McKinley. Taft hoped a Supreme Court appointment was in the works, but instead McKinley wanted to place Taft on the commission to organize a civilian government in the Philippines. The appointment would require Taft's resignation from the bench; the president assured him that if he fulfilled this task, McKinley would appoint him to the next vacancy on the high court. Taft accepted on condition he was made head of the commission, with responsibility for success or failure; McKinley agreed, and Taft sailed for the islands in April 1900.\nThe American takeover meant the Philippine Revolution bled into the Philippine\u2013American War, as Filipinos fought for their independence, but U.S. forces, led by military governor General Arthur MacArthur Jr. had the upper hand by 1900. MacArthur felt the commission was a nuisance, and their mission a quixotic attempt to impose self-government on a people unready for it. The general was forced to co-operate with Taft, as McKinley had given the commission control over the islands' military budget. The commission took executive power in the Philippines on September 1, 1900; on July 4, 1901, Taft became civilian governor. MacArthur, until then the military governor, was relieved by General Adna Chaffee, who was designated only as commander of American forces. As Governor-General, Taft oversaw the final months of the primary phase of the Philippine\u2013American War. He approved of General James Franklin Bell's use of concentration camps in the provinces of Batangas and Laguna, and accepted the surrender of Filipino general Miguel Malvar on April 16, 1902.\nTaft sought to make the Filipinos partners in a venture that would lead to their self-government; he saw independence as something decades off. Many Americans in the Philippines viewed the locals as racial inferiors, but Taft wrote soon before his arrival, \"we propose to banish this idea from their minds\". Taft did not impose racial segregation at official events, and treated the Filipinos as social equals. Nellie Taft recalled that \"neither politics nor race should influence our hospitality in any way\".\nMcKinley was assassinated in September 1901, and was succeeded by Theodore Roosevelt. Taft and Roosevelt had first become friends around 1890 while Taft was Solicitor General and Roosevelt a member of the United States Civil Service Commission. Taft had, after McKinley's election, urged the appointment of Roosevelt as Assistant Secretary of the Navy, and watched as Roosevelt became a war hero, Governor of New York, and Vice President of the United States. They met again when Taft went to Washington in January 1902 to recuperate after two operations caused by an infection. There, Taft testified before the Senate Committee on the Philippines. Taft wanted Filipino farmers to have a stake in the new government through land ownership, but much of the arable land was held by Catholic religious orders of mostly Spanish priests, which were often resented by the Filipinos. Roosevelt had Taft go to Rome to negotiate with Pope Leo XIII, to purchase the lands and to arrange the withdrawal of the Spanish priests, with Americans replacing them and training locals as clergy. Taft did not succeed in resolving these issues on his visit to Rome, but an agreement on both points was made in 1903.\nSecretary of War.\nIn late 1902, Taft had heard from Roosevelt that a seat on the Supreme Court would soon fall vacant on the resignation of Justice George Shiras, and Roosevelt desired that Taft fill it. Although this was Taft's professional goal, he refused as he felt his work as governor was not yet done. The following year, Roosevelt asked Taft to become Secretary of War. As the War Department administered the Philippines, Taft would remain responsible for the islands, and Elihu Root, the incumbent, was willing to postpone his departure until 1904, allowing Taft time to wrap up his work in Manila. After consulting with his family, Taft agreed, and sailed for the United States in December 1903.\nWhen Taft took office as Secretary of War in January 1904, he was not called upon to spend much time administering the army, which the president was content to do himself\u2014Roosevelt wanted Taft as a troubleshooter in difficult situations, as a legal adviser, and to be able to give campaign speeches as he sought election in his own right. Taft strongly defended Roosevelt's record in his addresses, and wrote of the president's successful but strenuous efforts to gain election, \"I would not run for president if you guaranteed the office. It is awful to be afraid of one's shadow.\"\nBetween 1905 and 1907, Taft came to terms with the likelihood he would be the next Republican nominee for president, though he did not plan to actively campaign for it. When Justice Henry Billings Brown resigned in 1906, Taft would not accept the seat although Roosevelt offered it, a position Taft held to when another seat opened in 1906. Edith Roosevelt, the First Lady, disliked the growing closeness between the two men, feeling that they were too much alike and that the president did not gain much from the advice of someone who rarely contradicted him.\nAlternatively, Taft wanted to be chief justice, and kept a close eye on the health of the aging incumbent, Melville Fuller, who turned 75 in 1908. Taft believed Fuller likely to live many years. Roosevelt had indicated he was likely to appoint Taft if the opportunity came to fill the court's center seat, but some considered Attorney General Philander Knox a better candidate. In any event, Fuller remained chief justice throughout Roosevelt's presidency.\nThrough the 1903 separation of Panama from Colombia and the Hay\u2013Bunau-Varilla Treaty, the United States had secured rights to build a canal in the Isthmus of Panama. Legislation authorizing construction did not specify which government department would be responsible, and Roosevelt designated the Department of War. Taft journeyed to Panama in 1904, viewing the canal site and meeting with Panamanian officials. The Isthmian Canal Commission had trouble keeping a chief engineer, and when in February 1907 John F. Stevens submitted his resignation, Taft recommended an army engineer, George W. Goethals. Under Goethals, the project moved ahead smoothly.\nAnother colony lost by Spain in 1898 was Cuba, but as freedom for Cuba had been a major purpose of the war, it was not annexed by the U.S., but was, after a period of occupation, given independence in 1902. Election fraud and corruption followed, as did factional conflict. In September 1906, President Tom\u00e1s Estrada Palma asked for U.S. intervention. Taft traveled to Cuba with a small American force, and on September 29, 1906, under the terms of the Cuban\u2013American Treaty of Relations of 1903, declared himself Provisional Governor of Cuba, a post he held for two weeks before being succeeded by Charles Edward Magoon. In his time in Cuba, Taft worked to persuade Cubans that the U.S. intended stability, not occupation.\nTaft remained involved in Philippine affairs. During Roosevelt's election campaign in 1904, he urged that Philippine agricultural products be admitted to the U.S. without duty. This caused growers of U.S. sugar and tobacco to complain to Roosevelt, who remonstrated with his Secretary of War. Taft expressed unwillingness to change his position, and threatened to resign; Roosevelt hastily dropped the matter. Taft returned to the islands in 1905, leading a delegation of congressmen, and again in 1907, to open the first Philippine Assembly.\nOn both of his Philippine trips as Secretary of War, Taft went to Japan, and met with officials there. The meeting in July 1905 came a month before the Portsmouth Peace Conference, which would end the Russo-Japanese War with the Treaty of Portsmouth. Taft met with Japanese prime minister Katsura Tar\u014d. After that meeting, the two signed a memorandum. It contained nothing new but instead reaffirmed official positions: Japan had no intention to invade the Philippines, and the U.S. that it did not object to Japanese control of Korea. There were U.S. concerns about the number of Japanese laborers coming to the American West Coast, and during Taft's second visit, in September 1907, Tadasu Hayashi, the foreign minister, informally agreed to issue fewer passports to them.\nPresidential election of 1908.\nGaining the nomination.\nRoosevelt had served almost three and a half years of McKinley's term. On the night of his own election in 1904, Roosevelt publicly declared that he would not run for reelection in 1908, a pledge he quickly regretted. But he felt bound by his word. Roosevelt believed Taft was his logical successor, although the War Secretary had initially been reluctant to run. Roosevelt used his control of the party machinery to aid his heir apparent. On pain of the loss of their jobs, political appointees were required to support Taft or remain silent.\nA number of Republican politicians, such as Treasury Secretary George Cortelyou, tested the waters for a run but chose to stay out. New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes ran, but when he made a major policy speech, Roosevelt the same day sent a special message to Congress warning in strong terms against corporate corruption. The resulting coverage of the presidential message relegated Hughes to the back pages. Roosevelt reluctantly deterred repeated attempts to draft him for another term.\nAssistant Postmaster General Frank H. Hitchcock resigned from his office in February 1908 to lead the Taft effort. In April, Taft made a speaking tour, traveling as far west as Omaha before being recalled to straighten out a contested election in Panama. He had no serious opposition at the 1908 Republican National Convention in Chicago in June, and gained a first-ballot victory. Yet Taft did not have things his own way: he had hoped his running mate would be a midwestern progressive like Iowa senator Jonathan Dolliver, but instead the convention named Congressman James S. Sherman of New York, a conservative. Taft resigned as Secretary of War on June 30 to devote himself full-time to the campaign.\nGeneral election campaign.\nTaft's opponent in the general election was William Jennings Bryan, the Democratic nominee for the third time in four presidential elections. As many of Roosevelt's reforms stemmed from proposals by Bryan, the Democrat argued that he was the true heir to Roosevelt's mantle. Corporate contributions to federal political campaigns had been outlawed by the 1907 Tillman Act, and Bryan proposed that contributions by officers and directors of corporations be similarly banned, or at least disclosed when made. Taft was only willing to see the contributions disclosed after the election, and tried to ensure that officers and directors of corporations litigating with the government were not among his contributors.\nTaft began the campaign on the wrong foot, fueling the arguments of those who said he was not his own man by traveling to Roosevelt's home at Sagamore Hill for advice on his acceptance speech, saying that he needed \"the President's judgment and criticism\". Taft supported most of Roosevelt's policies. He argued that labor had a right to organize, but not boycott, and that corporations and the wealthy must also obey the law. Bryan wanted the railroads to be owned by the government, but Taft preferred that they remain in the private sector, with their maximum rates set by the Interstate Commerce Commission, subject to judicial review. Taft attributed blame for the recent recession, the Panic of 1907, to stock speculation and other abuses, and felt some reform of the currency (the U.S. was on the gold standard) was needed to allow flexibility in the government's response to poor economic times, that specific legislation on trusts was needed to supplement the Sherman Antitrust Act, and that the constitution should be amended to allow for an income tax, thus overruling decisions of the Supreme Court striking such a tax down. Roosevelt's expansive use of executive power had been controversial; Taft proposed to continue his policies, but place them on more solid legal underpinnings through the passage of legislation.\nTaft upset some progressives by choosing Frank Harris Hitchcock as chairman of the Republican National Committee (RNC), placing him in charge of the presidential campaign. Hitchcock was quick to bring in men closely allied with big business. Taft took an August vacation in Hot Springs, Virginia, where he irritated political advisors by spending more time on golf than strategy. After seeing a newspaper photo of Taft taking a large swing at a golf ball, Roosevelt warned him against candid shots.\nRoosevelt, frustrated by his own relative inaction, showered Taft with advice, fearing that the electorate would not appreciate Taft's qualities, and that Bryan would win. Roosevelt's supporters spread rumors that the president was in effect running Taft's campaign. This annoyed Nellie Taft, who never trusted the Roosevelts. Nevertheless, Roosevelt supported the Republican nominee with such enthusiasm that humorists suggested \"TAFT\" stood for \"Take advice from Theodore\".\nBryan urged a system of bank guarantees, so that depositors could be repaid if banks failed, but Taft opposed this, offering a postal savings system instead. The issue of prohibition of alcohol entered the campaign when in mid-September, Carrie Nation called on Taft and demanded to know his views. Taft and Roosevelt had agreed the party platform would take no position on the matter, and Nation left indignant, to allege that Taft was irreligious and against temperance. Taft, at Roosevelt's advice, ignored the issue.\nIn the end, Taft won by a comfortable margin. Taft defeated Bryan by 321 electoral votes to 162; however, he garnered just 51.6 percent of the popular vote. Nellie Taft said regarding the campaign, \"There was nothing to criticize, except his not knowing or caring about the way the game of politics is played.\" Longtime White House usher Ike Hoover recalled that Taft came often to see Roosevelt during the campaign, but seldom between the election and Inauguration Day, March 4, 1909.\nOn February 18, 1909, after his election but before his inauguration, Taft was recognized as a Mason at sight at the Scottish Rite Cathedral in Cincinnati.\nPresidency (1909\u20131913).\nInauguration and appointments.\nTaft was sworn in as president on March 4, 1909. Due to a winter storm that coated Washington with ice, Taft was inaugurated within the Senate Chamber rather than outside the Capitol as is customary. The new president stated in his inaugural address that he had been honored to have been \"one of the advisers of my distinguished predecessor\" and to have had a part \"in the reforms he has initiated. I should be untrue to myself, to my promises, and to the declarations of the party platform on which I was elected if I did not make the maintenance and enforcement of those reforms a most important feature of my administration\". He pledged to make those reforms long-lasting, ensuring that honest businessmen did not suffer uncertainty through change of policy. He spoke of the need to reduce the 1897 Dingley tariff, of the need for antitrust reform, and for continued advancement of the Philippines toward full self-government. Roosevelt left office with regret that his tenure in the position he enjoyed so much was over and, to keep out of Taft's way, arranged for a year-long hunting trip to Africa.\nSoon after the Republican convention, Taft and Roosevelt had discussed which cabinet officers would stay on. Taft kept only Agriculture Secretary James Wilson and Postmaster General George von Lengerke Meyer (who was transferred to the Navy Department). Others appointed to the Taft cabinet included Philander Knox, who had served under McKinley and Roosevelt as Attorney General, as the new Secretary of State, and Franklin MacVeagh as Treasury Secretary.\nTaft did not enjoy the easy relationship with the press that Roosevelt had, choosing not to offer himself for interviews or photo opportunities as often as his predecessor had. His administration marked a change in style from the charismatic leadership of Roosevelt to Taft's quieter passion for the rule of law.\nFirst Lady's illness.\nEarly in Taft's term, in May 1909, his wife Nellie had a severe stroke that left her paralyzed in one arm and one leg and deprived her of the power of speech. Taft spent several hours each day looking after her and teaching her to speak again, which took a year.\nForeign policy.\nOrganization and principles.\n BEP engraved portrait of Taft as President\nTaft made it a priority to restructure the State Department, noting, \"it is organized on the basis of the needs of the government in 1800 instead of 1900.\" The department was for the first time organized into geographical divisions, including desks for the Far East, Latin America and Western Europe. The department's first in-service training program was established, and appointees spent a month in Washington before going to their posts. Taft and Secretary of State Knox had a strong relationship, and the president listened to his counsel on matters foreign and domestic. According to historian Paolo E. Coletta, Knox was not a good diplomat, and had poor relations with the Senate, press, and many foreign leaders, especially those from Latin America.\nThere was broad agreement between Taft and Knox on major foreign policy goals; the U.S. would not interfere in European affairs, and would use force if necessary to enforce the Monroe Doctrine in the Americas. The defense of the Panama Canal, which was under construction throughout Taft's term (it opened in 1914), guided United States foreign policy in the Caribbean and Central America. Previous administrations had made efforts to promote American business interests overseas, but Taft went a step further and used the web of American diplomats and consuls abroad to further trade. Such ties, Taft hoped, would promote world peace. Taft pushed for arbitration treaties with Great Britain and France, but the Senate was not willing to yield to arbitrators its constitutional prerogative to approve treaties.\nTariffs and reciprocity.\nAt the time of Taft's presidency, protectionism through the use of tariffs was a fundamental position of the Republican Party. The Dingley Act tariff had been enacted to protect American industry from foreign competition. The 1908 party platform had supported unspecified revisions to the Dingley Act, and Taft interpreted this to mean reduction. Taft called a special session of Congress to convene on March 15, 1909, to deal with the tariff question.\nSereno E. Payne, chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, had held hearings in late 1908, and sponsored the resulting draft legislation. On balance, the bill reduced tariffs slightly, but when it passed the House in April 1909 and reached the Senate, the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, Rhode Island senator Nelson W. Aldrich, attached many amendments raising rates. This outraged progressives such as Wisconsin's Robert M. La Follette, who urged Taft to say that the bill was not in accord with the party platform. Taft refused, angering them. Taft insisted that most imports from the Philippines be free of duty, and according to Anderson, showed effective leadership on a subject he was knowledgeable on and cared about.\nWhen opponents sought to modify the tariff bill to allow for an income tax, Taft opposed it on the ground that the Supreme Court would likely strike it down as unconstitutional, as it had before. Instead, they proposed a constitutional amendment, which passed both houses in early July, was sent to the states, and by 1913 was ratified as the Sixteenth Amendment. In the conference committee, Taft won some victories, such as limiting the tax on lumber. The conference report passed both houses, and Taft signed it on August 6, 1909. The Payne-Aldrich tariff was immediately controversial. According to Coletta, \"Taft had lost the initiative, and the wounds inflicted in the acrid tariff debate never healed\".\nIn Taft's annual message sent to Congress in December 1910, he urged a free trade accord with Canada. Britain at that time still handled Canada's foreign relations, and Taft found the British and Canadian governments willing. Many in Canada opposed an accord, fearing the U.S. would dump it when it became inconvenient, as it had the 1854 Elgin-Marcy Treaty in 1866, and farm and fisheries interests in the United States were also opposed. After talks with Canadian officials in January 1911, Taft had the agreement, which was not a treaty, introduced into Congress. It passed in late July. The Parliament of Canada led by Prime Minister Sir Wilfrid Laurier had deadlocked over the issue. Canadians turned Laurier out of office in the September 1911 election and Robert Borden became the new prime minister. No cross-border agreement was concluded, and the debate deepened divisions within the Republican Party.\nLatin America.\nTaft and his Secretary of State, Philander Knox, instituted a policy of Dollar Diplomacy toward Latin America, believing U.S. investment would benefit all involved, while diminishing European influence in regions where the Monroe Doctrine applied. The policy was unpopular among Latin American states that did not wish to become financial protectorates of the United States, as well as in the U.S. Senate, many of whose members believed the U.S. should not interfere abroad. No foreign affairs controversy tested Taft's policy more than the collapse of the Mexican regime and subsequent turmoil of the Mexican Revolution.\nWhen Taft entered office, Mexico was increasingly restless under the grip of longtime dictator Porfirio D\u00edaz. Many Mexicans backed his opponent, Francisco Madero. There were a number of incidents in which Mexican rebels crossed the U.S. border to obtain horses and weapons; Taft sought to prevent this by ordering the US Army to the border areas for maneuvers. Taft told his military aide, Archibald Butt, that \"I am going to sit on the lid and it will take a great deal to pry me off\". He showed his support for D\u00edaz by meeting with him at El Paso, Texas, and Ciudad Ju\u00e1rez, Chihuahua, the first meeting between a U.S. and a Mexican president and also the first time an American president visited Mexico. The day of the summit, Frederick Russell Burnham and a Texas Ranger captured and disarmed an assassin holding a palm pistol only a few feet from the two presidents. Before the election in Mexico, D\u00edaz jailed opposition candidate Francisco I. Madero, whose supporters took up arms. This resulted in both the ousting of D\u00edaz and a revolution that would continue for another ten years. In the U.S.'s Arizona Territory, two citizens were killed and almost a dozen injured, some as a result of gunfire across the border. Taft was against an aggressive response and so instructed the territorial governor.\nNicaragua's president, Jos\u00e9 Santos Zelaya, wanted to revoke commercial concessions granted to American companies, and American diplomats quietly favored rebel forces under Juan Estrada. Nicaragua was in debt to foreign powers, and the U.S. was unwilling to let an alternate canal route fall into the hands of Europeans. Zelaya's elected successor, Jos\u00e9 Madriz, could not put down the rebellion as U.S. forces interfered, and in August 1910, the Estrada forces took Managua, the capital. The U.S. compelled Nicaragua to accept a loan, and sent officials to ensure it was repaid from government revenues. The country remained unstable, and after another coup in 1911 and more disturbances in 1912, Taft sent troops to begin the United States occupation of Nicaragua, which lasted until 1933.\nTreaties among Panama, Colombia, and the United States to resolve disputes arising from the Panamanian Revolution of 1903 had been signed by the lame-duck Roosevelt administration in early 1909, and were approved by the Senate and also ratified by Panama. Colombia, however, declined to ratify the treaties, and after the 1912 elections, Knox offered $10\u00a0million to the Colombians (later raised to $25\u00a0million). The Colombians felt the amount inadequate, and requested arbitration; the matter was not settled under the Taft administration.\nEast Asia.\nDue to his years in the Philippines, Taft was keenly interested as president in East Asian affairs. Taft considered relations with Europe relatively unimportant, but because of the potential for trade and investment, Taft ranked the post of minister to China as most important in the Foreign Service. Knox did not agree, and declined a suggestion that he go to Peking to view the facts on the ground. Taft considered Roosevelt's minister there, William W. Rockhill, as uninterested in the China trade, and replaced him with William J. Calhoun, whom McKinley and Roosevelt had sent on several foreign missions. Knox did not listen to Calhoun on policy, and there were often conflicts. Taft and Knox tried unsuccessfully to extend John Hay's Open Door Policy to Manchuria.\nIn 1898, an American company had gained a concession for a railroad between Hankow and Sichuan, but the Chinese revoked the agreement in 1904 after the company (which was indemnified for the revocation) breached the agreement by selling a majority stake outside the United States. The Chinese imperial government got the money for the indemnity from the British Hong Kong government, on condition British subjects would be favored if foreign capital was needed to build the railroad line, and in 1909, a British-led consortium began negotiations. This came to Knox's attention in May of that year, and he demanded that U.S. banks be allowed to participate. Taft appealed personally to the Prince Regent, Zaifeng, Prince Chun, and was successful in gaining U.S. participation, though agreements were not signed until May 1911. However, the Chinese decree authorizing the agreement also required the nationalization of local railroad companies in the affected provinces. Inadequate compensation was paid to the shareholders, and these grievances were among those which touched off the 1911 Revolution.\nAfter the revolution broke out, the revolt's leaders chose Sun Yat-sen as provisional president of what became the Republic of China, overthrowing the Manchu dynasty, Taft was reluctant to recognize the new government, although American public opinion was in favor of it. The U.S. House of Representatives in February 1912 passed a resolution supporting a Chinese republic, but Taft and Knox felt recognition should come as a concerted action by Western powers. Taft in his final annual message to Congress in December 1912 indicated that he was moving toward recognition once the republic was fully established, but by then he had been defeated for reelection and he did not follow through.\nTaft continued the policy against immigration from China and Japan as under Roosevelt. A revised treaty of friendship and navigation entered into by the U.S. and Japan in 1911 granted broad reciprocal rights to Japanese people in America and Americans in Japan, but were premised on the continuation of the Gentlemen's Agreement. There was objection on the West Coast when the treaty was submitted to the Senate, but Taft informed politicians that there was no change in immigration policy.\nEurope.\nTaft was opposed to the traditional practice of rewarding wealthy supporters with key ambassadorial posts, preferring that diplomats not live in a lavish lifestyle and selecting men who, as Taft put it, would recognize an American when they saw one. High on his list for dismissal was the ambassador to France, Henry White, whom Taft knew and disliked from his visits to Europe. White's ousting caused other career State Department employees to fear that their jobs might be lost to politics. Taft also wanted to replace the Roosevelt-appointed ambassador in London, Whitelaw Reid, but Reid, owner of the \"New-York Tribune\", had backed Taft during the campaign, and both William and Nellie Taft enjoyed his gossipy reports. Reid remained in place until his 1912 death.\nTaft was a supporter of settling international disputes by arbitration, and he negotiated treaties with Great Britain and with France providing that differences be arbitrated. These were signed in August 1911. Neither Taft nor Knox (a former senator) consulted with members of the Senate during the negotiating process. By then many Republicans were opposed to Taft and the president felt that lobbying too hard for the treaties might cause their defeat. He made some speeches supporting the treaties in October, but the Senate added amendments Taft could not accept, killing the agreements.\nAlthough no general arbitration treaty was entered into, Taft's administration settled several disputes with Great Britain by peaceful means, often involving arbitration. These included a settlement of the boundary between Maine and New Brunswick, a long-running dispute over seal hunting in the Bering Sea that also involved Japan, and a similar disagreement regarding fishing off Newfoundland. The sealing convention remained in force until abrogated by Japan in 1940.\nDomestic policies and politics.\nAntitrust.\nTaft continued and expanded Roosevelt's efforts to break up business combinations through lawsuits brought under the Sherman Antitrust Act, bringing 70 cases in four years (Roosevelt had brought 40 in seven years). Suits brought against the Standard Oil Company and the American Tobacco Company, initiated under Roosevelt, were decided in favor of the government by the Supreme Court in 1911. In June 1911, the Democrat-controlled House of Representatives began hearings into United States Steel (U.S. Steel). That company had been expanded under Roosevelt, who had supported its acquisition of the Tennessee Coal, Iron, and Railroad Company as a means of preventing the deepening of the Panic of 1907, a decision the former president defended when testifying at the hearings. Taft, as Secretary of War, had praised the acquisitions. Historian Louis L. Gould suggested that Roosevelt was likely deceived into believing that U.S. Steel did not want to purchase the Tennessee company, but it was in fact a bargain. For Roosevelt, questioning the matter went to his personal honesty.\nIn October 1911, Taft's Justice Department brought suit against U.S. Steel, demanding that over a hundred of its subsidiaries be granted corporate independence, and naming as defendants many prominent business executives and financiers. The pleadings in the case had not been reviewed by Taft, and alleged that Roosevelt \"had fostered monopoly, and had been duped by clever industrialists\". Roosevelt was offended by the references to him and his administration in the pleadings, and felt that Taft could not evade command responsibility by saying he did not know of them.\nTaft sent a special message to Congress on the need for a revamped antitrust statute when it convened its regular session in December 1911, but it took no action. Another antitrust case that had political repercussions for Taft was that brought against the International Harvester Company, the large manufacturer of farm equipment, in early 1912. As Roosevelt's administration had investigated International Harvester, but had taken no action (a decision Taft had supported), the suit became caught up in Roosevelt's challenge for the Republican presidential nomination. Supporters of Taft alleged that Roosevelt had acted improperly; the former president blasted Taft for waiting three and a half years, and until he was under challenge, to reverse a decision he had supported.\nBallinger\u2013Pinchot affair.\nRoosevelt was an ardent conservationist, assisted in this by like-minded appointees, including Interior Secretary James R. Garfield and Chief Forester Gifford Pinchot. Taft agreed with the need for conservation, but felt it should be accomplished by legislation rather than executive order. He did not retain Garfield, an Ohioan, as secretary, choosing instead a westerner, former Seattle mayor Richard A. Ballinger. Roosevelt was surprised at the replacement, believing that Taft had promised to keep Garfield, and this change was one of the events that caused Roosevelt to realize that Taft would choose different policies.\nRoosevelt had withdrawn much land from the public domain, including some in Alaska thought rich in coal. In 1902, Clarence Cunningham, an Idaho entrepreneur, had found coal deposits in Alaska, and made mining claims, and the government investigated their legality. This dragged on for the remainder of the Roosevelt administration, including during the year (1907\u20131908) when Ballinger served as head of the United States General Land Office. A special agent for the Land Office, Louis Glavis, investigated the Cunningham claims, and when Secretary Ballinger in 1909 approved them, Glavis broke governmental protocol by going outside the Interior Department to seek help from Pinchot.\nIn September 1909, Glavis made his allegations public in a magazine article, disclosing that Ballinger had acted as an attorney for Cunningham between his two periods of government service. This violated conflict of interest rules forbidding a former government official from advocacy on a matter he had been responsible for. On September 13, 1909, Taft dismissed Glavis from government service, relying on a report from Attorney General George W. Wickersham dated two days previously. Pinchot was determined to dramatize the issue by forcing his own dismissal, which Taft tried to avoid, fearing that it might cause a break with Roosevelt (still overseas). Taft asked Elihu Root (by then a senator) to look into the matter, and Root urged the firing of Pinchot.\nTaft had ordered government officials not to comment on the fracas. In January 1910, Pinchot forced the issue by sending a letter to Iowa senator Dolliver alleging that but for the actions of the Forestry Service, Taft would have approved a fraudulent claim on public lands. According to Pringle, this \"was an utterly improper appeal from an executive subordinate to the legislative branch of the government and an unhappy president prepared to separate Pinchot from public office\". Pinchot was dismissed, much to his delight, and he sailed for Europe to lay his case before Roosevelt. A congressional investigation followed, which cleared Ballinger by majority vote, but the administration was embarrassed when Glavis' attorney, Louis D. Brandeis, proved that the Wickersham report had been backdated, which Taft belatedly admitted. The Ballinger\u2013Pinchot affair caused progressives and Roosevelt loyalists to feel that Taft had turned his back on Roosevelt's agenda.\nCivil rights.\nTaft announced in his inaugural address that he would not appoint African Americans to federal jobs, such as postmaster, where this would cause racial friction. This differed from Roosevelt, who would not remove or replace black officeholders with whom local whites would not deal. Termed Taft's \"Southern Policy\", this stance effectively invited white protests against black appointees. Taft followed through, removing most black office holders in the South, and made few appointments of African Americans in the North.\nAt the time Taft was inaugurated, the way forward for African Americans was debated by their leaders. Booker T. Washington proposed in his Atlanta Compromise that most blacks be trained for industrial work, with only a few seeking higher education; W. E. B. DuBois took a more militant stand for equality. Taft tended toward Washington's approach. According to Coletta, Taft let the African-American \"be 'kept in his place' ... He thus failed to see or follow the humanitarian mission historically associated with the Republican party, with the result that Negroes both North and South began to drift toward the Democratic party.\"\nTaft, a Unitarian, was a leader in the early 20th century of the favorable reappraisal of Catholicism's historic role. It tended to neutralize anti-Catholic sentiments, especially in the Far West where Protestantism was a weak force. In 1904 Taft gave a speech at the University of Notre Dame. He praised the \"enterprise, courage, and fidelity to duty that distinguished those heroes of Spain who braved the then frightful dangers of the deep to carry Christianity and European civilization into\" the Philippines. In 1909 he praised Jun\u00edpero Serra as an \"apostle, legislator, [and] builder\" who advanced \"the beginning of civilization in California.\"\nA supporter of free immigration, Taft vetoed a bill passed by Congress and supported by labor unions that would have restricted unskilled laborers by imposing a literacy test.\nJudicial appointments.\nTaft made six appointments to the Supreme Court; only George Washington and Franklin D. Roosevelt made more. The death of Justice Rufus W. Peckham in October 1909 gave Taft his first opportunity. He chose an old friend and colleague from the Sixth Circuit, Horace H. Lurton of Georgia; he had in vain urged Theodore Roosevelt to appoint Lurton to the high court. Attorney General Wickersham objected that Lurton, a former Confederate soldier and a Democrat, was aged 65. Taft named Lurton anyway on December 13, 1909, and the Senate confirmed him by voice vote a week later. Lurton is still the oldest person to be made an associate justice. Lurie suggested that Taft, already beset by the tariff and conservation controversies, desired to perform an official act which gave him pleasure, especially since he thought Lurton deserved it.\nJustice David Josiah Brewer's death on March 28, 1910, gave Taft a second opportunity to fill a seat on the high court; he chose New York Governor Charles Evans Hughes. Taft told Hughes that should the chief justiceship fall vacant during his term, Hughes would be his likely choice for the center seat. The Senate quickly confirmed Hughes, but then Chief Justice Fuller died on July 4, 1910. Taft took five months to replace Fuller, and when he did, it was with Justice Edward Douglass White, who became the first associate justice to be promoted to chief justice. According to Lurie, Taft, who still had hopes of being chief justice, may have been more willing to appoint an older man than he (White) than a younger one (Hughes), who might outlive him, as indeed Hughes did. To fill White's seat as associate justice, Taft appointed Willis Van Devanter of Wyoming, a federal appeals judge. By the time Taft nominated White and Van Devanter in December 1910, he had another seat to fill due to William Henry Moody's retirement because of illness; he named a Louisiana Democrat, Joseph R. Lamar, whom he had met while playing golf, and had subsequently learned had a good reputation as a judge.\nWith the death of Justice Harlan in October 1911, Taft got to fill a sixth seat on the Supreme Court. After Secretary Knox declined appointment, Taft named Chancellor of New Jersey Mahlon Pitney. Pitney had a stronger anti-labor record than Taft's other appointments, and was the only one to meet opposition, winning confirmation by a Senate vote of 50\u201326.\nTaft appointed 13 judges to the federal courts of appeal and 38 to the United States district courts. He also appointed judges to various specialized courts, including the first five appointees each to the United States Commerce Court and the United States Court of Customs Appeals. The Commerce Court, created in 1910, stemmed from a Taft proposal for a specialized court to hear appeals from the Interstate Commerce Commission. There was considerable opposition to its establishment, which grew only when one of its judges, Robert W. Archbald, was in 1912 impeached for corruption and removed by the Senate the following January. Taft vetoed a bill to abolish the court, but the respite was short-lived as Woodrow Wilson signed similar legislation in October 1913.\n1912 presidential campaign and election.\nMoving apart from Roosevelt.\nDuring Roosevelt's fifteen months beyond the Atlantic, from March 1909 to June 1910, neither man wrote much to the other. Taft biographer Lurie suggested that each expected the other to make the first move to re-establish their relationship on a new footing. Upon Roosevelt's triumphant return, Taft invited him to stay at the White House. The former president declined, and in private letters to friends expressed dissatisfaction at Taft's performance. Taft and Roosevelt met twice in 1910; the meetings, though outwardly cordial, did not display their former closeness. Nevertheless, he wrote that he expected Taft to be renominated by the Republicans in 1912, and did not speak of himself as a candidate.\nRoosevelt gave a series of speeches in the West in the late summer and early fall of 1910 in which he severely criticized the nation's judiciary. He not only attacked the Supreme Court's 1905 decision \"Lochner v. New York\", he accused the federal courts of undermining democracy, branding the suspect jurists \"fossilized judges\", and comparing their tendency to strike down progressive reform legislation to Justice Roger Taney's ruling in \"Dred Scott v. Sandford\" (1857). To ensure that the constitution served the public interest, Roosevelt joined other progressives, including the Democrat William Jennings Bryan, in calling for \"judicial recall\", which would theoretically enable popular majorities to remove judges from office by referendum and, in some cases, reverse unpopular judicial decisions. This attack horrified Taft, who, though he privately agreed that \"Lochner\" and other decisions had been poorly decided, adamantly believed in the importance of judicial authority to constitutional government. His personal horror was shared by other prominent members of the nation's elite legal community, like Elihu Root and Alton B. Parker, and solidified in Taft's mind that Roosevelt must not be permitted to regain the presidency, whatever the cost.\nIn addition to the judicial issue, Roosevelt called for \"elimination of corporate expenditures for political purposes, physical valuation of railroad properties, regulation of industrial combinations, establishment of an export tariff commission, a graduated income tax\", and \"workmen's compensation laws, state and national legislation to regulate the [labor] of women and children, and complete publicity of campaign expenditure\". According to John Murphy, \"As Roosevelt began to move to the left, Taft veered to the right.\"\nDuring the 1910 midterm election campaign, Roosevelt involved himself in New York politics. With donations and influence, Taft meanwhile tried to secure the election of Ohio's Republican gubernatorial nominee, former lieutenant governor Warren G. Harding. The Republicans suffered losses in the 1910 elections as the Democrats took control of the House and slashed the Republican majority in the Senate. In New Jersey, Democrat Woodrow Wilson was elected governor, and Harding lost in Ohio.\nAfter the election, Roosevelt continued to promote progressive ideals, a New Nationalism, much to Taft's dismay. Roosevelt attacked his successor's administration, arguing that its guiding principles were not those of the party of Lincoln, but those of the Gilded Age. The feud continued on and off through 1911, a year in which there were few elections of significance. Senator Robert La Follette announced a presidential run as a Republican, and was backed by a convention of progressives. Roosevelt began to move into a position for a run in late 1911, writing that the tradition that presidents not run for a third term applied only to consecutive terms.\nRoosevelt received many letters from supporters urging him to run, and Republican office-holders were organizing on his behalf. Thwarted on many policies by an unwilling Congress and courts in his full term in the White House, he saw manifestations of public support he believed would sweep him to the White House with a mandate for progressive policies that would brook no opposition. In February, Roosevelt announced he would accept the Republican nomination if it was offered to him. Taft felt that if he lost in November, it would be a repudiation of the party, but if he lost renomination, it would be a rejection of himself. He was reluctant to oppose Roosevelt, who helped make him president, but having become president, he was determined to be president, and that meant not standing aside to allow Roosevelt to gain another term.\nPrimaries and convention.\nAs Roosevelt became more radical in his progressivism, Taft was hardened in his resolve to achieve re-nomination, as he was convinced that the progressives threatened the very foundation of the government. One blow to Taft was the loss of Archibald Butt, one of the last links between the previous and present presidents, as Butt had formerly served Roosevelt. Ambivalent between his loyalties, Butt went to Europe on vacation; he died in the sinking of the RMS \"Titanic\".\nRoosevelt dominated the primaries, winning 278 of the 362 delegates to the Republican National Convention in Chicago decided in that manner. Taft had control of the party machinery, and it came as no surprise that he gained the bulk of the delegates decided at district or state conventions. Taft did not have a majority, but was likely to have one once southern delegations committed to him. Roosevelt challenged the election of these delegates, but the RNC overruled most objections. Roosevelt's sole remaining chance was with a friendly convention chairman, who might make rulings on the seating of delegates that favored his side. Taft followed custom and remained in Washington, but Roosevelt went to Chicago to run his campaign and told his supporters in a speech, \"we stand at Armageddon, and we battle for the Lord\".\nTaft had won over Root, who agreed to run for temporary chairman of the convention, and the delegates elected Root over Roosevelt's candidate. The Roosevelt forces moved to substitute the delegates they supported for the ones they argued should not be seated. Root made a crucial ruling, that although the contested delegates could not vote on their own seating, they could vote on the other contested delegates, a ruling that assured Taft's nomination, as the motion offered by the Roosevelt forces failed, 567\u2013507. As it became clear Roosevelt would bolt the party if not nominated, some Republicans sought a compromise candidate to avert electoral disaster; they failed. Taft's name was placed in nomination by Warren G. Harding, whose attempts to praise Taft and unify the party were met with angry interruptions from progressives. Taft was nominated on the first ballot, though most Roosevelt delegates refused to vote.\nCampaign and defeat.\nAlleging Taft had stolen the nomination, Roosevelt and his followers formed the Progressive Party. Taft knew he would lose, but concluded that through Roosevelt's loss at Chicago the party had been preserved as \"the defender of conservative government and conservative institutions.\" He made his doomed run to preserve conservative control of the Republican Party. Governor Woodrow Wilson was the Democratic nominee. Seeing Roosevelt as the greater electoral threat, Wilson spent little time attacking Taft, arguing that Roosevelt had been lukewarm in opposing the trusts during his presidency, and that Wilson was the true reformer. A progressive conservative, Taft contrasted what he called his \"progressive conservatism\" with Roosevelt's Progressive democracy, which to Taft represented \"the establishment of a benevolent despotism.\"\nOf the differences between Taft and Roosevelt, one journal wrote that \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReverting to the pre-1888 custom that presidents seeking reelection did not campaign, Taft spoke publicly only once, making his nomination acceptance speech on August 1. He had difficulty in financing the campaign, as many industrialists had concluded he could not win, and would support Wilson to block Roosevelt. The president issued a confident statement in September after the Republicans narrowly won Vermont's state elections in a three-way fight, but had no illusions he would win his race. He had hoped to send his cabinet officers out on the campaign trail, but found them reluctant to go. Senator Root agreed to give a single speech for him.\nVice President Sherman had been renominated at Chicago; seriously ill during the campaign, he died six days before the election, and was replaced on the ticket by the president of Columbia University, Nicholas Murray Butler. But few electors chose Taft and Butler, who won only Utah and Vermont, for a total of eight electoral votes. Roosevelt won 88, and Wilson 435. Wilson won with a plurality\u2014not a majority\u2014of the popular vote. Taft finished with just under 3.5\u00a0million, over 600,000 less than the former president. Taft was not on the ballot in California, due to the actions of local Progressives, nor in South Dakota.\nReturn to Yale (1913\u20131921).\nWith no pension or other compensation to expect from the government after leaving the White House, Taft contemplated a return to the practice of law, from which he had long been absent. Given that Taft had appointed many federal judges, including a majority of the Supreme Court, this would raise questions of conflict of interest at every federal court appearance. He was saved from this by Yale Law School's offer to appoint him Kent Professor of Law and Legal History. He accepted, and after a month's vacation in Georgia, arrived in New Haven on April 1, 1913, to a rapturous reception. As it was too late in the semester for him to give an academic course, he instead prepared eight lectures on \"Questions of Modern Government\", which he delivered in May. In June, he was initiated as an honorary member of the campus chapter of the Acacia fraternity. He earned money with paid speeches and with articles for magazines, and would end his eight years out of office having increased his savings. While at Yale, he wrote the treatise, \"Our Chief Magistrate and His Powers\" (1916).\nTaft had been made president of the Lincoln Memorial Commission while still in office; when Democrats proposed removing him for one of their party, he quipped that unlike losing the presidency, such a removal would hurt. The architect, Henry Bacon, wanted to use Colorado-Yule marble, while southern Democrats urged using Georgia marble. Taft lobbied for the western stone, and the matter was submitted to the Commission of Fine Arts, which supported Taft and Bacon. The project went forward; Taft would dedicate the Lincoln Memorial as chief justice in 1922. In 1913, Taft was elected to a one-year term as president of the American Bar Association (ABA), a trade group of lawyers. He removed opponents, such as Louis Brandeis and University of Pennsylvania Law School dean William Draper Lewis (a supporter of the Progressive Party) from committees. At a 1913 ABA meeting in Montreal, Taft delivered remarks that harshly criticized direct election as a method of judicial selection in U.S. states (regardless of whether elections were partisan), and urged states holding such elections to return to appointive systems for judicial selection.\nTaft maintained a cordial relationship with Wilson. He privately criticized his successor on a number of issues, but made his views known publicly only on Philippine policy. Taft was appalled when, after Justice Lamar's death in January 1916, Wilson nominated Brandeis, whom Taft had never forgiven for his role in the Ballinger\u2013Pinchot affair. Within days of Brandeis's nomination, Taft began organizing opposition to it among the leadership of the American Bar Association. During Brandeis's near-unprecedented confirmation hearings, Taft and six other past ABA presidents sent the Senate Judiciary Committee a joint letter declaring strong opposition to the nomination, citing Brandeis's \"reputation, character and professional career\". Taft called the nomination \"an evil disgrace\". Brandeis was confirmed. After joining the Court, Taft came to respect and like Brandeis as a colleague.\nTaft and Roosevelt remained embittered; they met only once in the first three years of the Wilson presidency, at a funeral at Yale. They spoke only for a moment, politely but formally.\nAs president of the League to Enforce Peace, Taft hoped to prevent war through an international association of nations. With World War I raging in Europe, Taft sent Wilson a note of support for his foreign policy in 1915. President Wilson accepted Taft's invitation to address the league, and spoke in May 1916 of a postwar international organization that could prevent a repetition. Taft supported the effort to get Justice Hughes to resign from the bench and accept the Republican presidential nomination. Once this was done, Hughes tried to get Roosevelt and Taft to reconcile, as a united effort was needed to defeat Wilson. This occurred on October 3 in New York, but Roosevelt allowed only a handshake, and no words were exchanged. This was one of many difficulties for the Republicans in the campaign, and Wilson narrowly won reelection.\nIn March 1917, Taft demonstrated public support for the war effort by joining the Connecticut State Guard, a state defense force organized to carry out the state duties of the Connecticut National Guard while the National Guard served on active duty. When Wilson asked Congress to declare war on Germany in April 1917, Taft was an enthusiastic supporter; he was chairman of the American Red Cross' executive committee, which occupied much of the former president's time. In August 1917, Wilson conferred military titles on executives of the Red Cross as a way to provide them with additional authority to use in carrying out their wartime responsibilities, and Taft was appointed a major general.\nDuring the war, Taft took leave from Yale in order to serve as co-chairman of the National War Labor Board, tasked with assuring good relations between industry owners and their workers. In February 1918, the new RNC chairman, Will H. Hays, approached Taft seeking his reconciliation with Roosevelt. While at the Palmer House in Chicago, Taft heard that Roosevelt was there having dinner, and after he walked in, the two men embraced to the applause of the room, but the relationship did not progress; Roosevelt died in January 1919. Taft later wrote, \"Had he died in a hostile state of mind toward me, I would have mourned the fact all my life. I loved him always and cherish his memory.\"\nWhen Wilson proposed establishment of a League of Nations, Taft expressed public support. He was the leader of his party's activist wing, and was opposed by a small group of senators who vigorously opposed the League. Taft's flip-flop on whether reservations to the Versailles Treaty were necessary angered both sides, causing some Republicans to call him a Wilson supporter and a traitor to his party. The Senate refused to ratify the Versailles pact.\nChief Justice (1921\u20131930).\nAppointment.\nDuring the 1920 election campaign, Taft supported the Republican ticket\u2014Harding (by then a senator) and Massachusetts Governor Calvin Coolidge; they were elected. Taft was among those asked to come to the president-elect's home in Marion, Ohio, to advise him on appointments, and the two men conferred there on December 24, 1920. By Taft's later account, after some conversation, Harding casually asked if Taft would accept appointment to the Supreme Court; if Taft would, Harding would appoint him. Taft had a condition for Harding\u2014having served as president, and having appointed two of the present associate justices and opposed Brandeis, he could accept only the chief justice position. Harding made no response, and Taft in a thank-you note reiterated the condition and stated that Chief Justice White had often told him he was keeping the position for Taft until a Republican held the White House. In January 1921, Taft heard through intermediaries that Harding planned to appoint him, if given the chance.\nWhite by then was in failing health, but made no move to resign when Harding was sworn in on March 4, 1921. Taft called on the chief justice on March 26, and found White ill, but still carrying on his work and not talking of retiring. White did not retire, dying in office on May 19, 1921. Taft issued a tribute to the man he had appointed to the center seat and waited and worried if he would be White's successor. Despite widespread speculation that Taft would be the pick, Harding made no quick announcement. Taft was lobbying for himself behind the scenes, especially with the Ohio politicians who formed Harding's inner circle.\nIt later emerged that Harding had also promised former Utah senator George Sutherland a seat on the Supreme Court and was waiting in the expectation that another place would become vacant. Harding was also considering a proposal by Justice William R. Day to crown his career by being chief justice for six months before retiring. Taft felt, when he learned of this plan, that a short-term appointment would not serve the office well, and that once confirmed by the Senate, the memory of Day would grow dim. After Harding rejected Day's plan, Attorney General Harry Daugherty, who supported Taft's candidacy, urged him to fill the vacancy, and he named Taft on June 30, 1921. The Senate confirmed Taft the same day, 61\u20134, without any committee hearings and after a brief debate in executive session. Taft drew the objections of three progressive Republicans and one southern Democrat. When he was sworn in on July 11, he became the first and to date only person to serve both as president and chief justice.\nJurisprudence.\nCommerce Clause.\nThe Supreme Court under Taft compiled a conservative record in Commerce Clause jurisprudence. This had the practical effect of making it difficult for the federal government to regulate industry, and the Taft Court also scuttled many state laws. The few liberals on the court\u2014Brandeis, Holmes, and (from 1925) Harlan Fiske Stone\u2014sometimes protested, believing orderly progress essential, but often joined in the majority opinion.\nThe White Court had, in 1918, struck down an attempt by Congress to regulate child labor in \"Hammer v. Dagenhart\". Congress thereafter attempted to end child labor by imposing a tax on certain corporations making use of it. That law was overturned by the Supreme Court in 1922 in \"Bailey v. Drexel Furniture Co.\", with Taft writing the court's opinion for an 8\u20131 majority. He held that the tax was not intended to raise revenue, but rather was an attempt to regulate matters reserved to the states under the Tenth Amendment, and that allowing such taxation would eliminate the power of the states. One case in which Taft and his court upheld federal regulation was \"Stafford v. Wallace\". Taft ruled for a 7\u20131 majority that the processing of animals in stockyards was so closely tied to interstate commerce as to bring it within the ambit of Congress's power to regulate.\nA case in which the Taft Court struck down regulation that generated a dissent from the chief justice was \"Adkins v. Children's Hospital\". Congress had decreed a minimum wage for women in the District of Columbia. A 5\u20133 majority of the Supreme Court struck it down. Justice Sutherland wrote for the majority that the recently ratified Nineteenth Amendment, guaranteeing women the vote, meant that the sexes were equal when it came to bargaining power over working conditions; Taft, in dissent, deemed this unrealistic. Taft's dissent in \"Adkins\" was rare both because he authored few dissents, and because it was one of the few times he took an expansive view of the police power of the government.\nPowers of government.\nIn 1922, Taft ruled for a unanimous court in \"Balzac v. Porto Rico\". One of the Insular Cases, \"Balzac\" involved a Puerto Rico newspaper publisher who was prosecuted for libel but denied a jury trial, a Sixth Amendment protection under the constitution. Taft held that as Puerto Rico was not a territory designated for statehood, only such constitutional protections as Congress decreed would apply to its residents.\nIn 1926, Taft wrote for a 6\u20133 majority in \"Myers v. United States\" that Congress could not require the president to get Senate approval before removing an appointee. Taft noted that there is no restriction of the president's power to remove officials in the Constitution. Although \"Myers\" involved the removal of a postmaster, Taft in his opinion found invalid the repealed Tenure of Office Act, for violation of which his presidential predecessor, Andrew Johnson, had been impeached, though acquitted by the Senate. Taft valued \"Myers\" as his most important opinion.\nThe following year, the court decided \"McGrain v. Daugherty\". A congressional committee investigating possible complicity of former Attorney General Daugherty in the Teapot Dome scandal subpoenaed records from his brother, Mally, who refused to provide them, alleging Congress had no power to obtain documents from him. Van Devanter ruled for a unanimous court against him, finding that Congress had the authority to conduct investigations as an auxiliary to its legislative function.\nIndividual and civil rights.\nIn 1925, the Taft Court laid the groundwork for the incorporation of many of the guarantees of the Bill of Rights to be applied against the states through the Fourteenth Amendment. In \"Gitlow v. New York\", the Court, by a 6\u20132 vote with Taft in the majority, upheld Gitlow's conviction on criminal anarchy charges for advocating the overthrow of the government; his defense was freedom of speech. Justice Edward T. Sanford wrote the Court's opinion, and both majority and minority (Holmes, joined by Brandeis) assumed that the First Amendment's Free Speech and Free Press clauses were protected against infringement by the states.\n\"Pierce v. Society of Sisters\" was a 1925 decision by the Taft Court striking down an Oregon law banning private schools. In a decision written by Justice James C. McReynolds, a unanimous court held that Oregon could regulate private schools, but could not eliminate them. The outcome supported the right of parents to control the education of their children, and also, since the lead plaintiff (the society) ran Catholic schools, struck a blow for religious freedom.\n\"United States v. Lanza\" was one of a series of cases involving Prohibition. Lanza committed acts allegedly in violation of both state and federal law, and was first convicted in Washington state court, then prosecuted in federal district court. He alleged the second prosecution violated the Double Jeopardy Clause of the Fifth Amendment. Taft, for a unanimous court, allowed the second prosecution, holding that the state and federal governments were dual sovereigns, each empowered to prosecute the conduct in question.\nIn the 1927 case \"Lum v. Rice\", Taft wrote for a unanimous Court that included liberals Holmes, Brandeis and Stone. The ruling held the exclusion on account of race of a child of Chinese ancestry from a whites-only public school did not violate the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution. This allowed states to extend segregation in public schools to Chinese students.\nAdministration and political influence.\nTaft exercised the power of his position to influence the decisions of his colleagues, urging unanimity and discouraging dissents. Alpheus Mason, in his article on Chief Justice Taft for the \"American Bar Association Journal\", contrasted Taft's expansive view of the role of the chief justice with the narrow view of presidential power he took while in that office. Taft saw nothing wrong with making his views on possible appointments to the Court known to the White House, and was annoyed to be criticized in the press. He was initially a firm supporter of President Coolidge after Harding's death in 1923, but became disillusioned with Coolidge's appointments to office and to the bench; he had similar misgivings about Coolidge's successor, Herbert Hoover. Taft advised the Republican presidents in office while he was chief justice to avoid \"offside\" appointments like Brandeis and Holmes. Nevertheless, by 1923, Taft was writing of his liking for Brandeis, whom he deemed a hard worker, and Holmes walked to work with him until age and infirmity required an automobile.\nBelieving that the Chief Justice should be responsible for the federal courts, Taft felt that he should have an administrative staff to assist him, and the chief justice should be empowered to temporarily reassign judges. He also believed the federal courts had been ill-run. Many of the lower courts had lengthy backlogs, as did the Supreme Court. Immediately on taking office, Taft made it a priority to confer with Attorney General Daugherty as to new legislation, and made his case before congressional hearings, in legal periodicals and in speeches across the country. When Congress convened in December 1921, a bill was introduced for 24 new judges, to empower the Chief Justice to move judges temporarily to eliminate the delays, and to have him chair a body consisting of the senior appellate judge of each circuit. Congress objected to some aspects, requiring Taft to get the agreement of the senior judge of each involved circuit before assigning a judge, but it passed the bill in September 1922, and the Judicial Conference of Senior Circuit Judges held its first meeting that December.\nThe Supreme Court's docket was congested, swelled by war litigation and laws that allowed a party defeated in the circuit court of appeals to have the case decided by the Supreme Court if a constitutional question was involved. Taft believed an appeal should usually be settled by the circuit court, with only cases of major import decided by the justices. He and other Supreme Court members proposed legislation to make most of the Court's docket discretionary, with a case getting full consideration by the justices only if they granted a writ of \"certiorari\". To Taft's frustration, Congress took three years to consider the matter. Taft and other members of the Court lobbied for the bill in Congress, and the Judges' Bill became law in February 1925. By late the following year, Taft was able to show that the backlog was shrinking.\nWhen Taft became Chief Justice, the Court did not have its own building and met in the Capitol. Its offices were cluttered and overcrowded, but Fuller and White had been opposed to proposals to move the Court to its own building. In 1925, Taft began a fight to get the Court a building, and two years later Congress appropriated money to purchase the land, to the east of the Capitol. Cass Gilbert had prepared plans for the building, and was hired by the government as architect. Taft had hoped to see the Court move into the new building, but it did not do so until 1935, after Taft's death.\nDeclining health and death.\nTaft is remembered as the heaviest president; he was tall and his weight peaked at toward the end of his presidency, although by 1929 he weighed . By the time Taft became chief justice in 1921, his health was starting to decline, and he carefully planned a fitness regimen, walking from his home to the Capitol each day. When he walked back, he would usually go by way of Connecticut Avenue and use a particular crossing over Rock Creek. After his death, the crossing was named the Taft Bridge.\nTaft followed a weight loss program and hired the British doctor N. E. Yorke-Davies as a dietary advisor. The two men corresponded regularly for over twenty years, and Taft kept a daily record of his weight, food intake, and physical activity.\nAt Hoover's inauguration on March 4, 1929, Taft recited part of the oath incorrectly, later writing, \"my memory is not always accurate and one sometimes becomes a little uncertain\", misquoting again in that letter, differently. His health gradually declined over the near-decade of his chief justiceship. Worried that if he retired his replacement would be chosen by President Herbert Hoover, whom he considered too progressive, he wrote his brother Horace in 1929, \"I am older and slower and less acute and more confused. However, as long as things continue as they are, and I am able to answer to my place, I must stay on the court in order to prevent the Bolsheviki from getting control\".\nTaft insisted on going to Cincinnati to attend the funeral of his brother Charles, who died on December 31, 1929; the strain did not improve his own health. When the court reconvened on January 6, 1930, Taft had not returned to Washington, and two opinions were delivered by Van Devanter that Taft had drafted but had been unable to complete because of his illness. Taft went to Asheville, North Carolina, for a rest, but by the end of January, he could barely speak and was hallucinating. Taft was afraid that Stone would be made chief justice; he did not resign until he had secured assurances from Hoover that Hughes would be chosen. Taft resigned as chief justice on February 3, 1930. Returning to Washington after his resignation, Taft had barely enough physical or emotional strength to sign a reply to a letter of tribute from the eight associate justices. He died at his home in Washington, D.C., on March 8, 1930, at age 72, likely of heart disease, inflammation of the liver, and high blood pressure.\nTaft lay in state at the United States Capitol rotunda. On March 11, he became the first president and first member of the Supreme Court to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery. James Earle Fraser sculpted his grave marker out of Stony Creek granite.\nLegacy and historical view.\nLurie argued that Taft did not receive the public credit for his policies that he should have. Few trusts had been broken up under Roosevelt (although the lawsuits received much publicity). Taft, more quietly than his predecessor, filed many more cases than did Roosevelt, and rejected his predecessor's contention that there was such a thing as a \"good\" trust. This lack of flair marred Taft's presidency; according to Lurie, Taft \"was boring\u2014honest, likable, but boring\". Scott Bomboy for the National Constitution Center wrote that despite being \"one of the most interesting, intellectual, and versatile presidents\u00a0... a chief justice of the United States, a wrestler at Yale, a reformer, a peace activist, and a baseball fan\u00a0... today, Taft is best remembered as the president who was so large that he got stuck in the White House bathtub\", a story that is not true. Taft similarly has remained known for another physical characteristic\u2014as the last president with facial hair.\nMason called Taft's years in the White House \"undistinguished\". Coletta deemed Taft to have had a solid record of bills passed by Congress, but felt he could have accomplished more with political skill. Anderson noted that Taft's prepresidential federal service was entirely in appointed posts, and that he had never run for an important executive or legislative position, which would have allowed him to develop the skills to manipulate public opinion, as \"the presidency is no place for on-the-job training\". According to Coletta, \"in troubled times in which the people demanded progressive change, he saw the existing order as good.\"\nInevitably linked with Roosevelt, who chose him to be president and took it away, Taft generally falls in the former's shadow. Yet, a portrait of Taft as a victim of betrayal by his best friend is incomplete: as Coletta put it, \"Was he a poor politician because he was victimized or because he lacked the foresight and imagination to notice the storm brewing in the political sky until it broke and swamped him?\" Adept at using the levers of power in a way his successor could not, Roosevelt generally got what was politically possible out of a situation. Taft was generally slow to act, and when he did, his actions often generated enemies, as in the Ballinger\u2013Pinchot affair. Roosevelt was able to secure positive coverage in the newspapers; Taft was reticent talking to reporters, and, with no comment from the White House, hostile journalists filled the gaps with quotes from Taft opponents. Roosevelt engraved in public memory the image of Taft as a James Buchanan-like figure, with a narrow view of the presidency that made him unwilling to act for the public good. Anderson noted that Roosevelt's \"Autobiography\" (which placed this view in enduring form) was published after both men had left the presidency (in 1913), was intended in part to justify Roosevelt's splitting of the Republican Party, and contains not a single positive reference to the man Roosevelt had hand-picked as his successor. While Roosevelt was biased, he was not alone: every major newspaper reporter of that time who left reminiscences of Taft's presidency was critical of him. Taft replied to his predecessor's criticism with his constitutional treatise on the powers of the presidency.\nTaft was convinced history would vindicate him. After he left office, he was estimated to be in the middle of U.S. presidents by greatness, and subsequent rankings by historians have largely sustained that verdict. Coletta noted that this places Taft alongside James Madison, John Quincy Adams and McKinley. Lurie catalogued progressive innovations that took place under Taft, and argued that historians have overlooked them because Taft was not an effective political writer or speaker. According to Gould, \"the clich\u00e9s about Taft's weight, his maladroitness in the White House, and his conservatism of thought and doctrine have an element of truth, but they fail to do justice to a shrewd commentator on the political scene, a man of consummate ambition, and a resourceful practitioner of the internal politics of his party.\" Anderson deemed Taft's success in becoming both president and chief justice \"an astounding feat of inside judicial and Republican party politics, played out over years, the likes of which we are not likely to see again in American history\".\nTaft has been rated among the greatest of the chief justices; later Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia noted that this was \"not so much on the basis of his opinions, perhaps because many of them ran counter to the ultimate sweep of history\". A successor as chief justice, Earl Warren, concurred: \"In Taft's case, the symbol, the tag, the label usually attached to him is 'conservative.' It is certainly not of itself a term of opprobrium even when bandied by the critics, but its use is too often confused with 'reactionary.'\" Most commentators agree that Taft's most significant contribution as chief justice was his advocacy for reform of the high court, urging and ultimately gaining improvement in the Court's procedures and facilities. Mason cited enactment of the Judges' Bill of 1925 as Taft's major achievement on the Court. According to Anderson, as chief justice, Taft \"was as aggressive in the pursuit of his agenda in the judicial realm as Theodore Roosevelt was in the presidential\".\nThe house in Cincinnati in which Taft was born is now the William Howard Taft National Historic Site. Taft was one of the first Gold Medal Honorees of the National Institute of Social Sciences. His son Robert was a significant political figure, becoming Senate Majority Leader and three times a major contender for the Republican nomination for president. A conservative, each time he was defeated by a candidate backed by the more liberal Eastern Establishment wing of the party.\nLurie concluded his account of William Taft's career:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;While the fabled cherry trees in Washington represent a suitable monument for Nellie Taft, there is no memorial to her husband, except perhaps the magnificent home for his Court\u2014one for which he eagerly planned. But he died even before ground was broken for the structure. As he reacted to his overwhelming defeat for reelection in 1912, Taft had written that \"I must wait for years if I would be vindicated by the people\u00a0 ... I am content to wait.\" Perhaps he has waited long enough.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33523", "revid": "43320205", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33523", "title": "Woodrow Wilson", "text": "President of the United States from 1913 to 1921\nThomas Woodrow Wilson (December 28, 1856\u00a0\u2013 February 3, 1924) was the 28th president of the United States, serving from 1913 to 1921. He was the only Democrat to serve as president during the Progressive Era when Republicans dominated the presidency and legislative branches. As president, Wilson changed the nation's economic policies and led the United States into World War I. He was the leading architect of the League of Nations, and his stance on foreign policy came to be known as Wilsonianism.\nBorn in Staunton, Virginia, Wilson grew up in the Southern United States during the American Civil War and Reconstruction era. After earning a Ph.D. in history and political science from Johns Hopkins University, Wilson taught at several colleges prior to being appointed president of Princeton University, where he emerged as a prominent spokesman for progressivism in higher education. Wilson served as the governor of New Jersey from 1911 to 1913, during which he broke with party bosses and won the passage of several progressive reforms. \nIn the 1912 election, Wilson defeated the incumbent Republican president, William Howard Taft, and the third-party nominee and former president Theodore Roosevelt, becoming the first Southerner to win the presidency since 1848. During his first year as president, Wilson authorized the widespread imposition of racial segregation inside the federal bureaucracy, and his opposition to women's suffrage drew protests. His first term was largely devoted to pursuing the passage of his progressive New Freedom domestic agenda. His first major priority was the Revenue Act of 1913, which began the modern income tax, and the Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System. At the outbreak of World War I in 1914, the U.S. declared neutrality as Wilson tried to negotiate peace between the Allied and Central Powers. \nWilson was narrowly re-elected in the 1916 election, defeating the Republican nominee, Charles Evans Hughes. In April 1917, Wilson asked Congress for a declaration of war against Germany in response to its policy of unrestricted submarine warfare that sank American merchant ships. Wilson concentrated on diplomacy, issuing the \"Fourteen Points\" that the Allies and Germany accepted as a basis for post-war peace. He wanted the off-year elections of 1918 to be a referendum endorsing his policies, but instead the Republicans took control of Congress. After the Allied victory in November 1918, Wilson attended the Paris Peace Conference, accompanied by his most important adviser, Colonel Edward House. Wilson successfully advocated for the establishment of a multinational organization, the League of Nations, which was incorporated into the Treaty of Versailles that he signed; back home, he rejected a Republican compromise that would have allowed the Senate to ratify the Versailles Treaty and join the League.\nWilson had intended to seek a third term in office but had a stroke in October 1919 that left him incapacitated. His wife and his physician controlled Wilson, and no significant decisions were made. Meanwhile, his policies alienated German- and Irish-American Democrats and the Republicans won a landslide in the 1920 election. In February 1924, he died at age 67. Into the 21st century, historians have criticized Wilson for supporting racial segregation, although they continue to rank Wilson as an above-average president for his accomplishments in office. Conservatives in particular have criticized him for expanding the federal government, while others have praised his weakening the power of large corporations and have credited him for establishing modern liberalism.\nEarly life and education.\nThomas Woodrow Wilson was born to a family of Scotch-Irish and Scottish descent in Staunton, Virginia. He was the third of four children and the first son of Joseph Ruggles Wilson and Jessie Janet Woodrow. Wilson's paternal grandparents had immigrated to the United States from Strabane, County Tyrone, Ireland, in 1807, and settled in Steubenville, Ohio. Wilson's paternal grandfather James Wilson published a pro-tariff and anti-slavery newspaper, \"The Western Herald and Gazette\". Wilson's maternal grandfather, the Reverend Thomas Woodrow, moved from Paisley, Renfrewshire, Scotland, to Carlisle, Cumbria, England, before migrating to Chillicothe, Ohio, in the late 1830s. Joseph met Jessie while she was attending a girl's academy in Steubenville, and the two married on June 7, 1849. Soon after the wedding, Joseph was ordained as a Presbyterian pastor and assigned to serve in Staunton. His son Woodrow was born in the Manse, a house in the Staunton First Presbyterian Church where Joseph served. Before he was two years old, the family moved to Augusta, Georgia.\nWilson's earliest memory of his early youth was of playing in his yard and standing near the front gate of the Augusta parsonage at the age of three, when he heard a passerby announce in disgust that Abraham Lincoln had been elected and that a war was coming. Wilson was one of only two U.S. presidents to be a citizen of the Confederate States of America; the other was John Tyler, who served as the nation's tenth president from 1841 to 1845. Wilson's father identified with the Southern United States and was a staunch supporter of the Confederacy during the American Civil War.\nWilson's father was one of the founders of the Presbyterian Church in the Confederate States of America, later renamed the Presbyterian Church in the United States (PCUS), following its 1861 split from the Northern Presbyterians. He became minister of the First Presbyterian Church in Augusta, and the family lived there until 1870. From 1870 to 1874, Wilson lived in Columbia, South Carolina, where his father was a theology professor at the Columbia Theological Seminary. In 1873, Wilson became a communicant member of the Columbia First Presbyterian Church; he remained a member throughout his life.\nWilson attended Davidson College in Davidson, North Carolina, in the 1873\u201374 school year but transferred as a freshman to the College of New Jersey, which is now Princeton University, where he studied political philosophy and history, joined the Phi Kappa Psi fraternity, and was active in the Whig literary and debating society. He was also elected secretary of the school's football association, president of the school's baseball association, and managing editor of the student newspaper. In the hotly contested presidential election of 1876, Wilson supported the Democratic Party and its nominee, Samuel J. Tilden.\nAfter graduating from Princeton in 1879, Wilson attended the University of Virginia School of Law in Charlottesville, Virginia, where he was involved in the Virginia Glee Club and served as president of the Jefferson Literary and Debating Society. Poor health forced Wilson to withdraw from law school, but he continued to study law on his own while living with his parents in Wilmington, North Carolina. Wilson was admitted to the Georgia bar and made a brief attempt at establishing a law firm in Atlanta in 1882. Though he found legal history and substantive jurisprudence interesting, he abhorred the day-to-day procedural aspects of the practice of law. After less than a year, Wilson abandoned his legal practice to pursue the study of political science and history.\nIn late 1883, Wilson enrolled at the recently established Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore for doctoral studies in history, political science, German, and other fields. Wilson hoped to become a professor, writing that \"a professorship was the only feasible place for me, the only place that would afford leisure for reading and for original work, the only strictly literary berth with an income attached.\"\nWilson spent much of his time at Johns Hopkins University writing \"Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics\", which grew out of a series of essays in which he examined the workings of the federal government. In 1886, Wilson was awarded a Ph.D. in history and government from Johns Hopkins University, making him the only U.S. president in the nation's history to possess a Ph.D. In early 1885, Houghton Mifflin published Wilson's \"Congressional Government\", which was well received, with one critic calling it \"the best critical writing on the American constitution which has appeared since the 'Federalist' papers.\"\nMarriage and family.\nIn 1883, Wilson met and fell in love with Ellen Louise Axson. He proposed marriage in September 1883; she accepted, but they agreed to postpone marriage while Wilson attended graduate school. Axson graduated from Art Students League of New York, worked in portraiture, and received a medal for one of her works from the Exposition Universelle (1878) in Paris. She agreed to sacrifice further independent artistic pursuits in order to marry Wilson in 1885. Ellen learned German so she could help translate German-language political science publications relevant to Woodrow's research.\nIn April 1886, the couple's first child, Margaret, was born. Their second child, Jessie, was born in August 1887. Their third and final child, Eleanor, was born in October 1889. In 1913, Jessie married Francis Bowes Sayre Sr., who later served as High Commissioner to the Philippines. In 1914, their third child Eleanor married William Gibbs McAdoo, U.S. secretary of the treasury under Woodrow Wilson and later a U.S. senator from California.\nAcademic career.\nProfessor.\nFrom 1885 to 1888, Wilson taught at Bryn Mawr College, a newly established women's college in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, outside Philadelphia. Wilson taught ancient Greek and Roman history, American history, political science, and other subjects. At the time, there were only 42 students at the college, nearly all of them too passive for his taste. M. Carey Thomas, the dean, was a staunch feminist, and Wilson clashed with her over his contract, resulting in a bitter dispute. In 1888, Wilson left Bryn Mawr College and was not given a farewell.\nWilson accepted a position at Wesleyan University, an elite undergraduate college for men in Middletown, Connecticut. He taught graduate courses in political economy and Western history, coached Wesleyan's football team, and founded a debate team.\nIn February 1890, with the help of friends, Wilson was appointed Chair of Jurisprudence and Political Economy at the College of New Jersey (the name at the time of Princeton University), at an annual salary of $3,000 (). Wilson quickly earned a reputation at Princeton as a compelling speaker. In 1896, Francis Landey Patton announced that College of New Jersey was being renamed Princeton University; an ambitious program of expansion for the university accompanied the name change. In the 1896 presidential election, Wilson rejected Democratic nominee William Jennings Bryan as too far to the left and instead supported the conservative \"Gold Democrat\" nominee, John M. Palmer. Wilson's academic reputation continued to grow throughout the 1890s, and he turned down multiple positions elsewhere, including at Johns Hopkins University and the University of Virginia.\nAt Princeton University, Wilson published several works of history and political science and was a regular contributor to \"Political Science Quarterly\". Wilson's textbook, \"The State\", was widely used in American college courses until the 1920s. In \"The State\", Wilson wrote that governments could legitimately promote the general welfare \"by forbidding child labor, by supervising the sanitary conditions of factories, by limiting the employment of women in occupations hurtful to their health, by instituting official tests of the purity or the quality of goods sold, by limiting the hours of labor in certain trades, [and] by a hundred and one limitations of the power of unscrupulous or heartless men to out-do the scrupulous and merciful in trade or industry.\" He also wrote that charity efforts should be removed from the private domain and \"made the imperative legal duty of the whole\", a position which, according to historian Robert M. Saunders, seemed to indicate that Wilson \"was laying the groundwork for the modern welfare state.\" His third book, \"Division and Reunion\" (1893), became a standard university textbook for teaching mid- and late-19th century U.S. history. Wilson had a considerable reputation as a historian and was an early member of the American Academy of Arts and Letters. He was also an elected member of the American Philosophical Society in 1897.\nPresident of Princeton University.\n \nIn June 1902, Princeton trustees promoted Professor Wilson to president, replacing Patton, whom the trustees perceived to be an inefficient administrator. Wilson aspired, as he told alumni, \"to transform thoughtless boys performing tasks into thinking men.\" He tried to raise admission standards and to replace the \"gentleman's C\" with serious study. Wilson instituted academic departments and a system of core requirements to emphasize the development of expertise. Students were to meet in groups of six under the guidance of teaching assistants known as preceptors. To fund these new programs, Wilson undertook an ambitious and successful fundraising campaign, convincing alumni such as Moses Taylor Pyne and philanthropists such as Andrew Carnegie to donate to the school. Wilson appointed the first Jew and the first Roman Catholic to the faculty, and helped liberate the board from domination by conservative Presbyterians. He also worked to keep African Americans out of the school, even as other Ivy League schools were accepting small numbers of black people.\nPhilosophy professor John Grier Hibben had known Wilson since they were undergraduates together. They became close friends. Indeed, when Wilson became president of Princeton in 1902 Hibben was his chief advisor. In 1912 Hibben stunned Wilson by taking the lead against Wilson's pet reform plan. They were permanently estranged, and Wilson was decisively defeated. In 1912, two years after Wilson left Princeton, Hibben became president of Princeton.\nWilson's efforts to reform Princeton earned him national fame, but they also took a toll on his health. In 1906, Wilson awoke to find himself blind in the left eye, the result of a blood clot and hypertension. Modern medical opinion surmises Wilson had had a stroke; he later was diagnosed, as his father had been, with hardening of the arteries. He began to exhibit his father's traits of impatience and intolerance, which would on occasion lead to errors of judgment.\nIn 1906, while vacationing in Bermuda, Wilson met Mary Hulbert Peck, a socialite. According to biographer August Heckscher II, Wilson's friendship with Peck became the topic of frank discussion between Wilson and his wife, although Wilson historians have not conclusively established there was an affair. Wilson also sent very personal letters to her, which were later used against him by his adversaries.\nHaving reorganized Princeton University's curriculum and established the preceptorial system, Wilson next attempted to curtail the influence of social elites at Princeton by abolishing the upper-class eating clubs. He proposed moving the students into colleges, also known as quadrangles, but Wilson's plan was met with fierce opposition from Princeton alumni. In October 1907, due to the intensity of alumni opposition, Princeton's board of trustees instructed Wilson to withdraw his plan for relocating student dormitories. Late in his tenure, Wilson had a confrontation with Andrew Fleming West, dean of Princeton University's graduate school and his ally, ex-President Grover Cleveland, who was a Princeton trustee. Wilson wanted to integrate a proposed graduate school building into the core of the campus, but West preferred a more distant campus site. In 1909, Princeton's board accepted a gift made to the graduate school campaign subject to the graduate school being located off campus.\nWilson became disenchanted with his job as Princeton University president due to the resistance to his recommendations, and he began considering a run for political office. Prior to the 1908 Democratic National Convention, Wilson dropped hints to some influential players in the Democratic Party of his interest in the ticket. While he had no real expectations of being placed on it, Wilson left instructions that he should not be offered the vice presidential nomination. Party regulars considered his ideas politically and geographically detached and fanciful, but the seeds of interest had been sown. In 1956, McGeorge Bundy described Wilson's contribution to Princeton: \"Wilson was right in his conviction that Princeton must be more than a wonderfully pleasant and decent home for nice young men; it has been more ever since his time.\"\nGovernor of New Jersey (1911\u20131913).\nBy January 1910, Wilson had drawn the attention of James Smith Jr. and George Brinton McClellan Harvey, two leaders of New Jersey's Democratic Party, as a potential candidate in the upcoming gubernatorial election. Having lost the last five gubernatorial elections, New Jersey Democratic leaders decided to throw their support behind Wilson, an untested and unconventional candidate. Party leaders believed that Wilson's academic reputation made him the ideal spokesman against trusts and corruption, but they also hoped his inexperience in governing would make him easy to influence. Wilson agreed to accept the nomination if \"it came to me unsought, unanimously, and without pledges to anybody about anything.\"\nAt the state party convention, the bosses marshaled their forces and won the nomination for Wilson. On October 20, Wilson submitted his letter of resignation to Princeton University. Wilson's campaign focused on his promise to be independent of party bosses. He quickly shed his professorial style for more emboldened speechmaking and presented himself as a full-fledged progressive. Though Republican William Howard Taft had carried New Jersey in the 1908 presidential election by more than 82,000 votes, Wilson soundly defeated Republican gubernatorial nominee Vivian M. Lewis by a margin of more than 65,000 votes. Democrats also took control of the New Jersey General Assembly in the 1910 elections, though the New Jersey Senate remained in Republican hands. After winning the election, Wilson appointed Joseph Patrick Tumulty as his private secretary, a position he held throughout Wilson's political career.\nWilson began formulating his reformist agenda, intending to ignore the demands of his party machinery. Smith asked Wilson to endorse his bid for the U.S. Senate, but Wilson refused and instead endorsed Smith's opponent James Edgar Martine, who had won the Democratic primary. Martine's victory in the Senate election helped Wilson position himself as an independent force in the New Jersey Democratic Party. By the time Wilson took office, New Jersey had gained a reputation for public corruption; the state was known as the \"Mother of Trusts\" because it allowed companies like Standard Oil to escape the antitrust laws of other states. Wilson and his allies quickly won passage of the Geran bill, which undercut the power of the political bosses by requiring primaries for all elective offices and party officials. He was also successful with a corrupt practices law that required all candidates to file campaign financial statements, limited campaign expenditures, and prohibited corporate contributions to political campaigns. Additionally, Wilson supported passage of a workers' compensation law to aid the families of workers killed or injured on the job. For his success in passing these laws during the first months of his gubernatorial term, Wilson won national and bipartisan recognition as a reformer and a leader of the Progressive movement.\nRepublicans took control of the state assembly in early 1912, and Wilson spent much of the rest of his tenure vetoing bills. He nonetheless won passage of various reform laws\n including ones that restricted labor by women and children and increased standards for factory working conditions. A new State Board of Education was set up \"with the power to conduct inspections and enforce standards, regulate districts' borrowing authority, and require special classes for students with handicaps.\" Before leaving office Wilson oversaw the establishment of free dental clinics and enacted a \"comprehensive and scientific\" poor law. Trained nursing was standardized, while contract labor in all reformatories and prisons was abolished and an indeterminate sentence act passed. A law was introduced that compelled all railroad companies \"to pay their employees twice monthly\", while regulation of the working hours, health, safety, employment, and age of people employed in mercantile establishments was carried out. Shortly before leaving office, Wilson signed a series of antitrust laws known as the \"Seven Sisters\", as well as another law that removed the power to select juries from local sheriffs.\nPresidential election of 1912.\nDemocratic nomination.\nWilson became a prominent 1912 presidential contender immediately upon his election as Governor of New Jersey in 1910, and his clashes with state party bosses enhanced his reputation with the rising Progressive movement. In addition to progressives, Wilson enjoyed the support of Princeton alumni such as Cyrus McCormick Jr. and Southerners such as Walter Hines Page, who believed that Wilson's status as a transplanted Southerner gave him broad appeal. Edward M. House from Texas was also instrumental in securing Wilson's bid for the presidency as campaign manager and became his Wilson's chief advisor when he became president, where Wilson offered him any cabinet position he wanted, except Secretary of State, but House declined. Though Wilson's shift to the left won the admiration of many, it also created enemies such as George Brinton McClellan Harvey, a former Wilson supporter who had close ties to Wall Street. In July 1911, Wilson brought William Gibbs McAdoo in to manage the campaign. Prior to the 1912 Democratic National Convention, Wilson made a special effort to win the approval of three-time Democratic presidential nominee William Jennings Bryan, whose followers had largely dominated the Democratic Party since the 1896 presidential election.\nSpeaker of the House Champ Clark of Missouri was viewed by many as the front-runner for the nomination, while House Majority Leader Oscar Underwood of Alabama also loomed as a challenger. Clark found support among the Bryan wing of the party, while Underwood appealed to the conservative Bourbon Democrats, especially in the South. In the 1912 Democratic Party presidential primaries, Clark won several of the early contests, but Wilson finished strong with victories in Texas, the Northeast, and the Midwest. On the first presidential ballot of the Democratic convention, Clark won a plurality of delegates; his support continued to grow after the New York Tammany Hall machine swung behind him on the tenth ballot. Tammany's support backfired for Clark, as Bryan announced that he would not support any candidate that had Tammany's backing, and Clark began losing delegates on subsequent ballots. Wilson gained the support of Roger Charles Sullivan and Thomas Taggart by promising the vice presidency to Governor Thomas R. Marshall of Indiana. and several Southern delegations shifted their support from Underwood to Wilson. Wilson finally won two-thirds of the vote on the convention's 46th ballot, and Marshall became Wilson's running mate.\nGeneral election.\nIn the 1912 general election, Wilson faced two major opponents: one-term Republican incumbent William Howard Taft, and former Republican President Theodore Roosevelt, who ran a third party campaign as the \"Bull Moose\" Party nominee. The fourth candidate was Eugene V. Debs of the Socialist Party. Roosevelt had broken with his former party at the 1912 Republican National Convention after Taft narrowly won re-nomination, and the split in the Republican Party made Democrats hopeful that they could win the presidency for the first time since the 1892 presidential election.\nRoosevelt emerged as Wilson's main challenger, and Wilson and Roosevelt largely campaigned against each other despite sharing similarly progressive platforms that called for an interventionist central government. Wilson directed campaign finance chairman Henry Morgenthau not to accept contributions from corporations and to prioritize smaller donations from the widest possible quarters of the public. During the election campaign, Wilson asserted that it was the task of government \"to make those adjustments of life which will put every man in a position to claim his normal rights as a living, human being.\" With the help of legal scholar Louis Brandeis, he developed his New Freedom platform, focusing especially on breaking up trusts and lowering tariff rates. Brandeis and Wilson rejected Roosevelt's proposal to establish a powerful bureaucracy charged with regulating large corporations, instead favoring the break-up of large corporations in order to create a level economic playing field.\nWilson engaged in a spirited campaign, criss-crossing the country to deliver numerous speeches. Ultimately, he took 42 percent of the popular vote and 435 of the 531 electoral votes. Roosevelt won most of the remaining electoral votes and 27.4 percent of the popular vote, one of the strongest third party performances in U.S. history. Taft won 23.2 percent of the popular vote but just 8 electoral votes, while Debs won 6 percent of the popular vote. In the concurrent congressional elections, Democrats retained control of the House and won a majority in the Senate. Wilson's victory made him the first Southerner to win a presidential election since the Civil War, the first Democratic president since Grover Cleveland left office in 1897, and the first and only president to hold a Ph.D.\nPresidency (1913\u20131921).\nAfter the election, Wilson chose William Jennings Bryan as Secretary of State, and Bryan offered advice on the remaining members of Wilson's cabinet. William Gibbs McAdoo, a prominent Wilson supporter who married Wilson's daughter in 1914, became Secretary of the Treasury, and James Clark McReynolds, who had successfully prosecuted several prominent antitrust cases, was chosen as Attorney General. Publisher Josephus Daniels, a party loyalist and prominent white supremacist from North Carolina, was chosen to be Secretary of the Navy, while young New York attorney Franklin D. Roosevelt became Assistant Secretary of the Navy. Wilson's chief of staff (\"secretary\") was Joseph Patrick Tumulty, who acted as a political buffer and intermediary with the press. The most important foreign policy adviser and confidant was \"Colonel\" Edward M. House; Berg writes that, \"in access and influence, [House] outranked everybody in Wilson's Cabinet.\"\nNew Freedom domestic agenda.\nWilson introduced a comprehensive program of domestic legislation at the outset of his administration, something no president had ever done before. He announced four major domestic priorities: the conservation of natural resources, banking reform, tariff reduction, and better access to raw materials for farmers by breaking up Western mining trusts. Wilson introduced these proposals in April 1913 in a speech delivered to a joint session of Congress, becoming the first president since John Adams to address Congress in person. Wilson's first two years in office largely focused on his domestic agenda. With trouble with Mexico and the outbreak of World War I in 1914, foreign affairs increasingly dominated his presidency.\nTariff and tax legislation.\nDemocrats had long seen high tariff rates as equivalent to unfair taxes on consumers, and tariff reduction was their first priority. He argued that the system of high tariffs \"cuts us off from our proper part in the commerce of the world, violates the just principles of taxation, and makes the government a facile instrument in the hands of private interests.\" By late May 1913, House Majority Leader Oscar Underwood had passed a bill in the House that cut the average tariff rate by 10 percent and imposed a tax on personal income above $4,000. Underwood's bill represented the largest downward revision of the tariff since the Civil War. It aggressively cut rates for raw materials, goods deemed to be \"necessities\", and products produced domestically by trusts, but it retained higher tariff rates for luxury goods.\nNevertheless, the passage of the tariff bill in the Senate was a challenge. Some Southern and Western Democrats wanted the continued protection of their wool and sugar industries, and Democrats had a narrower majority in the upper house. Wilson met extensively with Democratic senators and appealed directly to the people through the press. After weeks of hearings and debate, Wilson and Secretary of State Bryan managed to unite Senate Democrats behind the bill. The Senate voted 44 to 37 in favor of the bill, with only one Democrat voting against it and only one Republican voting for it. Wilson signed the Revenue Act of 1913 (called the Underwood Tariff) into law on October 3, 1913. The Revenue Act of 1913 reduced tariffs and replaced the lost revenue with a federal income tax of one percent on incomes above $3,000, affecting the richest three percent of the population. The policies of the Wilson administration had a durable impact on the composition of government revenue, which now primarily came from taxation rather than tariffs.\nFederal Reserve System.\nWilson did not wait to complete the Revenue Act of 1913 before proceeding to the next item on his agenda\u2014banking. By the time Wilson took office, countries like Britain and Germany had established government-run central banks, but the United States had not had a central bank since the Bank War of the 1830s. In the aftermath of the nationwide financial crisis in 1907, there was general agreement to create some sort of central banking system to provide a more elastic currency and to coordinate responses to financial panics. Wilson sought a middle ground between progressives such as Bryan and conservative Republicans like Nelson Aldrich, who, as chairman of the National Monetary Commission, had put forward a plan for a central bank that would give private financial interests a large degree of control over the monetary system. Wilson declared that the banking system must be \"public not private, [and] must be vested in the government itself so that the banks must be the instruments, not the masters, of business.\"\nDemocrats crafted a compromise plan in which private banks would control twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks, but a controlling interest in the system was placed in a central board filled with presidential appointees. Wilson convinced Democrats on the left that the new plan met their demands. Among the bill's critics was U.S. Representative Charles August Lindbergh, who argued that it would create an \"invisible government\" of the monetary power and concentrate economic control into a \"purely profiteering group.\" The Senate voted 54\u201334 to approve the Federal Reserve Act. The new system began operations in 1915, and it played a key role in financing the Allied and American war efforts in World War I.\nAntitrust legislation.\nHaving passed major legislation lowering the tariff and reforming the banking structure, Wilson next sought antitrust legislation to enhance the Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890. The Sherman Antitrust Act barred any \"contract, combination ... or conspiracy, in restraint of trade\", but had proved ineffective in preventing the rise of large business combinations known as trusts. An elite group of businessmen dominated the boards of major banks and railroads, and they used their power to prevent competition by new companies. With Wilson's support, Congressman Henry Clayton, Jr. introduced a bill that would ban several anti-competitive practices such as discriminatory pricing, tying, exclusive dealing, and interlocking directorates.\nAs the difficulty of banning all anti-competitive practices via legislation became clear, Wilson came to back legislation that would create a new agency, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), to investigate antitrust violations and enforce antitrust laws independently of the Justice Department. With bipartisan support, Congress passed the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, which incorporated Wilson's ideas regarding the FTC. One month after signing the Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914, Wilson signed the Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914, which built on the Sherman Act by defining and banning several anti-competitive practices.\nLabor and agriculture.\nWilson thought a child labor law would probably be unconstitutional but reversed himself in 1916 with a close election approaching. In 1916, after intense campaigns by the National Child Labor Committee (NCLC) and the National Consumers League, the Congress passed the Keating\u2013Owen Act, making it illegal to ship goods in interstate commerce if they were made in factories employing children under specified ages. Southern Democrats were opposed but did not filibuster. Wilson endorsed the bill at the last minute under pressure from party leaders who stressed how popular the idea was, especially among the emerging class of women voters. He told Democratic Congressmen they needed to pass this law and also a workman's compensation law to satisfy the national progressive movement and to win the 1916 election against a reunited GOP. It was the first federal child labor law. However, the U.S. Supreme Court struck down the law in \"Hammer v. Dagenhart\" (1918). Congress then passed a law taxing businesses that used child labor, but that was struck down by the Supreme Court in \"Bailey v. Drexel Furniture\" (1923). Child labor was finally ended in the 1930s. He approved the goal of upgrading the harsh working conditions for merchant sailors and signed LaFollette's Seamen's Act of 1915. \nDuring his political career, Wilson commissioned members of the Fraternal Order of Eagles to study old age pension laws overseas to determine whether such laws could be adopted in the United States. Pensions for civil servants employed by the federal government were introduced during Wilson's final year in office.\nWilson called on the Labor Department to mediate conflicts between labor and management. In 1914, Wilson dispatched soldiers to help bring an end to the Colorado Coalfield War, one of the deadliest labor disputes in American history. In 1916 he pushed Congress to enact the eight-hour work day for railroad workers, which ended a major strike. It was \"the boldest intervention in labor relations that any president had yet attempted.\"\nWilson disliked the excessive government involvement in the Federal Farm Loan Act, which created twelve regional banks empowered to provide low-interest loans to farmers. Nevertheless, he needed the farm vote to survive the upcoming 1916 election, so he signed it.\nTerritories and immigration.\nWilson embraced the long-standing Democratic policy against owning colonies, and he worked for the gradual autonomy and ultimate independence of the Philippines, which had been acquired in 1898. Continuing the policy of his predecessors, Wilson increased self-governance on the islands by granting Filipinos greater control over the Philippine Legislature. The Jones Act of 1916 committed the United States to the eventual independence of the Philippines, and granted Filipinos further autonomy with the establishment of a Filipino Senate and House of Representatives, replacing the American-run Philippine Commission and Filipino-run Philippine Assembly, respectively. In 1916, Wilson purchased by treaty the Danish West Indies, renamed as the United States Virgin Islands.\nImmigration from Europe declined significantly once World War I began and Wilson paid little attention to the issue during his presidency. However, he looked favorably upon the \"new immigrants\" from southern and eastern Europe, and twice vetoed laws passed by Congress intended to restrict their entry, though the later veto was overridden.\nJudicial appointments.\nWilson nominated three men to the United States Supreme Court, all of whom were confirmed by the U.S. Senate. In 1914, Wilson nominated sitting attorney general James Clark McReynolds. Despite his credentials as an ardent trust buster, McReynolds became a staple of the court's conservative bloc until his retirement in 1941. According to Berg, Wilson considered appointing McReynolds one of his biggest mistakes in office. In 1916, Wilson nominated Louis Brandeis to the Court, setting off a major debate in the Senate over Brandeis's progressive ideology and his religion; Brandeis was the first Jewish nominee to the Supreme Court. Ultimately, Wilson was able to convince Senate Democrats to vote to confirm Brandeis, who served on the court until 1939. In contrast to McReynolds, Brandeis became one of the court's leading progressive voices. When a second vacancy arose in 1916, Wilson appointed progressive lawyer John Hessin Clarke. Clarke was confirmed by the Senate and served on the Court until retiring in 1922.\nFirst-term foreign policy.\nLatin America.\nWilson sought to move away from the foreign policy of his predecessors, which he viewed as imperialistic, and he rejected Taft's Dollar Diplomacy. Nonetheless, he frequently intervened in Latin America, saying in 1913, \"I am going to teach the South American republics to elect good men.\" The 1914 Bryan\u2013Chamorro Treaty converted Nicaragua into a \"de facto\" protectorate, and the U.S. stationed soldiers there throughout Wilson's presidency. The Wilson administration sent troops to occupy the Dominican Republic and intervene in Haiti, and Wilson also authorized military interventions in Cuba, Panama, and Honduras.\nWilson took office during the Mexican Revolution, which had begun in 1911 after liberals overthrew the military dictatorship of Porfirio D\u00edaz. Shortly before Wilson took office, conservatives retook power through a coup led by Victoriano Huerta. Wilson rejected the legitimacy of Huerta's \"government of butchers\" and demanded Mexico hold democratic elections. After Huerta arrested U.S. Navy personnel who had accidentally landed in a restricted zone near the northern port town of Tampico, Wilson dispatched the Navy to occupy the Mexican city of Veracruz. A strong backlash against the American intervention among Mexicans of all political affiliations convinced Wilson to abandon his plans to expand the U.S. military intervention, but the intervention nonetheless helped convince Huerta to flee from the country. A group led by Venustiano Carranza established control over a significant proportion of Mexico, and Wilson recognized Carranza's government in October 1915.\nCarranza continued to face various opponents within Mexico, including Pancho Villa, whom Wilson had earlier described as \"a sort of Robin Hood.\" In early 1916, Pancho Villa raided the village of Columbus, New Mexico, killing or wounding dozens of Americans and causing an enormous nationwide American demand for his punishment. Wilson ordered General John J. Pershing and 4,000 troops across the border to capture Villa. By April, Pershing's forces had broken up and dispersed Villa's bands, but Villa remained on the loose and Pershing continued his pursuit deep into Mexico. Carranza then pivoted against the Americans and accused them of a punitive invasion, leading to several incidents that nearly led to war. Tensions subsided after Mexico agreed to release several American prisoners, and bilateral negotiations began under the auspices of the Mexican-American Joint High Commission. Eager to withdraw from Mexico due to tensions in Europe, Wilson ordered Pershing to withdraw, and the last American soldiers left in February 1917.\nNeutrality in World War I.\nWorld War I broke out in July 1914, pitting the Central Powers (Germany, Austria-Hungary, the Ottoman Empire, and later Bulgaria) against the Allied Powers (Britain, France, Russia, Serbia, and several other countries). The war fell into a long stalemate with very high casualties on the Western Front in France. Both sides rejected offers by Wilson and the House to mediate an end to the conflict. From 1914 until early 1917, Wilson's primary foreign policy objectives were to keep the United States out of the war in Europe and to broker a peace agreement. He insisted that all U.S. government actions be neutral, stating that Americans \"must be impartial in thought as well as in action, must put a curb upon our sentiments as well as upon every transaction that might be construed as a preference of one party to the struggle before another.\" As a neutral power, the U.S. insisted on its right to trade with both sides. However, the powerful British Royal Navy imposed a blockade of Germany. To appease Washington, London agreed to continue purchasing certain major American commodities such as cotton at pre-war prices, and in the event an American merchant vessel was caught with contraband, the Royal Navy was under orders to buy the entire cargo and release the vessel. Wilson passively accepted this situation.\nIn response to the British blockade, Germany launched a submarine campaign against merchant vessels in the seas surrounding the British Isles. In early 1915, the Germans sank three American ships; Wilson took the view, based on some reasonable evidence, that these incidents were accidental, and a settlement of claims could be postponed until the end of the war. In May 1915, a German submarine torpedoed the British ocean liner RMS \"Lusitania\", killing 1,198 passengers, including 128 American citizens. Wilson publicly responded by saying, \"there is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight. There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right\". Wilson demanded that the German government \"take immediate steps to prevent the recurrence\" of incidents like the sinking of the \"Lusitania\". In response, Bryan, who believed that Wilson had placed the defense of American trade rights above neutrality, resigned from the Cabinet. In March 1916, the SS \"Sussex\", an unarmed ferry under the French flag, was torpedoed in the English Channel and four Americans were counted among the dead. Wilson extracted from Germany a pledge to constrain submarine warfare to the rules of cruiser warfare, which represented a major diplomatic concession.\nInterventionists, led by Theodore Roosevelt, wanted war with Germany and attacked Wilson's refusal to build up the army in anticipation of war. After the sinking of the \"Lusitania\" and the resignation of Bryan, Wilson publicly committed himself to what became known as the \"preparedness movement\", and began to build up the army and the navy. In June 1916, Congress passed the National Defense Act of 1916, which established the Reserve Officers' Training Corps and expanded the National Guard. Later in the year, Congress passed the Naval Act of 1916, which provided for a major expansion of the navy.\nSecond marriage.\nThe health of Ellen Wilson declined after her husband entered office, and doctors diagnosed her with Bright's disease in July 1914. She died on August 6, 1914. President Wilson was deeply affected by the loss, falling into depression. On March 18, 1915, Wilson met Edith Bolling Galt at a White House tea. Galt was a widow and jeweler who was also from the South. After several meetings, Wilson fell in love with her, and he proposed marriage to her in May 1915. Galt initially rebuffed him, but Wilson was undeterred and continued the courtship. Edith gradually warmed to the relationship, and they became engaged in September 1915. They were married on December 18, 1915. Woodrow Wilson joined John Tyler and Grover Cleveland as the only presidents to marry while in office.\nPresidential election of 1916.\nWilson was renominated at the 1916 Democratic National Convention without opposition. In an effort to win progressive voters, Wilson called for legislation providing for an eight-hour day and six-day workweek, health and safety measures, the prohibition of child labor, and safeguards for female workers. He also favored a minimum wage for all work performed by and for the federal government. The Democrats also campaigned on the slogan \"He Kept Us Out of War\", and warned that a Republican victory would mean war with Germany. Hoping to reunify the progressive and conservative wings of the party, the 1916 Republican National Convention nominated Supreme Court justice Charles Evans Hughes for president; as a jurist, he had been completely out of politics by 1912. Though Republicans attacked Wilson's foreign policy on various grounds, domestic affairs generally dominated the campaign. Republicans campaigned against Wilson's New Freedom policies, especially tariff reduction, the new income taxes, and the Adamson Act, which they derided as \"class legislation\".\nThe election was close and the outcome was in doubt with Hughes ahead in the East, and Wilson in the South and West. The decision came down to California. On November 10, California certified that Wilson had won the state by 3,806 votes, giving him a majority of the electoral vote. Nationally, Wilson won 277 electoral votes and 49.2 percent of the popular vote, while Hughes won 254 electoral votes and 46.1 percent of the popular vote. Wilson was able to win by picking up many votes that had gone to Roosevelt or Debs in 1912. He swept the Solid South and won all but one Western state, while Hughes won most of the Northeastern and Midwestern states. Wilson's re-election made him the first Democrat since Andrew Jackson (in 1832) to win two consecutive terms. The Democrats kept control of Congress.\nEntering World War I.\nIn January 1917, the German Empire initiated a new policy of unrestricted submarine warfare against ships in the seas around the British Isles. German leaders knew that the policy would likely provoke U.S. entrance into the war, but they hoped to defeat the Allied Powers before the U.S. could fully mobilize. In late February, the U.S. public learned of the Zimmermann Telegram, a secret diplomatic communication in which Germany sought to convince Mexico to join it in a war against the United States. After a series of attacks on American ships, Wilson held a Cabinet meeting on March 20; all Cabinet members agreed that the time had come for the United States to enter the war. The Cabinet members believed that Germany was engaged in a commercial war against the United States, and that the United States had to respond with a formal declaration of war.\nOn April 2, 1917, Wilson addressed the U.S. Congress, asking for a declaration of war against Germany, saying that Germany was engaged in \"nothing less than war against the government and people of the United States.\" He requested a military draft to raise the army, increased taxes to pay for military expenses, loans to Allied governments, and increased industrial and agricultural production. He stated, \"we have no selfish ends to serve. We desire no conquest, no dominion... no material compensation for the sacrifices we shall freely make. We are but one of the champions of the rights of mankind. We shall be satisfied when those rights have been made as secure as the faith and freedom of the nations can make them.\" The declaration of war by the United States against Germany passed Congress with strong bipartisan majorities on April 6, 1917. The United States later declared war against Austria-Hungary in December 1917.\nWith the U.S. entrance into the war, Wilson and Secretary of War Newton D. Baker launched an expansion of the army, with the goal of creating a 300,000-member Regular Army, a 440,000-member National Guard, and a 500,000-member conscripted force known as the \"National Army\". Despite some resistance to conscription and to the commitment of American soldiers abroad, large majorities of both houses of Congress voted to impose conscription with the Selective Service Act of 1917. Seeking to avoid the draft riots of the Civil War, the bill established local draft boards that were charged with determining who should be drafted. By the end of the war, nearly 3\u00a0million men had been drafted. The navy also saw tremendous expansion, and Allied shipping losses dropped substantially due to U.S. contributions and a new emphasis on the convoy system.\nFourteen Points.\nWilson sought the establishment of \"an organized common peace\" that would help prevent future conflicts. In this goal, he was opposed not just by the Central Powers, but also the other Allied Powers, who, to various degrees, sought to win concessions and to impose a punitive peace agreement on the Central Powers. On January 8, 1918, Wilson delivered a speech, known as the Fourteen Points, wherein he articulated his administration's long term war objectives. Wilson called for the establishment of an association of nations to guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all nations\u2014a League of Nations. Other points included the evacuation of occupied territory, the establishment of an independent Poland, and self-determination for the peoples of Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire.\nCourse of the war.\nUnder the command of General Pershing, the American Expeditionary Forces first arrived in France in mid-1917. Wilson and Pershing rejected the British and French proposal that American soldiers integrate into existing Allied units, giving the United States more freedom of action but requiring for the creation of new organizations and supply chains. Russia exited the war after signing the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in March 1918, allowing Germany to shift soldiers from the Eastern Front of the war. Hoping to break Allied lines before American soldiers could arrive in full force, the Germans launched the Spring Offensive on the Western Front. Both sides suffered hundreds of thousands of casualties as the Germans forced back the British and French, but Germany was unable to capture the French capital of Paris. There were only 175,000 American soldiers in Europe at the end of 1917, but by mid-1918 10,000 Americans were arriving in Europe per day. With American forces having joined in the fight, the Allies defeated Germany in the Battle of Belleau Wood and the Battle of Ch\u00e2teau-Thierry. Beginning in August, the Allies launched the Hundred Days Offensive, pushing back the exhausted German army. Meanwhile, French and British leaders convinced Wilson to send a few thousand American soldiers to join the Allied intervention in Russia, which was in the midst of a civil war between the Communist Bolsheviks and the White movement.\nBy the end of September 1918, the German leadership no longer believed it could win the war, and Kaiser Wilhelm II appointed a new government led by Prince Maximilian of Baden. Baden immediately sought an armistice with Wilson, with the Fourteen Points to serve as the basis of the German surrender. House procured agreement to the armistice from France and Britain, but only after threatening to conclude a unilateral armistice without them. Germany and the Allied Powers brought an end to the fighting with the signing of the Armistice of 11 November 1918. Austria-Hungary had signed the Armistice of Villa Giusti eight days earlier, while the Ottoman Empire had signed the Armistice of Mudros in October. By the end of the war, 116,000 American servicemen had died, and another 200,000 had been wounded.\nHome front.\nWith the American entrance into World War I in April 1917, Wilson became a war-time president. The War Industries Board, headed by Bernard Baruch, was established to set U.S. war manufacturing policies and goals. Future President Herbert Hoover led the Food Administration; the Federal Fuel Administration, run by Harry Augustus Garfield, introduced daylight saving time and rationed fuel supplies; William McAdoo was in charge of war bond efforts; Vance C. McCormick headed the War Trade Board. These men, known collectively as the \"war cabinet\", met weekly with Wilson. Because he was heavily focused on foreign policy during World War I, Wilson delegated a large degree of authority over the home front to his subordinates. In the midst of the war, the federal budget soared from $1\u00a0billion in fiscal year 1916 to $19\u00a0billion in fiscal year 1919. In addition to spending on its own military build-up, Wall Street in 1914\u20131916 and the Treasury in 1917\u20131918 provided large loans to the Allied countries, thus financing the war effort of Britain and France.\nSeeking to avoid the high levels of inflation that had accompanied the heavy borrowing of the American Civil War, the Wilson administration raised taxes during the war. The War Revenue Act of 1917 and the Revenue Act of 1918 raised the top tax rate to 77 percent, greatly increased the number of Americans paying the income tax, and levied an excess profits tax on businesses and individuals. Despite these tax acts, the United States was forced to borrow heavily to finance the war effort. Treasury Secretary McAdoo authorized the issuing of low-interest war bonds and, to attract investors, made interest on the bonds tax-free. The bonds proved so popular among investors that many borrowed money in order to buy more bonds. The purchase of bonds, along with other war-time pressures, resulted in rising inflation, though this inflation was partly matched by rising wages and profits.\nTo shape public opinion, Wilson in 1917 established the first modern propaganda office, the Committee on Public Information (CPI), headed by George Creel. Wilson called on voters in the 1918 off-year elections to elect Democrats as an endorsement of his policies. However the Republicans won over alienated German-Americans and took control. Wilson refused to coordinate or compromise with the new leaders of House and Senate\u2014Senator Henry Cabot Lodge became his nemesis. In November 1919, Wilson's attorney general, A. Mitchell Palmer, began to target anarchists, Industrial Workers of the World members, and other antiwar groups in what became known as the Palmer Raids. Thousands were arrested for incitement to violence, espionage, or sedition. Wilson by that point was incapacitated and was not told what was happening.\nAftermath of World War I.\nParis Peace Conference.\n \nAfter the signing of the armistice, Wilson traveled to Europe to lead the American delegation to the Paris Peace Conference, thereby becoming the first incumbent president to travel to Europe. Although Republicans now controlled Congress, Wilson shut them out. Senate Republicans and even some Senate Democrats complained about their lack of representation in the delegation. It consisted of Wilson, Colonel House, Secretary of State Robert Lansing, General Tasker H. Bliss, and diplomat Henry White, who was the only Republican, and he was not an active partisan. Save for a two-week return to the United States, Wilson remained in Europe for six months, where he focused on reaching a peace treaty to formally end the war. Wilson, British Prime Minister David Lloyd George, French Prime Minister Georges Clemenceau, and Italian Prime Minister Vittorio Emanuele Orlando made up the \"Big Four\", the Allied leaders with the most influence at the Paris Peace Conference. Wilson had an illness during the conference, and some experts believe the Spanish flu was the cause.\nUnlike other Allied leaders, Wilson did not seek territorial gains or material concessions from the Central Powers. His chief goal was the establishment of the League of Nations, which he saw as the \"keystone of the whole programme\". Wilson himself presided over the committee that drafted the Covenant of the League of Nations. The covenant bound members to respect freedom of religion, treat racial minorities fairly, and peacefully settle disputes through organizations like the Permanent Court of International Justice. Article X of the League Covenant required all nations to defend League members against external aggression. Japan proposed that the conference endorse a Racial Equality Proposal; The chairman, Woodrow Wilson, overturned it by saying that although the proposal had been approved by a clear majority, the particular matter had strong opposition manifest itself (despite the lack of any actual votes against the proposal) and that on this issue, a unanimous vote would be required. French delegate Ferdinand Larnaude [la; sv] immediately stated that \"a majority had voted for the amendment.\" Meanwhile, the Japanese delegation wanted the transcript to show that a clear majority had been voted for the amendment. The Covenant of the League of Nations was incorporated into the conference's Treaty of Versailles, which ended the war with Germany, and into other peace treaties.\nAside from the establishment the League of Nations and solidifying a lasting world peace, Wilson's other main goal at the Paris Peace Conference was that self-determination be the primary basis used for drawing new international borders. However, in pursuit of his League of Nations, Wilson conceded several points to the other powers present at the conference. Germany was required to permanently cede territory, pay war reparations, relinquish all of her overseas colonies and dependencies and submit to military occupation in the Rhineland. Additionally, a clause in the treaty specifically named Germany as responsible for the war. Wilson agreed to allowing the Allied European powers and Japan to essentially expand their empires by establishing \"de facto\" colonies in the Middle East, Africa, and Asia out the former German and Ottoman Empires; these territorial awards to the victorious countries were thinly disguised as \"League of Nations mandates\". The Japanese acquisition of German interests in the Shandong Peninsula of China proved especially unpopular, as it undercut Wilson's promise of self-government. Wilson's hopes for achieving self-determination saw some success when the conference recognized multiple new and independent states created in Eastern Europe, including Albania, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Yugoslavia.\nThe conference finished negotiations in May 1919, at which point the new leaders of republican Germany viewed the treaty for the first time. Some German leaders favored repudiating the peace due to the harshness of the terms, though ultimately Germany signed the treaty on June 28, 1919. Wilson was unable to convince the other Allied powers, France in particular, to temper the harshness of the settlement being leveled at the defeated Central Powers, especially Germany. For his efforts towards creating a lasting world peace, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize.\nRatification debate and defeat.\nRatification of the Treaty of Versailles required the support of two-thirds of the Senate, a difficult proposition given that Republicans held a narrow majority in the Senate after the 1918 U.S. elections. Republicans were outraged by Wilson's failure to discuss the war or its aftermath with them, and an intensely partisan battle developed in the Senate. Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge supported a version of the treaty that required Wilson to compromise. Wilson refused. Some Republicans, including former President Taft and former Secretary of State Elihu Root, favored ratification of the treaty with some modifications, and their public support gave Wilson some chance of winning the treaty's ratification.\nThe debate over the treaty centered around a debate over the American role in the world community in the post-war era, and senators fell into three main groups. The first group, consisting of most Democrats, favored the treaty. Fourteen senators, mostly Republicans, were known as the \"irreconcilables\" as they completely opposed U.S. entrance into the League of Nations. Some of these irreconcilables opposed the treaty for its failure to emphasize decolonization and disarmament, while others feared surrendering American freedom of action to an international organization. The remaining group of senators, known as \"reservationists\", accepted the idea of the League but sought varying degrees of change to ensure the protection of American sovereignty and the right of Congress to decide on going to war.\nArticle X of the League Covenant, which sought to create a system of collective security by requiring League members to protect one another against external aggression, seemed to force the U.S. to join in any war the League decided upon. Wilson consistently refused to compromise, partly due to concerns about having to re-open negotiations with the other treaty signatories. When Lodge was on the verge of building a two-thirds majority to ratify the Treaty with ten reservations, Wilson forced his supporters to vote Nay on March 19, 1920, thereby closing the issue. Cooper says that \"nearly every League advocate\" went along with Lodge, but their efforts \"failed solely because Wilson admittedly rejected all reservations proposed in the Senate.\" Thomas A. Bailey calls Wilson's action \"the supreme act of infanticide\". He adds: \"The treaty was slain in the house of its friends rather than in the house of its enemies. In the final analysis it was not the two-thirds rule, or the 'irreconcilables,' or Lodge, or the 'strong' and 'mild' reservationists, but Wilson and his docile following who delivered the fatal stab.\"\nHealth collapses.\nTo bolster public support for ratification, Wilson barnstormed the Western states, but he returned to the White House in late September due to health problems. On October 2, 1919, Wilson suffered a serious stroke, leaving him paralyzed on his left side, and with only partial vision in the right eye. He was confined to bed for weeks and sequestered from everyone except his wife, his physician, Cary Grayson, and consulting neurologist Francis Xavier Dercum. Bert E. Park, a neurosurgeon who examined Wilson's medical records after his death, writes that Wilson's illness affected his personality in various ways, making him prone to \"disorders of emotion, impaired impulse control, and defective judgment.\" Anxious to help the president recover, Tumulty, Grayson, and the First Lady determined what documents the president read and who was allowed to communicate with him. For her influence in the administration, some have described Edith Wilson as \"the first female President of the United States.\" Link states that by November 1919, Wilson's \"recovery was only partial at best. His mind remained relatively clear; but he was physically enfeebled, and the disease had wrecked his emotional constitution and aggravated all his more unfortunate personal traits.\nThroughout late 1919, Wilson's inner circle concealed the severity of his health issues. By February 1920, the president's true condition was publicly known. Many expressed qualms about Wilson's fitness for the presidency at a time when the League fight was reaching a climax, and domestic issues such as strikes, unemployment, inflation and the threat of Communism were ablaze. In mid-March 1920, Lodge and his Republicans formed a coalition with the pro-treaty Democrats to pass a treaty with reservations, but Wilson rejected this compromise and enough Democrats followed his lead to defeat ratification. No one close to Wilson was willing to certify, as required by the Constitution, his \"inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office.\" Though some members of Congress encouraged Vice President Marshall to assert his claim to the presidency, Marshall never attempted to replace Wilson. Wilson's lengthy period of incapacity while serving as president was nearly unprecedented; of the previous presidents, only James Garfield had been in a similar situation, but Garfield retained greater control of his mental faculties and faced relatively few pressing issues.\nDemobilization.\nWhen the war ended the Wilson Administration dismantled the wartime boards and regulatory agencies. Demobilization was chaotic and at times violent; four million soldiers were sent home with little money and few benefits. In 1919, strikes in major industries broke out, disrupting the economy. The country experienced further turbulence as a series of race riots broke out in the summer of 1919. In 1920, the economy plunged into a severe economic depression, unemployment rose to 12 percent, and the price of agricultural products sharply declined.\nRed Scare and Palmer Raids.\nFollowing the Bolshevik Revolution in Russia and similar revolutionary attempts in Germany and Hungary, many Americans feared the possibility of terrorism in the United States. Such concerns were inflamed by the bombings in April 1919 when anarchists mailed 38 bombs to prominent Americans; one person was killed but most packages were intercepted. Nine more mail bombs were sent in June, injuring several people. Fresh fears combined with a patriotic national mood sparking the \"First Red Scare\" in 1919. Attorney General Palmer from November 1919 to January 1920 launched the Palmer Raids to suppress radical organizations. Over 10,000 people were arrested and 556 aliens were deported, including Emma Goldman. Palmer's activities met resistance from the courts and some senior administration officials. No one told Wilson what Palmer was doing. Later in 1920, the Wall Street bombing on September 16 killed 40 and injured hundreds in the deadliest terrorist attack on American soil up to that point. Anarchists took credit and promised more violence; they escaped capture.\nProhibition and women's suffrage.\nProhibition developed as an unstoppable reform during World War I, but the Wilson administration played only a minor role. The Eighteenth Amendment passed Congress and was ratified by the states in 1919. In October 1919, Wilson vetoed the Volstead Act, legislation designed to enforce Prohibition, but his veto was overridden by Congress.\nWilson opposed women's suffrage in 1911 because he believed women lacked the public experience needed to be good voters. The actual evidence of how women voters behaved in the western states changed his mind, and he came to feel they could indeed be good voters. He did not speak publicly on the issue except to echo the Democratic Party position that suffrage was a state matter, primarily because of strong opposition in the white South to black voting rights.\nIn a 1918 speech before Congress, Wilson for the first time backed a national right to vote: \"We have made partners of the women in this war...Shall we admit them only to a partnership of suffering and sacrifice and toil and not to a partnership of privilege and right?\" The House passed a constitutional amendment providing for women's suffrage nationwide, but this stalled in the Senate. Wilson continually pressured the Senate to vote for the amendment, telling senators that its ratification was vital to winning the war. The Senate finally approved it in June 1919, and the requisite number of states ratified the Nineteenth Amendment in August 1920.\n1920 election.\nDespite his medical incapacity, Wilson wanted to run for a third term. While the 1920 Democratic National Convention strongly endorsed Wilson's policies, Democratic leaders refused, nominating instead a ticket consisting of Governor James M. Cox and Assistant Secretary of the Navy Franklin D. Roosevelt. The Republicans centered their campaign around opposition to Wilson's policies, with Senator Warren G. Harding promising a \"return to normalcy\". Wilson largely stayed out of the campaign, although he endorsed Cox and continued to advocate for U.S. membership in the League of Nations. Harding won the election in a landslide, capturing over 60% of the popular vote and winning every state outside of the South. Wilson met with Harding for tea on his last day in office, March 3, 1921. Due to his health, Wilson was unable to attend the inauguration.\nOn December 10, 1920, Wilson was awarded the 1919 Nobel Peace Prize \"for his role as founder of the League of Nations\". Wilson became the second sitting United States president after Theodore Roosevelt to become a Nobel Peace Laureate.\nFinal years and death (1921\u20131924).\nAfter the end of his second term in 1921, Wilson and his wife moved from the White House to a townhouse in the Kalorama section of Washington, D.C. He continued to follow politics as President Harding and the Republican Congress repudiated membership in the League of Nations, cut taxes, and raised tariffs. In 1921, Wilson opened a law practice with former secretary of state Bainbridge Colby. Wilson showed up the first day but never returned, and the practice was closed by the end of 1922. Wilson tried writing, and he produced a few short essays after enormous effort; they \"marked a sad finish to a formerly great literary career.\" He declined to write memoirs, but frequently met with Ray Stannard Baker, who wrote a three-volume biography of Wilson that was published in 1922. In August 1923, Wilson attended the funeral of his successor, Warren Harding. On November 10, 1923, Wilson made his last national address, delivering a short Armistice Day radio speech from the library of his home.\nWilson's health did not markedly improve after leaving office, declining rapidly in January 1924. He died on February 3, 1924, at the age of 67. The president and first lady, Calvin and Grace Coolidge, attended the funeral as did former first lady Florence Harding. Former first lady Helen Herron Taft represented her husband, Chief Justice and former president William Howard Taft, who was too ill to attend the service. Also among the 2,000 guests invited were 11 senators, many members of the House of Representatives, and several foreign dignitaries. Wilson was interred in Washington National Cathedral, being the only president whose final resting place lies within the nation's capital.\nRace relations.\nWilson was born and raised in the U.S. South by parents who were committed supporters of both slavery and the Confederacy. Academically, Wilson was an apologist for slavery and the Redeemers, and one of the foremost promoters of the Lost Cause mythology. \nWilson was the first Southerner elected president since Zachary Taylor in 1848 and the only former subject of the Confederacy. Wilson's election was celebrated by southern segregationists. At Princeton, Wilson actively discouraged the admission of African-Americans as students. Several historians have spotlighted consistent examples in the public record of Wilson's overtly racist policies and the inclusion of segregationists in his Cabinet. Other scholars say Wilson defended segregation as \"a rational, scientific policy\" in private and describe him as a man who \"loved to tell racist 'darky' jokes about black Americans.\"\nDuring Wilson's presidency, D. W. Griffith's pro-Ku Klux Klan film \"The Birth of a Nation\" (1915) was the first motion picture to be screened in the White House. Though he was not initially critical of the movie, Wilson distanced himself from it as public backlash mounted and eventually released a statement condemning the film's message while denying he had been aware of it prior to the screening.\nSegregating the federal bureaucracy.\nBy the 1910s, African Americans had become effectively shut out of elected office. Obtaining an executive appointment to a position within the federal bureaucracy was usually the only option for African-American statesmen. According to Berg, Wilson continued to appoint African-Americans to positions that had traditionally been filled by black people, overcoming opposition from many Southern senators. Oswald Garrison Villard, who later became an opponent of his, initially thought that Wilson was not a bigot and supported progress for black people, and he was frustrated by Southern opposition in the Senate, to which Wilson capitulated. In a conversation with Wilson, journalist John Palmer Gavit came to the realization that opposition to those views \"would certainly precipitate a conflict which would put a complete stop to any legislative program.\"\nSince the end of Reconstruction, both parties recognized certain appointments as unofficially reserved for qualified African-Americans. Wilson appointed a total of nine African-Americans to prominent positions in the federal bureaucracy, eight of whom were Republican carry-overs. For comparison, William Howard Taft was met with disdain and outrage from Republicans of both races for appointing thirty-one black officeholders, a record low for a Republican president. Upon taking office, Wilson fired all but two of the seventeen black supervisors in the federal bureaucracy appointed by Taft. Since 1863, the U.S. mission to Haiti and Santo Domingo was almost always led by an African American diplomat regardless of what party the sitting president belonged to; Wilson ended this half-century-old tradition but continued to appoint Black diplomats, such as George Washington Buckner, as well as Joseph L. Johnson, to head the mission to Liberia. Since the end of Reconstruction, the federal bureaucracy had been possibly the only career path where African-Americans could experience some measure of equality, and was the lifeblood and foundation of the Black middle class.\nWilson's administration escalated the discriminatory hiring policies and segregation of government offices that had begun under Theodore Roosevelt and continued under Taft. In Wilson's first month in office, Postmaster General Albert S. Burleson urged the president to establish segregated government offices. Wilson did not adopt Burleson's proposal but allowed Cabinet secretaries discretion to segregate their respective departments. By the end of 1913, many departments, including the Navy, Treasury, and Post Office, had segregated work spaces, restrooms, and cafeterias. Many agencies used segregation as a pretext to adopt a whites-only employment policy, claiming they lacked facilities for black workers. In these instances, African-Americans employed prior to the Wilson administration were either offered early retirement, transferred, or simply fired. At the suggestion of Oklahoma Senator Thomas Gore, Wilson nominated Adam E. Patterson, a Black Democrat from Muskogee, Oklahoma, for the position of Register of the Treasury in July 1913; Patterson withdrew his name from consideration following opposition from Southern Democratic senators James K. Vardaman and Benjamin Tillman. Wilson proceeded to nominate Gabe E. Parker, who was of mixed European and Choctaw descent, for the position instead, and did not nominate any other Black people for federal office afterwards.\nRacial discrimination in federal hiring increased further when after 1914, the United States Civil Service Commission instituted a new policy requiring job applicants to submit a personal photo with their application. The alleged impetus behind this policy was to guard against applicant fraud; however, only 14 cases of impersonation/attempted impersonation in the application process were uncovered the year prior. As a federal enclave, Washington, D.C., had long offered African Americans greater opportunities for employment and less glaring discrimination. In 1919, Black veterans returning home to D.C. were shocked to discover Jim Crow laws had set in; many could not go back to the jobs they held prior to the war or even enter the same building they used to work in due to the color of their skin. Booker T. Washington described the situation: \"I had never seen the colored people so discouraged and bitter as they are at the present time.\"\nAfrican Americans in the armed forces.\nWhile segregation had been present in the Army prior to Wilson, its severity increased significantly under his administration. During Wilson's first term, the Army and Navy refused to commission new black officers. Black officers already serving experienced increased discrimination and were often forced out or discharged on dubious grounds. Following the entry of the U.S. into World War I, the War Department drafted hundreds of thousands of black people into the Army, and draftees were paid equally regardless of race. Commissioning of African-American officers resumed but units remained segregated and most all-black units were led by white officers.\nUnlike the Army, the U.S. Navy was never formally segregated. Following Wilson's appointment of Josephus Daniels as Secretary of the Navy, a system of Jim Crow was swiftly implemented; with ships, training facilities, restrooms, and cafeterias all becoming segregated. While Daniels significantly expanded opportunities for advancement and training available to white sailors, by the time the U.S. entered World War I, African-American sailors had been relegated almost entirely to mess and custodial duties, often assigned to act as servants for white officers.\nResponse to racial violence.\nIn response to the demand for industrial labor, the Great Migration of African Americans out of the South surged in 1917 and 1918. This migration sparked race riots, including the East St. Louis riots of 1917. In response to these riots, but only after much public outcry, Wilson asked Attorney General Thomas Watt Gregory if the federal government could intervene to \"check these disgraceful outrages\". On the advice of Gregory, Wilson did not take direct action against the riots. In 1918, Wilson spoke out against lynching in the United States, stating: \"I say plainly that every American who takes part in the action of mob or gives it any sort of continence is no true son of this great democracy but its betrayer, and ... [discredits] her by that single disloyalty to her standards of law and of rights.\"\nIn 1919, another series of race riots occurred in Chicago, Omaha, and two dozen other major cities in the North. Historians estimate more than 250 African Americans were killed. The federal government did not become involved, just as it had not become involved previously.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nWilson is generally ranked by historians and political scientists as an above average president. In the view of some historians, Wilson, more than any of his predecessors, took steps towards the creation of a strong federal government that would protect ordinary citizens against the overwhelming power of large corporations. He is generally regarded as a key figure in the establishment of modern American liberalism, and a strong influence on future presidents such as Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson. Cooper argues that in terms of impact and ambition, only the New Deal and the Great Society rival the domestic accomplishments of Wilson's presidency. Many of Wilson's accomplishments, including the Federal Reserve, the Federal Trade Commission, the graduated income tax, and labor laws, continued to influence the United States long after Wilson's death.\nMany conservatives have attacked Wilson for his role in expanding the federal government. In 2018, conservative columnist George Will wrote in \"The Washington Post\" that Theodore Roosevelt and Wilson were the \"progenitors of today's imperial presidency\". Wilson's idealistic foreign policy, which came to be known as Wilsonianism, also cast a long shadow over American foreign policy, and Wilson's League of Nations influenced the development of the United Nations. Saladin Ambar writes that Wilson was \"the first statesman of world stature to speak out not only against European imperialism but against the newer form of economic domination sometimes described as 'informal imperialism.'\"\nNotwithstanding his accomplishments in office, Wilson has received criticism for his record on race relations and civil liberties, for his interventions in Latin America, and for his failure to win ratification of the Treaty of Versailles. Despite his Southern roots and record at Princeton, Wilson became the first Democrat to receive widespread support from the African American community in a presidential election. Wilson's African-American supporters, many of whom had crossed party lines to vote for him in 1912, found themselves bitterly disappointed by the Wilson presidency, his decision to allow the imposition of Jim Crow within the federal bureaucracy in particular.\nRoss Kennedy writes that Wilson's support of segregation complied with predominant public opinion. A. Scott Berg argues Wilson accepted segregation as part of a policy to \"promote racial progress... by shocking the social system as little as possible.\" The ultimate result of this policy was unprecedented levels of segregation within the federal bureaucracy and far fewer opportunities for employment and promotion being open to African-Americans than before. Historian Kendrick Clements argues \"Wilson had none of the crude, vicious racism of James K. Vardaman or Benjamin R. Tillman, but he was insensitive to African-American feelings and aspirations.\" A 2021 study in the \"Quarterly Journal of Economics\" found that Wilson's segregation of the civil service increased the black-white earnings gap by 3.4\u20136.9 percentage points, as existing black civil servants were driven to lower-paid positions. Black civil servants who were exposed to Wilson's segregationist policies experienced a relative decline in home ownership rates, with suggestive evidence of lasting adverse effects for the descendants of those black civil servants. In the wake of the 2015 Charleston church shooting, some individuals demanded the removal of Wilson's name from institutions affiliated with Princeton due to his stance on race.\nMemorials.\nThe Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library is located in Staunton, Virginia. The Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home in Augusta, Georgia, and the Woodrow Wilson House in Washington, D.C., are National Historic Landmarks. The Thomas Woodrow Wilson Boyhood Home in Columbia, South Carolina is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. Shadow Lawn, the Summer White House for Wilson during his term in office, became part of Monmouth University in 1956, and was declared a National Historic Landmark in 1985. Prospect House in Princeton, New Jersey, Wilson's residence as president of Princeton University, has been named a National Historic Landmark. Wilson's presidential papers and his personal library are housed in the Library of Congress.\nThe Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, D.C., is named for Wilson, and the Princeton School of Public and International Affairs at Princeton University was named for Wilson until 2020 when Princeton's board of trustees voted to remove Wilson's name from the school. The Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation is a non-profit that provides grants for teaching fellowships. The Woodrow Wilson Foundation was established to honor Wilson's legacy but was terminated in 1993. One of Princeton University's six residential colleges was originally named Wilson College. Numerous schools, including several high schools, bear Wilson's name. Several streets, including the Rambla Presidente Wilson in Montevideo, Uruguay, have been named for Wilson. The USS \"Woodrow Wilson\", a \"Lafayette\"-class submarine, was named for Wilson. Other things named for Wilson include the Woodrow Wilson Bridge between Prince George's County, Maryland and Virginia, and the Palais Wilson, which serves as the temporary headquarters of the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights in Geneva until 2023 at the end of leasing. Monuments to Wilson include the Woodrow Wilson Monument in Prague.\nPopular culture.\nIn 1944, 20th Century Fox released \"Wilson\", a biopic about Wilson starring Alexander Knox and directed by Henry King, considered an \"idealistic\" portrayal of Wilson. The movie was a personal passion project of studio president and producer Darryl F. Zanuck, who was a deep admirer of Wilson. The movie was praised by film critics and Wilson supporters, and scored ten Academy Awards nominations, winning five. Despite its popularity amongst elites, \"Wilson\" was a box-office bomb, incurring an almost $2 million loss for the studio. The movie's failure is said to have had a deep and long lasting impact on Zanuck and no attempt has been made by any major studio since to create a motion picture based on the life of Wilson.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33531", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33531", "title": "William Allen (governor)", "text": "American politician (1803\u20131879)\nWilliam Allen (December 18 or 27, 1803 \u2013 July 11, 1879) was an American lawyer and politician who served as a Democratic Representative, Senator and 31st governor of Ohio.\nEarly life and family.\nAllen was born in Edenton, North Carolina. His father was https://. His mother was Fanny Coulston, an enslaved woman who was either owned by his father or had been his mistress. Upon the death of his mother, he and his brother Frances Allen William moved to Lynchburg, Virginia. In 1819, he moved to live with his sister in Chillicothe, Ohio.\nHis father made the following arrangements in his will. \n\"I give and devise that part of lot # 5 in the new plan of the town of Edenton joining the lots wheron I now dwell and as far as the same is at present under fence with all the improvements thereon to Fanny Coulston her heirs and assigns forever. I also give and bequeath unto the said Fanny Coulston her heirs and assigns such part of my household and kitchen furniture as my executors hereinafter named, shall judge reasonable and necessary, due regard being paid to the situation of my estate and the interest of her children. I give and bequeath unto my three natural sons, Francis, Bonaparte, and William begotten on the body of the said Fanny Coulston, all my wearing apparel, including whatever remains or that left to me by my deceased Uncle Joseph Hewes, Esquire, to be equally divided among them share and share alike. Before the signing and the execution of the above Will, I do hereby declare it to be my further will and desire that the aforesaid Fanny Caulston shall have the use and labor of my negro woman named Penny for and during the term of three years.\"\nAllen and his sister Mary Granberry Allen lived in Chillicothe together. His sister married Reverend Pleasant Thurman, and their son, Allen G. Thurman, followed in his uncle's footsteps, becoming a lawyer and politician.\nAllen attended Chillicothe Academy before studying law with Colonel Edward King. He was admitted to the bar in Ohio at age 21. He began his career as a politician in the Democratic Party at a young age.\nCareer.\nAllen served as United States Representative from Ohio from 1833 to 1835, losing his bid for re-election.\nSenate.\nHe served as United States Senator from Ohio from 1837 to 1849, losing a bid for a third term in 1848.\nWhile in the Senate, Allen was one of a group of Western Democrat expansionists who asserted that the U.S. had a valid claim to the entire Oregon Country, which was an issue during the 1844 U.S. presidential election. He suggested that the United States should be prepared to go to war with the United Kingdom to annex the entire Oregon Country up to Russian-owned Alaska at latitude 54\u00b040\u2032N. This position ultimately produced the slogan \"Fifty-Four Forty or Fight!,\" coined in 1846 by opponents of such a policy (not, as popularly believed, a slogan in the 1844 Presidential campaign). Allen supported \"popular sovereignty\" and the presidential candidacy of fellow-Democrat Lewis Cass in 1848.\nIn 1849, Allen retired to his farm, \"Fruit Hill\", which had belonged to his father-in-law, and fellow Ohio Governor, Duncan McArthur, near Chillicothe, Ohio. Allen identified himself as a \"Peace Democrat\" by opposing the American Civil War.\nGovernorship.\nAllen did not return to public service for nearly a quarter century until he served as governor of Ohio from 1874 to 1876. He unsuccessfully sought a second two-year term in an 1875 election.\nAllen was noted for his loud voice. A friend asked Senator Benjamin Tappan if a fellow Ohioan was still in Washington. Tappan replied, \"No, he left yesterday and is probably by this time in Cumberland, Maryland, but if you will go to Bill Allen and tell him to raise that window and call him, he will come back.\"\nDeath and burial.\nAt the close of his administration, he retired to private life at Fruit Hill, where he died in 1879. Allen is buried at Grandview Cemetery, Chillicothe.\nLegacy.\nAllen County, Kansas, is named for William Allen.\nIn 1887, Ohio donated a statue of Allen to the National Statuary Hall Collection, which was exhibited in the National Statuary Hall of the U.S. Capitol. The statue was sculpted by Charles H. Niehaus. In 2010, the Ohio Historical Society held a statewide poll on the suitability of Allen as a distinguished representative of the state. The poll found that many Ohioans objected to Allen. On August 26, the Ohio National Statuary Committee voted to replace Allen's statue with a statue of Ohio-born inventor Thomas Edison. The Ohio General Assembly agreed to replace the statue in part because \"Allen\u2019s pro-slavery position and outspoken criticism of President Abraham Lincoln during the Civil War make him a poor representative for Ohio in the U.S. Capitol.\" However, lack of funding for the Edison statue delayed replacement of the Allen statue. The Edison statue was completed in spring 2015, and was installed on September 20, 2016. The statue of Allen was relocated to the Ross County Heritage Center in Chillicothe.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33532", "revid": "26953", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33532", "title": "William Boyd Allison", "text": ""}
{"id": "33536", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33536", "title": "William Randolph Hearst", "text": "American newspaper publisher (1863\u20131951)\nWilliam Randolph Hearst (; April 29, 1863 \u2013 August 14, 1951) was an American newspaper publisher and politician who developed the nation's largest newspaper chain and media company, Hearst Communications. His extravagant methods of yellow journalism in violation of ethics and standards influenced the nation's popular media by emphasizing sensationalism and human-interest stories. Hearst entered the publishing business in 1887 with Mitchell Trubitt after being given control of \"The San Francisco Examiner\" by his wealthy father, Senator George Hearst.\nAfter moving to New York City, Hearst acquired the \"New York Journal\" and fought a bitter circulation war with Joseph Pulitzer's \"New York World\". Hearst sold papers by printing giant headlines over lurid stories featuring crime, corruption, sex, and innuendos. Hearst acquired more newspapers and created a chain that numbered nearly 30 papers in major American cities at its peak. He later expanded to magazines, creating the largest newspaper and magazine business in the world. Hearst controlled the editorial positions and coverage of political news in all his papers and magazines, and thereby often published his personal views. He sensationalized Spanish atrocities in Cuba while calling for war in 1898 against Spain. Historians, however, reject his subsequent claims to have started the war with Spain as overly exaggerated.\nHe was twice elected as a Democrat to the U.S. House of Representatives. He ran unsuccessfully for President of the United States in 1904, Mayor of New York City in 1905 and 1909, and Governor of New York in 1906. During his political career, he espoused views generally associated with the left wing of the Progressive Movement, claiming to speak on behalf of the working class.\nAfter 1918 and the end of World War I, Hearst gradually began adopting more conservative views and started promoting an isolationist foreign policy to avoid any more entanglement in what he regarded as corrupt European affairs. He was at once a militant nationalist, a staunch anti-communist after the Russian Revolution, and deeply suspicious of the League of Nations and of the British, French, Japanese, and Russians. Following Hitler's rise to power, Hearst became a supporter of the Nazi Party, ordering his journalists to publish favorable coverage of Nazi Germany, and allowing leading Nazis to publish articles in his newspapers. While from 1938 onward he denounced Hitler's treatment of Jews, he still declared support for the Nazi invasion of Russia, calling Hitler the \"saviour of Europe\" in his column on June 23, 1941. He was a leading supporter of Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932\u20131934, but later broke with FDR and became a prominent critic of his administration. Hearst's publication reached a peak circulation of 20 million readers a day in the mid-1930s. He poorly managed finances and was so deeply in debt during the Great Depression that most of his assets had to be liquidated in the late 1930s. Hearst managed to keep his newspapers and magazines.\nHis life story was the main inspiration for Charles Foster Kane, the lead character in Orson Welles' film \"Citizen Kane\" (1941), with Kane's Xanadu representative of the real-life Hearst Castle. The castle, constructed on a hill overlooking the Pacific Ocean near San Simeon, California, has been preserved as a State Historical Monument and is designated as a National Historic Landmark.\nEarly life and education.\nHearst was born in San Francisco to George Hearst on April 29, 1863, a millionaire mining engineer, owner of gold and other mines through his corporation, and his much younger wife Phoebe Apperson Hearst, from a small town in Missouri. The elder Hearst later entered politics. He served as a U.S. Senator, first appointed for a brief period in 1886 and was then elected later that year. He served from 1887 to his death in 1891.\nHis paternal great-grandfather was John Hearst of Ulster Protestant origin. John Hearst, with his wife and six children, migrated to America from Ballybay, County Monaghan, Ireland, as part of the Cahans Exodus in 1766. The family settled in the Province of South Carolina. Their immigration there was spurred in part by the colonial government's policy that encouraged the immigration of Irish Protestants, many of Scots origin. The names \"John Hearse\" and \"John Hearse Jr.\" appear on the council records of October 26, 1766, being credited with meriting of land on the Long Canes in what became Abbeville District, based upon to heads of household and for each dependent of a Protestant immigrant; the \"Hearse\" spelling of the family name was never used afterward by the family members themselves, nor any family of any size. Hearst's mother, n\u00e9e Phoebe Elizabeth Apperson, was also of Scots-Irish ancestry; her family came from Galway. She was appointed as the first woman Regent of University of California, Berkeley, donated funds to establish libraries at several universities, funded many anthropological expeditions, and founded the Phoebe A. Hearst Museum of Anthropology.\nHearst attended preparatory school at St. Paul's School in Concord, New Hampshire. He gained admission to Harvard College, and began attending in 1885. While there, he was a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon, the A.D. Club, a Harvard Final club, the Hasty Pudding Theatricals, and the \"Harvard Lampoon\" prior to being expelled. His antics at Harvard ranged from sponsoring massive beer parties on Harvard Square to sending pudding pots used as chamber pots to his professors with their images depicted within the bowls.\nPublishing business.\nSearching for an occupation, in 1887 Hearst took over management of his father's newspaper, the \"San Francisco Examiner\", which his father had acquired in 1880 as repayment for a gambling debt. Giving his paper the motto \"Monarch of the Dailies\", Hearst acquired the most advanced equipment and the most prominent writers of the time, including Ambrose Bierce, Mark Twain, Jack London, and political cartoonist Homer Davenport. A self-proclaimed populist, Hearst reported accounts of municipal and financial corruption, often attacking companies in which his own family held an interest. Within a few years, his paper dominated the San Francisco market.\n\"New York Morning Journal\".\nEarly in his career at the \"San Francisco Examiner\", Hearst envisioned running a large newspaper chain and \"always knew that his dream of a nation-spanning, multi-paper news operation was impossible without a triumph in New York\". In 1895, with the financial support of his widowed mother (his father had died in 1891), Hearst bought the then failing \"New York Morning Journal\", hiring writers such as Stephen Crane and Julian Hawthorne and entering into a head-to-head circulation war with Joseph Pulitzer, owner and publisher of the \"New York World\". Hearst \"stole\" cartoonist Richard F. Outcault along with all of Pulitzer's Sunday staff. Another prominent hire was James J. Montague, who came from the \"Portland Oregonian\" and started his well-known \"More Truth Than Poetry\" column at the Hearst-owned \"New York Evening Journal\".\nWhen Hearst purchased the \"penny paper\", so called because its copies sold for a penny apiece, the \"Journal\" was competing with New York's 16 other major dailies. It had a strong focus on Democratic Party politics. Hearst imported his best managers from the \"San Francisco Examiner\" and \"quickly established himself as the most attractive employer\" among New York newspapers. He was seen as generous, paid more than his competitors, and gave credit to his writers with page-one bylines. Further, he was unfailingly polite, unassuming, \"impeccably calm\", and indulgent of \"prima donnas, eccentrics, bohemians, drunks, or reprobates so long as they had useful talents\" according to historian Kenneth Whyte.\nHearst's activist approach to journalism can be summarized by the motto, \"While others Talk, the \"Journal\" Acts.\"\nYellow journalism and rivalry with the \"New York World\".\nThe \"New York Journal\" and its chief rival, the \"New York World\", mastered a style of popular journalism that came to be derided as \"yellow journalism\", so named after Outcault's Yellow Kid comic. Pulitzer's \"World\" had pushed the boundaries of mass appeal for newspapers through bold headlines, aggressive news gathering, generous use of cartoons and illustrations, populist politics, progressive crusades, an exuberant public spirit and dramatic crime and human-interest stories. Hearst's \"Journal\" used the same recipe for success, forcing Pulitzer to drop the price of the \"World\" from two cents to a penny. Soon the two papers were locked in a fierce, often spiteful competition for readers in which both papers spent large sums of money and saw huge gains in circulation.\nWithin a few months of purchasing the \"Journal\", Hearst hired away Pulitzer's three top editors: Sunday editor Morrill Goddard, who greatly expanded the scope and appeal of the American Sunday newspaper; Solomon Carvalho; and a young Arthur Brisbane, who became managing editor of the Hearst newspaper empire and a well-known columnist. Contrary to popular assumption, they were not lured away by higher pay\u2014rather, each man had grown tired of the office environment that Pulitzer encouraged.\nWhile Hearst's many critics attribute the \"Journal\"'s incredible success to cheap sensationalism, Kenneth Whyte noted in \"The Uncrowned King: The Sensational Rise of William Randolph Hearst\": \"Rather than racing to the bottom, he [Hearst] drove the \"Journal\" and the penny press upmarket. The \"Journal\" was a demanding, sophisticated paper by contemporary standards.\" Though yellow journalism would be much maligned, Whyte said, \"All good yellow journalists\u00a0... sought the human in every story and edited without fear of emotion or drama. They wore their feelings on their pages, believing it was an honest and wholesome way to communicate with readers\", but, as Whyte pointed out: \"This appeal to feelings is not an end in itself... [they believed] our emotions tend to ignite our intellects: a story catering to a reader's feelings is more likely than a dry treatise to stimulate thought.\"\nThe two papers finally declared a truce in late 1898, after both lost vast amounts of money covering the Spanish\u2013American War. Hearst probably lost several million dollars in his first three years as publisher of the \"Journal\" (figures are impossible to verify), but the paper began turning a profit after it ended its fight with the \"World\".\nUnder Hearst, the \"Journal\" remained loyal to the populist or left wing of the Democratic Party. It was the only major publication in the East to support William Jennings Bryan in 1896. Its coverage of that election was probably the most important of any newspaper in the country, attacking relentlessly the unprecedented role of money in the Republican campaign and the dominating role played by William McKinley's political and financial manager, Mark Hanna, the first national party 'boss' in American history. A year after taking over the paper, Hearst could boast that sales of the \"Journal\"'s post-election issue (including the evening and German-language editions) topped 1.5\u00a0million, a record \"unparalleled in the history of the world.\"\nThe \"Journal\"'s political coverage, however, was not entirely one-sided. Kenneth Whyte says that most editors of the time \"believed their papers should speak with one voice on political matters\"; by contrast, in New York, Hearst \"helped to usher in the multi-perspective approach we identify with the modern op-ed page\". At first he supported the Russian Revolution of 1917 but later he turned against it. Hearst fought hard against Wilsonian internationalism, the League of Nations, and the World Court, thereby appealing to an isolationist audience.\nSpanish\u2013American War.\nThe \"Morning Journal\"'s daily circulation routinely climbed above the one million mark after the sinking of the and U.S. entry into the Spanish\u2013American War, a war that some called \"the \"Journal\"'s War\", due to the paper's immense influence in provoking American outrage against Spain. Much of the coverage leading up to the war, beginning with the outbreak of the Cuban Revolution in 1895, was tainted by rumor, propaganda, and sensationalism, with the \"yellow\" papers regarded as the worst offenders. The \"Journal\" and other New York newspapers were so one-sided and full of errors in their reporting that coverage of the Cuban crisis and the ensuing Spanish\u2013American War is often cited as one of the most significant milestones in the rise of yellow journalism's hold over the mainstream media. Huge headlines in the \"Journal\" assigned blame for the \"Maine\"'s destruction on sabotage, which was based on no evidence. This reporting stoked outrage and indignation against Spain among the paper's readers in New York.\nThe \"Journal\"'s crusade against Spanish rule in Cuba was not due to mere jingoism, although \"the democratic ideals and humanitarianism that inspired their coverage are largely lost to history,\" as are their \"heroic efforts to find the truth on the island under unusually difficult circumstances.\" The \"Journal\"'s journalistic activism in support of the Cuban rebels, rather, was centered around Hearst's political and business ambitions.\nPerhaps the best known myth in American journalism is the claim, without any contemporary evidence, that the illustrator Frederic Remington, sent by Hearst to Cuba to cover the Cuban War of Independence, cabled Hearst to tell him all was quiet in Cuba. Hearst, in this canard, is said to have responded, \"Please remain. You furnish the pictures and I'll furnish the war.\"\nHearst was personally dedicated to the cause of the Cuban rebels, and the \"Journal\" did some of the most important and courageous reporting on the conflict\u2014as well as some of the most sensationalized. Their stories on the Cuban rebellion and Spain's atrocities on the island\u2014many of which turned out to be untrue\u2014were motivated primarily by Hearst's outrage at Spain's brutal policies on the island. These had resulted in the deaths of hundreds of thousands of innocent Cubans. The most well-known story involved the imprisonment and escape of Cuban prisoner Evangelina Cisneros.\nWhile Hearst and the yellow press did not directly cause America's war with Spain, they inflamed public opinion in New York City to a fever pitch. New York's elites read other papers, such as the \"Times\" and \"Sun\", which were far more restrained. The \"Journal\" and the \"World\" were local papers oriented to a very large working class audience in New York City. They were not among the top ten sources of news in papers in other cities, and their stories did not make a splash outside New York City. Outrage across the country came from evidence of what Spain was doing in Cuba, a major influence in the decision by Congress to declare war. According to a 21st-century historian, war was declared by Congress because public opinion was sickened by the bloodshed, and because leaders like McKinley realized that Spain had lost control of Cuba. These factors weighed more on the president's mind than the melodramas in the \"New York Journal\".\nHearst sailed to Cuba with a small army of \"Journal\" reporters to cover the Spanish\u2013American War; they brought along portable printing equipment, which was used to print a single-edition newspaper in Cuba after the fighting had ended. Two of the \"Journal\"'s correspondents, James Creelman and Edward Marshall, were wounded in the fighting. A leader of the Cuban rebels, Gen. Calixto Garc\u00eda, gave Hearst a Cuban flag that had been riddled with bullets as a gift, in appreciation of Hearst's major role in Cuba's liberation.\nExpansion.\nIn part to aid in his political ambitions, Hearst opened newspapers in other cities, among them Chicago, Los Angeles and Boston. In 1915, he founded International Film Service, an animation studio designed to exploit the popularity of the comic strips he controlled. The creation of his Chicago paper was requested by the Democratic National Committee. Hearst used this as an excuse for his mother Phoebe Hearst to transfer him the necessary start-up funds. By the mid-1920s he had a nationwide string of 28 newspapers, among them the \"Los Angeles Examiner\", the \"Boston American\", the \"Atlanta Georgian\", the \"Chicago Examiner\", the \"Detroit Times\", the \"Seattle Post-Intelligencer\", the \"Washington Times-Herald\", the \"Washington Herald\", and his flagship, the \"San Francisco Examiner\".\nHearst also diversified his publishing interests into book publishing and magazines. Several of the latter are still in circulation, including such periodicals as \"Cosmopolitan\", \"Good Housekeeping\", \"Town and Country\", and \"Harper's Bazaar\".\nIn 1924, Hearst opened the \"New York Daily Mirror\", a racy tabloid frankly imitating the \"New York Daily News\". Among his other holdings were two news services, Universal News and International News Service, or INS, the latter of which he founded in 1909. He also owned INS companion radio station WINS in New York; King Features Syndicate, which still owns the copyrights of a number of popular comics characters; a film company, Cosmopolitan Productions; extensive New York City real estate; and thousands of acres of land in California and Mexico, along with timber and mining interests inherited from his father.\nHearst promoted writers and cartoonists despite the lack of any apparent demand for them by his readers. The press critic A. J. Liebling reminds us how many of Hearst's stars would not have been deemed employable elsewhere. One Hearst favorite, George Herriman, was the inventor of the dizzy comic strip \"Krazy Kat\". Not especially popular with either readers or editors when it was first published, in the 21st century it is considered a classic, a belief once held only by Hearst himself.\nIn 1929, he became one of the sponsors of the first round-the-world voyage in an airship, the LZ 127 \"Graf Zeppelin\" from Germany. His sponsorship was conditional on the trip starting at Lakehurst Naval Air Station, New Jersey. The ship's captain, Dr. Hugo Eckener, first flew the \"Graf Zeppelin\" across the Atlantic from Germany to pick up Hearst's photographer and at least three Hearst correspondents. One of them, Grace Marguerite Hay Drummond-Hay, by that flight became the first woman to travel around the world by air.\nThe Hearst news empire reached a revenue peak about 1928, but the economic collapse of the Great Depression in the United States and the vast over-extension of his empire cost him control of his holdings. It is unlikely that the newspapers ever paid their own way; mining, ranching and forestry provided whatever dividends the Hearst Corporation paid out. When the collapse came, all Hearst properties were hit hard, but none more so than the papers. Hearst's conservative politics, increasingly at odds with those of his readers, worsened matters for the once great Hearst media chain. Having been refused the right to sell another round of bonds to unsuspecting investors, the shaky empire tottered. Unable to service its existing debts, Hearst Corporation faced a court-mandated reorganization in 1937.\nFrom that point, Hearst was reduced to being an employee, subject to the directives of an outside manager. Newspapers and other properties were liquidated, the film company shut down; there was even a well-publicized sale of art and antiquities. While World War II restored circulation and advertising revenues, his great days were over. The Hearst Corporation continues to this day as a large, privately held media conglomerate based in New York City.\nPolitical engagement.\nHearst won two elections to Congress, then lost a series of elections. He narrowly failed in attempts to become mayor of New York City in both 1905 and 1909 and governor of New York in 1906, nominally remaining a Democrat while also creating the Independence Party. He was defeated for the governorship by Charles Evans Hughes. Hearst's unsuccessful campaigns for office after his tenure in the House of Representatives earned him the unflattering but short-lived nickname of \"William 'Also-Randolph' Hearst\", which was coined by Wallace Irwin.\nHearst was on the left wing of the Progressive Movement, speaking on behalf of the working class (who bought his papers) and denouncing the rich and powerful (who disdained his editorials). With the support of Tammany Hall (the regular Democratic organization in Manhattan), Hearst was elected to Congress from New York in 1902 and 1904. He made a major effort to win the 1904 Democratic nomination for president, losing to conservative Alton B. Parker. Breaking with Tammany in 1907, Hearst ran for mayor of New York City under a third party of his own creation, the Municipal Ownership League. Tammany Hall exerted its utmost to defeat him.\nAn opponent of the British Empire, Hearst opposed American involvement in the First World War and attacked the formation of the League of Nations. His newspapers abstained from endorsing any candidate in 1920 and 1924. Hearst's last bid for office came in 1922, when he was backed by Tammany Hall leaders for the U.S. Senate nomination in New York. Al Smith vetoed this, earning the lasting enmity of Hearst. Although Hearst shared Smith's opposition to Prohibition, he swung his papers behind Herbert Hoover in the 1928 presidential election.\nMove to the right and break with Franklin D. Roosevelt.\nDuring the 1920s Hearst was a Jeffersonian democrat. He warned citizens against the dangers of big government and against unchecked federal power that could infringe on individual rights. When unemployment was near 25 percent, it appeared that Hoover would lose his bid for reelection in 1932, so Hearst sought to block the nomination of Franklin D. Roosevelt as the Democratic challenger. While continuing to oppose Smith, he promoted the rival candidacy of Speaker of the House, John Nance Garner, a Texan \"whose guiding motto is \u2018America First'\" and who, in his own words, saw \"the gravest possible menace\" facing the country as \"the constantly increasing tendency toward socialism and communism\".\nAt the Democratic Party Convention in 1932, with control of delegations from his own state of California and from Garner's home state of Texas, Hearst had enough influence to ensure that the triumphant Roosevelt picked Garner as his running mate. In the anticipation that Roosevelt would turn out to be, in his words, \"properly conservative\", Hearst supported his election. But the rapprochement with Roosevelt did not last the year. The New Deal's program of unemployment relief, in Hearst's view, was \"more communistic than the communist\" and \"un-American to the core\". More and more often, Hearst newspapers supported business over organized labor and condemned higher income tax legislation.\nHearst broke with FDR in spring 1935 when the president vetoed the Patman Bonus Bill for veterans and tried to enter the World Court. His papers carried the publisher's rambling, vitriolic, all-capital-letters editorials, but he no longer employed the energetic reporters, editors, and columnists who might have made a serious attack. He reached 20 million readers in the mid-1930s. They included much of the working class which Roosevelt had attracted by three-to-one margins in the 1936 election. The Hearst papers\u2014like most major chains\u2014had supported the Republican Alf Landon that year.\nWhile campaigning against Roosevelt's policy of developing formal diplomatic relations with the Soviet Union, in 1935 Hearst ordered his editors to reprint eyewitness accounts of the Ukrainian famine (the Holodomor, which occurred in 1932\u20131933). These had been supplied in 1933 by Welsh freelance journalist Gareth Jones, and by the disillusioned American Communist Fred Beal. \"The New York Times\", content with what it has since conceded was \"tendentious\" reporting of Soviet achievements, printed the blanket denials of its Pulitzer Prize-winning Moscow correspondent Walter Duranty. Duranty, who was widely credited with facilitating the rapprochement with Moscow, dismissed the Hearst-circulated reports of man-made starvation as a politically motivated \"scare story\".\nIn the articles, written by Thomas Walker, to better serve Hearst's editorial line against Roosevelt's Soviet policy the famine was \"updated\": the impression was created of the famine continuing into 1934. In response, Louis Fischer wrote an article in \"The Nation\" accusing Walker of \"pure invention\" because Fischer had been to Ukraine in 1934 and claimed that he had not seen famine. He framed the story as an attempt by Hearst to \"spoil Soviet-American relations\" as part of \"an anti-red campaign\".\nPosition regarding Germany.\nAccording to Rodney Carlisle, \"Hearst condemned the domestic practices of Nazism, but he believed that German demands for boundary revision were legitimate. While he was not pro-Nazi, he accepted more German positions and propaganda than did some other editors and publishers.\"\nWith \"AMERICA FIRST\" emblazoned on his newspaper masthead, Hearst celebrated the \"great achievement\" of the new Nazi regime in Germany\u2014a lesson to all \"liberty-loving people.\" In 1934, after checking with Jewish leaders, Hearst visited Berlin to interview Adolf Hitler. When Hitler asked why he was so misunderstood by the American press, Hearst retorted: \"Because Americans believe in democracy, and are averse to dictatorship.\" William Randolph Hearst instructed his reporters in Germany to give positive coverage of the Nazis, and fired journalists who refused to write stories favourable of German fascism. Hearst's papers ran columns without rebuttal by Nazi leader Hermann G\u00f6ring, Alfred Rosenberg, and Hitler himself, as well as Mussolini and other dictators in Europe and Latin America. After the systematic massive Nazi attacks on Jews known as Kristallnacht (November 9\u201310, 1938), the Hearst press, like all major American newspapers, blamed Hitler and the Nazis: \"The entire civilized world is shocked and shamed by Germany's brutal oppression of the Jewish people,\" read an editorial in all Hearst papers. \"You [Hitler] are making the flag of National Socialism a symbol of national savagery,\" read an editorial written by Hearst. Despite this, following the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in 1941, Hearst wrote a column in the New York Journal-American the following day, praising Hitler as the \"saviour of Europe\", expressed regret that the British policy of \"co-operation with Hitler against communism was thrown out\" and had hope that \"peace can still be made and Europe united against the expansion of Asiatic Communism\".\nDuring 1934, Japan / U.S. relations were unstable. In an attempt to remedy this, Prince Tokugawa Iesato travelled throughout the United States on a goodwill visit. During his visit, Prince Iesato and his delegation met with William Randolph Hearst with the hope of improving relations between the two nations.\nPersonal life.\nMillicent Willson.\nIn 1903, 40-year-old Hearst married Millicent Veronica Willson (1882\u20131974), a 21-year-old chorus girl, in New York City. The couple had five sons: George Randolph Hearst, born on April 23, 1904; William Randolph Hearst Jr., born on January 27, 1908; John Randolph Hearst, born September 26, 1909; and twins Randolph Apperson Hearst and David Whitmire (n\u00e9 Elbert Willson) Hearst, born on December 2, 1915.\nMillicent separated from Hearst in the mid-1920s after tiring of his longtime affair with Marion Davies, but the couple remained legally married until Hearst's death. As a leading philanthropist, Millicent built an independent life for herself in New York City. She was active in society and in 1921 founded the Free Milk Fund for Babies. For decades, the fund provided New York's poverty-stricken families with free milk for children.\nMarion Davies.\nConceding an end to his political hopes, Hearst became involved in an affair with the film actress and comedian Marion Davies (1897\u20131961), former mistress of his friend Paul Block. From about 1919, he lived openly with her in California.\nAfter the death of Patricia Lake (1919/1923\u20131993), who had been presented as Davies's \"niece,\" her family confirmed that she was Davies and Hearst's daughter. She had acknowledged this before her death.\nCalifornia properties.\nGeorge Hearst invested some of his fortune from the Comstock Lode in land. In 1865 he purchased about , part of Rancho Piedra Blanca stretching from Simeon Bay and reached to Ragged Point. He paid the original grantee Jose de Jesus Pico USD$1 an acre, about twice the current market price. Hearst continued to buy parcels whenever they became available, including Rancho San Simeon.\nIn 1865, Hearst bought all of Rancho Santa Rosa totaling except one section of that Estrada lived on. However, as was common with claims before the Public Land Commission, Estrada's legal claim was costly and took many years to resolve. Estrada mortgaged the ranch to Domingo Pujol, a Spanish-born San Francisco lawyer, who represented him. Estrada was unable to pay the loan and Pujol foreclosed on it. Estrada did not have the title to the land. Hearst sued, but ended up with only of Estrada's holdings.\nRancho Milpitas was a land grant given in 1838 by California governor Juan Bautista Alvarado to Ygnacio Pastor. The grant encompassed present-day Jolon and land to the west. When Pastor obtained title from the Public Land Commission in 1875, Faxon Atherton immediately purchased the land. By 1880, the James Brown Cattle Company owned and operated Rancho Milpitas and neighboring Rancho Los Ojitos.\nIn 1923, Newhall Land sold Rancho San Miguelito de Trinidad and Rancho El Piojo to William Randolph Hearst. In 1925, Hearst's Piedmont Land and Cattle Company bought Rancho Milpitas and Rancho Los Ojitos (Little Springs) from the James Brown Cattle Company. Hearst gradually bought adjoining land until he owned about .\nFort Hunter Liggett.\nOn December 12, 1940, Hearst sold , including the Rancho Milpitas, to the United States government. Neighboring landowners sold another to create the Hunter Liggett Military Reservation troop training base for the War Department. The US Army used a ranch house and guest lodge named The Hacienda as housing for the base commander, for visiting officers, and for the officers' club.\nLittle Sur River.\nIn 1916, the Eberhard and Kron Tanning Company of Santa Cruz purchased land from the homesteaders along the Little Sur River. They harvested tanbark oak and brought the bark out on mules and crude wooden sleds known as \"go-devils\" to Notleys Landing at the mouth of Palo Colorado Canyon, where it was loaded via cable onto ships anchored offshore. Hearst was interested in preserving the uncut, abundant redwood forest, and on November 18, 1921, he purchased the land from the tanning company for about $50,000. On July 23, 1948, the Monterey Bay Area Council of the Boy Scouts of America purchased the property, originally , from the Hearst Sunical Land and Packing Company for $20,000. On September 9, 1948, Albert M. Lester of Carmel obtained a grant for the council of $20,000 from Hearst through the Hearst Foundation of New York City, offsetting the cost of the purchase.\nHearst Castle.\nBeginning in 1919, Hearst began to build Hearst Castle, which he never completed, on the ranch he had acquired near San Simeon. He furnished the mansion with art, antiques, and entire historic rooms purchased and brought from great houses in Europe. He established an Arabian horse breeding operation on the grounds.\nNorthern California forest land.\nHearst also owned property on the McCloud River in Siskiyou County, in far northern California, called Wyntoon. The buildings at Wyntoon were designed by architect Julia Morgan, who also designed Hearst Castle and worked in collaboration with William J. Dodd on a number of other projects.\nBeverly Hills mansion.\nIn 1947, Hearst paid $120,000 for an H-shaped Beverly Hills mansion, (located at 1011 N. Beverly Dr.), on 3.7 acres three blocks from Sunset Boulevard. The Beverly House, as it has come to be known, has some cinematic connections. According to \"Hearst Over Hollywood\", John and Jacqueline Kennedy stayed at the house for part of their honeymoon. The house appeared in the film \"The Godfather\" (1972).\nIn the early 1890s, Hearst began building a mansion on the hills overlooking Pleasanton, California, on land purchased by his father a decade earlier. Hearst's mother took over the project, hired Julia Morgan to finish it as her home, and named it Hacienda del Pozo de Verona. After her death, it was acquired by Castlewood Country Club, which used it as their clubhouse from 1925 to 1969, when it was destroyed in a major fire.\nArt collection.\nHearst was renowned for his extensive collection of international art that spanned centuries. Most notable in his collection were his Greek vases, Spanish and Italian furniture, Oriental carpets, Renaissance vestments, an extensive library with many books signed by their authors, and paintings and statues. In addition to collecting pieces of fine art, he also gathered manuscripts, rare books, and autographs. His guests included varied celebrities and politicians, who stayed in rooms furnished with pieces of antique furniture and decorated with artwork by famous artists.\nBeginning in 1937, Hearst began selling some of his art collection to help relieve the debt burden he had suffered from the Depression. The first year he sold items for a total of $11 million. In 1941 he put about 20,000 items up for sale; these were evidence of his wide and varied tastes. Included in the sale items were paintings by van Dyke, crosiers, chalices, Charles Dickens's sideboard, pulpits, stained glass, arms and armor, George Washington's waistcoat, and Thomas Jefferson's Bible. When Hearst Castle was donated to the State of California, it was still sufficiently furnished for the whole house to be considered and operated as a museum.\nSt Donat's Castle.\nAfter seeing photographs in \"Country Life\" magazine of St. Donat's Castle in the Vale of Glamorgan, Wales, Hearst bought and renovated it in 1925 as a gift to his mistress Marion Davies. The Castle was restored by Hearst, who spent a fortune buying entire rooms from other castles and palaces across the UK and Europe. The Great Hall was bought from the Bradenstoke Priory in Wiltshire and reconstructed brick by brick in its current site at St. Donat's. From the Bradenstoke Priory, he also bought and removed the guest house, Prior's lodging, and great tithe barn; of these, some of the materials became the St. Donat's banqueting hall, complete with a sixteenth-century French chimney-piece and windows; also used were a fireplace dated to c. 1514 and a fourteenth-century roof, which became part of the Bradenstoke Hall, despite this use being questioned in Parliament. Hearst built 34 green and white marble bathrooms for the many guest suites in the castle and completed a series of terraced gardens which survive intact today. Hearst and Davies spent much of their time entertaining, and held a number of lavish parties attended by guests including Charlie Chaplin, Douglas Fairbanks, Winston Churchill, and a young John F. Kennedy. When Hearst died, the castle was purchased by Antonin Besse II and donated to Atlantic College, an international boarding school founded by Kurt Hahn in 1962, which still uses it.\nInterest in aviation.\nHearst was particularly interested in the newly emerging technologies relating to aviation and had his first experience of flight in January 1910, in Los Angeles. Louis Paulhan, a French aviator, took him for an air trip on his Farman biplane. Hearst also sponsored \"Old Glory\" as well as the Hearst Transcontinental Prize.\nFinancial disaster.\nHearst's crusade against Roosevelt and the New Deal, combined with union strikes and boycotts of his properties, undermined the financial strength of his empire. Circulation of his major publications declined in the mid-1930s, while rivals such as the New York \"Daily News\" were flourishing. He refused to take effective cost-cutting measures, and instead increased his very expensive art purchases. His friend Joseph P. Kennedy offered to buy the magazines, but Hearst jealously guarded his empire and refused. Instead, he sold some of his heavily mortgaged real estate. San Simeon itself was mortgaged to \"Los Angeles Times\" owner Harry Chandler in 1933 for $600,000.\nFinally his financial advisors realized he was tens of millions of dollars in debt, and could not pay the interest on the loans, let alone reduce the principal. The proposed bond sale failed to attract investors when Hearst's financial crisis became widely known. Marion Davies's stardom waned and Hearst's movies also began to hemorrhage money. As the crisis deepened he let go of most of his household staff, sold his exotic animals to the Los Angeles Zoo and named a trustee to control his finances. He still refused to sell his beloved newspapers. At one point, to avoid outright bankruptcy, he had to accept a $1 million loan from Marion Davies, who sold all her jewelry, stocks and bonds to raise the cash for him. Davies also managed to raise him another million as a loan from \"Washington Herald\" owner Cissy Patterson. The trustee cut Hearst's annual salary to $500,000, and stopped the annual payment of $700,000 in dividends. He had to pay rent for living in his castle at San Simeon.\nLegally Hearst avoided bankruptcy although the public generally saw it as such, since appraisers went through the tapestries, paintings, furniture, silver, pottery, buildings, autographs, jewelry, and other collectibles. Items in the thousands were gathered from a five-story warehouse in New York, warehouses near San Simeon containing large amounts of Greek sculpture and ceramics, and the contents of St. Donat's. His collections were sold off in a series of auctions and private sales in 1938\u201339. John D. Rockefeller, Junior, bought $100,000 of antique silver for his new museum at Colonial Williamsburg. The market for art and antiques had not recovered from the depression, so Hearst made an overall loss of hundreds of thousands of dollars. During this time, Hearst's friend George Loorz commented sarcastically: \"He would like to start work on the outside pool [at San Simeon], start a new reservoir etc. but told me yesterday 'I want so many things but haven't got the money.' Poor fellow, let's take up a collection.\"\nHe was embarrassed in early 1939 when \"Time\" magazine published a feature which revealed he was at risk of defaulting on his mortgage for San Simeon and losing it to his creditor and publishing rival, Harry Chandler. This, however, was averted, as Chandler agreed to extend the repayment.\nFinal years and death.\nAfter the disastrous financial losses of the 1930s, the Hearst Company returned to profitability during the Second World War, when advertising revenues skyrocketed. Hearst, after spending much of the war at his estate of Wyntoon, returned to San Simeon full-time in 1945 and resumed building works. He also continued collecting, on a reduced scale. He threw himself into philanthropy by donating a great many works to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art.\nIn 1947, Hearst left his San Simeon estate to seek medical care, which was unavailable in the remote location. He died in Beverly Hills on August 14, 1951, at the age of 88. He was interred in the Hearst family mausoleum at the Cypress Lawn Memorial Park in Colma, California, which his parents had established.\nHis will established two charitable trusts, the Hearst Foundation and the William Randolph Hearst Foundation. By his amended will, Marion Davies inherited 170,000 shares in the Hearst Corporation, which, combined with a trust fund of 30,000 shares that Hearst had established for her in 1950, gave her a controlling interest in the corporation. This was short-lived, as she relinquished the 170,000 shares to the Corporation on October 30, 1951, retaining her original 30,000 shares and a role as an advisor. Like their father, none of Hearst's five sons graduated from college. They all followed their father into the media business, and Hearst's namesake, William Randolph Jr., became a Pulitzer Prize\u2013winning newspaper reporter.\nCriticism.\nIn the 1890s, the already existing anti-Chinese and anti-Asian racism in San Francisco were further fanned by Hearst's anti-Asian beliefs, which were reflected in the rhetoric and the focus in the \"Examiner\" and one of his own signed editorials. These prejudices continued to be the mainstays throughout his journalistic career to galvanize his readers\u2019 fears. Hearst staunchly supported the Japanese-American internment during WWII and used his media power to negatively portray Japanese Americans and to garner support for the internment of Japanese-Americans.\nSome media outlets have attempted to bring attention to Hearst's involvement in the prohibition of cannabis in the United States. Hearst collaborated with Harry J. Anslinger to ban hemp due to the threat that the burgeoning hemp paper industry posed to his major investment and market share in the paper milling industry. Due to their efforts, hemp would remain illegal to grow in the US for almost a century, not being legalized until 2018.\nAs Martin Lee and Norman Solomon noted in their 1990 book \"Unreliable Sources\", Hearst \"routinely invented sensational stories, faked interviews, ran phony pictures and distorted real events\".\nHearst's use of yellow journalism techniques in his \"New York Journal\" to whip up popular support for U.S. military adventurism in Cuba, Puerto Rico and the Philippines in 1898 was also criticized in Upton Sinclair's 1919 book, \"The Brass Check: A Study of American Journalism\". According to Sinclair, Hearst's newspapers distorted world events and deliberately tried to discredit socialists. Another critic, Ferdinand Lundberg, extended the criticism in \"Imperial Hearst\" (1936), charging that Hearst papers accepted payments from abroad to slant the news. After the Second World War, a further critic, George Seldes, repeated the charges in \"Facts and Fascism\" (1947). Lundberg described Hearst as \"the weakest strong man and the strongest weak man in the world today... a giant with feet of clay.\"\nIn fiction.\n\"Citizen Kane\".\nThe film \"Citizen Kane\" (released on May 1, 1941) is loosely based on Hearst's life. Welles and his collaborator, screenwriter Herman J. Mankiewicz, created Kane as a composite character, among them Harold Fowler McCormick, Samuel Insull and Howard Hughes. Hearst, enraged at the idea of \"Citizen Kane\" being a thinly disguised and very unflattering portrait of him, used his massive influence and resources to prevent the film from being released\u2014all without even having seen it. Welles and the studio RKO Pictures resisted the pressure but Hearst and his Hollywood friends ultimately succeeded in pressuring theater chains to limit showings of \"Citizen Kane\", resulting in only moderate box-office numbers and seriously impairing Welles's career prospects. The fight over the film was documented in the Academy Award-nominated documentary, \"The Battle Over Citizen Kane\", and nearly 60 years later, HBO offered a fictionalized version of Hearst's efforts in its original production \"RKO 281\" (1999), in which James Cromwell portrays Hearst. \"Citizen Kane\" has twice been ranked No. 1 on AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies: in 1998 and 2007. In 2020, David Fincher directed \"Mank\", starring Gary Oldman as Mankiewicz, as he interacts with Hearst prior to the writing of \"Citizen Kane\"'s screenplay. Charles Dance portrays Hearst in the film.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33537", "revid": "49001718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33537", "title": "Wing", "text": "Appendage used for flight\nA wing is a type of fin that produces both lift and drag while moving through air. Wings are defined by two shape characteristics, an airfoil section and a planform. Wing efficiency is expressed as lift-to-drag ratio, which compares the benefit of lift with the air resistance of a given wing shape, as it flies. Aerodynamics includes the study of wing performance in air.\nEquivalent foils that move through water are found on hydrofoil power vessels and foiling sailboats that lift out of the water at speed and on submarines that use diving planes to point the boat upwards or downwards, while running submerged. The study of foil performance in water is a subfield of Hydrodynamics.\nEtymology and usage.\nThe word \"wing\" from the Old Norse \"v\u00e6ngr\" for many centuries referred mainly to the foremost limbs of birds (in addition to the architectural aisle). But in recent centuries the word's meaning has extended to include lift producing appendages of insects, bats, pterosaurs, boomerangs, some sail boats and aircraft, or the airfoil on a race car.\nAerodynamics.\nThe design and analysis of the wings of aircraft is one of the principal applications of the science of aerodynamics, which is a branch of fluid mechanics. The properties of the airflow around any moving object can be found by solving the Navier\u2013Stokes equations of fluid dynamics. Except for simple geometries, these equations are difficult to solve. Simpler explanations can be given.\nFor a wing to produce \"lift\", it must be oriented at a suitable angle of attack relative to the flow of air past the wing. When this occurs, the wing deflects the airflow downwards, \"turning\" the air as it passes the wing. Since the wing exerts a force on the air to change its direction, the air must exert a force on the wing, equal in size but opposite in direction. This force arises from different air pressures that exist on the upper and lower surfaces of the wing.\nLower-than-ambient air pressure is generated on the top surface of the wing, with a higher-than ambient-pressure on the bottom of the wing. (See: airfoil) These air pressure differences can be either measured using a pressure-measuring device, or can be calculated from the airspeed using physical principles \u2013including Bernoulli's principle, which relates changes in air speed to changes in air pressure.\nThe lower air pressure on the top of the wing generates a smaller downward force on the top of the wing than the upward force generated by the higher air pressure on the bottom of the wing. This gives an upward force on the wing. This force is called the lift generated by the wing.\nThe different velocities of the air passing by the wing, the air pressure differences, the change in direction of the airflow, and the lift on the wing are different ways of describing how lift is produced so it is possible to calculate lift from any one of the other three. For example, the lift can be calculated from the pressure differences, or from different velocities of the air above and below the wing, or from the total momentum change of the deflected air. Fluid dynamics offers other approaches to solving these problems \u2013all which methods produce the same answer if correctly calculated. Given a particular wing and its velocity through the air, debates over which mathematical approach is the \"most convenient\" to use can be mistaken by those not familiar with the study of aerodynamics as differences of opinion about the basic principles of flight.\nCross-sectional shape.\nWings with an asymmetrical cross-section are the norm in subsonic flight. Wings with a symmetrical cross-section can also generate lift by using a positive angle of attack to deflect air downward. Symmetrical airfoils have higher stalling speeds than cambered airfoils of the same wing area but are used in aerobatic aircraft as they provide the same flight characteristics whether the aircraft is upright or inverted. Another example comes from sailboats, where the sail is a thin sheet.\nFor flight speeds near the speed of sound (transonic flight), specific asymmetrical airfoil sections are used to minimize the very pronounced increase in drag associated with airflow near the speed of sound. These airfoils, called supercritical airfoils, are flat on top and curved on the bottom.\nDesign features.\nAircraft wings may feature some of the following:\nAircraft wings may have various devices, such as flaps or slats, that the pilot uses to modify the shape and surface area of the wing to change its operating characteristics in flight.\nApplications.\nBesides fixed-wing aircraft, applications for wing shapes include:\nFlexible wings.\nIn 1948, Francis Rogallo invented the fully limp flexible wing. Domina Jalbert invented flexible un-sparred ram-air airfoiled thick wings.\nIn nature.\nWings have evolved multiple times in history: in insects, dinosaurs (see bird wing), mammals (see bats), fish, reptiles (see pterosaurs), and plants. Wings of birds, bats, and pterosaurs all evolved from existing limbs, however insect wings evolved as a completely separate structure. Wings facilitated increased locomotion, dispersal, and diversification. Various species of penguins and other flighted or flightless water birds such as auks, cormorants, guillemots, shearwaters, eider and scoter ducks and diving petrels are efficient underwater swimmers, and use their wings to propel through water.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNatural world:\nAviation:\nSailing:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33538", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33538", "title": "Week", "text": "Time unit equal to seven days\nA week is a unit of time equal to seven days. It is the standard time period used for short cycles of days in most parts of the world. The days are often used to indicate common work days and rest days, as well as days of worship. Weeks are often mapped against yearly calendars. There are just over 52 weeks in a year. The term \"week\" may also be used to refer to a sub-section of the week, such as the workweek and weekend.\nAncient cultures had different \"week\" lengths, including ten days in Egypt and an eight-day week for Etruscans. The Etruscan week was adopted by the ancient Romans, but they later moved to a seven-day week, which had spread across Western Asia and the Eastern Mediterranean due to the influence of the Christian seven-day week, which is rooted in the Jewish seven-day week. In AD 321, Emperor Constantine the Great officially decreed a seven-day week in the Roman Empire, including making Sunday a public holiday. This later spread across Europe, then the rest of the world.\nIn English, the names of the days of the week are Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday. In many languages, including English, the days of the week are named after gods or classical planets. Saturday has kept its Roman name, while the other six days use Germanic equivalents. Such a week may be called a \"planetary week\" (i.e., a classical planetary week). Certain weeks within a year may be designated for a particular purpose, such as Golden Week in China and Japan. More informally, certain groups may advocate awareness weeks, such as National Family Week in Canada, which are designed to draw attention to a certain subject or cause.\nCultures vary in which days of the week are designated the first and the last, though virtually all have Saturday, Sunday or Monday as the first day. The Geneva-based ISO standards organization uses Monday as the first day of the week in its ISO week date system through the international ISO 8601 standard. Most of Europe and China consider Monday the first day of the (work) week, while North America, South Asia, and many Catholic and Protestant countries, consider Sunday the first day of the week. It is also the first day of the week in almost all of the Arabic speaking countries. This is culturally and historically the case since in Arabic Sunday is referred to as \"Yaom Al'Ahad\" which literally means \"The first day\". Other regions are mixed, but typically observe either Sunday or Monday as the first day.\nThe three Abrahamic religions observe different days of the week as their holy day. Jews observe their Sabbath (Shabbat) on Saturday, the seventh day, from sundown Friday to sundown Saturday, in honor of God's creation of the world in six days and then resting on the seventh. Most Christians observe Sunday (the Lord's Day), the first day of the week in traditional Christian calendars, in honor of the resurrection of Jesus. Muslims observe their \"day of congregation\", known as , on Friday because it was described as a sacred day of congregational worship in the Quran.\nName.\nThe English word \"week\" comes from the Old English , ultimately from a Common Germanic ', from a root ' \"turn, move, change\". The Germanic word probably had a wider meaning prior to the adoption of the Roman calendar, perhaps \"succession series\", as suggested by Gothic translating \"order\" in Luke 1:8.\nThe seven-day week is named in many languages by a word derived from \"seven\". The archaism sennight (\"seven-night\") preserves the old Germanic practice of reckoning time by nights, as in the more common \"fortnight\" (\"fourteen-night\"). Hebdomad and hebdomadal week both derive from the Greek (, \"a seven\"). Septimana is cognate with the Romance terms derived from Latin (\"seven mornings\").\nDefinition and duration.\nA week is defined as an interval of exactly seven days, so that, except when passing through daylight saving time transitions or leap seconds,\n1 week = 7 days = 168 hours = 10,080 minutes = 604,800 seconds.\nWith respect to the Gregorian calendar:\nIn a Gregorian mean year, there are 365.2425 days, and thus exactly &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;52+71\u2044400 or 52.1775 weeks (unlike the Julian year of 365.25 days or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;52+5\u204428 \u2248 52.1786 weeks). There are exactly 20,871 weeks in 400 Gregorian years, so 18 1625 was a just as was 18 2025.\nRelative to the path of the Moon, a week is 23.659% of an average lunation or 94.637% of an average quarter lunation.\nHistorically, the system of dominical letters (letters A to G identifying the weekday of the first day of a given year) has been used to facilitate calculation of the day of week.\nThe day of the week can be easily calculated given a date's Julian day number (JD, i.e. the integer value at noon UT):\nAdding one to the remainder after dividing the Julian day number by seven (JD \"modulo\" 7 + 1) yields that date's ISO 8601 day of the week. For example, the Julian day number of 18 2025 is . Calculating mod 7 + 1 yields , corresponding to . In 1973, John Conway devised the Doomsday rule for mental calculation of the weekday of any date in any year.\nDays of the week.\nThe days of the week were named for the seven classical planets, which included the Sun and Moon. This naming system persisted alongside an \"ecclesiastical\" tradition of numbering the days in ecclesiastical Latin beginning with \"Dominica\" (the Lord's Day) as the first day. The Greco-Roman gods associated with the classical planets were rendered in their \"interpretatio germanica\" at some point during the late Roman Empire, yielding the Germanic tradition of names based on indigenous deities.\nThe ordering of the weekday names is not the classical order of the planets (by distance in the planetary spheres model, which is Moon, Mercury, Venus, Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn); nor, equivalently, by their apparent speed of movement in the night sky. Instead, the planetary hours systems resulted in succeeding days being named for planets that are three places apart in their traditional listing. This characteristic was apparently discussed in Plutarch in a treatise written in c. 100 CE, which is reported to have addressed the question of \"Why are the days named after the planets reckoned in a different order from the actual order?\" (the text of Plutarch's treatise has been lost). Dio Cassius (early 3rd century) gives two explanations in a section of his \"Historia Romana\" after mentioning the Jewish practice of sanctifying the day called the day of Kronos (Saturday).\nAn ecclesiastical, non-astrological, system of numbering the days of the week was adopted in Late Antiquity. This model also seems to have influenced (presumably via Gothic) the designation of Wednesday as \"mid-week\" in Old High German () and Old Church Slavonic (, sr\u011bda, literally, \"middle day\"). Old Church Slavonic may have also modeled the name of Monday, (literally, \"the day after Sunday\"), after the Latin .\nThe ecclesiastical system became prevalent in Eastern Christianity, but in the Latin West it remains extant only in modern Icelandic, Galician, and Portuguese.\nHistory.\nAncient Near East.\nThe earliest evidence of an astrological significance of a seven-day period is a decree of king Sargon of Akkad around 2300 BCE. Akkadians venerated the number seven, and the key celestial bodies visible to the naked eye numbered seven (the Sun, the Moon and the five closest planets).\nGudea, the priest-king of Lagash in Sumer during the Gutian dynasty (about 2100 BCE), built a seven-room temple, which he dedicated with a seven-day festival. In the flood story of the Assyro-Babylonian Epic of Gilgamesh, the storm lasts for seven days, the dove is sent out after seven days (similarly in Genesis), and the Noah-like character of Utnapishtim leaves the ark seven days after it reaches the firm ground.\nCounting from the new moon, the Babylonians celebrated the 7th, 14th, 21st and 28th of the approximately 29- or 30-day lunar month as \"holy days\", also called \"evil days\" (meaning inauspicious for certain activities). On these days, officials were prohibited from various activities and common men were forbidden to \"make a wish\", and at least the 28th was known as a \"rest day\".\nOn each of them, offerings were made to a different god and goddess. Though similar, the later practice of associating days of the week with deities or planets is not due to the Babylonians.\nJudaism.\nA continuous seven-day cycle that runs throughout history without reference to the phases of the moon was first practiced in Judaism, dated to the 6th century BCE at the latest.\nThere are several hypotheses concerning the origin of the biblical seven-day cycle.\nFriedrich Delitzsch and others suggested that the seven-day week being approximately a quarter of a lunation is the implicit astronomical origin of the seven-day week, and indeed the Babylonian calendar used intercalary days to synchronize the last week of a month with the new moon. According to this theory, the Jewish week was adopted from the Babylonians while removing the moon-dependency.\nGeorge Aaron Barton speculated that the seven-day creation account of Genesis is connected to the Babylonian creation epic, En\u00fbma Eli\u0161, which is recorded on seven tablets.\nIn a frequently-quoted suggestion going back to the early 20th century, the Hebrew \"Sabbath\" is compared to the Sumerian \"sa-bat\" \"mid-rest\", a term for the full moon. The Sumerian term has been reconstructed as rendered \"Sapattum\" or \"Sabattum\" in Babylonian, possibly present in the lost fifth tablet of the En\u00fbma Eli\u0161, tentatively reconstructed \"[Sa]bbath shalt thou then encounter, mid[month]ly\".\nHowever, Niels-Erik Andreasen, Jeffrey H. Tigay, and others claim that the Biblical Sabbath is mentioned as a day of rest in some of the earliest layers of the Pentateuch dated to the 9th century BCE at the latest, centuries before the Babylonian exile of Judah. They also find the resemblance between the Biblical Sabbath and the Babylonian system to be weak. Therefore, they suggest that the seven-day week may reflect an independent Israelite tradition. Tigay writes:\nIt is clear that among neighboring nations that were in position to have an influence over Israel \u2013 and in fact which did influence it in various matters \u2013 there is no precise parallel to the Israelite Sabbatical week. This leads to the conclusion that the Sabbatical week, which is as unique to Israel as the Sabbath from which it flows, is an independent Israelite creation.\nThe seven-day week seems to have been adopted, at different stages, by the Persian Empire, in Hellenistic astrology, and (via Greek transmission) in Gupta India and Tang China.\nThe Babylonian system was received by the Greeks in the 4th century BCE (notably via Eudoxus of Cnidus). Although some sources, such as the Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica, state that the Babylonians named the days of the week after the five planets, the sun, and the moon, many scholars disagree. Eviatar Zerubavel says, \"the establishment of a seven-day week based on the regular observance of the Sabbath is a distinctively Jewish contribution to civilization. The choice of the number 7 as the basis for the Jewish week might have had an Assyrian or Babylonian origin, yet it is crucial to remember that the ancient dwellers of Mesopotamia themselves did not have a seven-day week.\" The astrological concept of planetary hours is an innovation of Hellenistic astrology, probably first conceived in the 2nd century BCE.\nThe seven-day week was widely known throughout the Roman Empire by the 1st century CE, along with references to the Jewish Sabbath by Roman authors such as Seneca and Ovid. When the seven-day week came into use in Rome during the early imperial period, it did not immediately replace the older eight-day nundinal system. The nundinal system had probably fallen out of use by the time Emperor Constantine adopted the seven-day week for official use in CE 321, making the Day of the Sun () a legal holiday.\nAchaemenid period.\nThe Zoroastrian calendar follows the Babylonian in relating the 7th, 14th, 21st, and 28th of the 29- or 30-day lunar month to Ahura Mazda.\nThe forerunner of all modern Zoroastrian calendars is the system used to determine dates in the Persian Empire, adopted from the Babylonian calendar by the 4th century BCE.\nFrank C. Senn in his book \"Christian Liturgy: Catholic and Evangelical\" points to data suggesting evidence of an early continuous use of a seven-day week; referring to the Jews during the Babylonian captivity in the 6th century BCE, after the destruction of the Temple of Solomon.\nWhile the seven-day week in Judaism is tied to Creation account in the Book of Genesis in the Hebrew Bible, it is not clear whether the Genesis narrative predates the Babylonian captivity of the Jews in the 6th century BCE. At least since the Second Temple period under Persian rule, Judaism relied on the seven-day cycle of recurring Sabbaths.\nTablets from the Achaemenid period indicate that the lunation of 29 or 30 days basically contained three seven-day weeks, and a final week of eight or nine days inclusive, breaking the continuous seven-day cycle.\nThe Babylonians additionally celebrated the 19th as a special \"evil day\", the \"day of anger\", because it was roughly the 49th day of the (preceding) month, completing a \"week of weeks\", also with sacrifices and prohibitions.\nDifficulties with Friedrich Delitzsch's origin theory connecting Hebrew \"Shabbat\" with the Babylonian lunar cycle include reconciling the differences between an unbroken week and a lunar week, and explaining the absence of texts naming the lunar week as \"Shabbat\" in any language.\nHellenistic and Roman era.\nIn Jewish sources by the time of the Septuagint, the term \"Sabbath\" by synecdoche also came to refer to an entire seven-day week, the interval between two weekly Sabbaths. Jesus's parable of the Pharisee and the Publican describes the Pharisee as fasting \"twice in the week\". In the account of the women finding the tomb empty, they are described as coming there \"toward the one of the sabbaths\"; translations substitute \"week\" for \"sabbaths\".\nThe ancient Romans traditionally used the eight-day nundinum but, after the Julian calendar had come into effect in 45 BCE, the seven-day week came into increasing use. For a while, the week and the nundinal cycle coexisted, but by the time the week was officially adopted by Constantine in 321 CE, the nundinal cycle had fallen out of use. The association of the days of the week with the Sun, the Moon and the five planets visible to the naked eye dates to the Roman era (2nd century).\nThe continuous seven-day cycle of the days of the week can be traced back to the reign of Augustus; the first identifiable date cited complete with day of the week is 6 February 60 CE, identified as a \"Sunday\" (as \"eighth day before the ides of February, day of the Sun\") in a Pompeiian graffito. According to the (contemporary) Julian calendar, 6 February 60 was, however, a Wednesday. This is explained by the existence of two conventions of naming days of the weeks based on the planetary hours system: 6 February was a \"Sunday\" based on the sunset naming convention, and a \"Wednesday\" based on the sunrise naming convention.\nIslamic concept.\nAccording to Islamic beliefs, the seven-day week concept started with the creation of the universe by Allah. Abu Huraira reported that Muhammad said: Allah, the Exalted and Glorious, created the clay on Saturday and He created the mountains on Sunday and He created the trees on Monday and He created the things entailing labour on Tuesday and created light on Wednesday and He caused the animals to spread on Thursday and created Adam after 'Asr on Friday; the last creation at the last hour of the hours of Friday, i.e., between afternoon and night.\nAdoption in Asia.\nChina and Japan.\nThe earliest known reference in Chinese writings to a seven-day week is attributed to Fan Ning, who lived in the late 4th century in the Jin dynasty, while diffusions from the Manichaeans are documented with the writings of the Chinese Buddhist monk Yi Jing and the Ceylonese or Central Asian Buddhist monk Bu Kong of the 7th century (Tang dynasty).\nThe Chinese variant of the planetary system was brought to Japan by the Japanese monk K\u016bkai (9th century). Surviving diaries of the Japanese statesman Fujiwara Michinaga show the seven-day system in use in Heian Period Japan as early as 1007. In Japan, the seven-day system was kept in use for astrological purposes until its promotion to a full-fledged Western-style calendrical basis during the Meiji Period (1868\u20131912).\nIndia.\nThe seven-day week was known in India by the 6th century, referenced in the Pa\u00f1casiddh\u0101ntik\u0101. Shashi (2000) mentions the Garga Samhita, which he places in the 1st century BCE or CE, as a possible earlier reference to a seven-day week in India. He concludes \"the above references furnish a terminus ad quem (viz. 1st century) The terminus a quo cannot be stated with certainty\".\nChristian Europe.\nThe seven-day weekly cycle has remained unbroken in Christendom, and hence in Western history, for almost two millennia, despite changes to the Coptic, Julian, and Gregorian calendars, demonstrated by the date of Easter Sunday having been traced back through numerous computistic tables to an Ethiopic copy of an early Alexandrian table beginning with the Easter of 311 CE.\nA tradition of divinations arranged for the days of the week on which certain feast days occur develops in the early medieval period. There are many later variants of this, including the German and the versions of \"Erra Pater\" published in 16th- to 17th-century England, mocked in Samuel Butler's \"Hudibras\". South and East Slavic versions are known as \"koliadniki\" (from \"koliada\", a loan of Latin ), with Bulgarian copies dating from the 13th century, and Serbian versions from the 14th century.\nMedieval Christian traditions associated with the lucky or unlucky nature of certain days of the week survived into the modern period. This concerns primarily Friday, associated with the crucifixion of Jesus. Sunday, sometimes personified as Saint Anastasia, was itself an object of worship in Russia, a practice denounced in a sermon extant in copies going back to the 14th century.\nSunday, in the ecclesiastical numbering system also counted as the or the first day of the week; yet, at the same time, figures as the \"eighth day\", and has occasionally been so called in Christian liturgy.\nJustin Martyr wrote: \"the first day after the Sabbath, remaining the first of all the days, is called, however, the eighth, according to the number of all the days of the cycle, and [yet] remains the first.\"\nA period of eight days, usually (but not always, mainly because of Christmas Day) starting and ending on a Sunday, is called an octave, particularly in Roman Catholic liturgy. In German, the phrase (literally \"today in eight days\") can also mean one week from today (i.e. on the same weekday). The same is true of the Italian phrase (literally \"today eight\"), the French , and the Spanish .\nNumbering.\nWeeks in a Gregorian calendar year can be numbered for each year. This style of numbering is often used in European and Asian countries. It is less common in the U.S. and elsewhere.\nISO week date system.\nThe system for numbering weeks is the ISO week date system, which is included in ISO 8601. This system dictates that each week begins on a Monday and is associated with the year that contains that week's Thursday.\nDetermining \"Week 1\".\nIn practice week 1 (\"W01\" in ISO notation) of any year can be determined as follows:\nExamples:\nWeek 52 and 53.\nIt is also possible to determine if the last week of the previous year was Week 52 or Week 53 as follows:\nSchematic representation of ISO week date.\nNotes\n1. Numbers and letters in parentheses, ( ), apply to March \u2212 December in leap years.\n2. Underlined numbers and letters belong to previous year or next year.\n3. First date of the first week in the year.\n4. First date of the last week in the year.\nOther week numbering systems.\nIn some countries, though, the numbering system is different from the ISO standard. At least six numberings are in use: \nBecause the week starts on either Saturday, Sunday, or Monday in all these systems, the days in a workweek, Monday through Friday, will always have the same week number within a calendar week system. Quite often, these systems will agree on the week number for each day in a workweek:\nNote that this agreement occurs only for the week number of each day in a work week, not for the day number within the week, nor the week number of the weekends.\nThe epi week (epidemiological week) is used to report healthcare statistics, as with COVID-19 cases:\nThe epidemiological week begins on Sunday and ends on Saturday. The first epidemiological week of the year ends on the first Saturday of January, provided that it falls at least four or more days into the month. Therefore, the first epidemiological week may actually begin in December of the previous year.\nUses.\nThe semiconductor package date code is often a 4 digit date code YYWW where the first two digits YY are the last 2 digits of the calendar year and the last two digits WW are the two-digit week number.\nThe tire date code mandated by the US DOT is a 4 digit date code WWYY with two digits of the week number WW followed by the last two digits of the calendar year YY.\n\"Weeks\" in other calendars.\nThe term \"week\" is sometimes expanded to refer to other time units comprising a few days. Such \"weeks\" of between four and ten days have been used historically in various places. Intervals longer than 10 days are not usually termed \"weeks\" as they are closer in length to the fortnight or the month than to the seven-day week.\nPre-modern.\nCalendars unrelated to the Chaldean, Hellenistic, Christian, or Jewish traditions often have time cycles between the day and the month of varying lengths, sometimes also called \"weeks\".\nAn eight-day week was used in Ancient Rome and possibly in the pre-Christian Celtic calendar. Traces of a nine-day week are found in Baltic languages and in Welsh. The ancient Chinese calendar had a ten-day week, as did the ancient Egyptian calendar (and, incidentally, the French Republican Calendar, dividing its 30-day months into thirds).\nA six-day week was used in the Akan calendar and Kabiye culture in West Africa until 1981. Several cultures used a five-day week, including the Javanese calendar and the traditional cycle of market days in Korea. The Igbo have a \"market week\" of four days. Evidence of a \"three-day week\" has been derived from the names of the days of the week in Guipuscoan Basque.\nThe Aztecs and Mayas used the Mesoamerican calendars. The most important of these calendars divided a ritual cycle of 260 days (known as \"Tonalpohualli\" in Nahuatl and \"Tzolk'in\" in Yucatec Maya) into 20 weeks of 13 days (known in Spanish as trecenas). They also divided the solar year into 18 periods (\"winal\") of 20 days and five nameless days (\"wayeb\u02bc\"), creating a 20-day month divided into four five-day weeks. The end of each five-day week was a market day.\nThe Balinese Pawukon is a 210-day calendar consisting of 10 different simultaneously running weeks of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10 days, of which the weeks of 4, 8, and 9 days are interrupted to fit into the 210-day cycle.\nModern reforms.\nThe International Fixed Calendar (also known as the \"Eastman plan\") kept a 7-day week while defining a year of 13\u00a0months with 28\u00a0days each (364\u00a0days). Every calendar date was always on the same weekday. It was the official calendar of the Eastman Kodak Company for decades.\nA 10-day week, called a \"d\u00e9cade\", was used in Revolutionary France for nine and a half years from October\u00a01793 to April\u00a01802. The Paris Commune adopted this calendar for 18\u00a0days in 1871.\nThe Bah\u00e1'\u00ed calendar features a 19-day period that some classify as a month and others classify as a week.\nSoviet.\nIn the Soviet Union between 1929 and 1940, most factory and enterprise workers, but not collective farm workers, used five and six\u00a0day work weeks while the country as a whole continued to use the traditional seven\u00a0day week.\nFrom 1929 to 1951, five national holidays were days of rest (22 January, 1\u20132 May, 7\u20138 November). From autumn\u00a01929 to summer\u00a01931, the remaining 360\u00a0days of the year were subdivided into 72\u00a0five\u00a0day work weeks beginning on 1 January. Workers were assigned any one of the five days as their day off, even if their spouse or friends might be assigned a different day off. Peak use of the five\u00a0day work week occurred on 1 October 1930 at 72% of industrial workers. From summer\u00a01931 until 26 June 1940, each Gregorian month was subdivided into five six\u00a0day work weeks, more-or-less, beginning with the first day of each month. The sixth day of each six\u00a0day work week was a uniform day of rest. On 1 July 1935 74.2% of industrial workers were on non-continuous schedules, mostly six\u00a0day work weeks, while 25.8% were still on continuous schedules, mostly five\u00a0day work weeks. The Gregorian calendar with its irregular month lengths and the traditional seven\u00a0day week were used in the Soviet Union during its entire existence, including 1929\u20131940; for example, in the masthead of \"Pravda\", the official Communist newspaper, and in both Soviet calendars displayed here. The traditional names of the seven\u00a0day week continued to be used, including \"Resurrection\" (\u0412\u043e\u0441\u043a\u0440\u0435\u0441\u0435\u043d\u044c\u0435) for Sunday and \"Sabbath\" (\u0421\u0443\u0431\u0431\u043e\u0442\u0430) for Saturday, despite the government's official atheism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33539", "revid": "51011720", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33539", "title": "White trash", "text": "American English slur for poor white people, especially in the American South\nWhite trash is a derogatory term in American English for poor white people, especially in the rural areas of the southern United States. The label signifies a social class within the white population, especially those perceived to have a degraded standard of living. It is used as a way to separate the \"good poor\", who are \"noble and hardworking\", from the \"bad poor\", who are deemed lazy, \"undisciplined, ungrateful and disgusting\". The use of the term provides middle- and upper-class whites a means of distancing themselves from the social status of poor whites, who cannot enjoy the same class privileges, as well as a way to disown their perceived behavior.\nThe term has been adopted for white people living on the fringes of society, who are seen as dangerous because they may be criminal, unpredictable, and without respect for political, legal, or moral authority. While the term is mostly used pejoratively by urban and middle-class whites as a class signifier, some white entertainers self-identify as \"white trash\", considering it a badge of honor, and celebrate the stereotypes and social marginalization of lower-class whiteness.\nIn common usage, \"white trash\" overlaps in meaning with \"cracker\", used for people in the backcountry of the Southern states; \"hillbilly\", for poor people from Appalachia; \"Okie\" for those with origins in Oklahoma; \"Hoosier\" used in St. Louis to mean \"poor, rural, white trash\"; and \"redneck\", for those with rural origins, especially from the South. The primary difference is that \"redneck\", \"cracker\", \"Okie\", and \"hillbilly\" emphasize that a person is poor and uneducated and comes from the backwoods with little awareness of and interaction with the modern world, while \"white trash\"\u00a0\u2013 and the modern term \"trailer trash\"\u00a0\u2013 emphasizes the person's supposed moral failings, without regard to their upbringing. While the other terms suggest rural origins, \"white trash\" and \"trailer trash\" may be urban or suburban as well.\nScholars from the late 19th to the early 21st century explored generations of families who were considered \"disreputable\", such as the Jukes family and the Kallikak family, both pseudonyms for real families.\nTerminology.\nThe expression \"white trash\" probably originated in the slang used by enslaved African Americans, in the early decades of the 1800s, and was quickly adopted by richer white people who used the term to stigmatize and separate themselves from the kind of whites they historically considered inferior and without honor, such as \"menials, swineherds, peddlers and beggars\".\n\"Poor white trash\" signifies the \"bad poor\", in contrast with the \"good poor\" who were romanticized as \"noble and hardworking\". One word applied to such people was \"tackeys\" or \"tackies\". There may have been an intermediate time when it was used to describe those who may have been wealthy but had no family roots or good breeding. It now generally refers to anything that is cheap, shoddy, gaudy, seedy, or in bad taste.\nAcademic Jacqueline Zara Wilson suggests the term is partly rooted in the British class system, brought to North America by British settlers, which tended to privilege English settlers over their Scottish, Welsh and Irish counterparts. Wilson describes hierarchies within this framework, such as early Scots-Irish (Presbyterian) immigrants who saw themselves as better than later Irish (Catholic) immigrants.\nIn her book \"White Trash\", Nancy Isenberg argues that the British saw the American colonies as a \"wasteland\", and a place to dump their underclass \u2014 those people they called \"waste people\", the \"scum and dregs\" of society. The early term \"waste people\" gave way to \"squatters\" and \"crackers\", used to describe the settlers who populated the Western frontier of the United States and the backcountry of some southern states, but who did not have title to the land they settled on, and had little or no access to education or religious training. \"Cracker\" was especially used in the South. \nIsenberg also lists other derisive names that have been used to refer to poor whites:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Waste people. Offscourings. Lubbers. Bogtrotters. Rascals. Rubbish. Squatters. Crackers. Clay-eaters. Tuckies. Mudsills. Scalawags. Briar hoppers. Hillbillies. Low-downers. White niggers. Degenerates. White trash. Rednecks. Trailer trash. Swamp people.\nAs a racial epithet.\nWriting in the journal \"Critique of Anthropology\", Jacqueline Zara Wilson suggests the term is a \"form of invisible racism\" which implicitly blames poor whites for their own circumstances. She says that, when used by whites in particular, it \"declares the accused to be poor and in one way or another un-civilized, without the excuse of being racially oppressed\". She writes that this may be distinct from the way it was historically used by people of color as \"an implicitly anti-racist judgement\" or a \"vengeful\" racialized insult against those who were oppressing them, and that its use reveals hierarchies within whiteness itself.\nJournalist Annalee Newitz and sociologist Matt Wray state that \"white trash\" is both a classist slur and a \"racial epithet\" that casts poor whites as \"a dysgenic race unto themselves\".\nSociety and culture.\nEconomic status.\nMany poor whites in the 19th century South were only able to locate themselves on the worst possible land available to whites, since the best land had already been taken by the white slaveholders, large (such as the large-scale plantations owned by the planter class) and small. They lived and attempted to survive on ground that was sandy, swampy or covered in scrub pine and not suited for agriculture; for this, some became known as \"sandhillers\" and \"pineys\". These \"hard-scratch\" inhabitants were seen to match their surroundings: they were \"stony, stumpy, and shrubby, as the land they lived on\". Many ended up in the mountains, at the time the first frontier of the country. After the Civil War, these people began to be referred to as \"hillbillies\".\nIn the popular imagination of the mid-19th century, \"poor white trash\" were a \"curious\" breed of degenerate, gaunt, haggard people who suffered from numerous physical and social defects. They were seen as dirty, ragged, emaciated, and disgusting, and had feeble children with distended abdomens who were wrinkled and withered beyond their physical years, so that even 10-year-olds' \"countenances are stupid and heavy and they often become dropsical and loathsome to sight\", according to a New Hampshire schoolteacher. The skin of a poor white Southerner was described as waxy, \"ghastly yellowish-white\" like old parchment, or so white they almost appeared to be albinos. The parents were listless and slothful, neglected their children, and were alcoholics. They were looked on with contempt by both upper-class planters and yeoman farmers \u2013 the non-slave-owning smallholders.\nHarriet Beecher Stowe described a white trash woman and her children in \"\", published in 1856:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Crouched on a pile of dirty straw, sat a miserable haggard woman, with large, wild eyes, sunken cheeks, disheveled matted hair, and long, lean hands, like a bird's claws. At her skinny breast an emaciated infant was hanging, pushing, with its little skeleton hands, as if to force nourishment which nature no longer gave; and two scared-looking children, with features wasted and pinched blue with famine, were clinging to her gown. The whole group huddled together, drawing as far away as possible from the new comer [\"sic\"], looking up with large, frightened eyes, like hunted wild animals.\nWhite Southerners of the period equated coarse and disagreeable appearances with immoral thoughts and uncivil or criminal behavior \u2013 an evil countenance often meant a villainous character. In this way poor whites with unhealthy or ugly bodies \u2013 the result in large part of poor diets, lack of personal grooming, and a toxic environment \u2013 were condemned by the larger white community at first sight, with no thought given to investigating or ameliorating the conditions that were responsible for their appearances.\nThe physical characteristics of white trash were thought to be inherited in nature, serving to separate poor whites from the Southern gentility and those yeomen who shared patrician values. Slavery apologist Daniel R. Hundley's 1860 book \"Social Relations in Our Southern States\" includes a chapter entitled \"White Trash\". He used the existence of poor whites with supposed \"bad blood\" to argue that genetics and not societal structure was the problem, and that therefore slavery was justified. He called white trash the \"laziest two-legged animals that walk erect on the face of the Earth\", describing their appearance as \"lank, lean, angular, and bony, with ... sallow complexion, awkward manners, and a natural stupidity or dullness of intellect that almost surpasses belief\". Hundley considered the white trash population to be morally inferior not only to other whites, but to the black slave population as well. His evaluation was seconded by Randolph Shotwell, a future Ku Klux Klan leader, who described them as \"a distinct race of people ... thriftless, uneducated, unthinking beings, who live little better than negroes\".\nW. J. Cash in \"The Mind of the South\" (1941) writes in his description of the mythical Old South that beneath the aristocratic Cavalier planters was perceived to be:\n...a vague race lumped together indiscriminately as the poor whites \u2013 very often, in fact, as the \"white-trash\". These people belong in the main to a physically inferior type, having sprung for the most part from the convict servants, redemptioners, and debtors of old Virginia and Georgia, with a sprinkling of the most unsuccessful sort of European peasants and farm laborers and the dregs of the European town slums. And so, of course, the gulf between them and the master class was impassable, and their ideas and feeling did not enter into the make-up of the prevailing Southern civilization.\nCash goes on to explain that those who arrived in the New World under these circumstances \u2013 at least early in the history of European settlement \u2013 were as likely to end up in the planter class or as yeoman farmers as they were to become poor whites, as land, at first, was cheap and available, and hard work could pay off in a rise in economic and social status. But there were some who did not succeed,\n...the weakest element of the old backcountry population ... those who had been driven back [by the plantation system] to the red hills and the sandlands and the pine barrens and the swamps \u2013 to all the marginal lands of the South; those who, because of the poorness of the soil on which they dwelt or the great inaccessibility of markets, were, as a group, completely barred from escape or economic and social advance. They were the people to whom the term \"cracker\" properly applied \u2013 the \"white-trash\" and \"po' bukra\" ... [They exhibited] a distinctive physical character \u2013 a striking lankness of frame and slackness of muscle in association with a shambling gait, a boniness and misshapeness of head and feature, a peculiar swallow swartness, or alternatively a not less peculiar and a not less faded-out colorness of skin and hair.\nAccording to Cash, this physical appearance is not, for the most part, genetically determined, but is the result of the brutal circumstances in which this group had to survive.\nCultural traditions.\nChild rearing.\nBy Wyatt-Brown's account, in the mid-19th century South, even upper-class parents were extremely indulgent of their children, encouraging both boys and girls to be aggressive. They soon learned that they were expected to grab for what they wanted, wrestle with their siblings in front of their parents, disobey parental orders, make a racket with their toys, and physically attack visitors. Patrician girls would later be taught to be proper young ladies, but boys continued to be unrestrained, lest they become effeminate. These behaviors \u2013 which were also practiced by poorer whites to the extent their circumstances allowed \u2013 propelled young men into gambling, drinking, whoring and fighting, all of which was more or less expected as \"manly\" behavior. This pattern of child-rearing was predominate in the backwoods, where it was not limited to the upper class, but could be found among yeoman and poor whites alike. For white trash, this method of raising children was combined with violent folkways inherited from their English, Irish, and Scottish progenitors.\nProximity to Blacks and Native Americans.\nAccording to Wyatt-Brown, the Southern style of child-rearing was seen as paralleling that of the Native Americans who were a constant presence in post-colonial America, especially in the backwoods areas. Accordingly, another theory for the existence of white trash held that the degraded condition of poor white southerners was the result of living in close proximity to blacks and Native Americans. Samuel Stanhope Smith, a minister and educator who was the seventh president of Princeton College, wrote in 1810 that poor white southerners lived in \"a state of absolute savagism\", which caused them to resemble Indians in the color of their skin and their clothing, a belief that was endemic in the 18th and early 19th century. Smith saw them as a stumbling block in the evolution of mainstream American whites, a view that had previously been expressed by J. Hector St. John de Cr\u00e8vec\u0153ur in his 1782 book, \"Letters from an American Farmer\". Cr\u00e8vec\u0153ur, a French soldier-diplomat who resettled in the United States, considered poor white southerners to be \"not ... a very pleasing spectacle\" and inferior to the prototypical American he celebrated in his book, but still hoped that the effects of progress would improve the condition of these people whom he considered \"the most hideous parts of our society\".\nCeltic heritage.\nThe Brandeis University historian David Hackett Fischer says there is an enduring genetic basis for a \"willingness to resort to violence\" \u2013 citing especially the finding of high blood levels of testosterone \u2013 in the four main chapters of his book \"Albion's Seed\". He proposes that a propensity for violence in the Mid-Atlantic, Southern and Western states is due to genetic changes wrought over generations living in traditional herding societies in Northern England, the Scottish Borders, and Irish Border Region, which were then transferred to other ethnic groups by shared culture.\nEven before there was any scientific investigation into the roots of the poor white people of the South, social critic H. L. Mencken, in his 1919 essay \"Sahara of the Bozart\", challenged the prevailing myth at the time that \"poor white trash\", and most of the South's population, were primarily of Anglo-Saxon stock, suggesting most were Celtic, with lesser elements of French, Spanish, German and African American heritage. According to historian Jack Temple Kirby, Mencken was \"woefully ignorant of even the basics of southern history\", and was a \"captive of the tradition that Old South society consisted only of planter aristocrats, slaves, and poor white trash\".\nAs a legacy of slavery.\nIn his classic study, \"Democracy in America\" (1835), French aristocrat Alexis de Tocqueville sees the state of poor white southerners as being one of the effects of the slave system, which made them ignorant, idle, prideful, self-indulgent, and weak. He writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From birth, the southern American is invested with a kind of domestic dictatorship ... and the first habit he learns is that of effortless domination ... [which turns] the southern American into a haughty, hasty, irascible, violent man, passionate in his desires and irritated by obstacles. But he is easily discouraged if he fails to succeed at his first attempt.\nPoor whites were restricted from holding political office due to property qualifications, and their ability to vote was at the mercy of courts controlled by the slave-holding planters, meaning they had few advocates. Many were tenant farmers or day laborers, while others were forced to live as scavengers, thieves and vagrants, but all were socially ostracized by \"proper\" white society. Even slaves looked down on them. Despite poor whites being looked down on by both the planters and the yeoman farmers, they held the Blacks of the South in deep contempt. Cash writes that the slave system \"bred [in common whites] a savage and ignoble hate for the Negro, which required only opportunity to break forth in relentless ferocity\".\nRoistering among the British working class.\nPoor Southern whites in the 19th century were often casual about male sexual activity outside of marriage, in spite of evangelical revivalism and increasing church discipline. Wyatt-Brown suggests that this was part of a roistering tradition with roots in the class' British origins, and differentiated white trash from both the yeoman class and landed gentry of the plantations, where church proscriptions and social inhibitions held sway, respectively. For poor white women, there was generally a double standard: girls who broke the code of chastity and bore children outside of wedlock were often subject to public humiliation. In some deep mountain backwoods, however, such girls were seen as fertile rather than shameful.\nPolitics.\nNortherners claimed that the existence of white trash was the result of the system of slavery in the South, while Southerners worried that these clearly inferior whites would upset the \"natural\" class system which held that all whites were superior to all other races, especially blacks. People of both regions expressed concern that if the number of white trash people increased significantly, they would threaten the Jeffersonian ideal of a population of educated white freemen as the basis of a robust American democracy.\nFor Ralph Waldo Emerson, the mid-19th-century American philosopher and writer, poor people of all kinds\u00a0\u2013 including poor white Southerners\u00a0\u2013 lived in poverty because of traits inherent to their nature. The poor were \"carted to America to ditch &amp; to drudge\" only \"to lie down prematurely to make a spot of greener grass\" afterwards. According to Emerson, these people were fated to inhabit the lowest niches of society, and he specifically excluded them from his definition of what an \"American\" was. Emerson's \"American\" was of virile heritage \u2013 descended from the Danes, Norsemen, Saxons, and Anglo-Saxons \u2013 and was known for \"beastly ferocity\" and beauty, not shared by the poor white Southerners. Emerson felt New Englanders and northern Americans were superior to the other \"races\", but also to white Southerners (especially poor ones).\nSome, such as Theodore Roosevelt, saw poor \"degenerate\" whites \u2013 as well as the mass of immigrants from southern and eastern Europe \u2013 as causing \"race suicide\", the concept that poor whites and unwanted immigrants would eventually out-procreate and replace those of the dominant and superior (northern European) white \"race\", to the detriment of the country.\nHistory.\nIn the early 17th century, Virginia Governor Thomas Dale requested more colonists to work in the fields. It was difficult to find local workers, since those wealthy enough to emigrate to the colonies often became landowners instead. In response, King James sent felons and vagrant children (around a hundred of each) to Virginia.\nBy 1617, the Virginia Company instituted the headright system, bestowing 50 acres of land to anyone who sponsored an indentured worker's passage to the colony. The Plymouth Company followed suit, as did other colonies, including Maryland, Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina. This helped poorer European workers come to the colonies but it also had the effect of incentivizing planters to sponsor large numbers of workers (and later, enslaved Africans) in exchange for expanding their land rights. Once their indenture was complete, these workers often became landowners themselves, though they were usually given poorer, undeveloped land on the Western frontier. Others were unable to afford their independence and carried on working for planters as free wage laborers.\nTo meet demand, British gangs sometimes organized kidnappings, paid for by planters and speculators, to increase the numbers shipped overseas \u2014 amounting to thousands of unwilling migrants sent to North America by the middle of the century. Political and military prisoners were also sent as indentured servants to the colonies as a result of insurrections in Ireland. Oliver Cromwell sent hundreds of Irish Catholics to British North America during the Irish Confederate Wars (1641\u20131653).\nIn 1717, the Parliament of Great Britain passed the Transportation Act to regulate the system of shipping convicts as indentured servants to North America. This had previously operated for about a century under the royal prerogative of mercy, though was open to exploitation. One of the Act's stated aims was to increase the availability of laborers for the colonies. It also allowed the willing transportation of children as young as 15 on eight-year contracts of indenture. In 1720, the Act was amended to allow merchants to be paid for transporting felons. By the time penal transportation ceased during the American Revolutionary War (1775\u20131783), some 30,000\u201350,000 people had been transported to the New World under the law.\nIn total, 300,000 to 400,000 people were shipped to the North American colonies as indentured servants (between 1/2 and 2/3 of all white immigrants), serving up to seven years. While they expanded the populations of the colonies, and enriched the planter class, the systems of headright and indenture also expanded the lower class and the use of chattel slavery.\nMany of the poorer whites sent to the Western frontier, as well as those who settled in the backcountry of some southern states, were called \"waste people\", \"squatters\" and \"crackers\". They did not have title to the land they settled on, and had little access to education or religious training, if any. These people \u2013 trappers, miners, and small farmers of the backwoods \u2013 brought with them the \"customs, routines and beliefs\" of the old country, including ethics and morality which were adapted to fit their new environment. These included concepts of personal honor and the desire to protect the community, which Wyatt-Brown suggests developed into an abhorrence for race-mixing.\nEarly 19th century.\nThe first use of \"white trash\" in print to describe the Southern poor white population occurred in 1821. It came into common use in the 1830s as a pejorative used by the house slaves of \"quality folk\" against poor whites. This term achieved widespread popularity in the 1850s, and by 1855, it had passed into common usage by upper-class whites, and was in common usage among Southerners of all races throughout the rest of the 19th century.\nIn 1854, Harriet Beecher Stowe wrote that slavery not only produces \"degraded, miserable slaves\", but also \"a poor white population as degraded and brutal as ever existed in any of the most crowded districts of Europe\". She said the plantation system forced these whites to struggle for subsistence, becoming an \"inconceivably brutal\" group resembling \"some blind, savage monster, which, when aroused, tramples heedlessly over everything in its way\". Beyond economic factors, Stowe traces the existence of this class to the shortage of schools and churches in their communities. In her second novel \"Dred\", Stowe describes the poor white inhabitants of the Great Dismal Swamp, on the border between Virginia and North Carolina, as an ignorant, degenerate, and immoral class of people prone to criminality. Hinton Rowan Helper's influential 1857 book \"The Impending Crisis of the South\" describes the region's poor Caucasians as a people of lesser physical stature who were oppressed by the effects of slavery and would be driven to extinction by the South's \"cesspool of degradation and ignorance\". Historian Jeffrey Glossner of the University of Mississippi writes: \"While their voices are often unheard, we can gauge the broader importance of their presence through the social, political, and cultural developments of the period.\"\nDuring the Civil War.\nDuring the Civil War, the Confederacy instituted conscription of all men between the ages of 18 and 35, to raise soldiers for its army \u2013 this was later expanded to all men between 17 and 50. There were numerous exemptions, including for any slave-owner with more than 20 slaves, political officeholders, teachers, ministers and clerks, and men who worked in valuable trades. Poor white trash Southerners had little opportunity to avoid the draft, sometimes served as paid substitutes, and were looked down on as cannon fodder. Poor southerners said that it was a \"rich man's war\", but \"a poor man's fight.\" While upper-class Southern \"cavalier\" officers were granted frequent furloughs to return home, this was not the case with the ordinary private soldier, which led to an extremely high rate of desertion among this group, who put their families' well-being above the cause of the Confederacy, and thought of themselves as \"Conditional Confederates\". Deserters harassed soldiers, raided farms and stole food, and sometimes banded together in settlements, such as the \"Free State of Jones\" (formerly Jones County) in Mississippi. When found, deserters could be executed or humiliated by being put into chains.\nDespite the war being fought to protect the right of the Southern elite to own slaves, the planter class was reluctant to give up their cash crop, cotton, to grow the corn and grain needed by the Confederate armies and the civilian population. As a result, food shortages, exacerbated by inflation and hoarding by the rich, caused the poor of the South to suffer greatly. This led to food riots of angry mobs of poor women who raided stores, warehouses, and depots looking for food. Both the male deserters and the female rioters put the lie to the myth of Confederate unity, and that the war was being fought for the rights of all white Southerners.\nIdeologically, the Confederacy claimed that the system of slavery in the South was superior to the class divisions of the North, because while the South devolved all its degrading labor onto what it saw as an inferior race, the black slaves, the North did so to its own \"brothers in blood\", the white working class. The leaders and intellectuals of the Confederacy called this \"mudsill\" democracy, while they lauded the superiority of the pure-blooded Southern slave-owning \"cavaliers\" over the sullied Anglo-Saxon upper class of the North. Some of the military leaders of the North, especially Generals Ulysses S. Grant and William Tecumseh Sherman, recognized that their fight was not only to liberate slaves, but also the poor white Southerners, so they took steps to exploit the class divisions between the \"white trash\" population and plantation owners. An Army chaplain wrote in a letter to his wife after the Union siege of Petersburg, Virginia that the war would \"knock off the shackles of millions of poor whites\". After the Civil War and his presidency, in 1879 during his world tour, Grant said that he had hoped that the war would have freed the \"poor white class\" of the South from \"a bondage in some respects even worse than slavery\", but concluded \"they have been as much under the thumb of the slave holder as before the war\".\nDuring Reconstruction.\nAfter the war, President Andrew Johnson's first idea for the reconstruction of the South was essentially a \"white trash republic\", in which the aristocracy would maintain their property holdings and an amount of social power, but be disenfranchised until they could show their loyalty to the Union. The freed blacks would no longer be slaves, but would still be denied essential rights of citizenship and would make up the lowest rung on the social ladder. In between would be the poor white Southerner, who while occupying a lesser social position, would essentially become the masters of the South, voting and occupying political offices, and maintaining a superior status to the free blacks and freed slaves. Emancipated from the inequities of the plantation system, poor white trash would become the bulwark of Johnson's plan to rebuild the South.\nJohnson's plan was never put into effect, and the Freedmen's Bureau, created in 1865, was authorized to help \"all refugees and all freedmen\", black and white alike. The agency did this despite Johnson's basic lack of concern for the freed slaves the war had supposedly been fought over. Even though they provided relief to them, the Bureau did not accept Johnson's vision of poor whites as the loyal and honorable foundation of a reconstructed South. Northern journalists and other observers maintained that poor white trash, who were now destitute, were still victimized by poverty and vagrancy. They were seen as \"loafers\" dressed in rags and covered in filth who did no work, but accepted government relief. They were seen as only slightly more intelligent than blacks. Cotton merchant and novelist James R. Gilmore, who had traveled throughout the South, differentiated poor whites into two groups: \"mean whites\" and \"common whites\". While the former were thieves, loafers, and brutes, the latter were law-abiding citizens who were enterprising and productive. It was the \"mean\" minority who gave white trash their bad name and character.\nA number of commentators noted that poor white Southerners did not compare favorably to freed blacks, who were described as \"capable, thrifty, and loyal to the Union\". Marcus Sterling, a Freedmen's Bureau agent and a former Union officer, said that the \"pitiable class of poor whites\" were \"the only class which seem almost unaffected by the [bureau's] great benevolence and its bold reform\", while in contrast black freedmen had become \"more settled, industrious and ambitious\". Sidney Andrews saw in blacks a \"shrewd instinct for preservation\" which poor whites did not have, and Whitelaw Reid, a politician and newspaper editor from Ohio, thought that black children appeared eager to learn. \"Atlantic Monthly\" went so far as to suggest that government policy should switch from \"disenfranchis[ing] the humble, quiet, hardworking Negro\" and cease to provide help to the \"worthless barbarian\", the \"ignorant, illiterate, and vicious\" white trash population.\nDuring the Reconstruction Era, white trash were no longer seen as a degenerate breed which lived in the backcountry wilderness, but were brought into the mainstream of society, where they developed the reputation of being a dangerous, unintelligent class of criminals, vagrants and delinquents. They were seen as immoral, engaging in incest and prostitution, pimping out family members, and producing numerous in-bred bastard children.\nOne of the responses of Southerners and Northern Democrats to Reconstruction was the invention of two myths: the \"carpetbaggers\" and the \"scalawags\". The first were those Northern Republicans said to have invaded the South to take advantage of its people; and the second were those Southern whites who \"betrayed\" their race by supporting the Republican Party and Reconstruction. The scalawag, even if they came from a higher social class, was often described as being \"white trash\" or having a \"white trash heart\". They were decried as \"Black Republicans\", and were accused of easily mingling with blacks, inciting them to seek social equality. Democrats responded with \"Autobiography of a Scalawag\", a parody of the standard \"self-made man\" story, in which a white trash southerner with no innate ambition is nevertheless raised to a position of middling power just by being in the right place at the right time, or by lying and cheating.\nDuring Reconstruction, the Ku Klux Klan would frequently blame one of its particularly egregious killings or tortures on \"poor white trash\" with no discipline who did not follow the Klan's high standards of \"justice\" and \"honor\".\nPost-Reconstruction.\nAfter Reconstruction governments were \"Redeemed\", and Southern states returned to \"local control\" \u2013 i.e. white supremacist rule \u2013 some Southern conservatives in power expressed their desire to \"conserve\" the Blacks, and many African Americans, having no real alternative, accepted their protection as their best available option. This exposed a class-based fracture in the Southern white population. The aristocratic Governor of South Carolina, ex-Confederate General Wade Hampton III, said that the \"better class of whites\" approved of this policy, but that \"the lower whites are less favorable\". A Black member of the Virginia Assembly in 1877 was reported by Democratic politician Jabez Lamar Monroe Curry as saying that \"he and his race relied for the protection of their rights &amp; liberties, not on the 'poor white trash' but on the 'well-raised' gentleman\". In 1890, the editor of a Black newspaper editorialized that the demand in the South for Jim Crow laws did not come from the \"best people of the South\", but from the \"worst class of whites\" in that region. \nAround 1890, the term \"redneck\" began to be widely used for poor white southerners. State legislator Guy Rencher, a self-proclaimed \"redneck\", claimed the term came from his own \"long red neck\".\nThe \"New South\".\nFrom the 1890s until the turn of the century, the New South movement introduced industrialization, primarily in the form of hundreds of cotton mills across towns, villages and hamlets with flowing water to power the mill. The poor whites who had not already become sharecroppers or tenant farmers on cotton plantations moved into housing provided by the mills, and every member of the family, down to children as young as 6, worked at the mill, often from before dawn until after dark, for daily wages about half those paid for similar work in the North. Deprived of sunlight, working on badly ventilated mill floors, eating a diet which was no better than they had consumed before becoming industrialized, the mill worker became a notable physical type:\nA dead white skin, a sunken chest, and stooping shoulders were the earmarks of the breed. Chinless faces, microcephalic foreheads, rabbit teeth, goggling dead-fish eyes, rickety limbs and stunted bodies abounded \u2013 over and beyond the limits of their prevalence in the countryside. The women were characteristically stringy-haired and limp of breast at twenty, and shrunken hags at thirty of forty. And the incidence of tuberculosis, of insanity and epilepsy, and, above all, of pellagra, the curious vitamin-deficiency disease which is nearly peculiar to the South, was increasing.\nThe societal organization of the mills, in large part located just outside already organized municipal boundaries, was informed by that of the plantations, with the head of the mills replacing the planter as master. The mills provided rented housing and \"company stores\" where goods could be bought and charged against future earnings, putting the worker in the company's debt. Mills also had churches and schools, where workers paid the wages of the parson and the teacher. These mill workers attracted a new bevy of insulting and disdainful names, such as \"lint-heads\", \"cotton-tails\", \"factory rats\", and \"cotton-mill trash\".\nEugenics.\nAlso around 1890, the American eugenics movement turned its attention to poor white trash. They were stigmatized as being feeble-minded and promiscuous, having incestuous and inter-racial sex, and abandoning or mistreating their children. Eugenicists campaigned successfully for laws that would allow poor rural whites to be involuntarily sterilized by the state, in order to \"cleanse\" society of faulty genetic heritages. In 1907, Indiana passed the first eugenics-based compulsory sterilization law in the world. Thirty U.S. states would soon follow their lead. Although the law was overturned by the Indiana Supreme Court in 1921, in the 1927 case \"Buck v. Bell\", the Supreme Court of the United States upheld the constitutionality of the Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924, allowing for the compulsory sterilization of patients of state mental institutions.\nThe Depression.\nThe beginning of the 20th century brought no change of status for poor white southerners, especially after the onset of the Great Depression. The condition of this class was presented to the public in Margaret Bourke-White's photographic series for \"Life\" magazine and the work of other photographers made for Roy Stryker's Historical Section of the federal Resettlement Agency. Author James Agee wrote about them in his ground-breaking work \"Let Us Now Praise Famous Men\" (1941), as did Jonathan Daniels in \"A Southerner Discovers the South\" (1938).\nA number of Franklin D. Roosevelt's New Deal agencies tried to help the rural poor to better themselves and to break through the social barriers of Southern society which held them back, reinstating the American Dream of upward mobility. Programs such as those of the Subsistence Homesteads Division of the Department of the Interior; its successor, the Resettlement Administration, whose express purpose was to help the poor in rural areas; and its replacement, the Farm Security Administration which aimed to break the cycle of tenant farming and sharecropping and help poor whites and blacks to own their own farms, and to initiate the creation of the communities necessary to support those farms. The agencies also provided services for migrant workers, such as the Arkies and Okies, who had been devastated by the Dust Bowl and forced to head west toward California, bringing all their belongings by car.\nImportant in the devising and running of these programs were politicians and bureaucrats such as Henry Wallace, the Secretary of Agriculture; Milburn Lincoln Wilson, the first head of the Subsistence Homesteads Division, who was a social scientist and an agricultural expert; and Rexford G. Tugwell, a Columbia University economics professor appointed as the first head of the Resettlement Agency. Tugwell understood that the status of tenant farmers would not change if they could not vote, so he campaigned against poll tax, which prevented them voting, since they could not afford to pay it. His agency's goals were the four \"R's\": \"retirement of bad land, relocation of rural poor, resettlement of the unemployed in suburban communities, and rehabilitation of farm families\".\nArthur Raper, an expert on tenancy farming, published his study \"Preface to Peasantry\" (1936), in which he explained why the south's system held back the region's poor and caused them to migrate. Howard Odum, a University of North Carolina sociologist and psychologist, wrote the 600-page \"Southern Regions of the United States\", which became a guidebook for the New Deal. Journalist Gerald W. Johnson translated Odum's ideas in the book into a popular volume, \"The Wasted Land\". In 1938, Odum mailed questionnaires to academics to determine their views on what \"poor white\" meant to them. The results were similar to the popular views of \"white trash\" that had been held for many decades, indicating perceived character flaws in poor whites: \"purposeless, hand to mouth, lazy, unambitious, no account, no desire to improve themselves, inertia\", but, most often, \"shiftless\".\n\"Trailer trash\".\nTrailers got their start in the 1930s, and their use proliferated during the housing shortage of World War II, when the Federal government used 30,000 of them to house defense workers, soldiers and sailors, especially around areas with a large military or defense presence such as Mobile, Alabama and Pascagoula, Mississippi. Reporter Agnes E. Meyer of \"The Washington Post\" travelled throughout the country, reporting on the condition of the \"neglected rural areas\", and described the people who lived in the trailers, tents, and shacks there as malnourished, illiterate, and ragged. The shipyard workers who came to Mobile and Pascagoula were \"subnormal swamp and mountain folk\" whom the locals described as \"vermin\"; elsewhere, they were called \"squatters\". They were accused of having loose morals, high illegitimacy rates, and of allowing prostitution to thrive in their \"Hillbilly Havens\". The trailers themselves \u2013 sometimes purchased second- or third-hand \u2013 were often unsightly, unsanitary, and dilapidated, causing communities to zone them away from more desirable areas which had schools, stores, and other necessary facilities.\nIn the mid-20th century, poor whites who could not afford suburban-style tract housing began to purchase mobile homes, which were not only cheaper, but which could be easily relocated if work in one location ran out. Through a combination of choice and local zoning laws, these people gathered in trailer camps, and the people who lived in them became known as \"trailer trash\". Despite many of them having jobs, albeit sometimes itinerant ones, the character flaws perceived in poor white trash were also applied to so-called \"trailer trash\", and trailer camps or parks were seen as being inhabited by retired persons, migrant workers, and the poor. By 1968, a survey found that only 13% of those who owned and lived in mobile homes had white collar jobs.\nAnalysis.\nSociologist Allyson Drinkard writes in \"The Social History of the American Family\" that to be considered \"white trash\" in modern American society is different from simply being poor and white, because of the images it conjures. Drinkard writes that those called white trash are caught in the paradox of belonging to a supposedly privileged group without being able to benefit from that privilege. Like other oppressed minorities, poor whites are born trapped in poverty, and are blamed for not being able to \"raise themselves\" out of their predicament, while upper- and middle-class whites solidify their feeling of superiority by making sure that \"white trash\" people are seen as outsiders.\nEnglish professor Nell Sullivan argues that the term \"white trash\" erases the humanity of poor whites, through the \"invisibility that the middle and upper classes demand of the lower economic classes\". Isenberg says: \"The very existence of such people \u2013 both in their visibility and invisibilty \u2013 is proof that American society obsesses over the mutable labels we give to the neighbors we wish not to notice.\"\nIn popular culture.\nWhite popular culture.\nWhite trash! I am. People always say, 'Aren't you insulted when people call you white trash?' I say, 'Well it depends on who's calling me white trash and how they mean it.' But we really were, to some degree. Because when you're that poor and you're not educated, you fall in those categories.\nTalking about her fame, Parton said \"There\u2019s nothing like white trash at the White House!\" She cheerfully told \"Rolling Stone\" she will always remain \"a white-trash person\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33545", "revid": "37401930", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33545", "title": "Welsh language", "text": "Brittonic language\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nWelsh ( or ) is a Celtic language of the Brittonic subgroup that is native to the Welsh people. Welsh is spoken natively in Wales by about 18% of the population, by some in England, and in (the Welsh colony in Chubut Province, Argentina).\nHistorically, it has also been known in English as \"British\", \"Cambrian\", \"Cambric\" and \"Cymric\".\nThe Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011 gave the Welsh language official status in Wales. Welsh and English are \"de jure\" official languages of the Senedd (the Welsh parliament).\nAccording to the 2021 census, 538,300 usual residents in Wales aged three or over (17.8% of the population) were able to speak Welsh, while just over a quarter (25.1%) reported having some Welsh language skills. \nOther surveys have produced higher figures: a survey in 2022\u20132023 found that 34% of people aged 16 or over could speak Welsh (of whom 18 per cent said they could speak Welsh, and 16 per cent said they had some Welsh speaking ability). In March 2025, other survey data estimated that 828,600 people (26.9%) aged three or over in Wales could speak Welsh. \nAlmost half of all Welsh speakers consider themselves fluent, while 20% are able to speak a fair amount. 56% of Welsh speakers speak the language daily, and 19% speak the language weekly. \nYear upon year since 1951, the number of Welsh speakers in Wales has increased, though the percentage of those speakers within the population of Wales has decreased every decade apart from numbers reported via the 1991 and 2001 UK Census.\nThe Welsh Government plans to increase the number of Welsh-language speakers to one million, and to double the daily use of the language, by 2050. Since 1980, the number of children attending Welsh-medium schools has increased, while the number going to Welsh bilingual and dual-medium schools has decreased. Welsh is considered the least endangered Celtic language by UNESCO.\nHistory.\nThe language of the Welsh developed from the language of Britons. The emergence of Welsh was not instantaneous and clearly identifiable. Instead, the shift occurred over a long period, with some historians claiming that it had happened by as late as the 9th century, with a watershed moment being that proposed by linguist Kenneth H. Jackson, the Battle of Dyrham, a military battle between the West Saxons and the Britons in 577\u00a0AD, which split the South Western British from direct overland contact with the Welsh.\nFour periods are identified in the history of Welsh, with rather indistinct boundaries: Primitive Welsh, Old Welsh, Middle Welsh, and Modern Welsh. The period immediately following the language's emergence is sometimes referred to as Primitive Welsh, followed by the Old Welsh period \u2013 which is generally considered to stretch from the beginning of the 9th century to sometime during the 12th century. The Middle Welsh period is considered to have lasted from then until the 14th century, when the Modern Welsh period began, which in turn is divided into Early and Late Modern Welsh.\nThe word \"Welsh\" is a descendant, via Old English , of the Proto-Germanic word , which was derived from the name of the Celtic people known to the Romans as and which came to refer to speakers of Celtic languages, and then indiscriminately to the people of the Western Roman Empire. In Old English the term went through semantic narrowing, coming to refer to either Britons in particular or, in some contexts, slaves. The plural form evolved into the name for their territory, Wales.\nThe modern names for various Romance-speaking people in Continental Europe (e.g. Walloons, Valaisans, Vlachs/Wallachians, and , the Polish name for Italians) have a similar etymology. The Welsh term for the language, , descends from the Brythonic word , meaning 'compatriots' or 'fellow countrymen'.\nOrigins.\nWelsh evolved from Common Brittonic, the Celtic language spoken by the ancient Celtic Britons. Classified as Insular Celtic, the British language probably arrived in Britain during the Bronze Age or Iron Age and was probably spoken throughout the island south of the Firth of Forth. During the Early Middle Ages the British language began to fragment due to increased dialect differentiation, thus evolving into Welsh and the other Brittonic languages. It is not clear when Welsh became distinct.\nLinguist Kenneth H. Jackson has suggested that the evolution in syllabic structure and sound pattern was complete by around 550\u00a0AD, and labelled the period between then and about 800\u00a0AD \"Primitive Welsh\". This Primitive Welsh may have been spoken in both Wales and the ('Old North') \u2013 the Brittonic-speaking areas of what are now northern England and southern Scotland \u2013 and therefore may have been the ancestor of Cumbric as well as Welsh. Jackson, however, believed that the two varieties were already distinct by that time.\nThe earliest Welsh poetry \u2013 that attributed to the or \"Early Poets\" \u2013 is generally considered to date to the Primitive Welsh period. However, much of this poetry was supposedly composed in the , raising further questions about the dating of the material and language in which it was originally composed. This discretion stems from the fact that Cumbric was widely believed to have been the language used in Hen Ogledd. An 8th-century inscription in Tywyn shows the language already dropping inflections in the declension of nouns.\nJanet Davies proposed that the origins of the Welsh language were much less definite; in \"The Welsh Language: A History\", she proposes that Welsh may have been around even earlier than 600\u00a0AD. This is evidenced by the dropping of final syllables from Brittonic: 'poet' became , and 'river' became . Though both Davies and Jackson cite minor changes in syllable structure and sounds as evidence for the creation of Old Welsh, Davies suggests it may be more appropriate to refer to this derivative language as rather than characterising it as a new language altogether.\nPrimitive Welsh.\nThe argued dates for the period of \"Primitive Welsh\" are widely debated, with some historians' suggestions differing by hundreds of years.\nOld Welsh.\nThe next main period is Old Welsh (, 9th to 11th centuries); poetry from both Wales and Scotland has been preserved in this form of the language. As Germanic and Gaelic colonisation of Britain proceeded, the Brittonic speakers in Wales were split off from those in northern England, speaking Cumbric, and those in the southwest, speaking what would become Cornish, so the languages diverged. Both the works of Aneirin (, c.\u2009600) and the \"Book of Taliesin\" () were written during this era.\nMiddle Welsh.\nMiddle Welsh () is the label attached to the Welsh of the 12th to 14th centuries, of which much more remains than for any earlier period. This is the language of nearly all surviving early manuscripts of the , although the tales themselves are certainly much older. It is also the language of the existing Welsh law manuscripts. Middle Welsh is reasonably intelligible to a modern-day Welsh speaker.\nKey: \u2022 Welsh &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 \u2022 Bilingual &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0 \u2022 English &lt;templatestyles src=\"Legend/styles.css\" /&gt;\u00a0\nModern Welsh.\nThe Bible translations into Welsh helped maintain the use of Welsh in daily life, and standardised spelling. The New Testament was translated by William Salesbury in 1567, and the complete Bible by William Morgan in 1588. Modern Welsh is subdivided into Early Modern Welsh and Late Modern Welsh. Early Modern Welsh ran from the 15th century through to the end of the 16th century, and the Late Modern Welsh period roughly dates from the 16th century onwards. Contemporary Welsh differs greatly from the Welsh of the 16th century, but they are similar enough for a fluent Welsh speaker to have little trouble understanding it.\nDuring the Modern Welsh period, there has been a decline in the popularity of the Welsh language: the number of Welsh speakers declined to the point at which there was concern that the language would become extinct. During industrialisation in the late 19th century, immigrants from England led to the decline in Welsh speakers particularly in the South Wales Valleys. Welsh government processes and legislation have worked to increase the proliferation of the Welsh language, for example through education.\nGeographical distribution.\nWales.\nWelsh has been spoken continuously in Wales throughout history. By 1911, however, it had become a minority language, spoken by 43.5 per cent of the population. While this decline continued over the following decades, the language did not die out. The smallest number of speakers was recorded in 1981 with 503,000 although the lowest percentage was recorded in the most recent census in 2021 at 17.8 per cent. By the start of the 21st century, numbers began to increase once more, at least partly as a result of the increase in Welsh-medium education.\nThe 2004 Welsh Language Use Survey showed that 21.7 per cent of the population of Wales spoke Welsh, compared with 20.8 per cent in the 2001 census, and 18.5 per cent in the 1991 census. Since 2001, however, the number of Welsh speakers has declined in both the 2011 and 2021 censuses to about 538,300 or 17.8 per cent in 2021, lower than 1991, although it is still higher in absolute terms. The 2011 census also showed a \"big drop\" in the number of speakers in the Welsh-speaking heartlands, with the number dropping to under 50 per cent in Ceredigion and Carmarthenshire for the first time. However, according to the Welsh Language Use Survey in 2019\u201320, 22 per cent of people aged three and over were able to speak Welsh.\nThe Annual Population Survey (APS) by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) estimated that as of December 2024, approximately 843,500, or 27.4 per cent of the population of Wales aged 3 and over, were able to speak the language. Children and young people aged three to 15 years old were more likely to report that they could speak Welsh than any other age group (48.1% per cent, 235,700). Around 975,700 people, or 31.7 per cent, reported that they could understand spoken Welsh. 24.1 per cent (740,400) could read and 22.0 per cent (675,200) could write in Welsh. The APS estimates of Welsh language ability are historically higher than those produced by the census.\nIn terms of usage, ONS also reported that 14.0 per cent (430,000) of people aged three or older in Wales reported that they spoke Welsh daily in December 2024, with 5.4 per cent (167,000) speaking it weekly and 6.6 per cent (203,300) less often. Approximately 1.4 per cent (42,800) reported that they never spoke Welsh despite being able to speak the language, with the remaining 72.6 per cent of the population not being able to speak it.\nThe National Survey for Wales, carried out by the Welsh Government, has also generally reported a higher proportion of Welsh speakers than the census. In 2022\u20132023, the survey found that 34 per cent of people aged 16 or over could speak Welsh (of whom 18 per cent said they could speak Welsh, and a further 16 per cent reported having some Welsh-speaking ability. This was broadly unchanged from the 2021\u20132022 results.\nHistorically, large numbers of Welsh people spoke only Welsh. Over the course of the 20th century this monolingual population all but disappeared, but a small percentage remained at the time of the 1981 census. Most Welsh-speaking people in Wales also speak English. However, many Welsh-speaking people are more comfortable expressing themselves in Welsh than in English. A speaker's choice of language can vary according to the subject domain and the social context, even within a single discourse (known in linguistics as code-switching).\nWelsh speakers are largely concentrated in the north and west of Wales, principally , Conwy County Borough, Denbighshire, Anglesey, Carmarthenshire, north Pembrokeshire, , parts of Glamorgan, and north-west and extreme south-west . However, first-language and other fluent speakers can be found throughout Wales.\nOutside Wales.\nThe rest of the UK.\nWelsh-speaking communities persisted well into the modern period across the border in England. Archenfield was still Welsh enough in the time of Elizabeth I for the Bishop of Hereford to be made responsible, together with the four Welsh bishops, for the translation of the Bible and the Book of Common Prayer into Welsh. Welsh was still commonly spoken there in the first half of the 19th century, and churchwardens' notices were put up in both Welsh and English until about 1860. Alexander John Ellis in the 1880s identified a small part of Shropshire as still then speaking Welsh, with the \"Celtic Border\" passing from Llanymynech through Oswestry to Chirk.\nThe number of Welsh-speaking people in the rest of Britain has not yet been counted for statistical purposes. In 1993, the Welsh-language television channel S4C published the results of a survey into the numbers of people who spoke or understood Welsh, which estimated that there were around 133,000 Welsh-speaking people living in England, about 50,000 of them in the Greater London area. The Welsh Language Board, on the basis of an analysis of the Office for National Statistics Longitudinal Study, estimated there were 110,000 Welsh-speaking people in England, and another thousand in Scotland and Northern Ireland.\nIn the 2011 census, 8,248 people in England gave Welsh in answer to the question \"What is your main language?\" The Office for National Statistics subsequently published a census glossary of terms to support the release of results from the census, including their definition of \"main language\" as referring to \"first or preferred language\" (though that wording was not in the census questionnaire itself). The wards in England with the most people giving Welsh as their main language were the Liverpool wards of Central and Greenbank; and Oswestry South in Shropshire. The wards of Oswestry South (1.15%), Oswestry East (0.86%) and St Oswald (0.71%) had the highest percentage of residents giving Welsh as their main language.\nThe census also revealed that 3,528 wards in England, or 46% of the total number, contained at least one resident whose main language is Welsh. In terms of the regions of England, North West England (1,945), London (1,310) and the West Midlands (1,265) had the highest number of people noting Welsh as their main language. According to the 2021 census, 7,349 people in England recorded Welsh to be their \"main language\".\nIn the 2011 census, 1,189 people aged three and over in Scotland noted that Welsh was a language (other than English) that they used at home.\nArgentina.\nIt is believed that there are as many as 5,000 speakers of Patagonian Welsh.\nAustralia.\nIn response to the question 'Does the person speak a language other than English at home?' in the 2016 Australian census, 1,688 people noted that they spoke Welsh.\nCanada.\nIn the 2011 Canadian census, 3,885 people reported Welsh as their first language. According to the 2021 Canadian census, 1,130 people noted that Welsh was their mother tongue.\nNew Zealand.\nThe 2018 New Zealand census noted that 1,083 people in New Zealand spoke Welsh.\nUnited States.\nThe American Community Survey 2017\u20132021 noted that 2,003 people aged five years and over in the United States spoke Welsh at home.\nStatus.\nLegal status.\nCalls for the Welsh language to be granted official status grew with the establishment of the nationalist political party Plaid Cymru in 1925, the establishment of the Welsh Language Society in 1962 and the rise of Welsh nationalism in the later 20th century. Of the six living Celtic languages (including two revived), Welsh has the highest number of native speakers who use the language on a daily basis, and it is the Celtic language which is considered the least endangered by UNESCO.\nThe Welsh Language Act 1993 and the Government of Wales Act 1998 provide that the Welsh and English languages be treated equally in the public sector, as far as is reasonable and practicable. Each public body is required to prepare for approval a Welsh Language Scheme, which indicates its commitment to the equality of treatment principle. This is sent out in draft form for public consultation for a three-month period, whereupon comments on it may be incorporated into a final version. It requires the final approval of the now defunct Welsh Language Board (). Thereafter, the public body is charged with implementing and fulfilling its obligations under the Welsh Language Scheme. The list of other public bodies which have to prepare Schemes could be added to by initially the Secretary of State for Wales, from 1993 to 1997, by way of statutory instrument. Subsequent to the forming of the National Assembly for Wales in 1997, the Government Minister responsible for the Welsh language can and has passed statutory instruments naming public bodies who have to prepare Schemes. Neither the 1993 Act nor secondary legislation made under it covers the private sector, although some organisations, notably banks and some railway companies, provide some of their information in Welsh.\nOn 7 December 2010, the Welsh Assembly unanimously approved a set of measures to develop the use of the Welsh language within Wales. On 9 February 2011 this measure, the Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011, was passed and received Royal Assent, thus making the Welsh language an officially recognised language within Wales. The measure:\nThe measure required public bodies and some private companies to provide services in Welsh. The Welsh government's Minister for Heritage at the time, Alun Ffred Jones, said, \"The Welsh language is a source of great pride for the people of Wales, whether they speak it or not, and I am delighted that this measure has now become law. I am very proud to have steered legislation through the Assembly which confirms the official status of the Welsh language; which creates a strong advocate for Welsh speakers and will improve the quality and quantity of services available through the medium of Welsh. I believe that everyone who wants to access services in the Welsh language should be able to do so, and that is what this government has worked towards. This legislation is an important and historic step forward for the language, its speakers and for the nation.\" The measure was not welcomed warmly by all supporters: Bethan Williams, chairman of the Welsh Language Society, gave a mixed response to the move, saying,Through this measure we have won official status for the language and that has been warmly welcomed. But there was a core principle missing in the law passed by the Assembly before Christmas. It doesn't give language rights to the people of Wales in every aspect of their lives. Despite that, an amendment to that effect was supported by 18 Assembly Members from three different parties, and that was a significant step forward.On 5 October 2011, Meri Huws, Chair of the Welsh Language Board, was appointed the new Welsh Language Commissioner. She released a statement that she was \"delighted\" to have been appointed to the \"hugely important role\", adding, \"I look forward to working with the Welsh Government and organisations in Wales in developing the new system of standards. I will look to build on the good work that has been done by the Welsh Language Board and others to strengthen the Welsh language and ensure that it continues to thrive.\" First Minister Carwyn Jones said that Huws would act as a champion for the Welsh language, though some had concerns over her appointment: Plaid Cymru spokeswoman Bethan Jenkins said, \"I have concerns about the transition from Meri Huws's role from the Welsh Language Board to the language commissioner, and I will be asking the Welsh government how this will be successfully managed. We must be sure that there is no conflict of interest, and that the Welsh Language Commissioner can demonstrate how she will offer the required fresh approach to this new role.\" Huws started her role as the Welsh Language Commissioner on 1 April 2012.\nLocal councils and the Senedd use Welsh, issuing Welsh versions of their literature, to varying degrees.\nRoad signs in Wales are in Welsh and English. Prior to 2016, the choice of which language to display first was the responsibility of the local council. Since then, as part of the Welsh Language (Wales) Measure 2011, all new signs have Welsh displayed first. There have been incidents of one of the languages being vandalised, which may be considered a hate crime.\nSince 2000, the teaching of Welsh has been compulsory in all schools in Wales up to age 16; this has had an effect in stabilising and reversing the decline in the language.\nText on UK coins tends to be in English and Latin. However, a Welsh-language edge inscription was used on pound coins dated 1985, 1990 and 1995, which circulated in all parts of the UK prior to their 2017 withdrawal. The wording is , and derives from the national anthem of Wales, \"\". Banknotes used in Wales are in English only, as these are issued by the Bank of England for both England and Wales.\nSome shops employ bilingual signage. Welsh sometimes appears on product packaging or instructions.\nThe UK government has ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages in respect of Welsh.\nThe language has greatly increased its prominence since the creation of the television channel S4C in November 1982, which until digital switchover in 2010 broadcast 70 per cent of Channel 4's programming along with a majority of Welsh language shows during peak viewing hours. The all-Welsh-language digital station is available throughout Europe on satellite and online throughout the UK. Since the digital switchover was completed in South Wales on 31 March 2010, became the main broadcasting channel and fully in Welsh. The main evening television news provided by the BBC in Welsh is available for download. There is also a Welsh-language radio station, , which was launched in 1977.\nThe only Welsh-language national newspaper (\"The Welshman\") was published weekly until 2017, and monthly thereafter, following a change in ownership. There is no daily newspaper in Welsh. A daily newspaper called (\"The World\") was scheduled to be launched on 3 March 2008, but was scrapped, owing to insufficient sales of subscriptions and the Welsh Government offering only one third of the \u00a3600,000 public funding it needed. There is a Welsh-language online news service which publishes news stories in Welsh called ('360 [degree] view').\nAs of March 2021, there were 58 local Welsh language community newspapers, known as , in circulation.\nIn education.\nThe decade around 1840 was a period of great social upheaval in Wales, manifested in the Chartist movement. In 1839, 20,000 people marched on Newport, resulting in a riot when 20 people were killed by soldiers defending the Westgate Hotel, and the Rebecca Riots where tollbooths on turnpikes were systematically destroyed.\nThis unrest brought the state of education in Wales to the attention of the British government since social reformers of the time considered education as a means of dealing with social ills. \"The Times\" newspaper was prominent among those who considered that the lack of education of the Welsh people was the root cause of most of the problems.\nIn July 1846, three commissioners, R.R.W. Lingen, Jellynger C. Symons and H.R. Vaughan Johnson, were appointed to inquire into the state of education in Wales; the Commissioners were all Anglicans and thus presumed unsympathetic to the nonconformist majority in Wales. The Commissioners presented their report to the Government on 1 July 1847 in three large blue-bound volumes. This report quickly became known in Wales as the (\"Treason of the Blue Books\") since, apart from documenting the state of education in Wales, the Commissioners were also free with their comments disparaging the language, nonconformity, and the morals of the Welsh people in general. An immediate effect of the report was that ordinary Welsh people began to believe that the only way to get on in the world was through the medium of English, and an inferiority complex developed about the Welsh language whose effects have not yet been completely eradicated. The historian Professor Kenneth O. Morgan referred to the significance of the report and its consequences as \"the Glencoe and the Amritsar of Welsh history\".\nIn the later 19th century, the teaching of English in Welsh schools was generally supported by the Welsh public and parents who saw it as the language of economic advancement. Virtually all teaching in the schools of Wales was in English, even in areas where the pupils barely understood English. Some schools used the Welsh Not, a piece of wood, often bearing the letters \"WN\", which was hung around the neck of any pupil caught speaking Welsh. The pupil could pass it on to any schoolmate heard speaking Welsh, with the pupil wearing it at the end of the day being punished. One of the most famous Welsh-born pioneers of higher education in Wales was Sir Hugh Owen. He made great progress in the cause of education, and more especially the University College of Wales at Aberystwyth, of which he was chief founder. He has been credited with the Welsh Intermediate Education Act 1889 (52 &amp; 53 Vict c 40), following which several new Welsh schools were built. The first was completed in 1894 and named .\nTowards the beginning of the 20th century this policy slowly began to change, partly owing to the efforts of O.M. Edwards when he became chief inspector of schools for Wales in 1907.\nThe ('Aberystwyth Welsh School') was founded in 1939 by Sir Ifan ap Owen Edwards, the son of O.M. Edwards, as the first Welsh Primary School. The headteacher was Norah Isaac. is still a very successful school, and now there are Welsh-language primary schools all over the country. was established in Rhyl in 1956 as the first Welsh-medium secondary school.\nWelsh is now widely used in education, with 101,345 children and young people in Wales receiving their education in Welsh medium schools in 2014/15, 65,460 in primary and 35,885 in secondary. 26 per cent of all schools in Wales are defined as Welsh medium schools, with a further 7.3 per cent offering some Welsh-medium instruction to pupils. 22 per cent of pupils are in schools in which Welsh is the primary language of instruction. Under the National Curriculum, it is compulsory that all students study Welsh up to the age of 16 as either a first or a second language. Some students choose to continue with their studies through the medium of Welsh for the completion of their A-levels as well as during their college years. All local education authorities in Wales have schools providing bilingual or Welsh-medium education. The remainder study Welsh as a second language in English-medium schools. Specialist teachers of Welsh called support the teaching of Welsh in the National Curriculum. Welsh is also taught in adult education classes. The Welsh Government has recently set up six centres of excellence in the teaching of Welsh for Adults, with centres in North Wales, Mid Wales, South West, Glamorgan, Gwent, and Cardiff.\nThe ability to speak Welsh or to have Welsh as a qualification is desirable for certain career choices in Wales, such as teaching or customer service. All universities in Wales teach courses in the language, with many undergraduate and post-graduate degree programmes offered in the medium of Welsh, ranging from law, modern languages, social sciences, and also other sciences such as biological sciences. Aberystwyth, Cardiff, Bangor, and Swansea have all had chairs in Welsh since their virtual establishment, and all their schools of Welsh are successful centres for the study of the Welsh language and its literature, offering a BA in Welsh as well as post-graduate courses. At all Welsh universities and the Open University, students have the right to submit assessed work and sit exams in Welsh even if the course was taught in English (usually the only exception is where the course requires demonstrating proficiency in another language). Following a commitment made in the One Wales coalition government between Labour and Plaid Cymru, the (Welsh Language National College) was established. The purpose of the federal structured college, spread out between all the universities of Wales, is to provide and also advance Welsh medium courses and Welsh medium scholarship and research in Welsh universities. There is also a Welsh-medium academic journal called ('Oasis'), which is a platform for academic research in Welsh and is published quarterly. There have been calls for more teaching of Welsh in English-medium schools.\nUse in professional engineering.\nWhen conducting applicants' professional reviews for Chartered Engineer status, the Institution of Engineering and Technology accepts applications in Welsh and will conduct face-to-face interviews in Welsh if requested to do so. One of the requirements for Chartered Engineer is also to be able to communicate effectively in English.\nIn information technology.\nLike many of the world's languages, the Welsh language has seen an increased use and presence on the internet, ranging from formal lists of terminology in a variety of fields to Welsh language interfaces for Microsoft Windows XP and up, Microsoft Office, LibreOffice, OpenOffice.org, Mozilla Firefox and a variety of Linux distributions, and on-line services to blogs kept in Welsh. Wikipedia has had a Welsh version since July 2003 and Facebook since 2009.\nMobile phone technology.\nIn 2006 the Welsh Language Board launched a free software pack which enabled the use of SMS predictive text in Welsh. At the National Eisteddfod of Wales 2009, a further announcement was made by the Welsh Language Board that the mobile phone company Samsung was to work with the network provider Orange to provide the first mobile phone in the Welsh language, with the interface and the T9 dictionary on the Samsung S5600 available in the Welsh language. The model, available with the Welsh language interface, has been available since 1 September 2009, with plans to introduce it on other networks.\nOn Android devices, both the built-in Google Keyboard and user-created keyboards can be used. iOS devices have fully supported the Welsh language since the release of iOS 8 in September 2014. Users can switch their device to Welsh to access apps that are available in Welsh. Date and time on iOS is also localised, as shown by the built-in Calendar application, as well as certain third-party apps that have been localised.\nIn warfare.\nSecure communications are often difficult to achieve in wartime. Just as Navajo code talkers were used by the United States military during World War II, the Royal Welch Fusiliers, a Welsh regiment serving in Bosnia, used Welsh for emergency communications that needed to be secure.\nUse within the British parliament.\nIn 2017, parliamentary rules were amended to allow the use of Welsh when the Welsh Grand Committee meets at Westminster. The change did not alter the rules about debates within the House of Commons, where only English can be used.\nIn February 2018, Welsh was first used when the Welsh Secretary, Alun Cairns, delivered his welcoming speech at a sitting of the committee. He said, \"I am proud to be using the language I grew up speaking, which is not only important to me, my family and the communities Welsh MPs represent, but is also an integral part of Welsh history and culture\".\nUse at the European Union.\nIn November 2008, the Welsh language was used at a meeting of the European Union's Council of Ministers for the first time. The Heritage Minister Alun Ffred Jones addressed his audience in Welsh and his words were interpreted into the EU's 23 official languages. The official use of the language followed years of campaigning. Jones said \"In the UK we have one of the world's major languages, English, as the mother tongue of many. But there is a diversity of languages within our islands. I am proud to be speaking to you in one of the oldest of these, Welsh, the language of Wales.\" He described the breakthrough as \"more than [merely] symbolic\" saying \"Welsh might be one of the oldest languages to be used in the UK, but it remains one of the most vibrant. Our literature, our arts, our festivals, our great tradition of song all find expression through our language. And this is a powerful demonstration of how our culture, the very essence of who we are, is expressed through language.\"\nJill Evans MEP used Welsh in a number of speeches in the European Parliament. In 2004, her using Welsh was the first use of the language in the European Parliament. The last time Welsh was spoken in the European Parliament was during Evans' last speech shortly before Brexit.\nUse by the Voyager programme.\nA greeting in Welsh is one of the 55 languages included on the Voyager Golden Record chosen to be representative of Earth in NASA's Voyager programme launched in 1977. The greetings are unique to each language, with the Welsh greeting being , which translates into English as \"Good health to you now and forever\".\nVocabulary.\nWelsh supplements its core Brittonic vocabulary (words such as \"egg\", \"stone\") with hundreds of word lemmas borrowed from Latin, such as ( 'window' &lt; Latin , 'wine' &lt; Latin ). It also borrows words from English, such as ( 'shelf', 'gate').\nPhonology.\nThe phonology of Welsh includes a number of sounds that do not occur in English and are typologically rare in European languages. The voiceless alveolar lateral fricative , the voiceless nasals , and , and the voiceless alveolar trill are distinctive features of the Welsh language. Stress usually falls on the penultimate syllable in polysyllabic words, and the word-final unstressed syllable receives a higher pitch than the stressed syllable.\nSymbols in parentheses are either allophones, or found only in loanwords.\nThe vowels /\u0268\u031e/ and /\u0268/ are only found in Northern varieties of Welsh. In the South these have merged with /\u026a/ and /i/ in all cases.\nOrthography.\nWelsh is written in a Latin alphabet of 29 letters, of which eight are digraphs treated as single letters for collation, for example comes before in the dictionary:\n a, b, c, ch, d, dd, e, f, ff, g, ng, h, i, j, l, ll, m, n, o, p, ph, r, rh, s, t, th, u, w, y\nIn contrast to English practice, \u27e8w\u27e9 and \u27e8y\u27e9 are considered vowel letters in Welsh along with \u27e8a, e, i, o, u\u27e9.\n\u27e8j\u27e9 was not used traditionally but is now used in many everyday words borrowed from English such as ('jam'), ('joke') and ('garage'). \u27e8k, q, v, x, z\u27e9 are used in some technical terms such as \"kilogram\", \"volt\" and \"zero\" but in all cases can be, and often are, replaced by Welsh letters (same pronunciation): , and . \u27e8k\u27e9 was in common use until the 16th century but was dropped at the time of the publication of the New Testament in Welsh, as William Salesbury explained: \"\u27e8c\u27e9 for \u27e8k\u27e9, because the printers have not so many as the Welsh requireth\". This change was not popular at the time.\nThe most common diacritic is the circumflex (called in Welsh, lit. 'little roof'), which usually disambiguates long vowels, most often in the case of homographs, where the vowel is short in one word and long in the other: e.g. ('place') v. ('fine, small').\nMorphology.\nWelsh morphology has much in common with that of the other modern Insular Celtic languages, such as the use of initial consonant mutations and of so-called \"conjugated prepositions\" (prepositions that fuse with the personal pronouns that are their object). Welsh nouns belong to one of two grammatical genders, masculine and feminine, but they are not inflected for case. Welsh has a variety of different endings and other methods to indicate the plural, and two endings to indicate the singular (technically the singulative) of some nouns. In spoken Welsh, verbal features are indicated primarily by the use of auxiliary verbs rather than by the inflection of the main verb. In literary Welsh, on the other hand, inflection of the main verb is usual.\nSyntax.\nThe canonical word order in Welsh is verb\u2013subject\u2013object (VSO).\nColloquial Welsh inclines very strongly towards the use of auxiliaries with its verbs, as in English. The present tense is constructed with ('to be') as an auxiliary verb, with the main verb appearing as a verbnoun (used in a way loosely equivalent to an infinitive) after the particle :\nSi\u00e2n is going to Llanelli.\nThere, is a third-person singular present indicative form of , and is the verb-noun meaning \"to go\". The imperfect is constructed in a similar manner, as are the periphrastic forms of the future and conditional tenses.\nIn the preterite, future and conditional mood tenses, there are inflected forms of all verbs, which are used in the written language. However, speech now more commonly uses the verbnoun together with an inflected form of ('do'), so \"I went\" can be or ('I did go'). is an example of a preverbal particle; such particles are common in Welsh, though less so in the spoken language.\nWelsh lacks separate pronouns for constructing subordinate clauses; instead, special verb forms or relative pronouns that appear identical to some preverbal particles are used.\nPossessives as direct objects of verbnouns.\nThe Welsh for \"I like Rhodri\" is (word for word, \"am I [the] liking [of] Rhodri\"), with \"Rhodri\" in a possessive relationship with \"hoffi\". With personal pronouns, the possessive form of the personal pronoun is used, as in \"I like \"him\"\": [], literally, \"am I \"his\" liking\" \u2013 \"I like \"you\"\" is [] ('am I \"your\" liking'). Very informally, the pronouns are often heard in their normal subject/object form and aping English word order: ('Am I liking you').\nPronoun doubling.\nIn colloquial Welsh, possessive pronouns, whether they are used to mean \"my\", \"your\", etc. or to indicate the direct object of a verbnoun, are commonly reinforced by the use of the corresponding personal pronoun after the noun or verbnoun: \"his house\" (literally \"his house \"of him\"\"), \"I like you\" ('I am [engaged in the action of] your liking \"of you\"'), etc. The \"reinforcement\" (or, simply, \"redoubling\") adds no emphasis in the colloquial register. While the possessive pronoun alone may be used, especially in more formal registers, as shown above, it is considered incorrect to use only the personal pronoun. Such usage is nevertheless sometimes heard in very colloquial speech, mainly among young speakers: ('Where are we going? Your house or my house?').\nGrammar.\nWelsh is a moderately inflecting language. Verbs inflect at least for person, number and mood, while nouns inflect for number and there is a masculine-feminine distinction, of which the latter is marked via consonant mutation.\nColloquial and literary grammar show more differences than in English.\nCounting system.\nThe traditional counting system used in the Welsh language is vigesimal, i.e. it is based on twenties. Welsh numbers from 11 to 14 are \"\"x\" on ten\" (e.g. : 11), 16 to 19 are \"\"x\" on fifteen\" (e.g. : 16), though 18 is , \"two nines\"; numbers from 21 to 39 are \"1\u201319 on twenty\"(e.g. : 30), 40 is \"two twenties\", 60 is \"three twenties\", etc. This form continues to be used, especially by older people, and it is obligatory in certain circumstances (such as telling the time, and in ordinal numbers).\nThere is also a decimal counting system, which has become relatively widely used, though less so in giving the time, ages, and dates (it features no ordinal numbers). This system originated in Patagonian Welsh and was subsequently introduced to Wales in the 1940s. Whereas 39 in the vigesimal system is ('four on fifteen on twenty') or even ('two twenty minus one'), in the decimal system it is ('three tens nine').\nAlthough there is only one word for \"one\" (), it triggers the soft mutation () of feminine nouns, where possible, other than those beginning with \"ll\" or \"rh\". There are separate masculine and feminine forms of the numbers 'two' ( and ), 'three' ( and ) and 'four' ( and ), which must agree with the grammatical gender of the objects being counted. The objects being counted appear in the singular, not plural form.\nDialects.\nThere is a great deal of variation among Welsh dialects in terms of vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation. For example: consider the question \"Do you want a cuppa \"[a cup of tea]\"?\" In Gwynedd, this would typically be while in the south of Dyfed one would be more likely to hear (though, in other parts of the South, one could hear as well, among other possibilities). An example of a pronunciation difference is the tendency in some southern dialects to palatalise the letter \"s\", e.g. , usually pronounced , but as in parts of the south. This normally occurs next to a high front vowel like /i/, although exceptions include the pronunciation of \"how\" as in the southern dialects (compared with northern ).\nThe four traditional dialects.\nAlthough modern understanding often splits Welsh into northern () and southern () 'dialects', the traditional classification of four Welsh dialects remains the most academically useful:\nA fifth dialect is Patagonian Welsh, which has developed since the start of (the Welsh settlement in Argentina) in 1865; it includes Spanish loanwords and terms for local features, but a survey in the 1970s showed that the language in Patagonia is consistent throughout the lower Chubut Valley and in the Andes.\nSubdialects exist within the main dialects (such as the Cofi dialect). The 1989 book was accompanied by a cassette containing recordings of 14 different speakers demonstrating aspects of different regional dialects. The book also refers to the earlier \"Linguistic Geography of Wales\" (1973) as describing six different regions which could be identified as having words specific to those regions.\nIn the 1970s, there was an attempt to standardise the Welsh language by teaching ('Living Welsh') \u2013 a colloquially based generic form of Welsh, but the attempt largely failed because it did not encompass the regional differences used by Welsh speakers.\nRegisters.\nModern Welsh can be considered to fall broadly into two main registers\u2014Colloquial Welsh () and Literary Welsh (). Colloquial Welsh is used in most speech and informal writing. Literary Welsh is closer to the form of Welsh standardised by the 1588 translation of the Bible (although the 2004 is significantly less formal than the traditional 1588 Bible), and is found in official documents and other formal registers, including much literature. As a standardised form, literary Welsh shows little if any of the dialectal variation found in colloquial Welsh. Some differences include:\nAmongst the characteristics of the literary, as against the spoken language are a higher dependence on inflected verb forms, different usage of some of the tenses, less frequent use of pronouns (since the information is usually conveyed in the verb/preposition inflections) and a much lesser tendency to substitute English loanwords for native Welsh words. In addition, more archaic pronouns and forms of mutation may be observed in Literary Welsh.\nExamples of sentences in literary and colloquial Welsh.\nThe differences between colloquial and literary Welsh are so stark as to lack mutual intelligibility, with Welsh grammarian Gareth King asserting that they are almost two different languages in practice. A grammar of Literary Welsh can be found in \"A Grammar of Welsh\" by Stephen J. Williams. A more complete grammar can be found in by Peter Wynn Thomas. No comprehensive grammar of formal literary Welsh exists in English. However, by Ceri Jones functions as an English-language guide to colloquial Welsh forms and register and dialect differences.\nExample text.\nArticle 1 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33546", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33546", "title": "Welsh", "text": "Welsh may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33550", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33550", "title": "Wood", "text": "Fibrous material from trees or other plants\nWood is a structural tissue/material found as xylem in the stems and roots of trees and other woody plants. Being a natural material, it is characterized as an organic material\u00a0\u2013 a natural composite of cellulosic fibers that are strong in tension and embedded in a matrix of lignin and hemicelluloses that resists compression. \nWood is sometimes defined as only the secondary xylem in the stems of trees, or more broadly to include the same type of tissue elsewhere, such as in the roots of trees or shrubs. In a living tree, it performs a mechanical-support function, enabling woody plants to grow large or to stand up by themselves. It also conveys water and nutrients among the leaves, other growing tissues, and the roots. Wood may also refer to other plant materials with comparable properties, and to material engineered from wood, woodchips, or fibers.\nWood has been used for thousands of years for fuel, as a construction material, for making tools and weapons, furniture and paper. More recently it emerged as a feedstock for the production of purified cellulose and its derivatives, such as cellophane and cellulose acetate.\nAs of 2020, the growing stock of forests worldwide was about 557 billion cubic meters. As an abundant, carbon-neutral renewable resource, woody materials have been of intense interest as a source of renewable energy. In 2023, almost 4 billion cubic meters of wood were harvested. Dominant uses were for furniture and building construction.\nWood is scientifically studied and researched through the discipline of wood science, which was initiated since the beginning of the 20th century.\nHistory.\nA 2011 discovery in the Canadian province of New Brunswick yielded the earliest known plants to have grown wood, approximately 395 to 400 million years ago.\nWood can be dated by carbon dating and in some species by dendrochronology to determine when a wooden object was created.\nPeople have used wood for thousands of years for many purposes, including as a fuel or as a construction material for making houses, tools, weapons, furniture, packaging, artworks, and paper. Known constructions using wood date back ten thousand years. Buildings like the longhouses in Neolithic Europe were made primarily of wood.\nRecent use of wood has been enhanced by the addition of steel and bronze into construction.\nThe year-to-year variation in tree-ring widths and isotopic abundances gives clues to the prevailing climate at the time a tree was cut.\nEarly humans progressively invented tools and techniques for trapping animals. The earliest spears were crafted from wood, with tips toughened by burning. By 15,000 BC, hunters employed wooden and bone spear-launchers to enhance force and distance. These devices were frequently adorned with carvings of creatures.\nPhysical properties.\nGrowth rings.\nWood, in the strict sense, is yielded by trees, which increase in diameter by the formation, between the existing wood and the inner bark, of new woody layers which envelop the entire stem, living branches, and roots. This process is known as secondary growth; it is the result of cell division in the vascular cambium, a lateral meristem, and subsequent expansion of the new cells. These cells then go on to form thickened secondary cell walls, composed mainly of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin.\nWhere the differences between the seasons are distinct, e.g. New Zealand, growth can occur in a discrete annual or seasonal pattern, leading to growth rings; these can usually be most clearly seen on the end of a log, but are also visible on the other surfaces. If the distinctiveness between seasons is annual (as is the case in equatorial regions, e.g. Singapore), these growth rings are referred to as annual rings. Where there is little seasonal difference growth rings are likely to be indistinct or absent. If the bark of the tree has been removed in a particular area, the rings will likely be deformed as the plant overgrows the scar.\nIf there are differences within a growth ring, then the part of a growth ring nearest the center of the tree, and formed early in the growing season when growth is rapid, is usually composed of wider elements. It is usually lighter in color than that near the outer portion of the ring, and is known as earlywood or springwood. The outer portion formed later in the season is then known as the latewood or summerwood. There are major differences, depending on the kind of wood. If a tree grows all its life in the open and the conditions of soil and site remain unchanged, it will make its most rapid growth in youth, and gradually decline. The annual rings of growth are for many years quite wide, but later they become narrower and narrower. Since each succeeding ring is laid down on the outside of the wood previously formed, it follows that unless a tree materially increases its production of wood from year to year, the rings must necessarily become thinner as the trunk gets wider. As a tree reaches maturity its crown becomes more open and the annual wood production is lessened, thereby reducing still more the width of the growth rings. In the case of forest-grown trees so much depends upon the competition of the trees in their struggle for light and nourishment that periods of rapid and slow growth may alternate. Some trees, such as southern oaks, maintain the same width of ring for hundreds of years. On the whole, as a tree gets larger in diameter the width of the growth rings decreases.\nKnots.\nAs a tree grows, lower branches often die, and their bases may become overgrown and enclosed by subsequent layers of trunk wood, forming a type of imperfection known as a knot. The dead branch may not be attached to the trunk wood except at its base and can drop out after the tree has been sawn into boards. Knots affect the technical properties of the wood, usually reducing tension strength, but may be exploited for visual effect. In a longitudinally sawn plank, a knot will appear as a roughly circular \"solid\" (usually darker) piece of wood around which the grain of the rest of the wood \"flows\" (parts and rejoins). Within a knot, the direction of the wood (grain direction) is up to 90 degrees different from the grain direction of the regular wood.\nIn the tree a knot is either the base of a side branch or a dormant bud. A knot (when the base of a side branch) is conical in shape (hence the roughly circular cross-section) with the inner tip at the point in stem diameter at which the plant's vascular cambium was located when the branch formed as a bud.\nIn grading lumber and structural timber, knots are classified according to their form, size, soundness, and the firmness with which they are held in place. This firmness is affected by, among other factors, the length of time for which the branch was dead while the attaching stem continued to grow.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Knots materially affect cracking and warping, ease in working, and cleavability of timber. They are defects which weaken timber and lower its value for structural purposes where strength is an important consideration. The weakening effect is much more serious when timber is subjected to forces perpendicular to the grain and/or tension than when under load along the grain and/or compression. The extent to which knots affect the strength of a beam depends upon their position, size, number, and condition. A knot on the upper side is compressed, while one on the lower side is subjected to tension. If there is a season check in the knot, as is often the case, it will offer little resistance to this tensile stress. Small knots may be located along the neutral plane of a beam and increase the strength by preventing longitudinal shearing. Knots in a board or plank are least injurious when they extend through it at right angles to its broadest surface. Knots which occur near the ends of a beam do not weaken it. Sound knots which occur in the central portion one-fourth the height of the beam from either edge are not serious defects.\"\u2014\u200a\nKnots do not necessarily influence the stiffness of structural timber; this will depend on the size and location. Stiffness and elastic strength are more dependent upon the sound wood than upon localized defects. The breaking strength is very susceptible to defects. Sound knots do not weaken wood when subject to compression parallel to the grain.\nIn some decorative applications, wood with knots may be desirable to add visual interest. In applications where wood is painted, such as skirting boards, fascia boards, door frames and furniture, resins present in the timber may continue to 'bleed' through to the surface of a knot for months or even years after manufacture and show as a yellow or brownish stain. A knot primer paint or solution (knotting), correctly applied during preparation, may do much to reduce this problem but it is difficult to control completely, especially when using mass-produced kiln-dried timber stocks.\nHeartwood and sapwood.\nHeartwood (or duramen) is wood that as a result of a naturally occurring chemical transformation has become more resistant to decay. Heartwood formation is a genetically programmed process that occurs spontaneously. Some uncertainty exists as to whether the wood dies during heartwood formation, as it can still chemically react to decay organisms, but only once.\nThe term \"heartwood\" derives solely from its position and not from any vital importance to the tree. This is evidenced by the fact that a tree can thrive with its heart completely decayed. Some species begin to form heartwood very early in life, so having only a thin layer of live sapwood, while in others the change comes slowly. Thin sapwood is characteristic of such species as chestnut, black locust, mulberry, osage-orange, and sassafras, while in maple, ash, hickory, hackberry, beech, and pine, thick sapwood is the rule. Some others never form heartwood.\nHeartwood is often visually distinct from the living sapwood and can be distinguished in a cross-section where the boundary will tend to follow the growth rings. For example, it is sometimes much darker. Other processes such as decay or insect invasion can also discolor wood, even in woody plants that do not form heartwood, which may lead to confusion.\nSapwood (or alburnum) is the younger, outermost wood; in the growing tree it is living wood, and its principal functions are to conduct water from the roots to the leaves and to store up and give back according to the season the reserves prepared in the leaves. By the time they become competent to conduct water, all xylem tracheids and vessels have lost their cytoplasm and the cells are therefore functionally dead. All wood in a tree is first formed as sapwood. The more leaves a tree bears and the more vigorous its growth, the larger the volume of sapwood required. Hence trees making rapid growth in the open have thicker sapwood for their size than trees of the same species growing in dense forests. Sometimes trees (of species that do form heartwood) grown in the open may become of considerable size, or more in diameter, before any heartwood begins to form, for example, in second growth hickory, or open-grown pines.\nNo definite relation exists between the annual rings of growth and the amount of sapwood. Within the same species the cross-sectional area of the sapwood is very roughly proportional to the size of the crown of the tree. If the rings are narrow, more of them are required than where they are wide. As the tree gets larger, the sapwood must necessarily become thinner or increase materially in volume. Sapwood is relatively thicker in the upper portion of the trunk of a tree than near the base, because the age and the diameter of the upper sections are less.\nWhen a tree is very young it is covered with limbs almost, if not entirely, to the ground, but as it grows older some or all of them will eventually die and are either broken off or fall off. Subsequent growth of wood may completely conceal the stubs which will remain as knots. No matter how smooth and clear a log is on the outside, it is more or less knotty near the middle. Consequently, the sapwood of an old tree, and particularly of a forest-grown tree, will be freer from knots than the inner heartwood. Since in most uses of wood, knots are defects that weaken the timber and interfere with its ease of working and other properties, it follows that a given piece of sapwood, because of its position in the tree, may well be stronger than a piece of heartwood from the same tree.\nDifferent pieces of wood cut from a large tree may differ decidedly, particularly if the tree is big and mature. In some trees, the wood laid on late in the life of a tree is softer, lighter, weaker, and more even textured than that produced earlier, but in other trees, the reverse applies. This may or may not correspond to heartwood and sapwood. In a large log the sapwood, because of the time in the life of the tree when it was grown, may be inferior in hardness, strength, and toughness to equally sound heartwood from the same log. In a smaller tree, the reverse may be true.\nColor.\nIn species which show a distinct difference between heartwood and sapwood the natural color of heartwood is usually darker than that of the sapwood, and very frequently the contrast is conspicuous (see section of yew log above). This is produced by deposits in the heartwood of chemical substances, so that a dramatic color variation does not imply a significant difference in the mechanical properties of heartwood and sapwood, although there may be a marked biochemical difference between the two.\nSome experiments on very resinous longleaf pine specimens indicate an increase in strength, due to the resin which increases the strength when dry. Such resin-saturated heartwood is called \"fat lighter\". Structures built of fat lighter are almost impervious to rot and termites, and very flammable. Tree stumps of old longleaf pines are often dug, split into small pieces and sold as kindling for fires. Stumps thus dug may actually remain a century or more since being cut. Spruce impregnated with crude resin and dried is also greatly increased in strength thereby.\nSince the latewood of a growth ring is usually darker in color than the earlywood, this fact may be used in visually judging the density, and therefore the hardness and strength of the material. This is particularly the case with coniferous woods. In ring-porous woods the vessels of the early wood often appear on a finished surface as darker than the denser latewood, though on cross sections of heartwood the reverse is commonly true. Otherwise the color of wood is no indication of strength.\nAbnormal discoloration of wood often denotes a diseased condition, indicating unsoundness. The black check in western hemlock is the result of insect attacks. The reddish-brown streaks so common in hickory and certain other woods are mostly the result of injury by birds. The discoloration is merely an indication of an injury, and in all probability does not of itself affect the properties of the wood. Certain rot-producing fungi impart to wood characteristic colors which thus become symptomatic of weakness. Ordinary sap-staining is due to fungal growth, but does not necessarily produce a weakening effect.\nWater content.\nWater occurs in living wood in three locations, namely:\nIn heartwood it occurs only in the first and last forms. Wood that is thoroughly air-dried (in equilibrium with the moisture content of the air) retains 8\u201316% of the water in the cell walls, and none, or practically none, in the other forms. Even oven-dried wood retains a small percentage of moisture, but for all except chemical purposes, may be considered absolutely dry.\nThe general effect of the water content upon the wood substance is to render it softer and more pliable. A similar effect occurs in the softening action of water on rawhide, paper, or cloth. Within certain limits, the greater the water content, the greater its softening effect. The moisture in wood can be measured by several different moisture meters.\nDrying produces a decided increase in the strength of wood, particularly in small specimens. An extreme example is the case of a completely dry spruce block 5\u00a0cm in section, which will sustain a permanent load four times as great as a green (undried) block of the same size will.\nThe greatest strength increase due to drying is in the ultimate crushing strength, and strength at elastic limit in endwise compression; these are followed by the modulus of rupture, and stress at elastic limit in cross-bending, while the modulus of elasticity is least affected.\nStructure.\nWood is a heterogeneous, hygroscopic, cellular and anisotropic (or more specifically, orthotropic) material. It consists of cells, and the cell walls are composed of micro-fibrils of cellulose (40\u201350%) and hemicellulose (15\u201325%) impregnated with lignin (15\u201330%).\nIn coniferous or softwood species the wood cells are mostly of one kind, tracheids, and as a result the material is much more uniform in structure than that of most hardwoods. There are no vessels (\"pores\") in coniferous wood such as one sees so prominently in oak and ash, for example.\nThe structure of hardwoods is more complex. The water conducting capability is mostly taken care of by vessels: in some cases (oak, chestnut, ash) these are quite large and distinct, in others (buckeye, poplar, willow) too small to be seen without a hand lens. In discussing such woods it is customary to divide them into two large classes, \"ring-porous\" and \"diffuse-porous\".\nIn ring-porous species, such as ash, black locust, catalpa, chestnut, elm, hickory, mulberry, and oak, the larger vessels or pores (as cross sections of vessels are called) are localized in the part of the growth ring formed in spring, thus forming a region of more or less open and porous tissue. The rest of the ring, produced in summer, is made up of smaller vessels and a much greater proportion of wood fibers. These fibers are the elements which give strength and toughness to wood, while the vessels are a source of weakness.\nIn diffuse-porous woods the pores are evenly sized so that the water conducting capability is scattered throughout the growth ring instead of being collected in a band or row. Examples of this kind of wood are alder, basswood, birch, buckeye, maple, willow, and the \"Populus\" species such as aspen, cottonwood and poplar. Some species, such as walnut and cherry, are on the border between the two classes, forming an intermediate group.\nEarlywood and latewood.\nIn softwood.\nIn temperate softwoods, there often is a marked difference between latewood and earlywood. The latewood will be denser than that formed early in the season. When examined under a microscope, the cells of dense latewood are seen to be very thick-walled and with very small cell cavities, while those formed first in the season have thin walls and large cell cavities. The strength is in the walls, not the cavities. Hence the greater the proportion of latewood, the greater the density and strength. In choosing a piece of pine where strength or stiffness is the important consideration, the principal thing to observe is the comparative amounts of earlywood and latewood. The width of ring is not nearly so important as the proportion and nature of the latewood in the ring.\nIf a heavy piece of pine is compared with a lightweight piece it will be seen at once that the heavier one contains a larger proportion of latewood than the other, and is therefore showing more clearly demarcated growth rings. In white pines there is not much contrast between the different parts of the ring, and as a result the wood is very uniform in texture and is easy to work. In hard pines, on the other hand, the latewood is very dense and is deep-colored, presenting a very decided contrast to the soft, straw-colored earlywood.\nIt is not only the proportion of latewood, but also its quality, that counts. In specimens that show a very large proportion of latewood it may be noticeably more porous and weigh considerably less than the latewood in pieces that contain less latewood. One can judge comparative density, and therefore to some extent strength, by visual inspection.\nNo satisfactory explanation can as yet be given for the exact mechanisms determining the formation of earlywood and latewood. Several factors may be involved. In conifers, at least, rate of growth alone does not determine the proportion of the two portions of the ring, for in some cases the wood of slow growth is very hard and heavy, while in others the opposite is true. The quality of the site where the tree grows undoubtedly affects the character of the wood formed, though it is not possible to formulate a rule governing it. In general, where strength or ease of working is essential, woods of moderate to slow growth should be chosen.\nIn ring-porous woods.\nIn ring-porous woods, each season's growth is always well defined, because the large pores formed early in the season abut on the denser tissue of the year before.\nIn the case of the ring-porous hardwoods, there seems to exist a pretty definite relation between the rate of growth of timber and its properties. This may be briefly summed up in the general statement that the more rapid the growth or the wider the rings of growth, the heavier, harder, stronger, and stiffer the wood. This, it must be remembered, applies only to ring-porous woods such as oak, ash, hickory, and others of the same group, and is, of course, subject to some exceptions and limitations.\nIn ring-porous woods of good growth, it is usually the latewood in which the thick-walled, strength-giving fibers are most abundant. As the breadth of ring diminishes, this latewood is reduced so that very slow growth produces comparatively light, porous wood composed of thin-walled vessels and wood parenchyma. In good oak, these large vessels of the earlywood occupy from six to ten percent of the volume of the log, while in inferior material they may make up 25% or more. The latewood of good oak is dark colored and firm, and consists mostly of thick-walled fibers which form one-half or more of the wood. In inferior oak, this latewood is much reduced both in quantity and quality. Such variation is very largely the result of rate of growth.\nWide-ringed wood is often called \"second-growth\", because the growth of the young timber in open stands after the old trees have been removed is more rapid than in trees in a closed forest, and in the manufacture of articles where strength is an important consideration such \"second-growth\" hardwood material is preferred. This is particularly the case in the choice of hickory for handles and spokes. Here not only strength, but toughness and resilience are important.\nThe results of a series of tests on hickory by the U.S. Forest Service show that:\n\"The work or shock-resisting ability is greatest in wide-ringed wood that has from 5 to 14 rings per inch (rings 1.8-5 mm thick), is fairly constant from 14 to 38 rings per inch (rings 0.7\u20131.8 mm thick), and decreases rapidly from 38 to 47 rings per inch (rings 0.5\u20130.7 mm thick). The strength at maximum load is not so great with the most rapid-growing wood; it is maximum with from 14 to 20 rings per inch (rings 1.3\u20131.8 mm thick), and again becomes less as the wood becomes more closely ringed. The natural deduction is that wood of first-class mechanical value shows from 5 to 20 rings per inch (rings 1.3\u20135 mm thick) and that slower growth yields poorer stock. Thus the inspector or buyer of hickory should discriminate against timber that has more than 20 rings per inch (rings less than 1.3 mm thick). Exceptions exist, however, in the case of normal growth upon dry situations, in which the slow-growing material may be strong and tough.\"\nThe effect of rate of growth on the qualities of chestnut wood is summarized by the same authority as follows:\n\"When the rings are wide, the transition from spring wood to summer wood is gradual, while in the narrow rings the spring wood passes into summer wood abruptly. The width of the spring wood changes but little with the width of the annual ring, so that the narrowing or broadening of the annual ring is always at the expense of the summer wood. The narrow vessels of the summer wood make it richer in wood substance than the spring wood composed of wide vessels. Therefore, rapid-growing specimens with wide rings have more wood substance than slow-growing trees with narrow rings. Since the more the wood substance the greater the weight, and the greater the weight the stronger the wood, chestnuts with wide rings must have stronger wood than chestnuts with narrow rings. This agrees with the accepted view that sprouts (which always have wide rings) yield better and stronger wood than seedling chestnuts, which grow more slowly in diameter.\"\nIn diffuse-porous woods.\nIn the diffuse-porous woods, the demarcation between rings is not always so clear and in some cases is almost (if not entirely) invisible to the unaided eye. Conversely, when there is a clear demarcation there may not be a noticeable difference in structure within the growth ring.\nIn diffuse-porous woods, as has been stated, the vessels or pores are even-sized, so that the water conducting capability is scattered throughout the ring instead of collected in the earlywood. The effect of rate of growth is, therefore, not the same as in the ring-porous woods, approaching more nearly the conditions in the conifers. In general, it may be stated that such woods of medium growth afford stronger material than when very rapidly or very slowly grown. In many uses of wood, total strength is not the main consideration. If ease of working is prized, wood should be chosen with regard to its uniformity of texture and straightness of grain, which will in most cases occur when there is little contrast between the latewood of one season's growth and the earlywood of the next.\nMonocots.\nStructural material that resembles ordinary, \"dicot\" or conifer timber in its gross handling characteristics is produced by a number of monocot plants, and these also are colloquially called wood. Of these, bamboo, botanically a member of the grass family, has considerable economic importance, larger culms being widely used as a building and construction material and in the manufacture of engineered flooring, panels and veneer. Another major plant group that produces material that often is called wood are the palms. Of much less importance are plants such as \"Pandanus,\" \"Dracaena\" and \"Cordyline.\" With all this material, the structure and composition of the processed raw material is quite different from ordinary wood.\nSpecific gravity.\nThe single most revealing property of wood as an indicator of wood quality is specific gravity (Timell 1986), as both pulp yield and lumber strength are determined by it. Specific gravity is the ratio of the mass of a substance to the mass of an equal volume of water; density is the ratio of a mass of a quantity of a substance to the volume of that quantity and is expressed in mass per unit substance, e.g., grams per milliliter (g/cm3 or g/ml). The terms are essentially equivalent as long as the metric system is used. Upon drying, wood shrinks and its density increases. Minimum values are associated with green (water-saturated) wood and are referred to as \"basic specific gravity\" (Timell 1986).\nThe U.S. Forest Products Laboratory lists a variety of ways to define specific gravity (G) and density (\u03c1) for wood:\nThe FPL has adopted Gb and G12 for specific gravity, in accordance with the ASTM D2555 standard. These are scientifically useful, but don't represent any condition that could physically occur. The FPL Wood Handbook also provides formulas for approximately converting any of these measurements to any other.\nDensity.\nWood density is determined by multiple growth and physiological factors compounded into \"one fairly easily measured wood characteristic\" (Elliott 1970).\nAge, diameter, height, radial (trunk) growth, geographical location, site and growing conditions, silvicultural treatment, and seed source all to some degree influence wood density. Variation is to be expected. Within an individual tree, the variation in wood density is often as great as or even greater than that between different trees (Timell 1986). Variation of specific gravity within the bole of a tree can occur in either the horizontal or vertical direction.\nBecause the specific gravity as defined above uses an unrealistic condition, woodworkers tend to use the \"average dried weight\", which is a density based on mass at 12% moisture content and volume at the same (\u03c112). This condition occurs when the wood is at equilibrium moisture content with air at about 65% relative humidity and temperature at 30\u00a0\u00b0C (86\u00a0\u00b0F). This density is expressed in units of kg/m3 or lbs/ft3. If you know the specific gravity at 12% MC, G12 (from the Wood Handbook), then multiply by 1120 to get the average dried weight at 12% MC, \u03c112, in kg/m3. For example, if G12 is 0.40, then average dried weight is \u03c112 = 0.40 * 1120 = 448 kg/m3. You can also find values for dried weight in two other FPL publications, Hardwoods of North America and Softwoods of North America. \nTables.\nThe following tables list the mechanical properties of wood and lumber plant species, including bamboo. See also Mechanical properties of tonewoods for additional properties.\nWood properties:\nBamboo properties:\nHard versus soft.\nIt is common to classify wood as either softwood or hardwood. The wood from conifers (e.g. pine) is called softwood, and the wood from dicotyledons (usually broad-leaved trees, e.g. oak) is called hardwood. These names are a bit misleading, as hardwoods are not necessarily hard, and softwoods are not necessarily soft. The well-known balsa (a hardwood) is actually softer than any commercial softwood. Conversely, some softwoods (e.g. yew) are harder than many hardwoods.\nThere is a strong relationship between the properties of wood and the properties of the particular tree that yielded it, at least for certain species. For example, in loblolly pine, wind exposure and stem position greatly affect the hardness of wood, as well as compression wood content. The density of wood varies with species. The density of a wood correlates with its strength (mechanical properties). For example, mahogany is a medium-dense hardwood that is excellent for fine furniture crafting, whereas balsa is light, making it useful for model building. One of the densest woods is black ironwood.\nChemistry.\nThe chemical composition of wood varies from species to species, but is approximately 50% carbon, 42% oxygen, 6% hydrogen, 1% nitrogen, and 1% other elements (mainly calcium, potassium, sodium, magnesium, iron, and manganese) by weight. Wood also contains sulfur, chlorine, silicon, phosphorus, and other elements in small quantity.\nAside from water, wood has three main components. Cellulose, a crystalline polymer derived from glucose, constitutes about 41\u201343%. Next in abundance is hemicellulose, which is around 20% in deciduous trees but near 30% in conifers. It is mainly five-carbon sugars that are linked in an irregular manner, in contrast to the cellulose. Lignin is the third component at around 27% in coniferous wood vs. 23% in deciduous trees. Lignin confers the hydrophobic properties reflecting the fact that it is based on aromatic rings. These three components are interwoven, and direct covalent linkages exist between the lignin and the hemicellulose. A major focus of the paper industry is the separation of the lignin from the cellulose, from which paper is made.\nIn chemical terms, the difference between hardwood and softwood is reflected in the composition of the constituent lignin. Hardwood lignin is primarily derived from sinapyl alcohol and coniferyl alcohol. Softwood lignin is mainly derived from coniferyl alcohol.\nExtractives.\nAside from the structural polymers, i.e. cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin (lignocellulose), wood contains a large variety of non-structural constituents, composed of low molecular weight organic compounds, called \"extractives\". These compounds are present in the extracellular space and can be extracted from the wood using different neutral solvents, such as acetone. Analogous content is present in the so-called \"exudate\" produced by trees in response to mechanical damage or after being attacked by insects or fungi. Unlike the structural constituents, the composition of extractives varies over wide ranges and depends on many factors. The amount and composition of extractives differs between tree species, various parts of the same tree, and depends on genetic factors and growth conditions, such as climate and geography. For example, slower growing trees and higher parts of trees have higher content of extractives. Generally, the softwood is richer in extractives than the hardwood. Their concentration increases from the cambium to the pith. Barks and branches also contain extractives. Although extractives represent a small fraction of the wood content, usually less than 10%, they are extraordinarily diverse and thus characterize the chemistry of the wood species. Most extractives are secondary metabolites and some of them serve as precursors to other chemicals. Wood extractives display different activities, some of them are produced in response to wounds, and some of them participate in natural defense against insects and fungi.\nThese compounds contribute to various physical and chemical properties of the wood, such as wood color, fragnance, durability, acoustic properties, hygroscopicity, adhesion, and drying. Considering these impacts, wood extractives also affect the properties of pulp and paper, and importantly cause many problems in paper industry. Some extractives are surface-active substances and unavoidably affect the surface properties of paper, such as water adsorption, friction and strength. Lipophilic extractives often give rise to sticky deposits during kraft pulping and may leave spots on paper. Extractives also account for paper smell, which is important when making food contact materials.\nMost wood extractives are lipophilic and only a little part is water-soluble. The lipophilic portion of extractives, which is collectively referred as wood resin, contains fats and fatty acids, sterols and steryl esters, terpenes, terpenoids, resin acids, and waxes. The heating of resin, i.e. distillation, vaporizes the volatile terpenes and leaves the solid component \u2013 rosin. The concentrated liquid of volatile compounds extracted during steam distillation is called essential oil. Distillation of oleoresin obtained from many pines provides rosin and turpentine.\nMost extractives can be categorized into three groups: aliphatic compounds, terpenes and phenolic compounds. The latter are more water-soluble and usually are absent in the resin.\nUses.\nProduction.\nGlobal production of roundwood rose from 3.5 billion m\"\u00b3\" in 2000 to 4 billion m\"\u00b3\" in 2021. In 2021, wood fuel was the main product with a 49 percent share of the total (2 billion m\"\u00b3\"), followed by coniferous industrial roundwood with 30 percent (1.2 billion m\"\u00b3\") and non-coniferous industrial roundwood with 21 percent (0.9 billion m\"\u00b3\"). Asia and the Americas are the two main producing regions, accounting for 29 and 28 percent of the total roundwood production, respectively; Africa and Europe have similar shares of 20\u201321 percent, while Oceania produces the remaining 2 percent.\nFuel.\nWood has a long history of being used as fuel, which continues to this day, mostly in rural areas of the world. Hardwood is preferred over softwood because it creates less smoke and burns longer. Adding a woodstove or fireplace to a home is often felt to add ambiance and warmth.\nPulpwood.\nPulpwood is wood that is raised specifically for use in making paper.\nConstruction.\nWood has been an important construction material since humans began building shelters, houses and boats. Nearly all boats were made out of wood until the late 19th century, and wood remains in common use today in boat construction. Elm in particular was used for this purpose as it resisted decay as long as it was kept wet (it also served for water pipe before the advent of more modern plumbing).\nWood to be used for construction work is commonly known as \"lumber\" in North America. Elsewhere, \"lumber\" usually refers to felled trees, and the word for sawn planks ready for use is \"timber\". In medieval Europe oak was the wood of choice for all wood construction, including beams, walls, doors, and floors. Today a wider variety of woods is used: solid wood doors are often made from poplar, small-knotted pine, and Douglas fir.\nNew domestic housing in many parts of the world today is commonly made from timber-framed construction. Engineered wood products are becoming a bigger part of the construction industry. They may be used in both residential and commercial buildings as structural and aesthetic materials.\nIn buildings made of other materials, wood will still be found as a supporting material, especially in roof construction, in interior doors and their frames, and as exterior cladding.\nWood is also commonly used as shuttering material to form the mold into which concrete is poured during reinforced concrete construction.\nFlooring.\nA solid wood floor is a floor laid with planks or battens created from a single piece of timber, usually a hardwood. Since wood is hydroscopic (it acquires and loses moisture from the ambient conditions around it) this potential instability effectively limits the length and width of the boards.\nSolid hardwood flooring is usually cheaper than engineered timbers and damaged areas can be sanded down and refinished repeatedly, the number of times being limited only by the thickness of wood above the tongue.\nSolid hardwood floors were originally used for structural purposes, being installed perpendicular to the wooden support beams of a building (the joists or bearers) and solid construction timber is still often used for sports floors as well as most traditional wood blocks, mosaics and parquetry.\nEngineered products.\nEngineered wood products, glued building products \"engineered\" for application-specific performance requirements, are often used in construction and industrial applications. Glued engineered wood products are manufactured by bonding together wood strands, veneers, lumber or other forms of wood fiber with glue to form a larger, more efficient composite structural unit.\nThese products include glued laminated timber (glulam), wood structural panels (including plywood, oriented strand board and composite panels), laminated veneer lumber (LVL) and other structural composite lumber (SCL) products, parallel strand lumber, and I-joists. Approximately 100 million cubic meters of wood was consumed for this purpose in 1991. The trends suggest that particle board and fiber board will overtake plywood.\nWood unsuitable for construction in its native form may be broken down mechanically (into fibers or chips) or chemically (into cellulose) and used as a raw material for other building materials, such as engineered wood, as well as chipboard, hardboard, and medium-density fiberboard (MDF). Such wood derivatives are widely used: wood fibers are an important component of most paper, and cellulose is used as a component of some synthetic materials. Wood derivatives can be used for kinds of flooring, for example laminate flooring.\nFurniture and utensils.\nWood has always been used extensively for furniture, such as chairs and beds. It is also used for tool handles and cutlery, such as chopsticks, toothpicks, and other utensils, like the wooden spoon and pencil.\nOther.\nFurther developments include new lignin glue applications, recyclable food packaging, rubber tire replacement applications, anti-bacterial medical agents, and high strength fabrics or composites.\nAs scientists and engineers further learn and develop new techniques to extract various components from wood, or alternatively to modify wood, for example by adding components to wood, new more advanced products will appear on the marketplace. Moisture content electronic monitoring can also enhance next generation wood protection.\nArt.\nWood has long been used as an artistic medium. It has been used to make sculptures and carvings for millennia. Examples include the totem poles carved by North American indigenous people from conifer trunks, often Western Red Cedar (\"Thuja plicata\").\nOther uses of wood in the arts include:\nSports and recreational equipment.\nMany types of sports equipment are made of wood, or were constructed of wood in the past. For example, cricket bats are typically made of white willow. The baseball bats which are legal for use in Major League Baseball are frequently made of ash wood or hickory, and in recent years have been constructed from maple even though that wood is somewhat more fragile. National Basketball Association courts have been traditionally made out of parquetry.\nMany other types of sports and recreation equipment, such as skis, ice hockey sticks, lacrosse sticks and archery bows, were commonly made of wood in the past, but have since been replaced with more modern materials such as aluminium, titanium or composite materials such as fiberglass and carbon fiber. One noteworthy example of this trend is the family of golf clubs commonly known as the \"woods\", the heads of which were traditionally made of persimmon wood in the early days of the game of golf, but are now generally made of metal or (especially in the case of drivers) carbon-fiber composites.\nBacterial degradation.\nLittle is known about the bacteria that degrade cellulose. Symbiotic bacteria in \"Xylophaga\" may play a role in the degradation of sunken wood. \"Alphaproteobacteria\", \"Flavobacteria\", \"Actinomycetota\", \"Clostridia\", and \"Bacteroidota\" have been detected in wood submerged for over a year.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSources.\n\u00a0This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA IGO 3.0 (https://). Text taken from https://, FAO. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33554", "revid": "18872885", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33554", "title": "Widget", "text": "Widget may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33555", "revid": "28564", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33555", "title": "Wheel", "text": "Circular component rotating on an axle\nA wheel is a rotating component (typically circular in shape) that is intended to turn on an axle bearing. The wheel is one of the key components of the wheel and axle which is one of the six simple machines. Wheels, in conjunction with axles, allow heavy objects to be moved easily facilitating movement or transportation while supporting a load, or performing labor in machines. Wheels are also used for other purposes, such as a ship's wheel, steering wheel, potter's wheel, and flywheel.\nCommon examples can be found in transport applications. A wheel reduces friction by facilitating motion by rolling together with the use of axles. In order for a wheel to rotate, a moment must be applied to the wheel about its axis, either by gravity or by the application of another external force or torque.\nTerminology.\nThe English word \"wheel\" comes from the Old English word , from Proto-Germanic , from Proto-Indo-European , an extended form of the root 'to revolve, move around'. Cognates within Indo-European include Icelandic 'wheel, tyre', Greek , and Sanskrit , the last two both meaning 'circle' or 'wheel'.\nHistory.\nThe place and time of the invention of the wheel remains unclear, because the oldest hints do not guarantee the existence of real wheeled transport, or are dated with too much scatter.\nThe invention of the solid wooden disk wheel falls into the late Neolithic, and may be seen in conjunction with other technological advances that gave rise to the early Bronze Age. This implies the passage of several wheel-less millennia even after the invention of agriculture and of pottery, during the Pre-Pottery Neolithic.\nThe Halaf culture of 6500\u20135100\u00a0BCE is sometimes credited with the earliest depiction of a wheeled vehicle, but there is no evidence of Halafians using either wheeled vehicles or pottery wheels. Potter's wheels are thought to have been used in the 4th millennium BCE in the Middle East. The oldest surviving example of a potter's wheel was thought to be one found in Ur (modern day Iraq) dating to approximately 3100\u00a0BCE. However, a potter's wheel found in western Ukraine, of the Cucuteni\u2013Trypillia culture, dates to the middle of the 5th millennium BCE which pre-dates the earliest use of the potter's wheel in Mesopotamia. Wheels of uncertain dates have been found in the Indus Valley civilization of the late 4th millennium BCE covering areas of present-day India and Pakistan.\nThe oldest indirect evidence of wheeled movement was found in the form of miniature clay wheels north of the Black Sea before 4000BCE. From the middle of the 4th millennium\u00a0BCE onward, the evidence is condensed throughout Europe in the form of toy cars, depictions, or ruts, with the oldest find in Northern Germany dating back to around 3400BCE. In Mesopotamia, depictions of wheeled wagons found on clay tablet pictographs at the Eanna district of Uruk, in the Sumerian civilization are dated to c.3500\u20133350BCE. In the second half of the 4thmillennium\u00a0BCE, evidence of wheeled vehicles appeared near-simultaneously in the Northern (Maykop culture) and South Caucasus and Eastern Europe (Cucuteni\u2013Trypillia culture).\nDepictions of a wheeled vehicle appeared between 3631 and 3380\u00a0BCE in the Bronocice clay pot excavated in a Funnelbeaker culture settlement in southern Poland. In nearby Olszanica, a 2.2m wide door was constructed for wagon entry; this barn was 40m long with three doors, dated to 5000 BCE, and belonged to the Neolithic Linear Pottery culture. Surviving evidence of a wheel-axle combination, from Stare Gmajne near Ljubljana in Slovenia (wooden Ljubljana Marshes Wheel), is dated within two standard deviations to 3340\u20133030\u00a0BCE, the axle to 3360\u20133045\u00a0BCE. Two types of early Neolithic European wheel and axle are known: a circumalpine type of wagon construction (the wheel and axle rotate together, as in Ljubljana Marshes Wheel), and that of the Baden culture in Hungary (axle does not rotate). They both are dated to c.3200\u20133000\u00a0BCE. Some historians believe that there was a diffusion of the wheeled vehicle from the Near East to Europe around the mid-4th millennium\u00a0BCE.\nEarly wheels were simple wooden disks with a hole for the axle. Some of the earliest wheels were made from horizontal slices of tree trunks. Because of the uneven structure of wood, a wheel made from a horizontal slice of a tree trunk will tend to be inferior to one made from rounded pieces of longitudinal boards.\nThe spoked wheel was invented more recently and allowed the construction of lighter and swifter vehicles. The earliest known examples of wooden spoked wheels are in the context of the Sintashta culture, dating to c.2000\u00a0BCE (Krivoye Lake). Soon after this, horse cultures of the Caucasus region used horse-drawn spoked-wheel war chariots for the greater part of three centuries. They moved deep into the Greek peninsula where they joined with the existing Mediterranean peoples to give rise, eventually, to classical Greece after the breaking of Minoan dominance and consolidations led by pre-classical Sparta and Athens. Celtic chariots introduced an iron rim around the wheel in the 1stmillennium\u00a0BCE.\nIn China, wheel tracks dating to around 2200BCE have been found at Pingliangtai, a site of the Longshan Culture. Similar tracks were also found at Yanshi, a city of the Erlitou culture, dating to around 1700 BCE. The earliest evidence of spoked wheels in China comes from Qinghai, in the form of two wheel hubs from a site dated between 2000 and 1500BCE. Wheeled vehicles were introduced to China from the west.\nIn Britain, a large wooden wheel, measuring about in diameter, was uncovered at the Must Farm site in East Anglia in 2016. The specimen, dating from 1,100 to 800\u00a0BCE, represents the most complete and earliest of its type found in Britain. The wheel's hub is also present. A horse's spine found nearby suggests the wheel may have been part of a horse-drawn cart. The wheel was found in a settlement built on stilts over wetland, indicating that the settlement had some sort of link to dry land.\nAlthough large-scale use of wheels did not occur in the Americas prior to European contact, numerous small wheeled artifacts, identified as children's toys, have been found in Mexican archeological sites, some dating to approximately 1500\u00a0BCE. Some argue that the primary obstacle to large-scale development of the wheel in the Americas was the absence of domesticated large animals that could be used to pull wheeled carriages. The closest relative of cattle present in Americas in pre-Columbian times, the American bison, is difficult to domesticate and was never domesticated by Native Americans; several horse species existed until about 12,000 years ago, but ultimately became extinct. The only large animal that was domesticated in the Western hemisphere, the llama, a pack animal, was not physically suited to use as a draft animal to pull wheeled vehicles, and use of the llama did not spread far beyond the Andes by the time of the arrival of Europeans.\nOn the other hand, Mesoamericans never developed the wheelbarrow, the potter's wheel, nor any other practical object with a wheel or wheels. Although present in a number of toys, very similar to those found throughout the world and still made for children today (\"pull toys\"), the wheel was never put into practical use in Mesoamerica before the 16th century. Possibly the closest the Mayas came to the utilitarian wheel is the spindle whorl, and some scholars believe that these toys were originally made with spindle whorls and spindle sticks as \"wheels\" and \"axes\".\nAboriginal Australians traditionally used circular discs rolled along the ground for target practice.\nNubians from after about 400BCE used wheels for spinning pottery and as water wheels. It is thought that Nubian waterwheels may have been ox-driven. It is also known that Nubians used horse-drawn chariots imported from Egypt.\nStarting from the 18th century in West Africa, wheeled vehicles were mostly used for ceremonial purposes in places like Dahomey. The wheel was barely used for transportation, with the exception of Ethiopia and Somalia in Sub-Saharan Africa well into the 19th century. \nThe spoked wheel was in continued use without major modification until the 1870s, when wire-spoked wheels and pneumatic tires were invented. Pneumatic tires can greatly reduce rolling resistance and improve comfort. Wire spokes are under tension, not compression, making it possible for the wheel to be both stiff and light. Early radially spoked wire wheels gave rise to tangentially spoked wire wheels, which were widely used on cars into the late 20th century. Cast alloy wheels are now more commonly used; forged alloy wheels are used when weight is critical.\nThe invention of the wheel has also been important for technology in general, important applications including the water wheel, the cogwheel (see also antikythera mechanism), the spinning wheel, and the astrolabe or torquetum. More modern descendants of the wheel include the propeller, the jet engine, the flywheel (gyroscope) and the turbine.\nMechanics and function.\nA wheeled vehicle requires much less work to move than simply dragging the same weight. The low resistance to motion is explained by the fact that the frictional work done is no longer at the surface that the vehicle is traversing, but in the bearings. In the simplest and oldest case the bearing is just a round hole through which the axle passes (a \"plain bearing\"). Even with a plain bearing, the frictional work is greatly reduced because:\nExample:\nAdditional energy is lost from the wheel-to-road interface. This is termed rolling resistance which is predominantly a deformation loss. It depends on the nature of the ground, of the material of the wheel, its inflation in the case of a tire, the net torque exerted by the eventual engine, and many other factors.\nA wheel can also offer advantages in traversing irregular surfaces if the wheel radius is sufficiently large compared to the irregularities.\nThe wheel alone is not a machine, but when attached to an axle in conjunction with bearing, it forms the wheel and axle, one of the simple machines. A driven wheel is an example of a wheel and axle. Wheels pre-date driven wheels by about 6000 years, themselves an evolution of using round logs as rollers to move a heavy load\u2014a practice going back in pre-history so far that it has not been dated.\nConstruction.\nRim.\nThe rim is the \"outer edge of a wheel, holding the tire\". It makes up the outer circular design of the wheel on which the inside edge of the tire is mounted on vehicles such as automobiles. For example, on a bicycle wheel the rim is a large hoop attached to the outer ends of the spokes of the wheel that holds the tire and tube.\nIn the 1st millennium\u00a0BCE an iron rim was introduced around the wooden wheels of chariots.\nHub.\nThe hub is the center of the wheel, and typically houses a bearing, and is where the spokes meet.\nA hubless wheel (also known as a rim-rider or centerless wheel) is a type of wheel with no center hub. More specifically, the hub is actually almost as big as the wheel itself. The axle is hollow, following the wheel at very close tolerances.\nSpokes.\nA \"spoke\" is one of some number of rods radiating from the center of a wheel (the hub where the axle connects), connecting the hub with the round traction surface. The term originally referred to portions of a log which had been split lengthwise into four or six sections. The radial members of a wagon wheel were made by carving a spoke (from a log) into their finished shape. A spokeshave is a tool originally developed for this purpose. Eventually, the term spoke was more commonly applied to the finished product of the wheelwright's work, than to the materials used.\nWire.\nThe rims of \"wire wheels\" (or \"wire spoked wheels\") are connected to their hubs by wire spokes. Although these wires are generally stiffer than a typical wire rope, they function mechanically the same as tensioned flexible wires, keeping the rim true while supporting applied loads.\nWire wheels are used on most bicycles and still used on many motorcycles. They were invented by aeronautical engineer George Cayley and first used in bicycles by James Starley. A process of assembling wire wheels is described as wheelbuilding.\nTire/Tyre.\nA tire (in American English and Canadian English) or tyre (in some Commonwealth Nations such as UK, India, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand) is a ring-shaped covering that fits around a wheel rim to protect it and enable better vehicle performance by providing a flexible cushion that absorbs shock while keeping the wheel in close contact with the ground. The word itself may be derived from the word \"tie\", which refers to the outer steel ring part of a wooden cart wheel that ties the wood segments together (see Etymology above).\nThe fundamental materials of modern tires are synthetic rubber, natural rubber, fabric, and wire, along with other compound chemicals. They consist of a tread and a body. The tread provides traction while the body ensures support. Before rubber was invented, the first versions of tires were simply bands of metal that fitted around wooden wheels to prevent wear and tear. Today, the vast majority of tires are pneumatic inflatable structures, comprising a doughnut-shaped body of cords and wires encased in rubber and generally filled with compressed air to form an inflatable cushion. Pneumatic tires are used on many types of vehicles, such as cars, bicycles, motorcycles, trucks, earthmovers, and aircraft.\nProtruding or covering attachments.\nExtreme off-road conditions have resulted in the invention of several types of wheel cover, which may be constructed as removable attachments or as permanent covers. Wheels like this are no longer necessarily round, or have panels that make the ground-contact area flat.\nExamples include:\nTruck and bus wheels may block (stop rotating) under certain circumstances, such as brake system failure. To help detect this, they sometimes feature \"wheel rotation indicators\": colored strips of plastic attached to the rim and protruding out from it, such that they can be seen by the driver in the side-view mirrors. These devices were invented and patented in 1998 by a Canadian truck shop owner.\nAlternatives.\nWhile wheels are very widely used for ground transport, there are alternatives, some of which are suitable for terrain where wheels are ineffective. Alternative methods for ground transport without wheels include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSymbolism.\nThe wheel has also become a strong cultural and spiritual metaphor for a cycle or regular repetition (see chakra, reincarnation, Yin and Yang among others). As such and because of the difficult terrain, wheeled vehicles were forbidden in old Tibet. The wheel in ancient China is seen as a symbol of health and strength and used by some villages as a tool to predict future health and success. The diameter of the wheel is indicator of one's future health. The Kalachakra or wheel of time is also a subject in some forms of Buddhism, along with the dharmachakra.\nThe winged wheel is a symbol of progress, seen in many contexts including the coat of arms of Panama, the logo of the Ohio State Highway Patrol and the State Railway of Thailand. The wheel is also the prominent figure on the flag of India. The wheel in this case represents law (dharma). It also appears in the flag of the Romani people, hinting to their nomadic history and their Indian origins.\nThe sixth century monk Dorotheus of Gaza used the image of a spiked wheel to explain how interdependent ethic of compassion worked, in which those that get closer to God get closer to other people and reverse. In medieval Europe, the Wheel of Fortune aimed to show the transitory, ephemeral, and almost illusionary character of power, in which a person that has risen to the top may go down again by the turn of the wheel.\nThe introduction of spoked (chariot) wheels in the Middle Bronze Age appears to have carried somewhat of a prestige. The sun cross appears to have a significance in Bronze Age religion, replacing the earlier concept of a solar barge with the more 'modern' and technologically advanced solar chariot. The wheel was also a solar symbol for the Ancient Egyptians.\nIn modern usage, the 'invention of the wheel' can be considered as a symbol of one of the first technologies of early civilization, alongside farming and metalwork, and thus be used as a benchmark to grade the level of societal progress.\nSome Neopagans such as Wiccans have adopted the Wheel of the Year into their religious practices.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33557", "revid": "46051904", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33557", "title": "Whaling", "text": "Hunting of whales\nWhaling is the hunting of whales for their products such as meat and blubber, which can be turned into a type of oil that was important in the Industrial Revolution. Whaling was practiced as an organized industry as early as 875 AD. By the 16th century, it had become the principal industry in the Basque coastal regions of Spain and France. The whaling industry spread throughout the world and became very profitable in terms of trade and resources. Some regions of the world's oceans, along the animals' migration routes, had a particularly dense whale population and became targets for large concentrations of whaling ships, and the industry continued to grow well into the 20th century. The depletion of some whale species to near extinction led to the banning of whaling in many countries by 1969 and to an international cessation of whaling as an industry in the late 1980s.\nArchaeological evidence suggests the earliest known forms of whaling date to at least 3000 BC, practiced by the Inuit and other peoples in the North Atlantic and North Pacific. Coastal communities around the world have long histories of subsistence use of cetaceans, by dolphin drive hunting and by harvesting drift whales. Widespread commercial whaling emerged with organized fleets of whaling ships in the 17th century; competitive national whaling industries in the 18th and 19th centuries; and the introduction of factory ships and explosive harpoons along with the concept of whale harvesting in the first half of the 20th century. By the late 1930s, more than 50,000 whales were killed annually. In 1982, the International Whaling Commission (IWC) decided that there should be a pause on commercial whaling on all whale species from 1986 onwards because of the extreme depletion of most of the whale stocks.\nContemporary whaling for whale meat is subject to intense debate. Iceland, Japan, Norway, North American indigenous peoples and the Danish dependencies of the Faroe Islands and Greenland continue to hunt in the 21st century. The IWC ban on commercial whaling has been very successful, with only Iceland, Japan and Norway still engaging in and supporting commercial hunting. They also support having the IWC moratorium lifted on certain whale stocks for hunting. Anti-whaling countries and environmental activists oppose lifting the ban. Under the terms of the IWC moratorium, aboriginal whaling is allowed to continue on a subsistence basis. Over the past few decades, whale watching has become a significant industry in many parts of the world; in some countries it has replaced whaling, but in a few others the two business models exist in an uneasy tension. The live capture of cetaceans for display in aquaria (e.g., captive killer whales) continues.\nHistory.\nWhaling began in prehistoric times in coastal waters. The earliest depictions of whaling are the Neolithic Bangudae Petroglyphs in Korea, which may date back to 6000 BC. These images are the earliest evidence for whaling. Although prehistoric hunting and gathering is generally considered to have had little ecological impact, early whaling in the Arctic may have altered freshwater ecology.\nEarly whaling affected the development of widely disparate cultures on different continents. The Basques were the first to catch whales commercially and dominated the trade for five centuries, spreading to the far corners of the North Atlantic and even reaching the South Atlantic. The development of modern whaling techniques was spurred in the 19th century by the increase in demand for whale oil, sometimes known as \"train oil\", and in the 20th century by a demand for margarine and later whale meat.\nModernity.\nThe primary species hunted are minke whales,\nbelugas, narwhals,\nand pilot whales, which are some of the smallest species of whales. There are also smaller numbers killed of gray whales, sei whales, fin whales, bowhead whales, Bryde's whales, sperm whales and humpback whales.\nRecent scientific surveys estimate a population of 103,000 minkes in the northeast Atlantic. With respect to the populations of Antarctic minke whales, as of January 2010, the IWC states that it is \"unable to provide reliable estimates at the present time\" and that a \"major review is underway by the Scientific Committee.\"\nWhale oil is used little today, and modern whaling is primarily done for food: for pets, fur farms, sled dogs and humans, and for making carvings of tusks, teeth and vertebrae. Both meat and blubber (muktuk) are eaten from narwhals, belugas and bowheads. From commercially hunted minkes, meat is eaten by humans or animals, and blubber is rendered down mostly to cheap industrial products such as animal feed or, in Iceland, as a fuel supplement for whaling ships.\nInternational cooperation on whaling regulation began in 1931 and culminated in the signing of the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling (ICRW) in 1946. Its aim is to:\nprovide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry.\nInternational Whaling Commission.\nThe International Whaling Commission (IWC) was set up under the ICRW to decide hunting quotas and other relevant matters based on the findings of its Scientific Committee. Non-member countries are not bound by its regulations and conduct their own management programs. It regulates hunting of 13 species of great whales and has not reached consensus on whether it may regulate smaller species.\nThe IWC voted on July 23, 1982, to establish a moratorium on commercial whaling of great whales beginning in the 1985\u201386 season. Since 1992, the IWC's Scientific Committee has requested that it be allowed to give quota proposals for some whale stocks, but this has so far been refused by the Plenary Committee.\nAt the 2010 meeting in Morocco, representatives of the 88 member states discussed whether to lift the 24-year ban on commercial whaling. Japan, Norway and Iceland urged the organisation to lift the ban. A coalition of anti-whaling nations offered a compromise plan that would allow these countries to continue whaling but with smaller catches and under close supervision. Their plan would also completely ban whaling in the Southern Ocean. More than 200 scientists and experts have opposed the compromise proposal for lifting the ban and have also opposed allowing whaling in the Southern Ocean, which was declared a whale sanctuary in 1994. Opponents of the compromise plan want to see an end to all commercial whaling but are willing to allow subsistence-level catches by indigenous peoples.\nWhaling catches by location.\nThese totals include great whales: counts from IWC and WDC\nand IWC Summary Catch Database version 6.1, July 2016.\nThe IWC database is supplemented by Faroese catches of pilot whales,\nGreenland's and Canada's catches of narwhals (data 1954\u20132014), belugas from multiple sources shown in the Beluga whale article, Indonesia's catches of sperm whales, and bycatch in Korea.\nMost of the whale species in the table are not considered endangered by the IUCN (\"least concern\" or \"data deficient\"). Only the sei whale is classified as \"endangered\", and the fin whale is classified as \"vulnerable\" by the IUCN.\nOngoing debate.\nKey elements of the debate over whaling include sustainability, ownership, national sovereignty, cetacean intelligence, suffering during hunting, health risks, the value of 'lethal sampling' to establish catch quotas, the value of controlling whales' impact on fish stocks and the rapidly approaching extinction of a few whale species.\nSustainability.\nThe World Wide Fund for Nature says that 90% of all northern right whales killed by human activities are from ship collisions, calling for restrictions on the movement of shipping in certain areas. Noise pollution threatens the existence of cetaceans. Large ships and boats make a tremendous amount of noise that falls into the same frequency range of many whales. Bycatch also kills more animals than hunting. Some scientists believe pollution to be a factor. Moreover, since the IWC moratorium, there have been several instances of illegal whale hunting by IWC nations. In 1994, the IWC reported evidence from genetic testing of whale meat and blubber for sale on the open market in Japan in 1993. In addition to the legally permitted minke whale, the analyses showed that 10\u201325% of tissues sampled came from non-minke baleen whales. Further research in 1995 and 1996 showed a significant drop of non-minke baleen whales sampled to 2.5%. In a separate paper, Baker stated that \"many of these animals certainly represent a bycatch (incidental entrapment in fishing gear)\" and stated that DNA monitoring of whale meat is required to adequately track whale products.\nIt was revealed in 1994 that the Soviet Union had been systematically undercounting its catch. For example, from 1948 to 1973, the Soviet Union caught 48,477 humpback whales rather than the 2,710 it officially reported to the IWC. On the basis of this new information, the IWC stated that it would have to rewrite its catch figures for the last 40 years. According to Ray Gambell, then-Secretary of the IWC, the organization had raised its suspicions with the former Soviet Union, but it did not take further action because it could not interfere with national sovereignty.\nHealth risks.\nWhales are long-lived predators, so their tissues build up concentrations of methylmercury from their prey. Mercury concentrations reach levels that are hazardous to humans who consume too much too often, since mercury also bioaccumulates in humans. High levels have been found in the Caribbean (where people are advised not to exceed one serving every three weeks), in the Faroe Islands, and in Japan.\nEffects on global carbon cycles.\nScientists have analyzed the ability of the oceans to sequester atmospheric carbon before industrial whaling and in modern times, hundreds of years after the most active whaling periods. Focusing on the amount of carbon stored in baleen whales, scientists determined that large marine mammals hold over 9 million less tons of carbon in the ocean than during the pre whaling era (9.1 x 10^6 tons).\nWhales play an important role in the carbon cycle in life and death. Living whales cycle carbon and nitrogen throughout the water column via whale feces where it can contribute to primary productivity at the surface. In death, their carcasses can become part of a whale fall and sink to the bottom, bringing their carbon with them to help form a temporary ecosystem at the ocean floor. Despite rebounding whale numbers after the international ban on whaling, climate change and rising carbon levels continue to hinder the amount of carbon sequestered by whales.\nBy country.\nAustralia.\nWhaling was a major maritime industry in Australia from 1791 until its final cessation in 1978. At least 45 whaling stations operated in Tasmania during the 19th century, and bay whaling was conducted out of other mainland centres. Modern whaling using harpoon guns and iron hulled catchers was conducted in the 20th century from shore-based stations in Western Australia, South Australia, New South Wales and Queensland, also in Norfolk Island. Overfishing saw the closure of some whaling stations before a government ban on the industry was introduced in 1978 after a major campaign by conservationists.\nCanada.\nCanadians kill about 600 narwhals per year. They kill 100 belugas per year in the Beaufort Sea,\n300 in northern Quebec (Nunavik), and an unknown number in Nunavut. The total annual kill in Beaufort and Quebec areas varies between 300 and 400 belugas per year. Numbers are not available for Nunavut since 2003, when the Arviat area, with about half Nunavut's hunters, killed 200\u2013300 belugas, though the authors say hunters resist giving complete numbers.\nHarvested meat is sold through shops and supermarkets in northern communities where whale meat is a component of the traditional diet. Hunters in Hudson Bay rarely eat beluga meat. They give a little to dogs and leave the rest for wild animals. Other areas may dry the meat for later consumption by humans. An average of one or two vertebrae and one or two teeth per beluga or narwhal are carved and sold. One estimate of the annual gross value received from Beluga hunts in Hudson Bay in 2013 was CA$ for 190 belugas, or CA$ per beluga, and CA$ for 81 narwhals, or CA$ per narwhal. However the net income, after subtracting costs in time and equipment, was a loss of CA$ per person for belugas and CA$ per person for narwhals. Hunters receive subsidies, but they continue as a tradition rather than for the money, and the economic analysis noted that whale watching may be an alternate revenue source. Of the gross income, CA$ was for beluga skin and meat, to replace beef, pork and chickens which would otherwise be bought, CA$ was received for carved vertebrae and teeth. CA$ was for narwhal skin and meat, CA$ was received for tusks, and carved vertebrae and teeth of males, and CA$ was received for carved vertebrae and teeth of female narwhals.\nThe Whale and Dolphin Conservation says: \"Canada has pursued a policy of marine mammal management which appears to be more to do with political expediency rather than conservation.\"\nCanada left the IWC in 1982, and the only IWC-regulated species currently harvested by the Canadian Inuit is the bowhead whale. As of 2004, the limit on bowhead whale hunting allows for the hunt of one whale every two years from the Hudson Bay-Foxe Basin population, and one whale every 13 years from the Baffin Bay-Davis Strait population. \nDenmark.\nFaroe Islands.\nThe traditional whale hunt, known as \"grindadr\u00e1p\", is regulated by Faroese authorities but not by the IWC, which does not claim jurisdiction over small cetaceans. Around 800 long-finned pilot whales (\"Globicephala melaena\") are caught each year, mainly during the summer. Other species are not hunted, though occasionally Atlantic white-sided dolphin can be found among the pilot whales. \nGreenland.\nThe Inuit mastered the art of whaling around the 11 century AD in the Bering Strait. The technique consisted of spearing a whale with a spear connected to an inflated seal bladder. The bladder would float and exhaust the whale when diving, and when it surfaced the Inuit hunters would spear it again, further exhausting the animal until they were able to kill it. Vikings in Greenland also ate whale meat, but archaeologists believe they never hunted them on the sea.\nGreenlandic Inuit whalers catch around 175 large whales per year, mostly minke whales, as well as 360 narwhals, 200 belugas, 190 pilot whales and 2,300 porpoises. The government of Greenland sets limits for narwhals and belugas. There are no limits on pilot whales and porpoises.\nThe IWC treats the west and east coasts of Greenland as two separate population areas and sets separate quotas for each coast. The far more densely populated west coast accounts for over 90% of the catch. The average per year from 2012 to 2016 was around 150 minke and 17 fin whales and humpback whales taken from west coast waters and around 10 minke from east coast waters. In April 2009 Greenland landed its first bowhead whale in nearly 40 years. It landed three bowheads each year in 2009 and 2010, one each in 2011 and 2015.\nIn 2021 the Sermersooq municipal council banned whaling in Nuup Kangerlua, one of the largest fjords in inhabited areas of Greenland. The council did not want hunting to kill the humpback whales seen by the local tourism industry. Before local humpback hunting resumed in 2010 there had been nine humpbacks in the fjord during summer. When hunting resumed some were killed and others left. Sermersooq has not banned whaling elsewhere in the municipality, which is the world's largest municipality, at 200,000 square miles on both coasts. \nGermany.\nOriginally one of the most successful whaling nations, German whaling vessels started from Hamburg and other smaller cities on the Elbe River, hunting for whales around Greenland and Spitsbergen. While 1770 is recorded to have been the most successful year of German whaling, German whaling went into steep decline with the beginning of the Napoleonic Wars and never really recovered. After the Napoleonic Wars, Germany tried but could never re-establish a successful whaling industry. \nGerman whaling ships in the mid to late 19th century would generally not be staffed with experienced sailors but rather with members of more wealthy farming communities, going for short trips to Scandinavia during the end of spring and beginning of summer, when their labor was not required on the fields. This kind of whaling was ineffective. Many journeys would not lead to any whales caught, instead seal- and polar bear skins were brought back to shore. Communities often paid more for equipping the vessels in the first place than making money with the goods brought back to shore. Today, local historians believe that German whaling in the late 19th century was more a rite of passage for the sons of wealthy farmers from northern German islands than an action undertaken for true commercial reason. German whaling was abandoned in 1872. \nPrior to the First World War, the newly established German Empire attempted to re-establish large scale German whaling. This was undertaken with ships either going from Germany to Iceland or from the newly established German colonies to African waters. These attempts never were commercially successful and quickly given up. Only in the 1930s could Germany\u2014with mainly Norwegian personnel\u2014re-establish a large and successful whaling industry. More than 15,000 whales were caught between 1930 and 1939. With the beginning of the Second World War, German whaling was abandoned completely. In the early 1950s, Germany maintained one whaling vessel for testing purpose as it considered re-establishing a German whaling fleet, but abandoned these plans in 1956. The last remaining German whalers worked for Dutch vessels in the 1950s and 1960s. \nIceland.\nIceland is one of a handful of countries which still host a (privately owned) whaling fleet. One company (Hvalur hf.) concentrates on hunting fin whales, largely for export to Japan, while the only other one hunts minke whales for domestic consumption, as the meat is popular with tourists. Iceland has its own whale watching sector, which exists in uneasy tension with the whaling industry.\nIceland did not object to the 1986 IWC moratorium. Between 1986 and 1989 around 60 animals per year were taken under a scientific permit. However, under strong pressure from anti-whaling countries, who viewed scientific whaling as a circumvention of the moratorium, Iceland ceased whaling in 1989. Following the IWC's 1991 refusal to accept its Scientific Committee's recommendation to allow sustainable commercial whaling, Iceland left the IWC in 1992.\nIceland rejoined the IWC in 2002 with a reservation to the moratorium. Iceland presented a feasibility study to the 2003 IWC meeting for catches in 2003 and 2004. The primary aim of the study was to deepen the understanding of fish\u2013whale interactions. Amid disagreement within the IWC Scientific Committee about the value of the research and its relevance to IWC objectives, no decision on the proposal was reached. However, under the terms of the convention the Icelandic government issued permits for a scientific catch. In 2003 Iceland resumed scientific whaling which continued in 2004 and 2005.\nIceland resumed commercial whaling in 2006. Its annual quota was 30 minke whales (out of an estimated 174,000 animals in the central and north-eastern North Atlantic) and nine fin whales (out of an estimated 30,000 animals in the central and north-eastern North Atlantic). For the 2012 commercial whaling season, starting in April and lasting six months, the quota was set to 216 minke whales, of which 52 were caught. Iceland did not hunt any whales in 2019, and it is reported that demand for whale meat decreased in that year.\nIndonesia.\nLamalera, on the south coast of the island of Lembata, and Lamakera on neighbouring Solor, are the two remaining Indonesian whaling communities. The hunters obey religious taboos that ensure that they use every part of the animal. About half of the catch is kept in the village; the rest is bartered in local markets.\nIn 1973, the United Nations's Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) sent a whaling ship and a Norwegian whaler to modernize their hunt. This effort lasted three years and was not successful. According to the FAO report, the Lamalerans \"have evolved a method of whaling which suits their natural resources, cultural tenets and style.\" Lamalerans say they returned the ship because they immediately caught five sperm whales, too many to butcher and eat without refrigeration. Since these communities only hunt whales for noncommercial purposes, it is categorized as 'aboriginal subsistence hunters' by the IWC.\nThe Lamalerans hunt for several species of whales but catching sperm whales are preferable, while other whales, such as baleen whales, are considered taboo to hunt. They caught five sperm whales in 1973; they averaged about 40 per year from the 1960s through the mid 1990s, 13 total from 2002 to 2006, 39 in 2007, an average of 20 per year 2008 through 2014, and caught 3 in 2015.\nTraditional Lamaleran whaling used wooden fishing boats built by a group of local craftsmen clan called \"ata mol\u00e3,\" and the fishermen will mourn the \"death\" of their ships for two months. These days, the Lamalerans use a motor engine to power their boats; however, their tradition dictates that once a whale has been caught, fishermen will have to row their boats and the whale back to the shore. The traditional practices made whaling a dangerous hunt. In one case, a boat was pulled approximately 120\u00a0km away towards Timor (see Nantucket sleighride), while in another case, the hunted whale capsized the boat and forced the fishermen to swim for 12 hours back to the shore.\nJapan.\nWhen the commercial whaling moratorium was introduced by the IWC in 1982, Japan lodged an official objection. However, in response to US threats to cut Japan's fishing quota in US territorial waters under the terms of the Packwood-Magnuson Amendment, Japan withdrew its objection in 1987. According to the BBC, the US went back on this promise, effectively destroying the deal. Since Japan could not resume commercial whaling, it began whaling on a purported scientific-research basis. Australia, Greenpeace, the Australian Marine Conservation Society, Sea Shepherd Conservation Society and other groups dispute the Japanese claim of research \"as a disguise for commercial whaling, which is banned.\" The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society has attempted to disrupt Japanese whaling in the Antarctic since 2003 but eventually ceased this activity in 2017 due to little achievement in creating change. Other NGOs such as the Australian Marine Conservation Society and Humane Society International continued to campaign against Japan's scientific whaling program and block votes at IWC to bring back commercial whaling.\nThe stated purpose of the research program is to establish the size and dynamics of whale populations. The Japanese government wishes to resume whaling in a sustainable manner under the oversight of the IWC, both for whale products (meat, etc.) and to help preserve fishing resources by culling whales. Anti-whaling organizations claim that the research program is a front for commercial whaling, that the sample size is needlessly large and that equivalent information can be obtained by non-lethal means, for example by studying samples of whale tissue (such as skin) or feces. The Japanese government sponsored Institute of Cetacean Research (ICR), which conducts the research, disagrees, stating that the information obtainable from tissue and/or feces samples is insufficient and that the sample size is necessary in order to be representative.\nJapan's scientific whaling program is controversial in anti-whaling countries. Countries opposed to whaling have passed non-binding resolutions in the IWC urging Japan to stop the program. Japan claims that whale stocks for some species are sufficiently large to sustain commercial hunting and blame filibustering by the anti-whaling side for the continuation of scientific whaling. Deputy whaling commissioner, Joji Morishita, told BBC News:The reason for the moratorium [on commercial whaling] was scientific uncertainty about the number of whales. ... It was a moratorium for the sake of collecting data and that is why we started scientific whaling. We were asked to collect more data.This collusive relationship between the whaling industry and the Japanese government is sometimes criticized by pro-whaling activists who support local, small-scale coastal whaling such as the Taiji dolphin drive hunt.\nIn September 2018, Japan chaired the 67th IWC meeting in Brazil and attempted to pass a motion to lift the moratorium on commercial whaling. Japan did not receive enough votes and the IWC rejected the motion. Subsequently, on 26 December 2018, Japan announced that it would withdraw its membership from the IWC, because in its opinion, the IWC had failed its duty to promote sustainable hunting as the culture within the IWC moved towards an anti-whaling, pro-conservation agenda. Japanese officials also announced they will resume commercial hunting within its territorial waters and its 200-mile exclusive economic zones starting in July 2019, but it will cease whaling activities in the Antarctic Ocean, the northwest Pacific Ocean, and the Australian Whale Sanctuary.\nIn 2019, the Australian Marine Conservation Society and International Fund for Animal Welfare commissioned legal opinion, which concluded that Japan's commercial whaling program within its territorial waters breaks international convention and law and that Japan makes itself vulnerable to potential international legal action.\nNorway.\nNorway registered an objection to the International Whaling Commission moratorium and is thus not bound by it. Commercial whaling ceased for a five-year period to allow a small scientific catch for gauging the stock's sustainability; whaling subsequently resumed in 1993. Minke whales are the only legally hunted species. Catches have fluctuated between 487 animals in 2000 to 592 in 2007. For the year 2011 the quota is set at 1,286 minke whales. The catch is made solely from the Northeast Atlantic minke whale population, which is estimated at 102,000.\nPhilippines.\nWhaling in the Philippines has been illegal since 1997 since the Fisheries Administrative Order 185 of 1991 was amended. The order initially only made illegal the catching, selling, or transporting of dolphins but the 1997 amendment widened the scope of the ban to include all cetaceans including whales. The calls for ban on whaling and dolphin hunting in the Philippines were raised by both domestic and international groups after local whaling and dolphin hunting traditions of residents of Pamilacan in Bohol were featured in newspapers in the 1990s. As compromise for residents of Pamilacan who were dependent on whaling and dolphin hunting, whale and dolphin watching is being promoted in the island as a source of tourism income. Despite the ban, it is believed that the whaling industry in the Philippines did not cease to exist but went underground.\nRussia.\nThe USSR had a significant whaling hunt of orcas and dolphins along with Iceland and Japan. The Soviet Union's harvest of over 534,000 whales between the 1930s and the 1980s has been called \"one of the most senseless environmental crimes of the 20th century\" by Charles Homans of the \"Pacific Standard\". In 1970, a study published by Bigg M.A. following photographic recognition of orcas found a significant difference in the suspected ages of whale populations and their actual ages. Following this evidence, the Soviet Union and then Russia continued a scientific whale hunt, though the verisimilitude of the intentions of the hunt over the last 40 years are questioned.\nThe Soviet Union's intensive illegal whaling program from 1948 to 1973 was controlled and managed by the central government. In Soviet society, whaling was perceived to be a glamorous and well-paid job. Whalers were esteemed as well-traveled adventurers, and their return to land was often celebrated elaborately such as with fanfare and parades. In regard to economics, the Soviet Union transformed from a \"rural economy into an industrial giant\" by disregarding the sustainability of a resource to fill high production targets. The government had controlled all industries, including fisheries, and whaling was not constrained by the need for sustainability through profits. Managers' and workers' production was incentivized with salary bonuses of 25%-60% and various other benefits, awards, and privileges. Many industries, whaling included, became a \"manic numbers game\".\nCurrently, the indigenous Chukchi people in Chukotka Autonomous Okrug in the Russian Far East are permitted under IWC regulation to take up to 140 gray whales from the North-East Pacific population each year. About 40 beluga whales are caught in the Sea of Okhotsk each year.\nThere are no recent data on catches in the Arctic Ocean or Bering Sea, where about 60 belugas per year were caught in the early 1980s.\nSaint Vincent and the Grenadines.\nNatives of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines on the island of Bequia have a quota from the International Whaling Commission of up to four humpback whales per year.\nTheir quota allows up to four humpback whales per year using only traditional hunting methods of hand-thrown harpoons in small, open sailboats. The limit is rarely met, with no catch some years.\nIts classification as aboriginal, and therefore permissible, is highly contested. In the 2012 meeting of the IWC, delegates from several anti-whaling countries, and environmental groups, spoke out against it, calling it \"artisanal whaling out of control\".\nThe meat is sold commercially and 82% of Bequia residents consume it at least occasionally, though it is subject to high levels of methyl mercury.\nResidents of the town of Barrouallie hunt and sell meat from short-finned pilot whales and several dolphin species, including killer whales and false killer whales. 92% of people from the town, and high fractions from nearby towns, eat this meat at least occasionally. Sellers call this meat \"black fish\" without regard to species. Its levels of methyl mercury mean that consumption needs to be less than a serving every three weeks. However the mercury danger is not well known in the country. As of 2020 the government is considering banning the hunt of killer whales.\nSouth Korea.\nCommercial whaling was banned in 1986 in South Korea in keeping with the IWC issued global moratorium on whale hunting. In early July 2012, during IWC discussions in Panama, South Korea said it would undertake scientific whaling as allowed despite the global moratorium on whaling. Due to a loud global outcry, South Korea abandoned this plan and has not resumed any form of whaling program.\nThere is still a loophole in South Korean laws that allows fishermen to keep any bycatch including whales. All whales caught accidentally must be reported and is then inspected for harpoon injuries. The meat from these whales can then be sold, which can be very lucrative for fishermen who can earn up to 200 million won ($150,000 US) per minke whale. This loophole has led to high numbers of whale, dolphin and other cetacean deaths. In 2023, the number was 866 recorded deaths, which is a sizable reduction from a high of 2,014 cases in 2019 and 1,066 in 2022, but is still worryingly high. Fishermen who abuse this loophole have been arrested and prosecuted, but activists have spoken out against this loophole, and demanded more protections for whales and better accounting for those caught and killed.\nDue to their concern, and the higher than the global average numbers of bycatch cetacean deaths, 15 members of the Korean Parliament put forward a bill in 2023 to ban the consumption of whale meat and to have a more rigorous inspection of all whale carcasses by Coast Guards. Activists also want to have a database created that would help authorities spot more easily those who are using the loophole to illegally hunt whales.\nThe Bill raises hopes for better protections for whales but it will have to face a culture with deep historical, geographical and cultural ties to whale meat, and opposition from the commercial fishing industry.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, beluga whaling is widely carried out, catching about 300 belugas per year,\nmonitored by the Alaska Beluga Whale Committee. The annual catch ranges between 250 and 600 per year.\nSubsistence hunting of the bowhead whale is carried out by nine different indigenous Alaskan communities, and is managed by the Alaska Eskimo Whaling Commission which reports to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. The hunt takes around 50 bowhead whales a year from a population of about 10,500 in Alaskan waters. Conservationists fear this hunt is not sustainable, though the IWC Scientific Committee, the same group that provided the above population estimate, projects a population growth of 3.2% per year. Bowhead whales weigh approximately 5\u201310 times as much as minke whales. The hunt also took an average of one or two gray whales each year until 1996. The quota was reduced to zero in that year due to sustainability concerns. A future review may result in the gray whale hunt being resumed.\nThe Makah tribe in Washington state also reinstated whaling in 1999, despite protests from animal rights groups. They are currently seeking to resume whaling of the gray whale, a right recognized in the Treaty of Neah Bay, within limits (Article 4 of the Treaty).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33559", "revid": "7677356", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33559", "title": "Wipe (transition)", "text": "Film transition in which a shot replaces another by traveling across the screen\nIn filmmaking, a wipe is a type of film transition where one shot replaces another by travelling from one side of the frame to another or with a special shape. If the wipe proceeds from two opposite edges of the screen toward the center or vice versa, it is known as a barn door wipe (named for its similarity to a pair of doors opening or closing).\nThe following are some specific styles of wipes:\nThe earliest known example of a wipe was George Albert Smith's film \"Mary Jane's Mishap\" of 1903.\nGeorge Lucas made frequent use of wipes in his \"Star Wars\" films, inspired by a similar use of wipes by Akira Kurosawa.\nSince at least the 1980s, the American game show \"The Price is Right\" has made extensive use of wipes, usually from contestants to prizes. In the early-to-mid 1980s, an iris slow was used twice during the opening sequence, transitioning from the shot of the host entrance to the camera panning down from the studio lights, and then from that camera shot to one of the host. Around 1987, this was changed to a star wipe, which the show would end up using for years until 2010.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33560", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33560", "title": "The Wizard of Speed and Time", "text": "1979 and 1988 films by Mike Jittlov\nThe Wizard of Speed and Time is a 1988 American feature film written by, directed by, and starring animator Mike Jittlov. It was preceded by a 1979 short film of the same name, also by Jittlov.\n1979 short film.\nIn the original short film, a young man in a green wizard costume runs throughout America at super speed, much like the superhero The Flash. Along the way, he gives a hitchhiking woman (Toni Handcock) a swift lift to another city and gives golden stars to other women who want a trip themselves. He then slips on a banana peel and comically crashes into a film stage, which he then brings to life in magical ways.\nJittlov is a special effects technician, and he produced all of the special effects in the film himself, many through stop motion animation.\nThis short film was originally shown as a segment of an episode of \"The Wonderful World of Disney\". The episode, titled \"Major Effects,\" aired in 1979 to coincide with the release of Disney's \"The Black Hole\".\nThe film segment then began to be shown at science fiction conventions around the country, gaining popularity, prompting Jittlov to eventually create a (semi-)fictionalized account, in the form of a feature film, of how this short film came to be.\n1988 feature film.\nYears later, Jittlov was able to remake the short, as well as incorporate portions of some of his other short films (such as \"Time Tripper\" and \"Animato\"), into a feature-length 35 mm film. The feature version recounts the exploits of a special effects \"wizard\" (played by Jittlov) trying to fulfill his dream of making a full-length movie. The tricks of movie magic are exposed; but so are the tribulations of the independent moviemaker working around the heavily unionized Hollywood film industry.\nStraeker: There are your film cans, but you can't move them.\nJittlov: Why? Are they stuck to the floor?\nStraeker: No, to the system!\nMany scenes in the movie turned out to be only too prophetic, according to Jittlov. In the film, a director, Lucky Straeker (Steve Brodie), and a producer, Harvey Bookman (Richard Kaye), bet over whether Jittlov can actually complete a major effects assignment, and Bookman does everything in his power to thwart Jittlov.\nRichard Kaye produced the film and starred as one of the main characters, Harvey Bookman, also a producer. Richard Kaye's daughter Lauri Kaye, at the age of 16, was the production secretary of \"The Wizard of Speed and Time\" and performed in the film as a voice-over artist and a hand model.\nThe feature film is also filled with subliminal messages, many hidden in single frames during the \"Wizard Run\" sequence (which was remade and expanded from the original short film), or hidden in electrical sparks generated by various happenings in the film.\nThe feature film was filmed in 1983 to 1986, released to theaters in 1989 (though it was never widely distributed), and was later released on VHS and laserdisc. Although there is no official DVD release yet, Jittlov's fans have (with Jittlov's knowledge and at least tacit approval) created a DVD image file, and made it available for free on peer-to-peer networks until such time as an official release is realized.\nProduction.\nMike Jittlov spent 14 years trying to get the film made independently, as he didn't want to compromise his artistic vision for the film (as would've been the case with a studio production). Much like he had done with his short films, Jittlov sprinkled subliminal messages throughout the feature length version of \"The Wizard of Speed and Time\" that pushed words associated with positivity and fulfillment.\nLegacy.\nIn the November 2019 Marvel comic book series \"Loki\", issue 5, the title character states that \"The Wizard of Speed and Time\" is his favorite film.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33563", "revid": "50609751", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33563", "title": "Word problem for groups", "text": "Problem in finite group theory\nIn mathematics, especially in the area of abstract algebra known as combinatorial group theory, the word problem for a finitely generated group formula_1 is the algorithmic problem of deciding whether two words in the generators represent the same element of formula_1. The word problems for certain groups provide well-known examples of undecidable problems.\nIf formula_3 is a finite set of generators for formula_1, then the word problem is the membership problem for the formal language of all words in formula_3 and a formal set of inverses that map to the identity under the natural map from the free monoid with involution on formula_3 to the group formula_1. If formula_8 is another finite generating set for formula_1, then the word problem over the generating set formula_8 is equivalent to the word problem over the generating set formula_3. Thus one can speak unambiguously of the decidability of the word problem for the finitely generated group formula_1.\nThe related but different uniform word problem for a class formula_13 of recursively presented groups is the algorithmic problem of deciding, given as input a presentation formula_14 for a group formula_1 in the class formula_13 and two words in the generators of formula_1, whether the words represent the same element of formula_1. Some authors require the class formula_13 to be definable by a recursively enumerable set of presentations.\nHistory.\nThroughout the history of the subject, computations in groups have been carried out using various normal forms. These usually implicitly solve the word problem for the groups in question. In 1911 Max Dehn proposed that the word problem was an important area of study in its own right, together with the conjugacy problem and the group isomorphism problem. In 1912 he gave an algorithm that solves both the word and conjugacy problem for the fundamental groups of closed orientable two-dimensional manifolds of genus greater than or equal to 2. Subsequent authors have greatly extended Dehn's algorithm and applied it to a wide range of group theoretic decision problems.\nIt was shown by Pyotr Novikov in 1955 that there exists a finitely presented group formula_1 such that the word problem for formula_1 is undecidable. It follows immediately that the uniform word problem is also undecidable. A different proof was obtained by William Boone in 1958.\nThe word problem was one of the first examples of an unsolvable problem to be found not in mathematical logic or the theory of algorithms, but in one of the central branches of classical mathematics, algebra. As a result of its unsolvability, several other problems in combinatorial group theory have been shown to be unsolvable as well.\nThe word problem is in fact solvable for many groups formula_1. For example, polycyclic groups have solvable word problems since the normal form of an arbitrary word in a polycyclic presentation is readily computable; other algorithms for groups may, in suitable circumstances, also solve the word problem, see the Todd\u2013Coxeter algorithm and the Knuth\u2013Bendix completion algorithm. On the other hand, the fact that a particular algorithm does not solve the word problem for a particular group does not show that the group has an unsolvable word problem. For instance Dehn's algorithm does not solve the word problem for the fundamental group of the torus. However this group is the direct product of two infinite cyclic groups and so has a solvable word problem.\nA more concrete description.\nIn more concrete terms, the uniform word problem can be expressed as a rewriting question, for literal strings. For a presentation formula_14 of a group formula_1, formula_14 will specify a certain number of generators\nformula_26\nfor formula_1. We need to introduce one letter for formula_28 and another (for convenience) for the group element represented by formula_29. Call these letters (twice as many as the generators) the alphabet formula_30 for our problem. Then each element in formula_1 is represented in \"some way\" by a product\nformula_32\nof symbols from formula_30, of some length, multiplied in formula_1. The string of length 0 (null string) stands for the identity element formula_35 of formula_1. The crux of the whole problem is to be able to recognise \"all\" the ways formula_35 can be represented, given some relations.\nThe effect of the \"relations\" in formula_1 is to make various such strings represent the same element of formula_1. In fact the relations provide a list of strings that can be either introduced where we want, or cancelled out whenever we see them, without changing the 'value', i.e. the group element that is the result of the multiplication.\nFor a simple example, consider the group given by the presentation formula_40. Writing formula_3 for the inverse of formula_42, we have possible strings combining any number of the symbols formula_42 and formula_3. Whenever we see formula_45, or formula_46 or formula_47 we may strike these out. We should also remember to strike out formula_48; this says that since the cube of formula_42 is the identity element of formula_1, so is the cube of the inverse of formula_42. Under these conditions the word problem becomes easy. First reduce strings to the empty string, formula_42, formula_53, formula_3 or formula_55. Then note that we may also multiply by formula_45, so we can convert formula_3 to formula_53 and convert formula_55 to formula_42. The result is that the word problem, here for the cyclic group of order three, is solvable.\nThis is not, however, the typical case. For the example, we have a canonical form available that reduces any string to one of length at most three, by decreasing the length monotonically. In general, it is not true that one can get a canonical form for the elements, by stepwise cancellation. One may have to use relations to expand a string many-fold, in order eventually to find a cancellation that brings the length right down.\nThe upshot is, in the worst case, that the relation between strings that says they are equal in formula_1 is an \"Undecidable problem\".\nExamples.\nThe following groups have a solvable word problem:\nExamples with unsolvable word problems are also known:\nformula_64\nPartial solution of the word problem.\nThe word problem for a recursively presented group can be partially solved in the following sense:\nGiven a recursive presentation formula_65 for a group formula_1, define:\nformula_67\nthen there is a partial recursive function formula_68 such that:\nformula_69\nMore informally, there exists an algorithm that halts if formula_70, but does not do so otherwise.\nIt follows that to solve the word problem for formula_14 it is sufficient to construct a recursive function formula_72 such that:\nformula_73\nHowever formula_70 in formula_1 if and only if formula_76 in formula_1. It follows that to solve the word problem for formula_14 it is sufficient to construct a recursive function formula_79 such that:\nformula_80\nExample.\nThe following will be proved as an example of the use of this technique:\n Theorem: A finitely presented residually finite group has solvable word problem.\n\"Proof:\" Suppose formula_81 is a finitely presented, residually finite group.\nLet formula_82 be the group of all permutations of the natural numbers formula_83 that fixes all but finitely many numbers. Then:\nGiven these facts, the algorithm defined by the following pseudocode:\n For every mapping of X into S\n If every relator in R is satisfied in S\n If w \u2260 1 in S\n return 0\n End if\n End if\n End for\ndefines a recursive function formula_79 such that:\nformula_99\nThis shows that formula_1 has solvable word problem.\nUnsolvability of the uniform word problem.\nThe criterion given above, for the solvability of the word problem in a single group, can be extended by a straightforward argument. This gives the following criterion for the uniform solvability of the word problem for a class of finitely presented groups:\nTo solve the uniform word problem for a class formula_13 of groups, it is sufficient to find a recursive function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; that takes a finite presentation formula_14 for a group formula_1 and a word &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in the generators of formula_1, such that whenever formula_105:\nformula_106\n Boone\u2013Rogers Theorem: There is no uniform partial algorithm that solves the word problem in all finitely presented groups with solvable word problem.\nIn other words, the uniform word problem for the class of all finitely presented groups with solvable word problem is unsolvable. This has some interesting consequences. For instance, the Higman embedding theorem can be used to construct a group containing an isomorphic copy of every finitely presented group with solvable word problem. It seems natural to ask whether this group can have solvable word problem. But it is a consequence of the Boone\u2013Rogers result that:\n Corollary: There is no universal solvable word problem group. That is, if formula_1 is a finitely presented group that contains an isomorphic copy of every finitely presented group with solvable word problem, then formula_1 itself must have unsolvable word problem.\nRemark: Suppose formula_81 is a finitely presented group with solvable word problem and formula_110 is a finite subset of formula_1. Let formula_112, be the group generated by formula_110. Then the word problem in formula_114 is solvable: given two words formula_115 in the generators formula_110 of formula_114, write them as words in formula_86 and compare them using the solution to the word problem in formula_1. It is easy to think that this demonstrates a uniform solution of the word problem for the class formula_13 (say) of finitely generated groups that can be embedded in formula_1. If this were the case, the non-existence of a universal solvable word problem group would follow easily from Boone\u2013Rogers. However, the solution just exhibited for the word problem for groups in formula_13 is not uniform. To see this, consider a group formula_123; in order to use the above argument to solve the word problem in formula_124, it is first necessary to exhibit a mapping formula_125 that extends to an embedding formula_126. If there were a recursive function that mapped (finitely generated) presentations of groups in formula_13 to embeddings into formula_1, then a uniform solution of the word problem in formula_13 could indeed be constructed. But there is no reason, in general, to suppose that such a recursive function exists. However, it turns out that, using a more sophisticated argument, the word problem in formula_124 can be solved \"without\" using an embedding formula_131. Instead an \"enumeration of homomorphisms\" is used, and since such an enumeration can be constructed uniformly, it results in a uniform solution to the word problem in formula_13.\nProof that there is no universal solvable word problem group.\nSuppose formula_1 were a universal solvable word problem group. Given a finite presentation formula_65 of a group formula_110, one can recursively enumerate all homomorphisms formula_136 by first enumerating all mappings formula_137. Not all of these mappings extend to homomorphisms, but, since formula_138 is finite, it is possible to distinguish between homomorphisms and non-homomorphisms, by using the solution to the word problem in formula_1. \"Weeding out\" non-homomorphisms gives the required recursive enumeration: formula_140.\nIf formula_110 has solvable word problem, then at least one of these homomorphisms must be an embedding. So given a word formula_89 in the generators of formula_110:\nformula_144\nformula_145\nConsider the algorithm described by the pseudocode:\n Let \"n\" = 0\n Let \"repeatable\" = TRUE\n while (\"repeatable\")\n increase \"n\" by 1\n if (solution to word problem in \"G\" reveals \"hn\"(\"w\") \u2260 1 in \"G\")\n Let \"repeatable\" = FALSE\n output 0.\nThis describes a recursive function:\nformula_146\nThe function formula_147 clearly depends on the presentation formula_14. Considering it to be a function of the two variables, a recursive function &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; has been constructed that takes a finite presentation formula_14 for a group formula_110 and a word formula_89 in the generators of a group formula_1, such that whenever formula_1 has soluble word problem:\nformula_154\nBut this uniformly solves the word problem for the class of all finitely presented groups with solvable word problem, contradicting Boone\u2013Rogers. This contradiction proves formula_1 cannot exist.\nAlgebraic structure and the word problem.\nThere are a number of results that relate solvability of the word problem and algebraic structure. The most significant of these is the Boone\u2013Higman theorem:\nA finitely presented group has solvable word problem if and only if it can be embedded in a simple group that can be embedded in a finitely presented group.\nIt is widely believed that it should be possible to do the construction so that the simple group itself is finitely presented. If so one would expect it to be difficult to prove as the mapping from presentations to simple groups would have to be non-recursive.\nThe following has been proved by Bernhard Neumann and Angus Macintyre:\nA finitely presented group has solvable word problem if and only if it can be embedded in every algebraically closed group.\nWhat is remarkable about this is that the algebraically closed groups are so wild that none of them has a recursive presentation.\nThe oldest result relating algebraic structure to solvability of the word problem is Kuznetsov's theorem:\nA recursively presented simple group formula_82 has solvable word problem.\nTo prove this let formula_157 be a recursive presentation for formula_82. Choose a nonidentity element formula_159, that is, formula_160 in formula_82.\nIf formula_89 is a word on the generators formula_86 of formula_82, then let:\nformula_165\nThere is a recursive function formula_166 such that:\nformula_167\nWrite:\nformula_168\nThen because the construction of formula_147 was uniform, this is a recursive function of two variables.\nIt follows that: &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is recursive. By construction:\nformula_170\nSince formula_82 is a simple group, its only quotient groups are itself and the trivial group. Since formula_160 in formula_82, we see formula_174 in formula_175 if and only if formula_175 is trivial if and only if formula_92 in formula_82. Therefore:\nformula_179\nThe existence of such a function is sufficient to prove the word problem is solvable for formula_82.\nThis proof does not prove the existence of a uniform algorithm for solving the word problem for this class of groups. The non-uniformity resides in choosing a non-trivial element of the simple group. There is no reason to suppose that there is a recursive function that maps a presentation of a simple groups to a non-trivial element of the group. However, in the case of a finitely presented group we know that not all the generators can be trivial (Any individual generator could be, of course). Using this fact it is possible to modify the proof to show:\nThe word problem is uniformly solvable for the class of finitely presented simple groups."}
{"id": "33569", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33569", "title": "Waring's problem", "text": "Mathematical problem in number theory\nIn number theory, Waring's problem asks whether each natural number \"k\" has an associated positive integer \"s\" such that every natural number is the sum of at most \"s\" natural numbers raised to the power \"k\". For example, every natural number is the sum of at most 4 squares, 9 cubes, or 19 fourth powers. Waring's problem was proposed in 1770 by Edward Waring, after whom it is named. Its affirmative answer, known as the Hilbert\u2013Waring theorem, was provided by Hilbert in 1909. Waring's problem has its own Mathematics Subject Classification, 11P05, \"Waring's problem and variants\".\nRelationship with Lagrange's four-square theorem.\nLong before Waring posed his problem, Diophantus had asked whether every positive integer could be represented as the sum of four perfect squares greater than or equal to zero. This question later became known as Bachet's conjecture, after the 1621 translation of Diophantus by Claude Gaspard Bachet de M\u00e9ziriac, and it was solved by Joseph-Louis Lagrange in his four-square theorem in 1770, the same year Waring made his conjecture. Waring sought to generalize this problem by trying to represent all positive integers as the sum of cubes, integers to the fourth power, and so forth, to show that any positive integer may be represented as the sum of other integers raised to a specific exponent, and that there was always a maximum number of integers raised to a certain exponent required to represent all positive integers in this way.\nThe number \"g\"(\"k\").\nFor every formula_1, let formula_2 denote the minimum number formula_3 of formula_1th powers of naturals needed to represent all positive integers. Every positive integer is the sum of one first power, itself, so formula_5. Some simple computations show that 7 requires 4 squares, 23 requires 9 cubes, and 79 requires 19 fourth powers; these examples show that formula_6, formula_7, and formula_8. Waring conjectured that these lower bounds were in fact exact values.\nLagrange's four-square theorem of 1770 states that every natural number is the sum of at most four squares. Since three squares are not enough, this theorem establishes formula_9. Lagrange's four-square theorem was conjectured in Bachet's 1621 edition of Diophantus's \"Arithmetica\"; Fermat claimed to have a proof, but did not publish it.\nOver the years various bounds were established, using increasingly sophisticated and complex proof techniques. For example, Liouville showed that formula_10 is at most 53. Hardy and Littlewood showed that all sufficiently large numbers are the sum of at most 19 fourth powers.\nThat formula_11 was established from 1909 to 1912 by Wieferich and A. J. Kempner, formula_12 in 1986 by R. Balasubramanian, F. Dress, and J.-M. Deshouillers, formula_13 in 1964 by Chen Jingrun, and formula_14 in 1940 by Pillai.\nLet formula_15 and formula_16 respectively denote the integral and fractional part of a positive real number formula_17. Given the number formula_18, only formula_19 and formula_20 can be used to represent formula_21; the most economical representation requires \nformula_22 terms of formula_19 and formula_24 terms of formula_20. It follows that formula_2 is at least as large as formula_27. This was noted by J.\u00a0A. Euler, the son of Leonhard Euler, in about 1772. \nThe Ideal Waring Theorem would be an unconditional strengthening of Euler's observation: \n Define: g*(k) formula_28. Then g(k) = g*(k).\nWork by Dickson and Pillai in 1936, Rubugunday in 1942, Niven in 1944 and many others has proved that\n formula_29\nDickson's 1936 proof applies when k &gt; 6, and Pillai's when k &gt; 7, leaving g(4), g(5), and g(6) to be resolved as documented above.\nNo value of formula_1 is known for which formula_31. Mahler proved that there can only be a finite number of such formula_1, and Kubina and Wunderlich have shown that any such formula_1 must satisfy formula_34, extending work of Stemmler. Thus it is conjectured that this never happens, that is, formula_35 for every positive integer formula_1.\nThe first few values of formula_2 are:\n 1, 4, 9, 19, 37, 73, 143, 279, 548, 1079, 2132, 4223, 8384, 16673, 33203, 66190, 132055, 263619, 526502, 1051899, ... (sequence in the OEIS).\nThe number \"G\"(\"k\").\nFrom the work of Hardy and Littlewood, the related quantity \"G\"(\"k\") was studied with \"g\"(\"k\"). \"G\"(\"k\") is defined to be the least positive integer \"s\" such that every sufficiently large integer (i.e. every integer greater than some constant) can be represented as a sum of at most \"s\" positive integers to the power of \"k\". Clearly, \"G\"(1) = 1. Since squares are congruent to 0, 1, or 4 (mod 8), no integer congruent to 7 (mod 8) can be represented as a sum of three squares, implying that \"G\"(2) \u2265 4. Since \"G\"(\"k\") \u2264 \"g\"(\"k\") for all \"k\", this shows that \"G\"(2) = 4. Davenport showed that \"G\"(4) = 16 in 1939, by demonstrating that any sufficiently large number congruent to 1 through 14 mod 16 could be written as a sum of 14 fourth powers (Vaughan in 1986 and 1989 reduced the 14 biquadrates successively to 13 and 12). The exact value of \"G\"(\"k\") is unknown for any other \"k\", but there exist bounds.\nLower bounds for \"G\"(\"k\").\nThe number \"G\"(\"k\") is greater than or equal to\nIn the absence of congruence restrictions, a density argument suggests that \"G\"(\"k\") should equal \"k\" + 1.\nUpper bounds for \"G\"(\"k\").\n\"G\"(3) is at least 4 (since cubes are congruent to 0, 1 or \u22121 mod 9); for numbers less than 1.3\u00d7109, is the last to require 6 cubes, and the number of numbers between \"N\" and 2\"N\" requiring 5 cubes drops off with increasing \"N\" at sufficient speed to have people believe that \"G\"(3) = 4; the largest number now known not to be a sum of 4 cubes is , and the authors give reasonable arguments there that this may be the largest possible. The upper bound \"G\"(3) \u2264 7 is due to Linnik in 1943. (All nonnegative integers require at most 9 cubes, and the largest integers requiring 9, 8, 7, 6 and 5 cubes are conjectured to be 239, 454, 8042, and , respectively.)\n is the largest number to require 17 fourth powers (Deshouillers, Hennecart and Landreau showed in 2000 that every number between and 10245 required at most 16, and Kawada, Wooley and Deshouillers extended Davenport's 1939 result to show that every number above 10220 required at most 16). Numbers of the form 31\u00b716\"n\" always require 16 fourth powers.\n is the last known number that requires 9 fifth powers (Integer sequence S001057, Tony D. Noe, Jul 04 2017), is the last number less than 1.3\u00d7109 that requires 10 fifth powers, and is the last number less than 1.3\u00d7109 that requires 11.\nThe upper bounds on the right with \"k\" = 5, 6, ..., 20 are due to Vaughan and Wooley.\nUsing his improved Hardy\u2013Ramanujan\u2013Littlewood method, I.\u00a0M. Vinogradov published numerous refinements leading to\n formula_38\nin 1947 and, ultimately,\n formula_39\nfor an unspecified constant \"C\" and sufficiently large \"k\" in 1959.\nApplying his \"p\"-adic form of the Hardy\u2013Ramanujan\u2013Littlewood\u2013Vinogradov method to estimating trigonometric sums, in which the summation is taken over numbers with small prime divisors, Anatolii Alexeevitch Karatsuba obtained in 1985 a new estimate, for formula_40:\n formula_41\nFurther refinements were obtained by Vaughan in 1989.\nWooley then established that for some constant \"C\",\n formula_42\nVaughan and Wooley's survey article from 2002 was comprehensive at the time.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33571", "revid": "1310623001", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33571", "title": "Williams tube", "text": "Early form of computer memory\nThe Williams tube, or the Williams\u2013Kilburn tube named after inventors Freddie Williams and Tom Kilburn, is an early form of computer memory. It was the first random-access digital storage device, and was used successfully in several early computers.\nThe Williams tube works by displaying a grid of dots on a cathode-ray tube (CRT). Due to the way CRTs work, this creates a small charge of static electricity over each dot. The charge at the location of each of the dots is read by a thin metal sheet just in front of the display. Since the display faded over time, it was periodically refreshed. It operates faster than earlier acoustic delay-line memory, at the speed of the electrons inside the vacuum tube, rather than at the speed of sound. The system was adversely affected by nearby electrical fields, and required frequent adjustment to remain operational. Williams\u2013Kilburn tubes were used primarily on high-speed computer designs.\nWilliams and Kilburn applied for British patents on 11 December 1946, and 2 October 1947, followed by United States patent applications on 10 December 1947, and 16 May 1949.\nWorking principle.\nThe Williams tube depends on an effect called secondary emission that occurs on cathode-ray tubes (CRTs). When the electron beam strikes the phosphor that forms the display surface, it normally causes it to illuminate. If the beam energy is above a given threshold (depending on the phosphor mix) it also causes electrons to be struck out of the phosphor. These electrons travel a short distance before being attracted back to the CRT surface and falling on it a short distance away. The overall effect is to cause a slight positive charge in the immediate region of the beam where there is a deficit of electrons, and a slight negative charge around the dot where those electrons land. The resulting charge well remains on the surface of the tube for a fraction of a second while the electrons flow back to their original locations. The lifetime depends on the electrical resistance of the phosphor and the size of the well.\nWriting.\nThe process of creating the charge well is used as the write operation in a computer memory, storing a single binary digit, or bit. A positively charged dot is erased (filling the charge well) by drawing a second dot immediately adjacent to the one to be erased (most systems did this by drawing a short dash starting at the dot position, the extension of the dash erased the charge initially stored at the starting point). This works because the negative halo around the second dot will fill in the positive center of the first dot. A collection of dots or spaces, often one horizontal row on the display, represents a computer word. Increasing beam energy makes the dots bigger and last longer, but requires them to be further apart, since otherwise, nearby dots erase each other.\nThe beam energy has to be large enough to produce dots with a usable lifetime. This places an upper limit on the memory density, and each Williams tube could typically store about 256 to 2560 bits of data.\nBecause the electron beam is essentially inertia-free and can be moved anywhere on the display, the computer can access any location, making it a random access memory. Typically, the computer would load the memory address as an X and Y pair into the driver circuitry and then trigger a time base generator to sweep the selected locations, reading from or writing to the internal registers, normally implemented with flip-flops.\nReading.\nReading the memory took place via a secondary effect caused by the writing operation. During the short period when the write takes place, the redistribution of charges in the phosphor creates an electrical current that induces voltage in any nearby conductors. This is read by placing a thin metal sheet just in front of the display side of the CRT. During a read operation, the beam first writes to the selected bit locations on the display. Those locations that were previously written to are already depleted of electrons, so no current flows, and no voltage appears on the plate. This allows the computer to determine there was a \"1\" in that location. If the location had not been written to previously, the write process will create a well and a pulse will be read on the sheet, indicating a \"0\".\nReading a memory location creates a charge well whether or not one was previously there, thus destroying the original contents of that location. So any read has to be followed by a rewrite to reinstate the original data. In some systems this was accomplished using a second electron gun inside the CRT that could write to one location while the other was reading the next.\nRefreshing.\nSince the display fades over time, the entire display has to be periodically refreshed using the same basic method. As the data is read and then immediately rewritten, this operation can be carried out by external circuitry while the central processing unit (CPU) is busy carrying out other operations. This refresh operation is similar to the memory refresh cycles of DRAM in modern systems.\nErasing.\nSince the refresh process caused the same pattern to continually reappear on the display, there was a need to be able to erase previously written values. This was normally accomplished by writing to the display just beside the original location. The electrons released by this new write would fall into the previously written well, filling it. The original systems produced this effect by writing a small dash, which was easy to accomplish without changing the master timers and simply producing the write current for a slightly longer period. The resulting pattern was a series of dots and dashes. There was a considerable amount of research on more effective erasing systems, with some systems using out-of-focus beams or complex patterns.\nVisibility of data.\nSome Williams tubes were made from radar-type cathode-ray tubes with a phosphor coating that made the data visible, while other tubes were purpose-built without such a coating. The presence or absence of this coating had no effect on the operation of the tube, and was of no importance to the operators, since the face of the tube was covered by the pickup plate. If a visible output was needed, a second tube connected in parallel with the storage tube, with a phosphor coating, but without a pickup plate, was used as a display device.\nDevelopment.\nDeveloped at the University of Manchester in England, it provided the program storage medium for the Manchester Baby, the first electronic stored-program computer, which first successfully ran a program on 21 June, 1948. Rather than the Williams tube memory being designed for the Baby, the Baby was a testbed to demonstrate the reliability of the memory. Tom Kilburn wrote a 17-instruction program to calculate the highest proper factor of numbers as large as 218. Tradition at the university has it that this was the only program Kilburn ever wrote.\nWilliams tubes tended to become unreliable with age, and most working installations had to be hand tuned. By contrast, mercury delay-line memory was slower and not random access, as the bits were presented serially, which complicated programming. Delay lines also needed hand tuning, but did not age as badly and enjoyed some success in early digital electronic computing despite their data rate, weight, cost, thermal and toxicity problems. The Manchester Mark 1, which used Williams tubes, was successfully commercialised as the Ferranti Mark 1. Some early computers in the United States also used Williams tubes, including the IAS machine (originally designed for Selectron tube memory), the UNIVAC 1103, IBM 701, IBM 702 and the Standards Western Automatic Computer (SWAC). Williams tubes were also used in the Soviet Strela-1 and in the Japan TAC (Tokyo Automatic Computer).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33573", "revid": "51038444", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33573", "title": "Wallace &amp; Gromit", "text": "British claymation comedy franchise\nWallace &amp; Gromit is a British claymation comedy franchise created by Nick Park and produced by Aardman Animations. The series centres on Wallace, a good-natured, eccentric and cheese-loving bachelor inventor, and Gromit, his loyal and intelligent anthropomorphic dog. It consists of four short films, two feature-length films, and numerous spin-offs and TV adaptations. The first short film, \"A Grand Day Out\", was finished and released in 1989. Wallace has been voiced by Peter Sallis and Ben Whitehead. While Wallace speaks very often, Gromit is largely silent and has no dialogue, instead communicating through facial expressions and body language.\nBecause of their popularity, the characters have been described as positive international cultural icons of both modern British culture and British people in general. BBC News called them \"some of the best-known and best-loved stars to come out of the UK\". Culture24 outlet \"ICONS\" has said they have done \"more to improve the image of the English world-wide than any officially appointed ambassadors\".\nPark has stated that he was inspired by his childhood through the 1950s and 1960s in Lancashire in Northern England. The setting is deliberately ambiguous: the overall style resembles the 1960s, but numerous anachronisms abound, such as the use of 21st-century technology. Although Wigan is seen at the end of Wallace's alliterative home address on his letters, his accent comes from the Holme Valley of West Yorkshire, and he is especially fond of Wensleydale cheese (from North Yorkshire).\nTheir films have been widely praised, with the first three short films, \"A Grand Day Out\" (1989), \"The Wrong Trousers\" (1993) and \"A Close Shave\" (1995) earning 100% on \"Rotten Tomatoes\"; the feature film ' (2005) has also received acclaim. The film is the second-highest-grossing stop-motion animated film, outgrossed only by \"Chicken Run\" (2000), another creation of Park's. A fourth short film, \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\", was released in 2008. A second full-length feature film, ' \u2014 marking the return of the penguin Feathers McGraw, the villain from \"The Wrong Trousers\" \u2014 was released in 2024. The franchise has received numerous accolades, including seven BAFTAs, three Academy Awards and a Peabody Award.\nHistory.\nThe first short film, \"A Grand Day Out\", was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Short Film in 1991. The short films \"The Wrong Trousers\" and \"A Close Shave\" followed, both of which won the aforementioned award. The first full-length feature film, \"\" was released in 2005, and went on to win the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature.\nIn January 2007, a five-film deal with DreamWorks and Aardman fell through after three films, due to creative differences, as well as the box office failure of \"Flushed Away\". Park said later that DreamWorks executives wanted to Americanise the very British Wallace and Gromit after test screenings, which would have tarnished some of the duo's nostalgic charm. The fourth \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" short, \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\", was Park's first production since the end of the DreamWorks deal. It was the most-watched television programme in the UK in 2008. \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\" won the 2008 BAFTA Award for Best Short Animation and was nominated for an Academy Award in 2010. In 2013, Peter Lord stated that there were no plans at the moment for a new short film, and Park announced in the following year that the declining health of Wallace's voice actor, Peter Sallis, had the possibility of preventing any future films despite the availability of Ben Whitehead.\nIn May 2017, Lord stated that more projects with the characters were likely while speaking at an animation event in Stuttgart, Germany. He said, \"When Nick [Park]'s not drawing cavemen, he's drawing Wallace &amp; Gromit ... I absolutely assume he will do another, but not a feature. I think he found it was too much. I think he liked the half-hour format.\"\nSallis died on 2 June 2017. In 2018, Park said to \"Radio Times\": \"[Sallis] was such a special one-off person with such unique qualities, it would be hard to fill his shoes but I think he'd want us to carry on and I've got more Wallace and Gromit ideas.\" In 2019, Park announced that a new \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" project is in development. \"I can't give too much away because it would spoil it really, but it's Wallace &amp; Gromit up to their old antics.\" In May 2020, Aardman announced the release of \"The Big Fix Up\", a Wallace &amp; Gromit story in the form of an augmented reality (AR) mobile app. It features the voices of Miriam Margolyes, Isy Suttie and Jim Carter and was released on 18 January 2021.\nIn September 2021, a bronze bench statue of \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" was unveiled in Preston, Lancashire, Park's home town. A statue of Feathers McGraw was later added as part of an extension in February 2025. In January 2022, a new feature film, \"\", was announced, which debuted first on the BBC on Christmas Day 2024, and was released worldwide on Netflix on 3 January 2025, winning two awards at the 78th British Academy Film Awards and additionally being nominated for the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature.\nOverview.\nWallace.\nWallace lives, along with his pet dog Gromit, at No. 62 West Wallaby Street that is in a part of Wigan in Greater Manchester, England.\nHe usually wears brown woollen trousers, a white shirt with detachable sleeves, and a red tie under a green vee-necked knitted sleeveless sweater. He is fond of cheese, especially Wensleydale, with crackers.\nNick Park, his creator, said: \"He's a very self-contained figure. A very homely sort who doesn't mind the odd adventure.\" He is loosely based on Park's father and Park has never made it clear as to whether Wallace is the character's forename or surname, preferring to leave this ambiguous.\nWallace was voiced by Peter Sallis until his retirement in 2010, being succeeded by Ben Whitehead.\nWallace is an inveterate inventor, creating elaborate contraptions that often do not work wholly as intended. Their appearance is similar to the illustrations of W. Heath Robinson and Rube Goldberg, where Nick Park has said of Wallace that all his inventions are designed around the principle of using a \"sledge-hammer to crack a nut\". Some of Wallace's contraptions are based on real-life inventions. For example, his method of waking up in the morning uses a bed that tips up to wake up its owner, an invention that was exhibited at the Great Exhibition of 1851 by Theophilus Carter.\nWallace has had three romantic interests. The first was wool shop owner Wendolene Ramsbottom, which ended quickly when Wendolene told Wallace that she was allergic to some cheese. The second was Lady Campanula Tottington in \"The Curse of the Were-Rabbit\", whom Wallace fondly calls \"Totty\". In \"A Matter of Loaf &amp; Death\", Wallace becomes engaged to Piella Bakewell, who turns out to be a serial killer of bakers.\nGromit.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Gromit doesn't ever say a word, but there has never been a more expressive character (animated or otherwise) to grace our screens.\"\n \u2014\"Empire\" magazine's entry for Gromit placing the dog first in their list of \"the 50 best animated movie characters\".\nGromit is a dog, with a cream-coloured short-hair coat and oversized, floppy, dark brown ears, who is Wallace's pet and best friend. He is very intelligent, having graduated from \"Dogwarts University\" (\"Dogwarts\" being a pun on \"Hogwarts\", the wizard school from the \"Harry Potter\" books) with a double first in Engineering for Dogs. He likes knitting, playing chess, reading the newspaper, tea and cooking. His prized possessions include his alarm clock, dog bone, brush, and a framed photo of himself with Wallace. He is very handy with electronic equipment and an excellent aeroplane pilot. He often threatens the plans of the antagonists he and Wallace encounter in their adventures. Sometimes, Gromit ignores Wallace's orders, such as in \"A Close Shave\" and \"Shopper 13\", where Wallace orders him to get rid of Shaun but Gromit does not. Gromit's birthday is 12 February. In \"The Wrong Trousers\", he is seen circling the date on a calendar.\nGromit has no visible mouth and expresses himself through facial expressions and body language. Peter Hawkins originally intended to voice Gromit, but Park dropped the idea when he realised how Gromit's thoughts and feelings could be known through movement with some canine noises on rare occasions. Many critics believe that Gromit's silence makes him the perfect straight man, with a pantomime expressiveness that drew favourable comparisons to Buster Keaton. He does at times make dog-like noises, such as yelps and growling. According to the fortieth anniversary documentary \"\", Gromit was originally supposed to be a cat, but the idea was dropped as Park realised that animating a dog was easier.\nGenerally speaking, Gromit's tastes are more in vogue than those of Wallace; this being one of the many ways they contrast with each other as characters. Gromit seems to have a significant interest in encyclopaedic, classical and philosophical literature, and popular culture, including film and music. \"Electronics for Dogs\" has been a firm favourite since \"A Grand Day Out\", and in \"The Wrong Trousers\" Gromit's bookshelves feature titles such as \"Kites\", \"Sticks\", \"Sheep\", \"Penguins\", \"Rockets\", \"Bones\" and \"Stars\", while he is seen reading \"The Republic\", by Pluto (a nod to the Disney character of the same name and a pun on Plato) and \"Crime and Punishment\", by Fido Dogstoyevsky (a pun on Fyodor Dostoyevsky). Gromit's various possessions make extensive use of puns: \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\" features \"\"Pup Fiction\" (\"Pulp Fiction\"), \"The Dogfather\" (\"The Godfather\"), \"Where Beagles Dare\" (\"Where Eagles Dare\"), \"Bite Club\" (\"Fight Club\") and \"The Bone Identity\" (\"The Bourne Identity\") all as book titles, and \"Citizen Canine\"\" (\"Citizen Kane\") as a film poster. In \"\", he is shown reading \"A Room of One's Own\", by \"Virginia Woof\" (a pun on Virginia Woolf), and \"Paradise Lost\", by \"John Stilton\" (a pun on John Milton). His taste in music has been shown to cover Bach (presumably punning on \"bark\"), \"Poochini\" (a play on Puccini), \"McFlea\" (McFly), \"The Beagles\" (the Beatles), \"Red Hot Chili Puppies\" (Red Hot Chili Peppers), \"Puppy Love\" by Doggy Osmond (Donny Osmond), \"The Hound of Music\" (The Sound of Music) and \"Walkies on the Wild Side\" by Rod Lead.\nGromit gains his own love interest in \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\", when he becomes attached to Fluffles, a poodle.\nNASA named one of its new prototype Mars explorer robots after Gromit in 2005. On 1 April 2007, HMV announced that Gromit would stand in for Nipper for a three-month period, promoting children's DVDs in its UK stores.\nLocation.\nAlthough not overtly setting the series in any particular town, Nick Park had previously hinted that its milieu was inspired by thoughts of 1950s Wigan, reinforced by an \"A\u2013Z Wigan\" being displayed on Wallace's Anti-Pesto van in \"The Curse of the Were-Rabbit\". In \"The Wrong Trousers\", Gromit picks up a letter at the Wallace &amp; Gromit residence addressed to \"62 West Wallaby Street, Wigan\". The address includes a postcode of WG7\u00a03FU, though this does not match any street in the United Kingdom; Wigan postcodes begin with the letters WN. This address can be seen in the \"Cracking Contraptions\" episode \"Shopper 13\".\nWallace's accent comes from the Holme Valley of West Yorkshire.\nIn the \"Cracking Contraptions\" episode \"The Soccamatic\", Wallace says to Gromit, \"How do you like my Preston North End soccamatic, Gromit?\". The episode references famous English footballers of the 1950s and '60s, including Nobby Stiles, Tom Finney and Bill Shankly (all of whom played for Preston in their careers) as well as Geoff Hurst and Stanley Matthews.\nThe nostalgic quality of \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\"'s world has been compared to 1950s Beanotown.\nProduction.\nStop motion technique.\nThe \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" films are shot using the stop motion animation technique. After detailed storyboarding, set and plasticine model construction, the films are shot one frame at a time, moving the models of the characters slightly to give the impression of movement in the final film. As is common with other animation techniques, the stop motion animation in \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" may duplicate frames if there is little motion, and in action scenes sometimes multiple exposures per frame are used to produce a faux motion blur. Because a second of film constitutes 24 separate frames, even a short half-hour film like \"A Close Shave\" takes a great deal of time to animate. General quotes on the speed of animation of a \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" film put the filming rate at typically around 30 frames per day per animator.\nSome effects, particularly the fire, smoke and floating bunnies in \"The Curse of the Were-Rabbit\", proved impossible to create in stop motion and were rendered by computer animation specialists MPC film. MPC film studied the set for three months to create clay-like animation to match the stop-motion production. By paying close attention to detail, MPC was able to make the animated bunnies blend in with the clay bunnies. Adding imperfections such as fingerprints along with texture to the animated bunnies helped enhance the effect. MPC's collaboration resulted in over 700 effects to aid the film along with colouring to match the visuals.\nMost models were destroyed in the 2005 Aardman studio fire, but some still exist, such as a small-scale model for the Cooker from \"A Grand Day Out\" and Feathers McGraw trapped in a bottle from \"The Wrong Trousers\". The set and several props from the museum featured in the latter short film survived as well, as they were being kept at the National Science and Media Museum in Bradford, West Yorkshire, before the fire occurred. In 2008, a set from \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\", which was produced after the fire, was displayed at the We The Curious science centre.\nMusic.\nThe music featured in every film was written by British film composer Julian Nott. The theme song was used to wake up astronauts aboard space shuttle mission STS-132 in May 2010.\nOther media.\nVideo games.\nA \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" interactive CD-ROM game from 1996, named \"Wallace &amp; Gromit Fun Pack\", was released for the PC, containing the \"Crackin' Compendium\" with three mini-games based on the three original animated shorts as well as brief video clips. The other program in the Fun Pack the \"Customise-O-Matic\" contained wallpapers, screen savers and sounds that could be assigned as system sounds. A sequel \"Fun Pack 2\" was released in 2000 featuring enhanced graphics and two new games as well as a remake of the Great Train Game.\nThe characters were associated with a 144-issue fortnightly digest called Techno Quest, published by Eaglemoss Publications starting in 1997. It was designed to get children interested in science and technology.\nIn 1997, an animated screensaver themed video game entitled \"Wallace &amp; Gromit Cracking Animator\" was released. Screensaver games were made by Dibase. Players could create their own multimedia animations through the collation of things like sound effects, sets, characters and props. Players could manipulate the facial movements of characters to synchronise their expressions with dialogue. Players could choose to make their finished creation their screensaver, or choose one of the pre-made screensaver games. The \"Boston Herald\" offered a rating of 2.5 stars, noting that creativity is limited.\nIn September 2003, \"Wallace &amp; Gromit in Project Zoo\" was released for the PlayStation 2, Xbox, GameCube, and Microsoft Windows. This separate story sees the duo take on Feathers McGraw (of \"The Wrong Trousers\") again. Still obsessed with diamonds, he escapes from the penguin enclosure of West Wallaby Zoo, where he was \"imprisoned\" at the end of \"The Wrong Trousers\", and takes over the entire zoo, kidnapping young animals and forcing their parents to work for him, helping him turn the zoo into a diamond mine.\nIn 2005, a video game of \"\" was released for PlayStation 2 and Xbox, following the plot of the film as Wallace and Gromit work as vermin-catchers, protecting customers' vegetable gardens from rabbits, using a \"BunGun\". Gameplay for the Project Zoo involve players exclusively controlling Gromit, as Wallace functions as a helper non-player character, but in \"The Curse of the Were-Rabbit\", gameplay shifts between the two, and includes two-player cooperative play. Both games were developed by Frontier Developments with the assistance of Aardman, with Peter Sallis reprising his role as Wallace. \"Project Zoo\" was published by BAM! Entertainment, while \"The Curse of the Were-Rabbit\" was published by Konami.\nIn July 2008, developer Telltale Games announced a new series of episodic video games based on the characters, called \"Wallace &amp; Gromit's Grand Adventures\". The first episode in \"Grand Adventures\", \"Fright of the Bumblebees\", was released on 23 March 2009. The second episode, \"The Last Resort\", was released on 5 May 2009. Two more episodes, \"Muzzled!\" and \"The Bogey Man\", were released in later 2009. The four episodes have separately been released on Xbox Live Arcade for the Xbox 360.\nOn 25 July 2024, a \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\"-themed course was added to the virtual reality game \"Walkabout Mini Golf\" as downloadable content (DLC). A DLC pack based on the franchise was added to \"PowerWash Simulator\" on 4 March 2025.\nList of video games.\nThere are also several interactive games on the official \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\", \"Shaun the Sheep\" and \"Timmy Time\" websites.\nComic.\nBritish publisher Titan Magazines started producing a monthly \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" comic after the debut of \"Curse of the Were-Rabbit\". The characters still run Anti-Pesto, and both Shaun and Feathers McGraw have appeared in the comic.\nThe two characters appeared in the monthly \"BeanoMAX\" comic until its closure in June 2013, and now appear every four weeks in \"The Beano\". They are heavily featured in 'Aardmag', the free online magazine that is unofficial but supported by Aardman Animations. Nick Park guest-edited the 70th birthday issue of \"The Beano\" weekly, and so this issue contained numerous \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" references.\nOn 17 May 2010, they began appearing daily in \"The Sun\". It is credited to Titan and Aardman, with scripts written by Richy Chandler, Robert Etherington, Mike Garley, Ned Hartley, Rik Hoskin, David Leach, Luke Paton, J.P. Rutter, Rona Simpson and Gordon Volke, art by Sylvia Bennion, Jay Clarke, Jimmy Hansen, Viv Heath, Mychailo Kazybrid and Brian Williamson. It replaced \"George and Lynne\". A graphic novel compiling all 311 daily strips was released on 8 October 2013, and a second volume followed on 4 November 2014. A third volume was released on 25 March 2015, and a fourth volume was released on 9 September 2015.\nTheatre.\nIn November 1997, the characters appeared in a play called \"Wallace And Gromit\u2122 Alive on Stage in a Grand Night Out\". This show featured Feathers McGraw escaping prison and hypnotising Wendolene to assist in his planned revenge on the duo, culminating in a showdown involving Shaun the Sheep donning the Techno-Trousers.\nOn 9 March 2011, Shaun the Sheep made its live theatre d\u00e9but in \"Shaun's Big Show\". The 100-minute-long musical/dance show features all the regular characters, including Bitzer, Shirley and Timmy.\nIn 2015, Shaun starred in \"Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs\" pantomime at Bristol Hippodrome.\nPromotional appearances.\nIn 2003, Aardman produced a cinematic commercial for the Renault Kangoo starring Wallace and Gromit. The commercial, entitled \"The Kangoo-matic\", played in front of several summer blockbusters in top British cinemas. Later \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" commercials were made for Jacob's Cream Crackers, energy supplier Npower and beverage PG Tips.\nThe duo were used to promote a Harvey Nichols store that opened in Bristol (where Aardman is based) in 2008. The pictures show them, and Lady Tottington from \"\", wearing designer clothes and items. They were used to prevent a Wensleydale cheese factory from shutting down because of financial difficulties after a member of staff came up with the idea of using Wallace and Gromit as mascots, as Wensleydale is one of Wallace's favourite cheeses.\nOn 28 March 2009, The Science Museum in London opened an exhibition called \"Wallace &amp; Gromit present a World of Cracking Ideas\". The family-orientated show, open until 1 November 2009, hoped to inspire children to be inventive. Wallace and Gromit were featured in many exhibition-exclusive videos, as well as one announcing the opening of the exhibition.\nIn December 2010, Wallace and Gromit featured on series of UK postage stamps issued by the Royal Mail for Christmas. The same month, Nick Park appeared on BBC Radio 4's \"Desert Island Discs\" and announced that he was working with Blackpool Pleasure Beach to build a theme park ride based on the characters. Wallace &amp; Gromit's Thrill-O-Matic dark ride was opened by Park at Blackpool Pleasure Beach in 2013.\nWallace and Gromit appeared in a one-minute special for the Diamond Jubilee of Elizabeth II called \"Jubilee Bunt-a-thon\". In 2012, Wallace and Gromit featured on an advert saying \"Inventing For Britain\" which was part of a poster campaign to promote British trade and business abroad in the year they hosted the Olympics.\nIn August 2012, they presented an edition of The BBC Proms, \"Wallace &amp; Gromit's Musical Marvels\", as Prom 20 of the 2012 season. Because of its popularity, \"Wallace &amp; Gromit's Musical Marvels\" became a full touring show in 2013. It premi\u00e8red at The Plenary in Melbourne, Australia on 9 February 2013. It was performed at other venues throughout 2013, with \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\" screened at each performance.\nIn 2013 and 2014, the pair appeared in a nationwide TV, press and cinema campaign promoting the British government's \"Holidays at Home are Great\" directive, called \"Wallace &amp; Gromit's Great UK Adventure\".\nIn December 2019, they appeared in a DFS Furniture advert created by Krow to celebrate their 30th anniversary. Helena Bonham Carter reprised her role as Lady Tottington with new dialogue for the advert.\nFrom 29 November to 31 December 2024, a six-minute \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" animation was projected onto London's Battersea Power Station every evening, as part of Apple's Shot on iPhone marketing campaign.\nIn 2025, \"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" entered into a partnership with gravy brand Bisto. Characters from the films featured on Bisto products, with consumers offered the chance to win a lab-grown blue diamond worth \u00a31,500. A pop-up gravy restaurant called \"The Gravy Boat\" also opened in Paddington, London, offering a gravy-themed three course menu and \"meet and greet\" opportunities for diners to meet Wallace, Gromit and Feathers McGraw.\nCharity.\n\"Wallace &amp; Gromit\" spearheaded the fundraising for two children's charities: Wallace &amp; Gromit's Children's Foundation, which supports children's hospices and hospitals in the United Kingdom, and Wallace &amp; Gromit's Grand Appeal, the Bristol Children's Hospital charity.\nIn July 2013, 80 giant fibreglass decorated sculptures of Gromit were distributed around Bristol as part of a Nick Park-inspired project to raise funds for the charity. The project was named Gromit Unleashed, and the sculptures were decorated by a range of artists and celebrities including Joanna Lumley, Sir Peter Blake, Trevor Baylis and Jools Holland. A similar project featuring Shaun the Sheep called Shaun in the City took place in 2015. Gromit Unleashed 2, also featuring Wallace &amp; Shaun took place in 2018. In 2020, \"Gromit Unleashed: The Grand Adventure\" in The Mall, Cribbs Causeway featured 15 sculptures of Wallace, Gromit, Shaun and Feathers. A further sculpture trail will take place in July and August 2025.\nTheme park ride.\nA theme park ride called \"Wallace &amp; Gromit's Thrill-O-Matic\" opened at Blackpool Pleasure Beach on 29 April 2013 by creator Nick Park, Amanda Thompson, Nick Thompson, Nick Farmer and Merlin Crossingham.\nThe ride, which cost \u00a35.25\u00a0million to make, was created by Blackpool Pleasure Beach design in association with Aardman Animations. The cars on the ride are designed on one of Wallace's slippers, so that, when a rider is seated, it is as if they are sitting inside a large slipper. The ride lasts almost four minutes, and features scenes from \"A Grand Day Out\", \"The Wrong Trousers\", \"A Close Shave\", \"The Curse of the Were-Rabbit\" and \"A Matter of Loaf and Death\" along with some archive audio and some newly recorded lines from Ben Whitehead as the voice of Wallace.\nSpin-offs.\n\"Shaun the Sheep\" (2007\u2013present).\nIn 2007, a spin-off series \"Shaun the Sheep\" was created for the character of Shaun, first introduced in 1995's \"A Close Shave\". In the series, Shaun lives with his flock at Mossy Bottom Farm, a traditional small northern English farm. In each episode, their latest attempt to add excitement to their dull mundane life as livestock somehow snowballs into a fantastic sitcom-style escapade, most often with the help of their fascination with human doings and devices. This usually brings them into conflict\u2014and often into partnership\u2014with the farm sheepdog Bitzer, while they all are simultaneously trying to avoid discovery by the Farmer. Following the success of the series, two series of 1-minute shorts were created \u2013 \"Mossy Bottom Shorts\" and \"Championsheeps\"\u2014followed by a television special \"The Farmer's Llamas\" (2015) and two feature films, \"Shaun the Sheep Movie\" (2015) and \"\" (2019). A third feature film, \"Shaun the Sheep: The Beast of Mossy Bottom\", is scheduled for a theatrical release in 2026.\n\"Timmy Time\" (2009\u201312).\nIn 2009, a spin-off of \"Shaun the Sheep\", \"Timmy Time\", was created centring on the character of the same name. In the series, Timmy and his friends have to learn to share, make friends and accept their mistakes. They are supervised by two teachers, Harriet the Heron and Osbourne the Owl. The show is aimed at pre-school-aged children which the company described as \"a natural step for Aardman\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33578", "revid": "50984144", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33578", "title": "1 World Trade Center (1970\u20132001)", "text": "Former skyscraper in Manhattan, New York\nThe original One World Trade Center (also known as the North Tower, Tower 1, Building One, or 1 WTC) was one of the Twin Towers of the original World Trade Center complex in New York City. It was topped out in 1970, and completed in 1972. It stood at a height of , and was the tallest building in the world until 1973, when surpassed by the Sears Tower in Chicago. On the 106th and 107th floors of this building were a complex of dining, meeting, and entertainment venues known as Windows on the World.\nIt was distinguishable from its twin, the original 2 World Trade Center, also known as the South Tower, by the telecommunications antenna on its roof. Including the antenna, the building stood at a total height of . The North Tower was 6 feet taller than the South Tower because floor 43 was 2 feet taller and floor 67 was 4 feet taller than the standard ceiling of 12 feet. These two floors were used by the Port Authority. Other things that made the North Tower distinguishable from its twin was a canopy connected to the North Tower's west facade on street level as well as two pedestrian walkways that extended from the west and south promenades of Three and Six World Trade Center to the North Tower's north and south facades on plaza level, all of which the South Tower lacked. The building's address was 1 World Trade Center, and the WTC complex had its own ZIP code (10048) due to its large size.\nThe original World Trade Center was destroyed in the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Struck by American Airlines Flight 11 at 8:46 a.m., the North Tower was the first of the Twin Towers to be hit by a hijacked aircraft, and the second to collapse, at 10:28 a.m. The North Tower stood for 102 minutes after the aircraft impact. Of the 2,977 victims killed in the attacks, around 1,700 were in the North Tower or on the ground.\nThe North Tower was succeeded by the present-day One World Trade Center tower, which was opened in November 2014 as the lead building of the redeveloped World Trade Center site. At the National September 11 Memorial &amp; Museum, the northern pool marks the spot where the North Tower once stood.\nHistory.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1961, the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey agreed to build the World Trade Center on the site of the Hudson Terminal in Lower Manhattan, New York City. On September 20, 1962, the Port Authority announced the selection of Minoru Yamasaki as lead architect and Emery Roth &amp; Sons as associate architects. Yamasaki devised the plan to incorporate twin towers. His original plan called for the towers to be 80 stories tall, but to meet the Port Authority's requirement for of office space, the buildings would each have to be 110 stories tall. Yamasaki's design for the World Trade Center, unveiled to the public on January 18, 1964, called for a square plan approximately in dimension on each side.\nIn March 1965, the Port Authority began acquiring property at the World Trade Center site. Demolition work began on March 21, 1966, and groundbreaking for the construction of the World Trade Center took place on August 5, 1966. In January 1967, the Port Authority awarded $74\u00a0million in contracts to various steel suppliers. Construction work began on the North Tower in August 1968. The topping out ceremony for 1\u00a0WTC (the North Tower) took place on December 23, 1970. The first tenants moved into the North Tower on December 15, 1970, while it was still under construction, and a ribbon cutting ceremony took place on April 4, 1973.\nOn the 106th and 107th floors of this building were a complex of dining, meeting, and entertainment venues known as Windows on the World.\nOperation.\nOn February 12, 1975, a three-alarm fire broke out on the North Tower's 11th floor, spreading to the 9th and 14th floors. At that time, the World Trade Center had no fire sprinkler systems. A disgruntled custodian was discovered to have deliberately started the fire and was criminally charged. Following the fire, in 1981, the Port Authority announced a $45 million plan to install sprinklers throughout the World Trade Center.\nThe first terrorist attack on the World Trade Center occurred on February 26, 1993, at 12:17\u00a0p.m. A Ryder truck filled with of explosives (planted by Ramzi Yousef) detonated in the North Tower's underground garage. According to a presiding judge, the conspirators' chief aim at the time of the attack was to destabilize the North Tower and send it crashing into the South Tower, toppling both skyscrapers. Six people were killed and 1,042 others were injured in the attacks. Following the bombing, floors that were blown out needed to be repaired to restore structural support.\nIn February 2001, the Port Authority leased the entire World Trade Center complex to Vornado Realty Trust. However, Vornado insisted on last minute changes to the deal, and the next-highest bidder, Silverstein Properties, signed a lease for the complex on July 24, 2001.\nDestruction.\nAt 8:46\u00a0a.m. (EDT) on September 11, 2001, five hijackers affiliated with al-Qaeda crashed American Airlines Flight 11 into the northern facade of the North Tower between the 93rd and 99th floors. Seventeen minutes later, at 9:03\u00a0a.m. (EDT), a second group of five terrorists crashed the hijacked United Airlines Flight 175 into the southern facade of the South Tower, striking between the 77th and 85th floors.\nBy 9:59\u00a0a.m. (EDT), the South Tower collapsed after burning for approximately 56 minutes. After burning for 102\u00a0minutes, the North Tower collapsed due to structural failure at 10:28\u00a0a.m. (EDT). When the North Tower collapsed, debris fell on the nearby 7 World Trade Center, damaging it and starting fires. The fires burned for hours, compromising the building's structural integrity. Seven World Trade Center collapsed at 5:21\u00a0p.m. (EDT).\nTogether with a simultaneous attack on the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia, and a passenger revolt that resulted in a plane crash in Shanksville, Pennsylvania, the attacks resulted in the deaths of 2,996 people (2,507 civilians, 343 firefighters, 72 law enforcement officers, 55 military personnel, and the 19 hijackers). More than 90% of the workers and visitors who died in the towers had been at or above the points of impact. In the North Tower, 1,355 people at or above the point of impact were trapped, and died of smoke inhalation, fell, jumped from the tower to escape the smoke and flames, or were killed when the building eventually collapsed. One stairwell in the South Tower, Stairwell A, somehow avoided complete destruction, unlike the rest of the building. When Flight 11 hit, all three staircases in the North Tower's impact zone were destroyed, making it impossible for anyone above the 91st floor to escape. 107 people below the point of impact also died.\nArchitecture.\nMinoru Yamasaki was the lead architect for the tower, and Emery Roth &amp; Sons were the associate architects. During the World Trade Center's construction, the structural engineers ended up following draft versions of New York City's 1968 building codes, which incorporated \"advanced techniques\" in building design. The Twin Towers used a tube-frame design, which required 40 percent less structural steel than conventional building designs. The structures were inspired by the architectural ethic of Le Corbusier and was the seminal expression of Yamasaki's gothic modernist tendencies. Yamasaki was also inspired by Islamic architecture, elements of which he incorporated in the buildings' design, having previously designed Saudi Arabia's Dhahran International Airport with the Saudi Binladin Group. \nWhen completed, the North Tower stood tall. It featured a telecommunications antenna or mast that was built on the roof in 1979 (upgraded in 1999 to accommodate DTV broadcasts). With this addition, the highest point of the North Tower reached . Each tower stood over high, and occupied about of the total of the site's land.\nFacade.\nThe Twin Towers' facades were made of high-strength, load-bearing perimeter steel columns which acted as Vierendeel trusses. Although the columns themselves were lightweight, they were spaced closely together, forming a strong, rigid wall structure. There were 59 perimeter columns, narrowly spaced, on each side of the building. In all, the perimeter walls measured long on each side, and the corners were beveled. The perimeter structure was constructed of prefabricated modular pieces connected by spandrel plates. From the 7th floor to the ground level, and down to the foundation, the columns were spaced apart to accommodate doorways. All columns were placed on bedrock 65\u201385\u00a0feet (20\u201326\u00a0m) below the surface.\nStructural features.\nThe building's core housed the elevator and utility shafts, restrooms, three stairwells, and other support spaces. The core of each tower was a rectangular area 87 by 135\u00a0feet (27 by 41\u00a0m), and contained 47 steel columns running from the bedrock to the top of the tower. The North Tower's structural core was oriented with the long axis east to west. The core columns supported about half the towers' weight. All elevators were located in the core. Each building had three stairwells, also in the core, except on the mechanical floors. The large, column-free space between the perimeter and core was bridged by prefabricated floor trusses, which connected to the perimeter columns.\nHat trusses (or \"outrigger truss\") located from the 107th floor to the top of the North and South towers were designed to support a tall communication antenna on top of each building. Only the North Tower actually had an antenna fitted, which was added in 1978. The framed-tube design using steel core and perimeter columns protected with sprayed-on fire resistant material created a relatively lightweight structure that would sway more in response to the wind. In designing the World Trade Center, Leslie Robertson considered the scenario of the impact of a jet airliner crashing into the building. The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) found a three-page white paper that mentioned another aircraft impact analysis, involving impact of a jet at , was indeed considered, but NIST could not locate the documentary evidence of the aircraft impact analysis.\nSprayed-fire resistant materials (SFRMs), gypsum wallboard, and vermiculite were used to provide fireproofing to the interiors. More fireproofing was added after a fire in February 1975, but after the 1993 bombing, inspections found fireproofing to be deficient. The 1968 New York City building codes did not require sprinklers for high-rise buildings, except for underground spaces, but the entire complex was retrofitted by 2001.\nTenants at the time of the attacks.\nThe tenant list below was compiled from the original list provided by CoStar Group (a provider of electronic commercial real estate information), quoted by CNN, and was sourced from UnBlinking.com. Cantor Fitzgerald's corporate headquarters were located in 1 World Trade Center.\nSOURCES: CoStar Group, CNN, and Unblinking.\nFloor unknown: Alliance Global Finance, Associated Charter Marine, Carreden Group, CIF Agency, Dimetol International Trade, Eastern Capital Corporation, Falcon International Freight, First Pacific Rim, GAC Shipping, Garwood Financial, Globe Shipping Company, GSI Cargo Service, Hachijuni Bank, Hanil Securities, Lin Brothers International, Pluto Commodities, Port Newark\n92nd floor.\nThe 92nd floor, though technically the first floor below Flight 11's impact zone, did not have any survivors. Sixty-nine people reported to work that morning, including 67 employees of Carr Futures, a tenant on the 92nd floor. The impact itself spared every single person on Floor 92 and did no damage to the floor directly. However, the force of the crash collapsed walls and inflicted nonstructural damage such as smashed windows, broken ceiling tiles and severed electrical wires, as well as causing knee-deep flooding throughout various rooms on the 92nd floor after the water pipes burst. Multiple calls were recorded from people trapped on the floor, the workers reporting that although the stairs on the 92nd floor had not been destroyed, they were walled off by fallen debris from Flight 11's impact zone immediately above. In addition to the stairs being rendered impassable, the centralized impact into the North Tower's core also interrupted elevator service in the skyscraper from its 50th floor and higher, severing all escape routes for anyone above the 91st floor.\nInitially, conditions on the 92nd floor were likely not dissimilar to what they were on the 91st, from which everyone survived and escaped. The situation changed very quickly when flammable aviation fuel spilled down into the 92nd floor, igniting fires that rapidly began consuming its east side; within 12 minutes of the impact, the first known fatalities from the floor occurred over a three-minute period when eight workers were forced to jump from the northern end of the tower's east side to escape a rapidly advancing wall of flames.\nThose who remained made their way to an unoccupied area on the west side of the floor that was initially free of smoke and fire. However, images show that the blaze on the tower's north face eventually spread westward to their safe haven in that section of the floor, making conditions there unsurvivable.\nThe last phone call from the North Tower came from Thomas McGinnis, a trader on the 92nd floor, when he got through to his wife Iliana at 10:18. McGinnis and a number of others had been confined to a conference room the entire time after the door jammed shut from the building buckling as the plane hit, separating them from everyone else on the floor. Most of the floor was engulfed in flames by the time McGinnis called, with extremely limited space for the group to avoid being burned.\nDespite his wife's attempts to reassure him, McGinnis did not believe they would survive. The South Tower had already collapsed, and McGinnis revealed to her that he could see people jumping from the floors above. The line went dead at 10:26, two minutes before the tower collapsed.\nTenants that left prior to the attacks.\nBetween 1978 and 1995, the Consulate of Paraguay was located in Suite 1609 of 1 World Trade Center. Home Lines once occupied Suite 3969 from 1974 until 1988. Telerate Systems, Inc., which was subsumed by Dow Jones, occupied the 104th floor.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33580", "revid": "37480484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33580", "title": "William Saroyan", "text": "Armenian writer (1908\u20131981)\nWilliam Saroyan (; August 31, 1908 \u2013 May 18, 1981) was an American novelist, playwright, and short story writer. He was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for Drama in 1940, and in 1943 won the Academy Award for Best Story for the film \"The Human Comedy\". When the studio rejected his original 240-page treatment, he turned it into a novel, \"The Human Comedy.\"\nSaroyan wrote extensively about the Armenian immigrant life in California. Many of his stories and plays are set in his native Fresno. Some of his best-known works are \"The Time of Your Life\", \"My Name Is Aram\" and \" My Heart's in the Highlands\". His two collections of short stories from the 1930s, \"Inhale Exhale\" (1936) and \"The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze\" (1941), are regarded as among his major achievements and essential documents of the cultural history of the period on the American West Coast.\nHe has been described in a Dickinson College news release as \"one of the most prominent literary figures of the mid-20th century\" and by Stephen Fry as \"one of the most underrated writers of the [20th] century.\" Fry suggests that \"he takes his place naturally alongside Hemingway, Steinbeck and Faulkner\". Kurt Vonnegut has said that Saroyan was \"the first and still the greatest of all the American minimalists.\u201d\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nWilliam Saroyan () was born on August 31, 1908, in Fresno, California, to Armenak and Takuhi Saroyan, Armenian immigrants from Bitlis, Ottoman Empire. His father came to New York in 1905 and started preaching in Armenian Apostolic churches. His cousin was musician Ross Bagdasarian.\nAt the age of three, after his father's death, Saroyan, along with his brother and sister, was placed in an orphanage in Oakland, California. He later went on to describe his experience in the orphanage in his writings. Five years later, the family reunited in Fresno, where his mother, Takuhi, had already secured work at a cannery. He continued his education on his own, supporting himself with jobs, such as working as an office manager for the San Francisco Telegraph Company.\nSaroyan decided to become a writer after his mother showed him some of his father's writings. A few of his early short articles were published in \"Overland Monthly\". His first stories appeared at the end of the 1920s. Among these was \"The Broken Wheel\", written under the name Sirak Goryan and published in the Armenian journal \"Hairenik\" in 1933. Many of Saroyan's stories were based on his childhood experiences among the Armenian-American fruit growers of the San Joaquin Valley or dealt with the rootlessness of the immigrant. The short story collection \"My Name is Aram\" (1940), an international bestseller, was about a young boy and the colorful characters of his immigrant family. It has been translated into many languages.\nCareer.\nAs a writer, Saroyan made his breakthrough in \"Story\" magazine with \"The Daring Young Man on the Flying Trapeze\" (1934), the title taken from the nineteenth-century song of the same title. The protagonist \u2014 a young, starving writer who tries to survive in a Depression-ridden society \u2014 resembles the penniless writer in Knut Hamsun's 1890 novel \"Hunger\", but lacks the anger and nihilism of Hamsun's narrator. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Through the air on the flying trapeze, his mind hummed. Amusing it was, astoundingly funny. A trapeze to God, or to nothing, a flying trapeze to some sort of eternity; he prayed objectively for strength to make the flight with grace.\nThe story was republished in the 1941 short story collection that took its title. The royalties from this enabled Saroyan to travel to Europe and Armenia, where he learned to love the taste of Russian cigarettes, once observing, \"You may tend to get cancer from the thing that makes you want to smoke so much, not from the smoking itself\" (from \"Not Dying\", 1963). His advice to a young writer was: \"Try to learn to breathe deeply; really to taste food when you eat, and when you sleep really to sleep. Try as much as possible to be wholly alive with all your might, and when you laugh, laugh like hell.\" Saroyan endeavored to create a prose style full of zest for life and seemingly impressionistic, that came to be called \"Saroyanesque\".\nSaroyan's stories of the period characteristically devote an unvarnished attention to the trials and tribulation, social malaise and despair of the Depression. He worked rapidly, hardly editing his text, and drinking and gambling away much of his earnings. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am an estranged man, said the liar: estranged from myself, from my family, my fellow man, my country, my world, my time, and my culture. I am not estranged from God, although I am a disbeliever in everything about God excepting God indefinable, inside all and careless of all.\u2014\u200a\nSaroyan published essays and memoirs, in which he depicted the people he had met on travels in the Soviet Union and Europe, such as the playwright George Bernard Shaw, the Finnish composer Jean Sibelius, and Charlie Chaplin. In 1952, Saroyan published \"The Bicycle Rider in Beverly Hills\", the first of several volumes of memoirs. Several other works were drawn from his own experiences, although his approach to autobiographical fact contained a fair bit of poetic license. Drawn from such deeply personal sources, Saroyan's plays often disregarded the convention that conflict is essential to drama. \"My Heart's in the Highlands\" (1939), his first play, a comedy about a young boy and his Armenian family, was produced at the Guild Theatre in New York. He is probably best remembered for his play \"The Time of Your Life\" (1939), set in a waterfront saloon in San Francisco. It won a Pulitzer Prize, which Saroyan refused on the grounds that commerce should not judge the arts; he did accept the New York Drama Critics' Circle award. The play was adapted into a 1948 film starring James Cagney.\nBefore the war, Saroyan had worked on the screenplay of \"Golden Boy\" (1939), based on Clifford Odets's play, but he never had much success in Hollywood. A second screenplay, \"The Human Comedy\" (1943) is set in the fictional California town of Ithaca in the San Joaquin Valley (based on Saroyan's memories of Fresno, California), where young telegraph messenger Homer bears witness to the sorrows and joys of life during World War II.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Mrs. Sandoval,\" Homer said swiftly, \"your son is dead. Maybe it's a mistake. Maybe it wasn't your son. Maybe it was somebody else. The telegram says it was Juan Domingo. But maybe the telegram is wrong ...\u2014\u200a\nHaving hired Saroyan to write the MGM screenplay, Louis B. Mayer balked at its length, but Saroyan would not compromise and was removed from directing the project. He then turned the script into a novel, publishing it just prior to the release of the film, for which he won the 1943 Academy Award for Best Story. The novel is often credited as the source for the movie, when in fact the reverse is true. The novel was itself the basis for a 1983 musical of the same name. After his disappointment with the \"Human Comedy\" film project, he never permitted Hollywood screen adaptations of any of his novels, despite his often dire financial straits.\nSaroyan served in the U.S. Army during World War II and was stationed in Astoria, Queens, spending much of his time at the Lombardy Hotel in Manhattan, far from Army personnel. In 1942, he was posted to London as part of a Signal Corps film unit. He narrowly avoided a court martial when his novel, \"The Adventures of Wesley Jackson\", was seen as advocating pacifism. Interest in Saroyan's novels declined after the war, when he was criticized for sentimentality. Freedom, brotherly love, and universal benevolence were for him basic values, but critics considered his idealism as out of step with the times which, in their view, were properly described as devoted to division, ethnic and ideological hatred, and universal predation. He still wrote prolifically, so that one of his readers could ask \"How could you write so much good stuff and still write such bad stuff?\" In the novellas \"The Assyrian and other stories\" (1950) and in \"The Laughing Matter\" (1953), Saroyan mixed allegorical elements within a realistic novel. The plays \"Sam Ego's House\" (1949) and \"The Slaughter of the Innocents\" (1958) were not as successful as his prewar plays. Many of Saroyan's later plays, such as \"The Paris Comedy\" (1960), \"The London Comedy\" (1960), and \"Settled Out of Court\" (1960), premiered in Europe. Manuscripts of a number of unperformed plays are now at Stanford University with his other papers.\nWhen Ernest Hemingway learned that Saroyan had made fun of the controversial non-fiction work \"Death in the Afternoon\", Hemingway responded: \"We've seen them come and go \u2014 good ones too, better ones than you, Mr. Saroyan.\"\nOne of Saroyan's most financially successful ventures was perhaps his most unlikely: the song \"Come On-a My House,\" which became a huge hit in 1951 for singer Rosemary Clooney. Saroyan wrote the song in 1939 with his cousin Ross Bagdasarian (who later became famous as \"David Seville,\" the impresario behind Alvin and the Chipmunks), adapting the music from an Armenian folk song.\nSaroyan also painted. He said: \"I made drawings before I learned how to write. The impulse to do so seems basic \u2014 it is both the invention and the use of language.\" His abstract expressionist works were exhibited by the Anita Shapolsky Gallery in New York City. From 1958 on, William Saroyan mainly resided in a Paris apartment. In the late 1960s and 1970s, Saroyan earned more money and finally got out of debt. In 1979, he was inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame. The Indian educational board CBSE has added a chapter of his in the grade 11 English book \"Snapshots\" named \"The Summer of the Beautiful White Horse\" in his honour.\nPersonal life.\nSaroyan had a correspondence with writer Sanora Babb that began in 1932 and ended in 1941, that grew into an unrequited love affair on Saroyan's part.\nIn 1943, Saroyan married actress Carol Grace (1924\u20132003; also known as Carol Marcus), with whom he had two children: Aram, who became an author and published a book about his father, and Lucy, who became an actress. By the late 1940s, Saroyan's drinking and gambling took a toll on his marriage, and in 1949, upon returning from an extended European trip, he filed for divorce. They remarried in 1951 and divorced again in 1952 with Marcus later claiming in her autobiography, \"Among the Porcupines: A Memoir\", that Saroyan was abusive. After her divorce from Saroyan, Carol Grace (Marcus) married actor Walter Matthau in 1959, and they remained married until his death in 2000. \nDeath.\nSaroyan died in Fresno, of prostate cancer at the age of 72. Half of his ashes were buried in Ararat Cemetery in Fresno, California, and the remainder in Armenia at the Komitas Pantheon near fellow artists such as composer Aram Khachaturian, painter Martiros Saryan, and film director Sergei Parajanov.\nCommemoration.\nIn 2008, a monument was erected in honor of Saroyan in Mashtots Avenue in Yerevan (sculptor David Yerevantsi, architects Ruben Asratyan and Levon Igityan).\nIn 2014, the city council of Bitlis approved the renaming of five streets in the historical part of the city in Southeast Turkey. One of the 5 streets was renamed to \u201cWilliam Saroyan Street\u201d.\nIn 2015 several libraries were opened in honor of William Saroyan in the city of Bitlis, Turkey.\nOn August 31, 2018, the William Saroyan House Museum was opened in the house where Saroyan lived for the last 17 years of his life, in the city of Fresno, the USA. The house presents photographs from different periods of his life, drawings, and covers of his books. The museum has a separate room which features a hologram of the writer.\nIn 1991, the USA and the USSR (series \"Joint issue of USSR and USA. William Saroyan\") issued stamps depicting William Saroyan.\nThe Central Bank of Armenia issued a 10,000 Dram coin (\"100th Birth anniversary of novelist William Saroyan\") in 2008 and a 5,000 Dram banknote in 2018.\nIn October 1988, a small alley in San Francisco across from City Lights Bookstore named Adler Place, was renamed William Saroyan Place in Saroyan's honor. Championed by City Lights owner Lawrence Ferlinghetti, the naming (along with the renaming of its twin alley across the street to \"Jack Kerouac Alley\") was commemorated with a gala.\nIn Los Angeles, there are a series of stairs in the Hollywoodland neighborhood, one of which is named the Saroyan Stairs. Saroyan used to live in the nearby Villa Carlotta.\nAwards.\nIn 1940, William Saroyan was awarded the Pulitzer Prize for his play \"The Time of Your Life\", but he refused the award.\nIn 1943, William Saroyan received the Academy Award for his screenplay for \"The Human Comedy\", a screenplay he adapted into a novel that was published just prior to the release of the film.\" \"\nThe 2013 Parajanov-Vartanov Institute Award posthumously honored Saroyan for the play \"The Time of Your Life\" and the novel \"Human Comedy\". It was presented to his granddaughter by Academy Award-winning Hollywood actor Jon Voight.\nBibliography.\nNovels.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nShort story collections.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nPlays.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n*\"My Heart's in the Highlands\"\n*\"The Time of Your Life\"\n* \"Love's Old Sweet Song\"\nShort stories.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "33582", "revid": "48104169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33582", "title": "World Food Programme", "text": "Food-assistance branch of the UN\nThe World Food Programme (WFP) is an international organization within the United Nations (UN) that provides food assistance worldwide. It is the world's largest humanitarian organization and the leading provider of school meals. Founded in 1961, WFP is headquartered in Rome and has offices in 87 countries. In 2023 it supported over 152 million people, and it is present in more than 120 countries and territories.\nIn addition to emergency food relief, WFP offers technical and development assistance, such as building capacity for emergency preparedness and response, managing supply chains and logistics, promoting social safety programs, and strengthening resilience against climate change. It is also a major provider of direct cash assistance, and provides passenger services for humanitarian workers through its management of the United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS).\nWFP is an executive member of the United Nations Sustainable Development Group, a consortium of UN entities that aims to fulfil the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), with a priority to achieve SDG 2, \"zero hunger\", by 2030.\nThe World Food Programme was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2020 for its efforts to provide food assistance in areas of conflict and to prevent the use of food as a weapon of war and conflict.\nHistory.\nWFP was established in 1961 after the 1960 Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) Conference, when George McGovern, director of the US Food for Peace Programmes, proposed establishing a multilateral food aid programme. WFP launched its first programmes in 1963 by the FAO and the United Nations General Assembly on a three-year experimental basis, supporting the Nubian population at Wadi Halfa in Sudan. In 1965, the programme was extended to a continuing basis.\nBackground.\nWFP works across a broad spectrum of Sustainable Development Goals. Food shortages, hunger, malnutrition, and foodborne illness lead to poor health, which affects other areas of sustainable development, such as education, employment, and poverty (Sustainable Development Goals Four, Eight, and One respectively).\nFunding.\nWFP operations are primarily funded by voluntary donations by governments worldwide, along with contributions from corporations and private donors. In 2022, funding reached a record USD 14.1 billion\u2014up by almost 50 percent from 2021\u2014against an operational funding need of USD 21.4 billion. The United States was the largest donor.\nIn 2023, the WFP received USD 8.3 billion in funding, likely marking the first time since 2010 that funding decreased from the previous year, creating a funding gap of 64%.\nIn February 2025, the WFP received directives from the U.S. to halt operations on numerous U.S.-funded grants, despite an emergency waiver issued by Secretary of State Marco Rubio intended to allow essential food assistance to continue. These grants, managed by the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), are valued at tens of millions of dollars and are instrumental in providing food aid to countries such as Yemen, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Sudan, South Sudan, the Central African Republic, Haiti, and Mali. The suspension encompasses several projects under the Food for Peace Title II program, which annually allocates approximately $2 billion for the donation of U.S. commodities and constitutes a significant portion of U.S. international food assistance. This program is jointly administered by the U.S. Department of Agriculture and USAID.\nOrganization.\nGovernance, leadership and staff.\nWFP is governed by an executive board that consists of representatives of 36 member states and provides intergovernmental support, direction, and supervision of WFP's activities. Of the 36 board members, 18 are elected by the United Nations Economic and Social Council and 18 by the Food and Agriculture Organization. The European Union is a permanent observer in WFP and, as a major donor, participates in the work of its executive board. WFP is headed by an executive director, who is appointed jointly by the UN Secretary-General and the director-general of the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations. The executive director is appointed for fixed five-year terms and is responsible for the administration of the organization as well as the implementation of its programmes, projects, and other activities. Cindy McCain, previously Ambassador and Permanent Representative of the United States Mission to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Agencies in Rome, was appointed to the role in March 2023.\nIn March 2023, WFP had over 22,300 staff.\nList of executive directors.\nSince 1992, all executive directors have been American. The following is a chronological list of those who have served as executive director of the World Food Programme:\nActivities.\nEmergencies.\nAbout two-thirds of WFP life-saving food assistance goes to people facing high degrees of food insecurity, predominantly resulting from violence and armed conflict. Over 60% of the people facing hunger globally live in regions experiencing armed violence, which compounds with increased displacement, destruction of food systems, and increased humanitarian access challenges to pose massive risks to food security in the regions. In 2023, more than 300 million people faced acute hunger globally. WFP said it had \"reached 152 million people with essential aid\" in 2023.\nThe latest Hunger Hotspots outlook released June 2024 and co-published by WFP and FAO, emphasised that \"acute food insecurity is likely to deteriorate further in 18 hotspots\" between June and October 2024. These countries and country clusters face famine or risk of famine, with population already in or facing IPC Phase 5 (Catastrophe). Of those countries, Haiti, Mali, Palestine, South Sudan, and Sudan are classified as the most concerning.\nWFP is also a first responder to sudden-onset emergencies. When floods struck Sudan in July 2020, it provided emergency food assistance to nearly 160,000 people. WFP provided food as well as vouchers for people to buy vital supplies, while also planning recovery, reconstruction, and resilience-building activities, after Cyclone Idai struck Mozambique and floods washed an estimated 400,000 hectares of crops on early 2019.\nWFP's emergency support is also preemptive in offsetting the potential impact of disasters. In the Sahel region of Africa, amidst economic challenges, climate change, and armed militancy, WFP's activities included working with communities and partners to harvest water for irrigation, restore degraded land, and support livelihoods through skills training. It uses early-warning systems to help communities prepare for disasters. In Bangladesh, weather forecasting led to the distribution of cash to vulnerable farmers to pay for measures such as reinforcing their homes or stockpiling food ahead of heavy flooding.\nWFP is the lead agency of the Logistics Cluster, a coordination mechanism established by the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC). It also co-leads the Food Security Cluster. The WFP-managed United Nations Humanitarian Air Service (UNHAS) serves over 300 destinations globally. WFP also manages the United Nations Humanitarian Response Depot (UNHRD), a global network of hubs that procure, store and transport emergency supplies for the organization and the wider humanitarian community. WFP logistical support, including its air service and hubs, has enabled staff and supplies from WFP and partner organizations to reach areas where commercial flights have not been available during the COVID-19 pandemic.\nClimate change.\nWFP provided cash to vulnerable groups ahead of torrential rains in Bangladesh in July 2019. Its response to Hurricane Dorian in the Bahamas in September 2019 was assisted by a regional office in Barbados, which had been set up the previous year to enable better disaster preparedness and response. In advance of Dorian, WFP deployed technical experts in food security, logistics and emergency telecommunication to support a rapid needs assessment. Assessment teams also conducted an initial aerial reconnaissance mission with the aim to put teams on the ground as soon as possible.\nNutrition.\nWFP works with governments, other UN agencies, NGOs and the private sector, increasing food security, supporting nutrition interventions, policies and programmes, that include school meals and food fortification.\nSchool meals.\nSchool meals encourage parents in vulnerable families to send their children to school, rather than work. They have proved highly beneficial in areas including education and gender equality, health and nutrition, social protection, local economies and agriculture. WFP works with partners to ensure school feeding is part of integrated school health and nutrition programmes, which include services such as malaria control, menstrual hygiene and guidance on sanitation and hygiene.\nSmallholder farmers.\nWFP is a member of a global consortium that forms the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Farm to Market Alliance, which helps smallholder farmers receive information, investment and support, so they can produce and sell marketable surplus and increase their income. WFP connects smallholder farmers to markets in more than 40 countries.\nIn 2008, WFP coordinated the five-year Purchase for Progress (P4P) pilot project. P4P assists smallholding farmers by offering them opportunities to access agricultural markets and become competitive players in the marketplace. The project spanned across 20 countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America and trained 800,000 farmers in improved agricultural production, post-harvest handling, quality assurance, group marketing, agricultural finance, and contracting with WFP. The project resulted in 366,000 metric tons of food produced and generated more than US$148\u00a0million in income for its smallholder farmers.\nAsset creation.\nWFP's Food Assistance for Assets (FFA) programme provides cash or food-based transfers to address recipients' immediate food needs, while they build or boost assets, such as repairing irrigation systems, bridges, and land and water management activities.\nFFA reflects WFP's drive towards food assistance and development rather than food aid and dependency. It does this by focusing on the assets and their impact on people and communities rather than on the work to realize them, a shift away from previous approaches such as Food or Cash for Work programmes and large public works programmes.\nCash assistance.\nWFP uses cash transfers such as physical banknotes, a debit card or vouchers, aiming to give more choices to aid recipients and encourage the funds to be invested back into local economies. During the first half of 2022, WFP delivered US$1.6 billion in cash to 37 million people in 70 countries to alleviate hunger. A 2022 study by the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative concluded that the Emergency Social Safety Net (ESSN) cash programme \"significantly reduced the incidence and intensity of multidimensional poverty\" among the people receiving cash transfers.\nCapacity building.\nIn the most climate disaster-prone provinces of the Philippines, WFP is providing emergency response training and equipment to local government units, and helping set up automated weather stations.\nDigital innovation.\nWFP's digital transformation centres on deploying the latest technologies and data to help achieve zero hunger. The WFP Innovation Accelerator has sourced and supported more than 60 projects spanning 45 countries. In 2017, WFP launched the Building Blocks programme. It aims to distribute money-for-food assistance to Syrian refugees in Jordan. The project uses blockchain technology to digitize identities and allow refugees to receive food by eye scanning. WFP's low-tech hydroponics kits allow refugees to grow barley that feed livestock in the Sahara desert. The SMP PLUS software is an AI-powered menu creation tool for school meals programmes worldwide \nPartnerships.\nWFP works with governments, the private sector, UN agencies, international finance groups, academia, and more than 1,000 non-governmental organisations. The WFP, the UN Food and Agriculture Organization, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development reaffirmed their joint efforts to end global hunger, particularly amid the COVID-19 pandemic, during a joint meeting of their governing bodies in October 2020. In the United States, Washington, D.C.\u2013based 501(c)(3) organization World Food Program USA supports the WFP. The American organisation frequently donates to the WFP, though the two are separate entities for taxation purposes.\nAid transparency.\nWFP joined the International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) in 2013 as its 150th member and has regularly published data since then using the identifier XM-DAC-41140. The organisation was assessed by Publish What You Fund and included in the 2024 Aid Transparency Index with an overall score of 84.5, which is categorised as a \"very good\" score.\nCountries of operation.\nAfghanistan.\n14.8 million people have acute food insecurity.\nYemen.\n19.5 million people need humanitarian assistance and 17.1 million are food insecure.\nReviews.\nRecognition and awards.\nWFP won the 2020 Nobel Peace Prize for its \"efforts for combating hunger\", its \"contribution to creating peace in conflicted-affected areas\", and for acting as a driving force in efforts to prevent the use of food as a weapon of war and conflict. Receiving the award, executive David Beasley called for billionaires to \"step up\" and help source the US$5 billion WFP needs to save 30 million people from famine.\nChallenges.\nIn 2018, the Center for Global Development ranked WFP last in a study of 40 aid programmes, based on indicators grouped into four themes: maximising efficiency, fostering institutions, reducing burdens, and transparency and learning. These indicators relate to aid effectiveness principles developed at the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness (2005), the Accra Agenda for Action (2008), and the Busan Partnership Agreement (2011).\nThere is wide general debate on the net effectiveness of aid, including unintended consequences such as increasing the duration of conflicts and increasing corruption. WFP faces difficult decisions in working with some regimes.\nSome surveys have shown internal culture problems at WFP, including sexual harassment.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33583", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33583", "title": "World Health Organization", "text": "Specialized agency of the United Nations\nThe World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations which coordinates responses to international public health issues and emergencies. It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, and has six regional offices and 150 field offices worldwide. Only sovereign states are eligible to join, and it is the largest intergovernmental health organization at the international level.\nThe WHO's purpose is to achieve the highest possible level of health for all the world's people, defining health as \"a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity.\" The main functions of the World Health Organization include promoting the control of epidemic and endemic diseases; providing and improving the teaching and training in public health, the medical treatment of disease, and related matters; and promoting the establishment of international standards for biological products.\nThe WHO was established on 7 April 1948, and formally began its work on 1 September 1948. It incorporated the assets, personnel, and duties of the League of Nations' Health Organization and the Paris-based , including the International Classification of Diseases (ICD). The agency's work began in earnest in 1951 after a significant infusion of financial and technical resources.\nThe WHO's official mandate is to promote health and safety while helping the vulnerable worldwide. It provides technical assistance to countries, sets international health standards, collects data on global health issues, and serves as a forum for scientific or policy discussions related to health. Its official publication, the \"World Health Report\", provides assessments of worldwide health topics.\nThe WHO has played a leading role in several public health achievements, most notably the eradication of smallpox, the near-eradication of polio, and the development of an Ebola vaccine. Its current priorities include communicable diseases, such as HIV/AIDS, Ebola, malaria and tuberculosis; non-communicable diseases such as heart disease and cancer; healthy diet, nutrition, and food security; occupational health; and substance abuse. The agency advocates for universal health care coverage, engagement with the monitoring of public health risks, coordinating responses to health emergencies, and promoting health and well-being generally.\nThe WHO is governed by the World Health Assembly (WHA), which is composed of its 194 member states. The WHA elects and advises an executive board made up of 34 health specialists; selects the WHO's chief administrator, the director-general (currently Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus of Ethiopia); sets goals and priorities; and approves the budget and activities. The WHO is funded primarily by contributions from member states (both assessed and voluntary), followed by private donors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nOrigin and founding.\nArcot Ramaswamy Mudaliar, the first president of the UN Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) in 1946, played a central role in founding the World Health Organization (WHO). Under his presidency, ECOSOC initiated the international conference that established the WHO as a specialized UN agency.\nThe International Sanitary Conferences (ISC), the first of which was held on 23 June 1851, were a series of conferences that took place until 1938, about 87 years. The first conference, in Paris, was almost solely concerned with cholera, which would remain the disease of major concern for the ISC for most of the 19th century. With the cause, origin, and communicability of many epidemic diseases still uncertain and a matter of scientific argument, international agreement on appropriate measures was difficult to reach.\nSeven of these international conferences, spanning 41 years, were convened before any resulted in a multi-state international agreement. The seventh conference, in Venice in 1892, finally resulted in a convention. It was concerned only with the sanitary control of shipping traversing the Suez Canal, and was an effort to guard against importation of cholera.\nFive years later, in 1897, a convention concerning the bubonic plague was signed by sixteen of the nineteen states attending the Venice conference. While Denmark, Sweden-Norway, and the US did not sign this convention, it was unanimously agreed that the work of the prior conferences should be codified for implementation. Subsequent conferences, from 1902 until the final one in 1938, widened the diseases of concern for the ISC, and included discussions of responses to yellow fever, brucellosis, leprosy, tuberculosis, and typhoid. In part as a result of the successes of the Conferences, the Pan-American Sanitary Bureau (1902), and the or \"International office of Public Hygiene\" in English (1907) were soon founded. When the League of Nations was formed in 1920, it established the Health Organization of the League of Nations. After World War II, the United Nations assembled all the other health organizations to form the WHO.\nThe WHO has played a crucial role in coordinating the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic, providing essential guidelines on preventive measures, supporting research on vaccines, and facilitating vaccine distribution through initiatives like COVAX.\nEstablishment.\nDuring the 1945 United Nations Conference on International Organization, Szeming Sze, a delegate from the Republic of China, conferred with Norwegian and Brazilian delegates on creating an international health organization under the auspices of the new United Nations. After failing to get a resolution passed on the subject, Alger Hiss, the secretary general of the conference, recommended using a declaration to establish such an organization. Sze and other delegates lobbied and a declaration passed calling for an international conference on health. The use of the word \"world\", rather than \"international\", emphasized the truly global nature of what the organization was seeking to achieve. The constitution of the World Health Organization was signed by all 51 countries of the United Nations, and by 10 other countries, on 22 July 1946. It thus became the first specialized agency of the United Nations to which every member subscribed. Its constitution formally came into force on the first World Health Day on 7 April 1948, when it was ratified by the 26th member state. The WHO formally began its work on 1 September 1948.\nThe first meeting of the World Health Assembly finished on 24 July 1948, having secured a budget of US$ (then \u00a3) for the 1949 year. G. Brock Chisholm was appointed director-general of the WHO, having served as executive secretary and a founding member during the planning stages, while Andrija \u0160tampar was the assembly's first president. Its first priorities were to control the spread of malaria, tuberculosis and sexually transmitted infections, and to improve maternal and child health, nutrition and environmental hygiene. Its first legislative act was concerning the compilation of accurate statistics on the spread and morbidity of disease. The logo of the World Health Organization features the Rod of Asclepius as a symbol for healing.\nIn 1959, the WHO signed Agreement WHA 12\u201340 with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), which says:\nThe nature of this statement has led some groups and activists including Women in Europe for a Common Future to claim that the WHO is restricted in its ability to investigate the effects on human health of radiation caused by the use of nuclear power and the continuing effects of nuclear disasters in Chernobyl and Fukushima. They believe WHO must regain what they see as independence. Independent WHO held a weekly vigil from 2007 to 2017 in front of WHO headquarters. However, as pointed out by Foreman in clause 2, it states:\nThe key text is highlighted in bold, the agreement in clause 2 states that the WHO is free to perform any health-related work.\nOperational history.\nIn 1947, the WHO established an epidemiological information service via telex. Two years later, in 1949, the Soviet Union and its constituent republics quit the organization over its unwillingness to share the penicillin recipe; they did not return until 1956. In 1950, a mass tuberculosis inoculation campaign using the BCG vaccine began.\nThe malaria eradication programme was launched in 1955, though its objectives were later revised so that in most regions the goal shifted from eradication to control. In 1958, Viktor Zhdanov, Deputy Minister of Health of the USSR, urged the World Health Assembly to undertake a global initiative to eradicate smallpox, leading to the adoption of Resolution WHA11.54.\nThe WHO's first report on diabetes mellitus was issued in 1965, the same year that the International Agency for Research on Cancer was established. In 1966, the organization moved its headquarters from the Ariana wing at the Palace of Nations to a new purpose-built facility in Geneva.\nBy 1967, the WHO intensified the global smallpox eradication campaign, contributing $2.4\u00a0million annually and adopting new disease surveillance methods at a time when 2 million people were dying of smallpox each year. The main challenge was underreporting of cases, which WHO addressed by creating a network of consultants to help countries implement surveillance and containment. The organization also helped manage the last European outbreak, which occurred in Yugoslavia in 1972. After more than two decades of effort, a Global Commission declared in 1979 that smallpox had been eradicated\u2014the first disease in history to be eliminated by human effort.\nIn 1974, the WHO launched the Expanded Programme on Immunization and also began its control programme for onchocerciasis, in partnership with the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), and the World Bank. The following year, it introduced the Special Programme for Research and Training in Tropical Diseases (TDR), co-sponsored by UNICEF, UNDP, and the World Bank, in response to a 1974 WHA resolution. The TDR aimed to coordinate international research into the diagnosis, treatment, and control of tropical diseases, while also building research capacity in endemic countries.\nIn 1976, the WHA passed a resolution on disability prevention and rehabilitation, emphasizing community-driven care. This was followed in 1977 by the first list of essential medicines, and in 1978 by the declaration of the ambitious goal of \"Health For All.\"\n1986: The WHO began its global programme on HIV/AIDS. Two years later preventing discrimination against patients was attended to and in 1996 the Joint United Nations Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) was formed.\n1988: The Global Polio Eradication Initiative was established.\n1995: The WHO established an independent International Commission for the Certification of Dracunculiasis Eradication (Guinea worm disease eradication; ICCDE). The ICCDE recommends to the WHO which countries fulfil requirements for certification. It also has role in advising on progress made towards elimination of transmission and processes for verification.\n1998: The WHO's director-general highlighted gains in child survival, reduced infant mortality, increased life expectancy and reduced rates of \"scourges\" such as smallpox and polio on the fiftieth anniversary of WHO's founding. He, did, however, accept that more had to be done to assist maternal health and that progress in this area had been slow.\n2000: The Stop TB Partnership was created along with the UN's formulation of the Millennium Development Goals.\n2001: The measles initiative was formed, and credited with reducing global deaths from the disease by 68% by 2007.\n2002: The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria was drawn up to improve the resources available.\n2005: The WHO revises International Health Regulations (IHR) in light of emerging health threats and the experience of the 2002/3 SARS epidemic, authorizing WHO, among other things, to declare a health threat a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.\n2006: The WHO endorsed the world's first official HIV/AIDS Toolkit for Zimbabwe, which formed the basis for global prevention, treatment, and support the plan to fight the AIDS pandemic.\n2006: The WHO launches the Global action plan for influenza vaccines.\n2016: The Global action plan for influenza vaccines ends with a report which concludes that \"while substantial progress has been made over the 10 years of the Plan, the world is still not ready to respond to an influenza pandemic.\"\n2016: Following the perceived failure of the response to the West Africa Ebola outbreak, the World Health Emergencies programme was formed, changing the WHO from just being a \"normative\" agency to one that responds operationally to health emergencies.\n2020: the World Health Organization announced that it had classified the novel coronavirus outbreak as a public health emergency of international concern. The novel coronavirus was a new strain of coronavirus that had never been detected in humans before. The WHO named this new coronavirus \"COVID-19\" or \"2019-nCov\".\n2022: The WHO suggests formation of a Global Health Emergency Council, with a new global health emergency workforce, and recommends revision of the International Health Regulations.\n2024: WHO has declared the spread of mpox (formerly monkeypox) in several African countries a public health emergency of international concern, marking the second such declaration in the last two years due to the virus's transmission. In September 2025, the director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus announced that mpox is no longer an emergency.\nPolicies and objectives.\nOverall focus.\nThe WHO's Constitution states that its objective \"is the attainment by all people of the highest possible level of health\".\nThe WHO seeks to fulfill this objective through its functions as defined in its Constitution:\nAs of 2012[ [update]], the WHO has defined its role in public health as follows:\nSince the late 20th century, the rise of new actors engaged in global health\u2014such as the World Bank, the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation, the U.S. President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief (PEPFAR) and dozens of public-private partnerships for global health\u2014have weakened the WHO's role as a coordinator and policy leader in the field; subsequently, there are various proposals to reform or reorient the WHO's role and priorities in public health, ranging from narrowing its mandate to strengthening its independence and authority.\nIn line with a growing global trend, as documented by the OECD and established at the EU, the WHO has embraced increased public participation in health policymaking. This is in alignment with the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and other intergovernmental agreements, and means \"empowering people, communities and civil society through inclusive participation in decision-making processes that affect health across the policy cycle and at all levels of the system.\"\nCommunicable diseases.\nDuring the 1970s, WHO had dropped its commitment to a global malaria eradication campaign as too ambitious, it retained a strong commitment to malaria control. WHO's Global Malaria Programme works to keep track of malaria cases, and future problems in malaria control schemes. As of 2012, the WHO was to report as to whether RTS,S/AS01, were a viable malaria vaccine. For the time being, insecticide-treated mosquito nets and insecticide sprays are used to prevent the spread of malaria, as are antimalarial drugs \u2013 particularly to vulnerable people such as pregnant women and young children.\nIn 1988, WHO launched the Global Polio Eradication Initiative to eradicate polio. It has also been successful in helping to reduce cases by 99% since WHO partnered with Rotary International, the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF), and smaller organizations. As of 2011[ [update]], it has been working to immunize young children and prevent the re-emergence of cases in countries declared \"polio-free\". In 2017, a study was conducted as to why Polio Vaccines may not be enough to eradicate the Virus &amp; conduct new technology. Polio is now on the verge of extinction, thanks to a Global Vaccination Drive. The World Health Organization (WHO) stated the eradication programme has saved millions from deadly disease.\nBetween 1990 and 2010, WHO's help has contributed to a 40% decline in the number of deaths from tuberculosis, and since 2005, over 46\u00a0million people have been treated and an estimated 7\u00a0million lives saved through practices advocated by WHO. These include engaging national governments and their financing, early diagnosis, standardizing treatment, monitoring of the spread and effect of tuberculosis, and stabilizing the drug supply. It has also recognized the vulnerability of victims of HIV/AIDS to tuberculosis.\nIn 2003, the WHO denounced the Roman Curia's health department's opposition to the use of condoms, saying: \"These incorrect statements about condoms and HIV are dangerous when we are facing a global pandemic which has already killed more than 20\u00a0million people, and currently affects at least 42\u00a0million.\" As of 2009[ [update]], the Catholic Church remains opposed to increasing the use of contraception to combat HIV/AIDS. At the time, the World Health Assembly president, Guyana's Health Minister Leslie Ramsammy, condemned Pope Benedict's opposition to contraception, saying he was trying to \"create confusion\" and \"impede\" proven strategies in the battle against the disease.\nIn 2007, the WHO organized work on pandemic influenza vaccine development through clinical trials in collaboration with many experts and health officials. A pandemic involving the H1N1 influenza virus was declared by the then director-general Margaret Chan in April 2009. Margret Chan declared in 2010 that the H1N1 has moved into the post-pandemic period. By the post-pandemic period, critics claimed the WHO had exaggerated the danger, spreading \"fear and confusion\" rather than \"immediate information\". Industry experts countered that the 2009 pandemic had led to \"unprecedented collaboration between global health authorities, scientists and manufacturers, resulting in the most comprehensive pandemic response ever undertaken, with a number of vaccines approved for use three months after the pandemic declaration. This response was only possible because of the extensive preparations undertaken during the last decade\".\nThe 2012\u20132013 WHO budget identified five areas among which funding was distributed. Two of those five areas related to communicable diseases: the first, to reduce the \"health, social and economic burden\" of communicable diseases in general; the second to combat HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis in particular.\nAs of 2015[ [update]], the World Health Organization has worked within the UNAIDS network and strives to involve sections of society other than health to help deal with the economic and social effects of HIV/AIDS. In line with UNAIDS, WHO has set itself the interim task between 2009 and 2015 of reducing the number of those aged 15\u201324 years who are infected by 50%; reducing new HIV infections in children by 90%; and reducing HIV-related deaths by 25%.\nThe World Health Organization's definition of neglected tropical disease has been criticized to be restrictive (focusing only on communicable diseases) and described as a form of epistemic injustice, where conditions like snakebite are forced to be framed as a medical problem.\nNon-communicable diseases.\nOne of the thirteen WHO priority areas is aimed at the prevention and reduction of \"disease, disability and premature deaths from chronic noncommunicable diseases, mental disorders, violence and injuries, and visual impairment which are collectively responsible for almost 71% of all deaths worldwide\". The Division of Noncommunicable Diseases for Promoting Health through the Reproductive Health has published the magazine, \"Entre Nous\", across Europe since 1983.\nWHO is mandated under two of the international drug control conventions (Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961 and Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971) to carry out scientific assessments of substances for international drug control. Through the WHO Expert Committee on Drug Dependence (ECDD), it can recommend changes to scheduling of substances to the United Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs. The ECDD is in charge of evaluating \"the impact of psychoactive substances on public health\" and \"their dependence producing properties and potential harm to health, as well as considering their potential medical benefits and therapeutic applications.\"\nEnvironmental health.\nThe WHO estimates that 12.6\u00a0million people died as a result of living or working in an unhealthy environment in 2012 \u2013 this accounts for nearly 1 in 4 of total global deaths. Environmental risk factors, such as air, water, and soil pollution, chemical exposures, climate change, and ultraviolet radiation, contribute to more than 100 diseases and injuries. This can result in a number of pollution-related diseases.\nLife course and lifestyle.\nWHO works to \"reduce morbidity and mortality and improve health during key stages of life, including pregnancy, childbirth, the neonatal period, childhood and adolescence, and improve sexual and reproductive health and promote active and healthy aging for all individuals\", for instance with the Special Programme on Human Reproduction.\nIt also tries to prevent or reduce risk factors for \"health conditions associated with use of tobacco, alcohol, drugs and other psychoactive substances, unhealthy diets and physical inactivity and unsafe sex\".\nThe WHO works to improve nutrition, food safety and food security and to ensure this has a positive effect on public health and sustainable development.\nIn April 2019, the WHO released new recommendations stating that children between the ages of two and five should spend no more than one hour per day engaging in sedentary behaviour in front of a screen and that children under two should not be permitted any sedentary screen time.\nIn January 2025, the WHO released a new guideline \"Use of lower-sodium salt substitutes\" which strongly recommends reducing sodium intake to less than 2 g/day and conditionally recommends replacing regular table salt with lower-sodium salt substitutes that contain potassium. This recommendation is intended for adults (not pregnant women or children) in general populations, excluding individuals with kidney impairments or with other circumstances or conditions that might compromise potassium excretion.\nSurgery and trauma care.\nThe World Health Organization promotes road safety as a means to reduce traffic-related injuries. It has also worked on global initiatives in surgery, including emergency and essential surgical care, trauma care, and safe surgery. The WHO Surgical Safety Checklist is in current use worldwide in the effort to improve patient safety.\nEmergency work.\nThe World Health Organization's primary objective in natural and man-made emergencies is to coordinate with member states and other stakeholders to \"reduce avoidable loss of life and the burden of disease and disability.\"\nOn 5 May 2014, WHO announced that the spread of polio was a world health emergency \u2013 outbreaks of the disease in Asia, Africa, and the Middle East were considered \"extraordinary\".\nOn 8 August 2014, WHO declared that the spread of Ebola was a public health emergency; an outbreak which was believed to have started in Guinea had spread to other nearby countries such as Liberia and Sierra Leone. The situation in West Africa was considered very serious.\nReform efforts following the Ebola outbreak.\nFollowing the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa, the organization was heavily criticized for its bureaucracy, insufficient financing, regional structure, and staffing profile.\nAn internal WHO report on the Ebola response pointed to underfunding and the lack of \"core capacity\" in health systems in developing countries as the primary weaknesses of the existing system. At the annual World Health Assembly in 2015, Director-General Margaret Chan announced a $100\u00a0million Contingency Fund for rapid response to future emergencies, of which it had received $26.9\u00a0million by April 2016 (for 2017 disbursement). WHO has budgeted an additional $494\u00a0million for its Health Emergencies Programme in 2016\u201317, for which it had received $140\u00a0million by April 2016.\nThe program was aimed at rebuilding WHO capacity for direct action, which critics said had been lost due to budget cuts in the previous decade that had left the organization in an advisory role dependent on member states for on-the-ground activities. In comparison, billions of dollars have been spent by developed countries on the 2013\u20132016 Ebola epidemic and 2015\u201316 Zika epidemic.\nResponse to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nThe WHO created an Incident Management Support Team on 1 January 2020, one day after Chinese health authorities notified the organization of a cluster of pneumonia cases of unknown aetiology. On 5 January the WHO notified all member states of the outbreak, and in subsequent days provided guidance to all countries on how to respond, and confirmed the first infection outside China. On 14 January 2020, the WHO announced that preliminary investigations conducted by Chinese authorities had found no clear evidence of human-to-human transmission of the novel coronavirus (2019-nCoV) identified in Wuhan. The same day, the organization warned of limited human-to-human transmission, and confirmed human-to-human transmission one week later. On 30 January the WHO declared a Public Health Emergency of International Concern (PHEIC), considered a \"call to action\" and \"last resort\" measure for the international community and a pandemic on 11 March.\nWhile organizing the global response to the COVID-19 pandemic and overseeing \"more than 35 emergency operations\" for cholera, measles and other epidemics internationally, the WHO has been criticized for praising China's public health response to the crisis while seeking to maintain a \"diplomatic balancing act\" between the United States and China. David L. Heymann, professor of infectious disease epidemiology at the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, said that \"China has been very transparent and open in sharing its data... and they opened up all of their files with the WHO present.\"\nThe WHO faced criticism from the United States' Trump administration while \"guid[ing] the world in how to tackle the deadly\" COVID-19 pandemic. On 14 April 2020, United States president Donald Trump said that he would halt United States funding to the WHO while reviewing its role in \"severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus.\" World leaders and health experts largely condemned President Trump's announcement, which came amid criticism of his response to the outbreak in the United States. WHO called the announcement \"regrettable\" and defended its actions in alerting the world to the emergence of COVID-19. On 8 May 2020, the United States blocked a vote on a U.N. Security Council resolution aimed at promoting nonviolent international cooperation during the pandemic, and mentioning the WHO. On 7 July 2020, President Trump formally notified the UN of his intent to withdraw the United States from the WHO. However, Trump's successor, President Joe Biden, cancelled the planned withdrawal and announced in January 2021 that the U.S. would resume funding the organization.\nIn May 2023, the WHO announced that COVID-19 was no longer a world-wide health emergency.\nIn January 2025, during his second term, President Trump issued an executive order to withdraw the United States from the WHO, citing their alleged mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic originating in Wuhan, among other reasons. The United States of America will leave the World Health Organization in January 2026. Meanwhile, the US ceased to cooperate with the WHO.\nHealth policy.\nWHO addresses government health policy with two aims: firstly, \"to address the underlying social and economic determinants of health through policies and programmes that enhance health equity and integrate pro-poor, gender-responsive, and human rights-based approaches\" and secondly \"to promote a healthier environment, intensify primary prevention and influence public policies in all sectors so as to address the root causes of environmental threats to health\".\nThe organization develops and promotes the use of evidence-based tools, norms and standards to support member states to inform health policy options. It oversees the implementation of the International Health Regulations, and publishes a series of medical classifications; of these, three are over-reaching \"reference classifications\": the International Statistical Classification of Diseases (ICD), the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF) and the International Classification of Health Interventions (ICHI). Other international policy frameworks produced by WHO include the International Code of Marketing of Breast-milk Substitutes (adopted in 1981), Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (adopted in 2003), the Global Code of Practice on the International Recruitment of Health Personnel (adopted in 2010) as well as the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines and its pediatric counterpart. An international convention on pandemic prevention and preparedness is being actively considered.\nIn terms of health services, WHO looks to improve \"governance, financing, staffing and management\" and the availability and quality of evidence and research to guide policy. It also strives to \"ensure improved access, quality and use of medical products and technologies\". WHO \u2013 working with donor agencies and national governments \u2013 can improve their reporting about use of research evidence.\nDigital Health.\nOn Digital Health topics, WHO has existing Inter-Agency collaboration with the International Telecommunication Union (the UN Specialized Agency for ICT), including the Be Health, Be Mobile initiate and the ITU-WHO Focus Group on Artificial Intelligence for Health.\nPolicy packages.\nThe WHO has developed several technical policy packages to support countries to improve health:\nGovernance and support.\nThe remaining two of WHO's thirteen identified policy areas relate to the role of WHO itself:\nPartnerships.\nThe WHO along with the World Bank constitute the core team responsible for administering the International Health Partnership (IHP+). The IHP+ is a group of partner governments, development agencies, civil society, and others committed to improving the health of citizens in developing countries. Partners work together to put international principles for aid effectiveness and development co-operation into practice in the health sector.\nThe organization relies on contributions from renowned scientists and professionals to inform its work, such as the WHO Expert Committee on Biological Standardization, the WHO Expert Committee on Leprosy, and the WHO Study Group on Interprofessional Education &amp; Collaborative Practice.\nWHO runs the Alliance for Health Policy and Systems Research, targeted at improving health policy and systems.\nWHO also aims to improve access to health research and literature in developing countries such as through the HINARI network.\nWHO collaborates with The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, UNITAID, and the United States President's Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief to spearhead and fund the development of HIV programs.\nWHO created the Civil Society Reference Group on HIV, which brings together other networks that are involved in policymaking and the dissemination of guidelines.\nWHO, a sector of the United Nations, partners with UNAIDS to contribute to the development of HIV responses in different areas of the world.\nWHO facilitates technical partnerships through the Technical Advisory Committee on HIV, which they created to develop WHO guidelines and policies.\nIn 2014, WHO released the \"Global Atlas of Palliative Care at the End of Life\" in a joint publication with the Worldwide Hospice Palliative Care Alliance, an affiliated NGO working collaboratively with the WHO to promote palliative care in national and international health policy.\nPublic health education and action.\nThe practice of empowering individuals to exert more control over and make improvements to their health is known as health education, as described by the WHO. It shifts away from an emphasis on personal behaviour and toward a variety of societal and environmental solutions.\nEach year, the organization marks World Health Day and other observances focusing on a specific health promotion topic. World Health Day falls on 7 April each year, timed to match the anniversary of WHO's founding. Recent themes have been vector-borne diseases (2014), healthy ageing (2012) and drug resistance (2011).\nThe other official global public health campaigns marked by WHO are World Tuberculosis Day, World Immunization Week, World Malaria Day, World No Tobacco Day, World Blood Donor Day, World Hepatitis Day, and World AIDS Day.\nAs part of the United Nations, the World Health Organization supports work towards the Millennium Development Goals. Of the eight Millennium Development Goals, three \u2013 reducing child mortality by two-thirds, to reduce maternal deaths by three-quarters, and to halt and begin to reduce the spread of HIV/AIDS \u2013 relate directly to the WHO's scope; the other five inter-relate and affect world health.\nData handling and publications.\nThe World Health Organization works to provide the needed health and well-being evidence through a variety of data collection platforms, including the World Health Survey covering almost 400,000 respondents from 70 countries, and the \"Study on Global Aging and Adult Health\" (SAGE) covering over 50,000 persons over 50 years old in 23 countries. The Country Health Intelligence Portal (CHIP), has also been developed to provide an access point to information about the health services that are available in different countries. The information gathered in this portal is used by the countries to set priorities for future strategies or plans, implement, monitor, and evaluate it.\nThe WHO has published various tools for measuring and monitoring the capacity of national health systems and health workforces. The Global Health Observatory (GHO) has been the WHO's main portal which provides access to data and analyses for key health themes by monitoring health situations around the globe.\nThe \"WHO Assessment Instrument for Mental Health Systems\" (WHO-AIMS), the \"WHO Quality of Life Instrument\" (WHOQOL), and the \"Service Availability and Readiness Assessment\" (SARA) provide guidance for data collection. Collaborative efforts between WHO and other agencies, such as through the Health Metrics Network, also aim to provide sufficient high-quality information to assist governmental decision making. WHO promotes the development of capacities in member states to use and produce research that addresses their national needs, including through the Evidence-Informed Policy Network (EVIPNet). The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO/AMRO) became the first region to develop and pass a policy on research for health approved in September 2009.\nOn 10 December 2013, a new WHO database, known as MiNDbank, went online. The database was launched on Human Rights Day, and is part of WHO's QualityRights initiative, which aims to end human rights violations against people with mental health conditions. The new database presents a great deal of information about mental health, substance abuse, disability, human rights, and the different policies, strategies, laws, and service standards being implemented in different countries. It also contains important international documents and information. The database allows visitors to access the health information of WHO member states and other partners. Users can review policies, laws, and strategies and search for the best practices and success stories in the field of mental health.\nThe WHO regularly publishes a \"World Health Report\", its leading publication, including an expert assessment of a specific global health topic. Other publications of WHO include the \"Bulletin of the World Health Organization\", the \"Eastern Mediterranean Health Journal\" (overseen by EMRO), the \"Human Resources for Health\" (published in collaboration with BioMed Central), and the \"Pan American Journal of Public Health\" (overseen by PAHO/AMRO).\nIn 2016, the World Health Organization drafted a global health sector strategy on HIV. In the draft, the World Health Organization outlines its commitment to ending the AIDS epidemic by 2030 with interim targets for the year 2020. To make achievements towards these targets, the draft lists actions that countries and the WHO can take, such as a commitment to universal health coverage, medical accessibility, prevention and eradication of disease, and efforts to educate the public. Some notable points made in the draft include tailoring resources to mobilized regions where the health system may be compromised due to natural disasters, etc. Among the points made, it seems clear that although the prevalence of HIV transmission is declining, there is still a need for resources, health education, and global efforts to end this epidemic.\nThe WHO has a Framework Convention on Tobacco implementation database which is one of the few mechanisms to help enforce compliance with the FCTC. However, there have been reports of numerous discrepancies between it and national implementation reports on which it was built. As researchers Hoffman and Rizvi report \"As of July 4, 2012, 361 (32\u00b77%) of 1104 countries' responses were misreported: 33 (3\u00b70%) were clear errors (e.g., database indicated 'yes' when report indicated 'no'), 270 (24\u00b75%) were missing despite countries having submitted responses, and 58 (5\u00b73%) were, in our opinion, misinterpreted by WHO staff\".\nWHO has been moving toward acceptance and integration of traditional medicine and traditional Chinese medicine (TCM). In 2022, the new International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems, ICD-11, will attempt to enable classifications from traditional medicine to be integrated with classifications from evidence-based medicine. Though Chinese authorities have pushed for the change, this and other support of the WHO for traditional medicine has been criticized by the medical and scientific community, due to lack of evidence and the risk of endangering wildlife hunted for traditional remedies. A WHO spokesman said that the inclusion was \"not an endorsement of the scientific validity of any Traditional Medicine practice or the efficacy of any Traditional Medicine intervention.\"\nInternational Agency for Research on Cancer.\nThe WHO sub-department, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), conducts and coordinates research into the causes of cancer. It also collects and publishes surveillance data regarding the occurrence of cancer worldwide.\nIts Monographs Programme identifies carcinogenic hazards and evaluates environmental causes of cancer in humans.\nStructure and governance.\nThe World Health Organization is a member of the United Nations Development Group.\nMembership.\nAs of November 2025[ [update]], the WHO has 194 member states: all member states of the United Nations (UN) except for Liechtenstein (192 countries), plus the Cook Islands and Niue (non-UN members). No new members have joined since Tuvalu in 2023, and no withdrawals have occurred. A state becomes a full member of WHO by ratifying the treaty known as the Constitution of the World Health Organization. As of January 2025, it also had two associate members, Puerto Rico and Tokelau. The WHO two-year budget for 2022\u20132023 is paid by its 194 members and 2 associate members. Several other countries have been granted observer status. Palestine is an observer as a \"national liberation movement\" recognized by the League of Arab States under United Nations Resolution 3118. The Sovereign Military Order of Malta (or \"Order of Malta\") also attends on an observer basis. The Holy See attends as an observer, and its participation as \"non-Member State Observer\" was formalized by an Assembly resolution in 2021. The government of Taiwan was allowed to participate under the designation \"Chinese Taipei\" as an observer from 2009 to 2016, but has not been invited again since. On 20 January 2025, U.S. President Donald Trump signed Executive Order 14155 initiating the 12-month process of withdrawing the U.S. from the WHO. On 5 February 2025, Argentinian president Javier Milei announced that Argentina would also be withdrawing from WHO.\nWHO member states appoint delegations to the World Health Assembly, the WHO's supreme decision-making body. All UN member states are eligible for WHO membership, and, according to the WHO website, \"other countries may be admitted as members when their application has been approved by a simple majority vote of the World Health Assembly\". The World Health Assembly is attended by delegations from all member states, and determines the policies of the organization.\nThe executive board is composed of members technically qualified in health and gives effect to the decisions and policies of the World Health Assembly. In addition, the UN observer organizations International Committee of the Red Cross and International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies have entered into \"official relations\" with WHO and are invited as observers. In the World Health Assembly, they are seated alongside the other NGOs.\nMembership and participation of the Republic of China.\nThe Republic of China (ROC), whose government controlled Mainland China from 1912 to 1949 and currently controls Taiwan since 1945 following World War II, was the founding member of WHO since its inception and had represented \"China\" in the organization. The adoption of the United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2758 in 1971, however, had the representation of \"China\" handed over to the People's Republic of China (PRC), and led to the expulsion of the Republic of China from WHO and other UN bodies. Since that time, per the One-China policy, both the ROC and PRC lay claims of sovereignty to each other's territory.\nIn May 2009, the Department of Health of the Republic of China was invited by the WHO to attend the 62nd World Health Assembly as an observer under the name \"Chinese Taipei\". This was the ROC's first participation at WHO meetings since 1971, as a result of the improved cross-strait relations since Ma Ying-jeou became the president of the Republic of China a year before. Its participation with WHO ended due to diplomatic pressure from the PRC following the election in 2016 that brought the independence-minded Democratic Progressive Party back into power.\nPolitical pressure from the PRC has led to the ROC being barred from membership of the WHO and other UN-affiliated organizations, and in 2017 to 2020 the WHO refused to allow Taiwanese delegates to attend the WHO annual assembly. According to Taiwanese publication The News Lens, on multiple occasions Taiwanese journalists have been denied access to report on the assembly.\nIn May 2018, the WHO denied access to its annual assembly by Taiwanese media, reportedly due to demands from the PRC. Later in May 172 members of the United States House of Representatives wrote to the director-general of the World Health Organization to argue for Taiwan's inclusion as an observer at the WHA. The United States, Japan, Germany, and Australia all support Taiwan's inclusion in WHO.\nPressure to allow the ROC to participate in WHO increased as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic with Taiwan's exclusion from emergency meetings concerning the outbreak bringing a rare united front from Taiwan's diverse political parties. Taiwan's main opposition party, the Kuomintang (KMT, Chinese Nationalist Party), expressed their anger at being excluded arguing that disease respects neither politics nor geography. China once again dismissed concerns over Taiwanese inclusion with the foreign minister claiming that no-one cares more about the health and wellbeing of the Taiwanese people than central government of the PRC. During the outbreak Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau voiced his support for Taiwan's participation in WHO, as did Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe. In January 2020 the European Union, a WHO observer, backed Taiwan's participation in WHO meetings related to the coronavirus pandemic as well as their general participation.\nIn a 2020 interview, Assistant Director-General Bruce Aylward appeared to dodge a question from RTHK reporter Yvonne Tong about Taiwan's response to the pandemic and inclusion in the WHO, blaming internet connection issues. When the video chat was restarted, he was asked another question about Taiwan. He responded by indicating that they had already discussed China and formally ended the interview. This incident led to accusations about the PRC's political influence over the international organization.\nTaiwan's effective response to the 2019\u201320 COVID-19 pandemic has bolstered its case for WHO membership. Taiwan's response to the outbreak has been praised by a number of experts. In early May 2020, New Zealand Foreign Minister Winston Peters expressed support for the ROC's bid to rejoin the WHO during a media conference. The New Zealand Government subsequently supporting Taiwan's bid to join the WHO, putting NZ alongside Australia and the United States who have taken similar positions.\nOn 9 May, Congressmen Eliot Engel, the Democratic chairman of the United States House Committee on Foreign Affairs, Michael McCaul, the House Committee's ranking Republican member, Senator Jim Risch, the Republican chairman of the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, and Senator Bob Menendez, the Senate Committee's ranking Democratic member, submitted a joint letter to nearly 60 \"like-minded\" countries including Canada, Thailand, Japan, Germany, the United Kingdom, Saudi Arabia, and Australia, urging them to support ROC's participation in the World Health Organization.\nIn November 2020, the word \"Taiwan\" was blocked in comments on a livestream on the WHO's Facebook page.\nMembership and participation of the United States.\nOn 14 April 2020, United States president Donald Trump said that he would halt United States funding to the WHO while reviewing its role in \"severely mismanaging and covering up the spread of the coronavirus.\" World leaders and health experts largely condemned President Trump's announcement, which came amid criticism of his response to the outbreak in the United States. WHO called the announcement \"regrettable\" and defended its actions in alerting the world to the emergence of COVID-19. On 7 July 2020, President Trump formally notified the UN of his intent to withdraw the United States from the WHO. However, Trump's successor, president Joe Biden, cancelled the planned withdrawal and announced in January 2021 that the U.S. would resume funding the organization. On 20 January 2025, an executive order was signed by a re-inaugurated Trump, formally notifying the United Nations of his intent to withdraw the United States from the WHO for a second time.\nWorld Health Assembly and Executive Board.\nThe World Health Assembly (WHA) is the legislative and supreme body of the WHO. Based in Geneva, it typically meets yearly in May. It appoints the director-general every five years and votes on matters of policy and finance of WHO, including the proposed budget. It also reviews reports of the executive board and decides whether there are areas of work requiring further examination.\nThe Assembly elects 34 members, technically qualified in the field of health, to the executive board for three-year terms. The main functions of the board are to carry out the decisions and policies of the Assembly, to advise it, and to facilitate its work. As of June 2023, the chair of the executive board is Dr. Hanan Mohamed Al Kuwari of Qatar.\nDirector-General.\nThe head of the organization is the director-general, elected by the World Health Assembly. The term lasts for five years, and directors-general are typically appointed in May, when the Assembly meets. The current director-general is Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who was appointed on 1 July 2017.\nGlobal institutions.\nApart from regional, country, and liaison offices, the World Health Assembly has also established other institutions for promoting and carrying on research.\nPersonnel.\nThe WHO employs 7,000 people in 149 countries and regions to carry out its principles. In support of the principle of a tobacco-free work environment, the WHO does not recruit cigarette smokers. The organization has previously instigated the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control in 2003.\nGoodwill Ambassadors.\nThe WHO operates \"Goodwill Ambassadors\"; members of the arts, sports, or other fields of public life aimed at drawing attention to the WHO's initiatives and projects. There are currently five Goodwill Ambassadors (Jet Li, Nancy Brinker, Peng Liyuan, Yohei Sasakawa and the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra) and a further ambassador associated with a partnership project (Craig David).\nOn 21 October 2017, the director-general Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus appointed the then Zimbabwean president Robert Mugabe as a WHO Goodwill Ambassador to help promote the fight against non-communicable diseases. The appointment address praised Mugabe for his commitment to public health in Zimbabwe. The appointment attracted widespread condemnation and criticism in WHO member states and international organizations due to Robert Mugabe's poor record on human rights and presiding over a decline in Zimbabwe's public health. Due to the outcry, the following day the appointment was revoked.\nMedical Society of the World Health Organization.\nSince the beginning, the WHO has had the \"Medical Society\u00a0of the\u00a0World Health Organization\". It has conducted lectures by noted researchers and published findings, recommendations. The founder, Dr. S. William A. Gunn has been its president. In 1983, Murray Eden was awarded the\u00a0WHO \"Medical Society\" medal, for his work as consultant on research and development for WHO's director-general.\nFinancing and partnerships.\nThe WHO is financed by contributions from member states and outside donors. In 2020\u201321, the largest contributors were the Germany, Gates Foundation, United States, France, United Kingdom and European Commission. The WHO Executive Board formed a Working Group on Sustainable Financing in 2021, charged to rethink WHO's funding strategy and present recommendations. Its recommendations were adopted by the 2022 World Health Assembly, the key one being to raise compulsory member dues to a level equal to 50% of WHO's 2022\u20132023 base budget by the end of the 2020s.\nPast.\nAt the beginning of the 21st century, the WHO's work involved increasing collaboration with external bodies. As of 2002[ [update]], a total of 473 nongovernmental organizations (NGO) had some form of partnership with WHO. There were 189 partnerships with international NGOs in formal \"official relations\" \u2013 the rest being considered informal in character. Partners include the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation and the Rockefeller Foundation.\nAs of 2022[ [update]], the largest annual assessed contributions from member states came from the United States ($109\u00a0million), China ($57\u00a0million), Japan ($41\u00a0million), Germany ($29\u00a0million), France ($22\u00a0million) and United Kingdom ($21\u00a0million).\nAccording to The Associated Press, the WHO routinely spends about $200\u00a0million a year on travel expenses, more than it spends to tackle mental health problems, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria combined. In 2016, Margaret Chan, director-general of WHO from January 2007 to June 2017, stayed in a $1000-per-night hotel room while visiting West Africa.\nThe biggest contributor used to be the United States, which gives over $400\u00a0million annually. U.S. contributions to the WHO are funded through the U.S. State Department's account for Contributions to International Organizations (CIO). In April 2020, U.S. President Donald Trump, with backing by members of his party, announced that his administration would halt funding to the WHO. Funds previously earmarked for the WHO were to be held for 60\u201390 days pending an investigation into the WHO's handling of the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly in respect to the organization's purported relationship with China. The announcement was immediately criticized by world leaders including Ant\u00f3nio Guterres, the secretary general of the United Nations; Heiko Maas, the German foreign minister; and Moussa Faki Mahamat, African Union chairman. During the first two years of the pandemic, American funding of the WHO declined by a quarter, although it is expected to increase during 2022 and 2023.\nOn 16 May 2020, the Trump administration agreed to pay up to what China pays in assessed contributions, which is less than about one-tenth of its previous funding. Biennium 2018\u20132019 China paid in assessed contributions US$75,796K, in specified voluntary contributions US$10,184K, for a total US$85,980K.\nWHO Public Health Prizes and Awards.\nWorld Health Organization Prizes and Awards are given to recognize major achievements in public health. The candidates are nominated and recommended by each prize and award selection panel. The WHO Executive Board selects the winners, which are presented during the World Health Assembly.\nWorld headquarters and offices.\nThe seat of the organization is in Geneva, Switzerland. It was designed by Swiss architect Jean Tschumi and inaugurated in 1966. In 2017, the organization launched an international competition to redesign and extend its headquarters.\nCountry and liaison offices.\nThe World Health Organization operates 150 country offices in six different regions. It also operates several liaison offices, including those with the European Union, United Nations and a single office covering the World Bank and International Monetary Fund. It also operates the International Agency for Research on Cancer in Lyon, France, and the WHO Centre for Health Development in Kobe, Japan. Additional offices include those in Pristina; the West Bank and Gaza; the US-Mexico Border Field Office in El Paso; the Office of the Caribbean Program Coordination in Barbados; and the Northern Micronesia office. There will generally be one WHO country office in the capital, occasionally accompanied by satellite-offices in the provinces or sub-regions of the country in question.\nThe country office is headed by a WHO Representative (WR). As of 2010[ [update]], the only WHO Representative outside Europe to be a national of that country was for the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya (\"Libya\"); all other staff was international. WHO Representatives in the Region termed the Americas are referred to as PAHO/WHO Representatives. In Europe, WHO Representatives also serve as head of the country office, and are nationals except for Serbia; there are also heads of the country office in Albania, the Russian Federation, Tajikistan, Turkey, and Uzbekistan. The WR is a member of the UN system country team which is coordinated by the UN System Resident Coordinator.\nThe country office consists of the WR, and several health and other experts, both foreign and local, as well as the necessary support staff. The main functions of WHO country offices include being the primary adviser of that country's government in matters of health and pharmaceutical policies.\nRegional offices.\nThe regional divisions of WHO were created between 1949 and 1952, following the model of the pre-existing Pan American Health Organization, and are based on article 44 of the WHO's constitution, which allowed the WHO to \"establish a [single] regional organization to meet the special needs of [each defined] area\". Many decisions are made at the regional level, including important discussions over WHO's budget, and in deciding the members of the next assembly, which are designated by the regions.\nEach region has a regional committee, which generally meets once a year, normally in the autumn. Representatives attend from each member or associative member in each region, including those states that are not full members. For example, Palestine attends meetings of the Eastern Mediterranean Regional Office. Each region also has a regional office. Each regional office is headed by a director, who is elected by the Regional Committee. The board must approve such appointments, although as of 2004, it had never over-ruled the preference of a regional committee. The exact role of the board in the process has been a subject of debate, but the practical effect has always been small. Since 1999, regional directors serve for a once-renewable five-year term, and typically take their position on 1 February.\nEach regional committee of the WHO consists of all the Health Department heads, in all the governments of the countries that constitute the Region. Aside from electing the regional director, the regional committee is also in charge of setting the guidelines for the implementation, within the region, of the health and other policies adopted by the World Health Assembly. The regional committee also serves as a progress review board for the actions of WHO within the Region. The regional director is effectively the head of WHO for his or her region. The RD manages and/or supervises a staff of health and other experts at the regional offices and in specialized centres. The RD is also the direct supervising authority \u2013 concomitantly with the WHO Director-General \u2013 of all the heads of WHO country offices, known as WHO Representatives, within the region.\nThe strong position of the regional offices has been criticized in WHO history for undermining its effectiveness and led to unsuccessful attempts to integrate them more strongly within 'One WHO'. Disease specific programmes such as the smallpox eradication programme or the 1980s Global Programme on AIDS were set up with more direct, vertical structures that bypassed the regional offices.\nPrivate funding.\nIn 2024, the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation was the organization's major private contributor, funding 10% of its budget.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33584", "revid": "19177367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33584", "title": "World Meteorological Organization", "text": "Specialized agency of the United Nations\nThe World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations responsible for promoting international cooperation on atmospheric science, climatology, hydrology and geophysics.\nThe WMO originated from the International Meteorological Organization (IMO), a nongovernmental organization founded in 1873 as a forum for exchanging weather data and research. Proposals to reform the status and structure of the IMO culminated in the World Meteorological Convention of 1947, which formally established the World Meteorological Organization. The Convention entered into force on 23 March 1950, and the following year the WMO began operations as an intergovernmental organization within the United Nations System.\nThe WMO is made up of 193 countries and territories, and facilitates the \"free and unrestricted\" exchange of data, information, and research between the respective meteorological and hydrological institutions of its members. It also collaborates with nongovernmental partners and other international organizations on matters related to environmental protection, climate change, resource management, and socioeconomic development.\nHeadquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, the WMO is governed by the World Meteorological Congress, composed of member states, which meets every four years to set policies and priorities. The Congress is led by an Executive Council led by the President, currently Abdulla Al Mandous of UAE.\nGovernance.\nThe WMO was established by the Convention of the World Meteorological Organization, signed 11 October 1947 and ratified on 23 March 1950. The Convention serves as the constituent treaty of the WMO, setting forth its purposes, governance, and general framework.\nThe WMO hierarchy:\nThe annually published WMO Statement on the status of the World Climate provides details of global, regional and national temperatures and extreme weather events. It also provides information on long-term climate change indicators including atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases, sea level rise, and sea ice extent. The year 2016 was the hottest year on record, with many weather and climate extremes, according to the most recent WMO report.\nAs of August 2023, the WMO has a membership of 193 member states and territories.\nMeteorological codes.\nIn keeping with its mandate to promote the standardization of meteorological observations, the WMO maintains numerous code forms for the representation and exchange of meteorological, oceanographical, and hydrological data. The traditional code forms, such as SYNOP, CLIMAT and TEMP, are character-based and their coding is position-based. Newer WMO code forms are designed for portability, extensibility and universality. These are BUFR, and, for gridded geo-positioned data, GRIB.\nRecognitions received.\nIn 2007, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), a joint creation of the WMO and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), received the Nobel Peace Prize \"for their efforts to build up and disseminate greater knowledge about anthropogenic (man-made) climate change, and to lay the foundations for the measures that are needed to counteract such change.\"\nWorld Meteorological Day.\nThe World Meteorological Day is held annually on 23 March.\nUse of the International System of Units.\nWMO states that \"the International System of Units (SI) should be used as the system of units for the evaluation of meteorological elements included in reports for international exchange.\" The following units, which include units which are not SI units, are recommended by the WMO for meteorological observations:\nMembership.\nAs of 2023, WMO Members include a total of 187 Member States and 6 Member Territories.\nEight United Nations member states are not members of WMO: Equatorial Guinea, Grenada, Liechtenstein, Marshall Islands, Palau, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and San Marino. Cook Islands and Niue are WMO Members but non-members of the United Nations. Vatican City and State of Palestine and the states with limited recognition are not members of either organization.\nThe six WMO Member Territories are the British Caribbean Territories (joint meteorological organization and membership), French Polynesia, Hong Kong, Macau, Cura\u00e7ao and Sint Maarten (joint meteorological service and membership) and New Caledonia.\nMembership by regional associations.\nRegional Association I (Africa).\nRegion I consists of the states of Africa and a few former colonial powers. Region I has 57 member states and no member territories:\nNon-member\nRegional Association II (Asia).\nRegion II has 33 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:\nThe member territories are:\nRegional Association III (South America).\nRegion III consists of the states of South America, including France as French Guiana is an overseas region of France. It has a total of 13 member states and no member territories:\nRegional Association IV (North America, Central America and the Caribbean).\nRegion IV consists of the states of North America, Central America, and the Caribbean, including three European states with dependencies within the region. It has a total of 25 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:\nRegional Association V (South-West Pacific).\nRegion V consists of 23 member states and 2 member territories. The member states are:\nRegional Association VI (Europe).\nRegion VI consists consist of all the states in Europe as well as some Western Asia. It has 50 member states:\nStates with membership in more than one region.\nA total of ten member states have membership in more than one region. Two nations are members to four different regions, while eight are members of two regions. These nations, with their regions, are as follows:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33585", "revid": "33343951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33585", "title": "WFP", "text": ""}
{"id": "33586", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33586", "title": "WHO (disambiguation)", "text": ""}
{"id": "33587", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33587", "title": "WMO", "text": ""}
{"id": "33589", "revid": "39515155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33589", "title": "Walmart", "text": "American multinational retail corporation operating department stores\nWalmart Inc. is an American multinational retail corporation that operates a chain of hypermarkets (also called supercenters), discount department stores, and grocery stores in the United States and 23 other countries. It is headquartered in Bentonville, Arkansas. The company was founded in 1962 by brothers Sam Walton and James \"Bud\" Walton in nearby Rogers, Arkansas. It also owns and operates Sam's Club retail warehouses.\nWalmart is the world's largest company by revenue. Walmart is also the largest private employer in the world, with 2.1 million employees. It is a publicly traded family-owned business (the largest such business in the world), as the company is controlled by the Walton family. Sam Walton's heirs own over 50 percent of Walmart through both their holding company Walton Enterprises and their individual holdings.\nWalmart was listed on the New York Stock Exchange in 1972 and will switch to the Nasdaq in December 2025. By 1988, it was the most profitable retailer in the U.S., and it had become the largest in terms of revenue by October 1989. The company was originally geographically limited to the South and lower Midwest, but it had stores from coast to coast by the early 1990s. \nHistory.\n1945\u20131969: Early history.\nIn 1945, businessman and former J. C. Penney employee Sam Walton bought a Ben Franklin store branch from the Butler Brothers. His primary focus was selling products at low prices to get higher-volume sales at a lower profit margin, portraying it as a crusade for the consumer. He experienced setbacks because the lease price and branch purchase were unusually high, but he was able to find lower-cost suppliers than those used by other stores and was consequently able to undercut his competitors on pricing. Sales increased 45% in his first year of ownership to US$ in revenue, which increased to $140,000 the next year and $175,000 the year after that. Within the fifth year, the store was generating $250,000 in revenue. The lease then expired for the location and Walton was unable to reach an agreement for renewal, so he opened up a new store at 105 N. Main Street in Bentonville, naming it \"Walton's Five and Dime\". That store is now the Walmart Museum.\nOn July 2, 1962, Walton opened the first Wal-Mart Discount City store at 719 W. Walnut Street in Rogers, Arkansas. Its design was inspired by Ann &amp; Hope, which Walton visited in 1961, as did Kmart founder Harry B. Cunningham. The name was derived from FedMart, a chain of discount department stores founded by Sol Price in 1954, whom Walton was also inspired by. Walton stated that he liked the idea of calling his discount chain \"Wal-Mart\" because he \"really liked Sol's FedMart name\". The building is now occupied by a hardware store and an antiques mall, while the company's \"Store #1\" has since expanded to a Supercenter several blocks west at 2110 W. Walnut Street. Within its first five years, the company expanded to 18 stores in Arkansas and reached $9\u00a0million in sales. In 1968, it opened its first stores outside Arkansas in Sikeston, Missouri and Claremore, Oklahoma.\n1969\u20131990: Incorporation and growth as a regional power.\nThe company was incorporated under Delaware General Corporation Law as Wal-Mart, Inc. on October 31, 1969, and changed its name to Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. in 1970. The same year, the company opened a home office and first distribution center in Bentonville, Arkansas. It had 38\u00a0stores operating with 1,500 employees and sales of $44.2\u00a0million. It began trading stock as a publicly held company on October 1, 1970, and was soon listed on the New York Stock Exchange. The first stock split occurred in May 1971 for $47 per share. By this time, Wal-Mart was operating in five states: Arkansas, Kansas, Louisiana, Missouri, and Oklahoma; it entered Tennessee in 1973 and Kentucky and Mississippi in 1974. As the company moved into Texas in 1975, there were 125\u00a0stores with 7,500 employees and total sales of $340.3\u00a0million.\nIn the 1980s, Wal-Mart briefly experimented with a precursor to the Supercenter, the Hyper-Mart. Four stores combined features of discount stores, supermarkets, pharmacies, video arcades, and other amenities. Wal-Mart continued to grow rapidly, and by the company's 25th anniversary in 1987, there were 1,198 Wal-Mart stores with sales of $15.9\u00a0billion and 200,000 associates. One reason for Wal-Mart's success between 1980 and 2000 is believed to be its contiguous pattern of expansion over time, building new distribution centers in a hub and spoke framework within driving distance of existing Supercenters.\nThe company's satellite network was also completed in 1987, a $24\u00a0million investment linking all stores with two-way voice and data transmissions and one-way video communications with the Bentonville office. At the time, the company was the largest private satellite network, allowing the corporate office to track inventory and sales and to instantly communicate with stores. By 1984, Sam Walton had begun to source between 6% and 40% of his company's products from China. In 1988, Walton stepped down as CEO and was replaced by David Glass. Walton remained as chairman of the board. During this year, the first Wal-Mart Supercenter opened in Washington, Missouri.\nWith the contribution of its superstores, the company surpassed Toys \"R\" Us in toy sales in 1998.\n1990\u20132005: Retail rise to multinational status.\nWhile it was the third-largest retailer in the United States, Wal-Mart was more profitable than rivals Kmart and Sears by the late 1980s. By 1990, it became the largest U.S. retailer by revenue.\nPrior to the summer of 1990, Wal-Mart had no presence on the West Coast or in the Northeast (except for a single Sam's Club in New Jersey which opened in November 1989); however, in July and October that year, it opened its first stores in California and Pennsylvania, respectively. By the mid-1990s, it was the most powerful retailer in the U.S. and expanded into Mexico in 1991 and Canada in 1994. Wal-Mart stores opened throughout the rest of the U.S., with Vermont being the last state to get a store in 1995.\nThe company also opened stores outside North America, entering South America in 1995 with stores in Argentina and Brazil; and Europe in July 1999, buying Asda in the United Kingdom for US$.\nIn 1997, Wal-Mart was added to the Dow Jones Industrial Average.\nIn 1998, Wal-Mart introduced the Neighborhood Market concept with three stores in Arkansas. By 2005, estimates indicate that the company controlled about 20% of the retail grocery and consumables business.\nIn 2000, H. Lee Scott became Wal-Mart's president and CEO as the company's sales increased to $165\u00a0billion. In 2002, it was listed for the first time as America's largest corporation on the Fortune 500 list, with revenues of $219.8\u00a0billion and profits of $6.7\u00a0billion. It has remained there every year except 2006, 2009, and 2012.\nIn 2005, Wal-Mart reported US$ in sales, more than 6,200 facilities around the world\u2014including 3,800 stores in the United States and 2,800 elsewhere, employing more than 1.6\u00a0million associates. Its U.S. presence grew so rapidly that only small pockets of the country remained more than from the nearest store.\nAs Wal-Mart expanded rapidly into the world's largest corporation, many critics worried about its effect on local communities, particularly small towns with many \"mom and pop\" stores. There have been several studies on the economic impact of Wal-Mart on small towns and local businesses, jobs, and taxpayers. Kenneth Stone, a professor of economics, found that some small towns can lose almost half of their retail trade within ten years of a Wal-Mart store opening. However, in another study, he compared the changes to what small-town shops had faced in the past\u2014including the development of the railroads, the advent of the Sears Roebuck catalog, and the arrival of shopping malls\u2014and concluded that shop owners who adapt to changes in the retail market can thrive after Wal-Mart arrives. A later study in collaboration with Mississippi State University showed that there are \"both positive and negative impacts on existing stores in the area where the new supercenter locates\".\nIn the aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in September 2005, Wal-Mart used its logistics network to organize a rapid response to the disaster, donating $20\u00a0million, 1,500 truckloads of merchandise, food for 100,000 meals, and the promise of a job for every one of its displaced workers. An independent study by Steven Horwitz of St. Lawrence University found that Wal-Mart, The Home Depot, and Lowe's made use of their local knowledge about supply chains, infrastructure, decision makers and other resources to provide emergency supplies and reopen stores well before the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) began its response. While the company was overall lauded for its quick response amidst criticism of FEMA, several critics were quick to point out that there still remained issues with the company's labor relations.\nIn 2006, Charles Fishman published \"The Wal-Mart Effect\", examining the operation of Wal-Mart's supply chain. His book caught the attention of the press and the public. Fishman's case studies illustrate Wal-Mart's drive to lower costs and achieve greater efficiency and suggest that it may have significant upstream effects. Since Fishman's book was published, Wal-Mart has more than doubled in size. Further research on Wal-Mart's role in the food supply chain has tended to be limited and anecdotal.\n2005\u20132010: Initiatives.\nEnvironmental initiatives.\nIn November 2005, Wal-Mart announced several environmental measures to increase energy efficiency and improve its overall environmental record, which had previously been lacking. The company's primary goals included spending $500\u00a0million a year to increase fuel efficiency in Wal-Mart's truck fleet by 25% over three years and double it within ten; reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20% in seven years; reduce energy use at stores by 30%; and cut solid waste from U.S. stores and Sam's Clubs by 25% in three years. CEO Lee Scott said that Wal-Mart's goal was to be a \"good steward of the environment\" and ultimately use only renewable energy sources and produce zero waste. The company also designed three new experimental stores with wind turbines, photovoltaic solar panels, biofuel-capable boilers, water-cooled refrigerators, and xeriscape gardens. In this time, Wal-Mart also became the biggest seller of organic milk and the biggest buyer of organic cotton in the world, while reducing packaging and energy costs. In 2007, the company worked with outside consultants to discover its total environmental impact and find areas for improvement. Wal-Mart created its own electric company in Texas, named Texas Retail Energy, which planned to supply its stores with cheap power purchased at wholesale prices. Through this new venture, the company expected to save $15\u00a0million annually and also to lay the groundwork and infrastructure to sell electricity to Texas consumers in the future.\nBranding and store design changes.\nIn 2006, Wal-Mart announced that it would remodel its U.S. stores to help it appeal to a wider variety of demographics, including more affluent shoppers. As part of the initiative, the company launched a new store in Plano, Texas, that included high-end electronics, jewelry, expensive wines and a sushi bar.\nOn September 12, 2007, Wal-Mart introduced new advertising with the slogan, \"\"Save money. Live better.\", replacing the previous slogan \"Always Low Prices, Always\"\", which it had used since 1988. Global Insight, which conducted the research that supported the ads, found that Wal-Mart's price level reduction resulted in savings for consumers of $287\u00a0billion in 2006, which equated to $957 per person or $2,500 per household (up 7.3% from the 2004 savings estimate of $2,329).\nOn June 30, 2008, Wal-Mart removed the hyphen from its logo and replaced the star with a \"Spark\" symbol. The store branding became \"Walmart\", with the corporate name remaining with the hyphen as \"Wal-Mart\". The new logo received mixed reviews from design critics who questioned whether the new logo was as bold as those of competitors, such as the Target bullseye, or as instantly recognizable as the previous company's logo, which was used for 18 years. The new logo made its debut on the company's website on July 1, 2008, and its U.S. locations updated store logos in the fall of 2008. Walmart Canada started to adopt the logo for its stores in early 2009.\nAcquisitions and employee benefits.\nOn March 20, 2009, Walmart announced that it was paying a combined US$ in bonuses to every full and part-time hourly worker. This was in addition to $788.8\u00a0million in profit sharing, 401(k) pension contributions, hundreds of millions of dollars in merchandise discounts, and contributions to the employees' stock purchase plan. While the economy at large was in an ongoing recession, Walmart reported solid financial figures for the fiscal year ending January 31, 2009, with $401.2\u00a0billion in net sales, a gain of 7.2% from the prior year. Income from continuing operations increased 3% to $13.3\u00a0billion, and earnings per share rose 6% to $3.35.\nOn February 22, 2010, the company confirmed it was acquiring video streaming company Vudu, Inc. for an estimated $100\u00a0million.\n2011\u20132019.\nWalmart's truck fleet logs millions of miles each year, and the company planned to double the fleet's efficiency between 2005 and 2015. Fifteen based at Walmart's Buckeye, Arizona, distribution center were converted to run on biofuel from reclaimed cooking grease made during food preparation at Walmart stores.\nOn November 14, 2012, Walmart launched its first mail subscription service called Goodies. Customers pay a $7 monthly subscription for five to eight delivered food samples each month. The service shut down in late 2013.\nIn August 2013, the firm announced it was in talks to acquire a majority stake in the Kenya-based supermarket chain, Naivas.\nOn November 25, 2013, Walmart announced that Doug McMillon, CEO of Walmart International, would replace Mike Duke as Walmart CEO effective on February 1, 2014, becoming the company's fifth chief executive.\nIn June 2014, some Walmart employees went on strike in major U.S. cities demanding higher wages. In July 2014, American actor and comedian Tracy Morgan launched a lawsuit against Walmart seeking punitive damages over a multi-car pile-up which the suit alleges was caused by the driver of one of the firm's tractor-trailers who had not slept for 24 hours. Morgan's limousine was apparently hit by the trailer, injuring him and two fellow passengers and killing a fourth, fellow comedian James McNair. Walmart settled with the McNair family for $10\u00a0million, while admitting no liability. Morgan and Walmart reached a settlement in 2015 for an undisclosed amount, though Walmart later accused its insurers of \"bad faith\" in refusing to pay the settlement.\nIn 2015, Walmart was the biggest U.S. commercial producer of solar power with 142 MW capacity, and had 17 energy storage projects. This solar was primarily on rooftops, whereas there is an additional 20,000\u00a0m2 for solar canopies over parking lots.\nOn January 15, 2016, Walmart announced it would close 269 stores in 2016, affecting 16,000 workers. Of the stores earmarked for closure, 154 were in the U.S., 95% of which were located, on average, 10 miles from another Walmart store. The 269 stores represented less than 1\u00a0percent of global square footage and revenue for the company. The 102 locations of Neighborhood Markets that were formerly or originally planned to be Walmart Express, which had been in a pilot program since 2011 and converted in to Neighborhood Markets in 2014, were included in the closures. Walmart planned to focus on \"strengthening Supercenters, optimizing Neighborhood Markets, growing the e-commerce business and expanding pickup services for customers\". In fiscal 2017, the company plans to open between 50 and 60 Supercenters, 85 to 95 Neighborhood Markets, 7 to 10 Sam's Clubs, and 200 to 240 international locations. At the end of fiscal 2017, Walmart opened 38 Supercenters and relocated, expanded or converted 21 discount stores into Supercenters, for a total of 59 Supercenters, and opened 69 Neighborhood Markets, 8 Sam's Clubs, and 173 international locations, and relocated, expanded or converted 4 locations for a total of 177 international locations. On August 8, 2016, Walmart announced a deal to acquire e-commerce website Jet.com for US$3.3\u00a0billion. Jet.com co-founder and CEO Marc Lore stayed on to run Jet.com in addition to Walmart's existing U.S. e-commerce operation. The acquisition was structured as a payout of $3\u00a0billion in cash, and an additional $300\u00a0million in Walmart stock vested over time as part of an incentive bonus plan for Jet.com executives. On October 19, 2016, Walmart announced it would partner with IBM and Tsinghua University to track the pork supply chain in China using blockchain. The use of blockchain to automate the tracking of the supply chain promises the potential for Walmart to save money and thus increase profits.\nOn February 15, 2017, Walmart announced the acquisition of Moosejaw, a leading online active outdoor retailer, for approximately $51\u00a0million. The acquisition closed on February 13, 2017. On June 16, 2017, Walmart agreed to acquire the men's apparel company Bonobos for $310\u00a0million in an effort to expand its fashion holdings. On September 29, 2017, Walmart acquired Parcel, a same-day and last-mile delivery company in Brooklyn. In 2018, Walmart started crowdsourcing delivery services to customers using drivers' private vehicles, under the brand \"Spark\".\nOn December 6, 2017, Walmart announced that it would change its corporate name to Walmart Inc. from Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. effective February 1, 2018.\nOn January 11, 2018, Walmart announced that 63 Sam's Club locations would be closing. Some of the stores had already liquidated, without notifying employees; some employees learned by a company-wide email delivered January 11. Walmart said that ten of the stores will become e-commerce distribution centers and employees can reapply to work at those locations. \"Business Insider\" magazine calculated that over 11,000 workers would be affected. On the same day, Walmart announced that as a result of the new tax law, it would be raising Walmart starting wages, distributing bonuses, expanding its leave policies and contributing toward the cost of employees' adoptions. Doug McMillon, Walmart's CEO, said, \"We are early in the stages of assessing the opportunities tax reform creates for us to invest in our customers and associates and to further strengthen our business, all of which should benefit our shareholders.\"\nIt was reported that Walmart is now looking at entering the subscription-video space, hoping to compete with Netflix and Amazon. They have enlisted the help of former Epix CEO, Mark Greenberg, to help develop a low-cost subscription video-streaming service.\nOn February 26, 2019, Walmart announced that it had acquired Tel Aviv-based product review start-up Aspectiva for an undisclosed sum.\nIn May 2019, Walmart announced the launch of free one-day shipping on more than 220,000 items with minimum purchase amount of $35.\nIn September 2019, Walmart made the announcement that it would cease the sale of all e-cigarettes due to \"regulatory complexity and uncertainty\" over the products. Earlier in 2019, Walmart stopped selling fruit-flavored e-cigarette and had raised the minimum age to 21 for the purchase of products containing tobacco. That same month, Walmart opened its first Health Center, a \"medical mall\" where customers can purchase primary care services. Prices without insurance were listed, for instance, at $30 for an annual physical and $45 for a counseling session. Continuing with its health care initiative, they opened a health and wellness clinic prototype in Springdale, Arkansas just to expand services.\nBy October 2019, Walmart stopped selling all live fish and aquatic plants.\n2020s: Development.\nIn 2020, the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic forced temporary measures such as store closures, limited store occupancy, large-scale employee dismissal, and enforcement of social distancing protocols. Store hours were adjusted to allow cleaning and stocking. Limits on items were placed due to the rise of panic buying.\nDuring the pandemic, Walmart changed some employee benefits. Employees were able to decide to stay home and take unpaid leave if they felt unable to work or uncomfortable coming to work. Employees who contracted the virus would receive \"up to two weeks of pay\". After two weeks, hourly associates who were unable to return to work were eligible for up to 26 weeks in pay. Walmart paid pandemic bonuses of $428\u00a0million. People who did part-time or temporary work received a bonus of $150 while those who worked full-time received a bonus of $300. Starting in July 2020, customers were required to wear masks in all stores. By February 2022, the COVID restrictions such as the mask requirements were lifted.\nIn the first quarter of 2020, consumers responded to COVID by shopping less frequently (5.6% fewer transactions), and buying more when they did shop (16.5%). As people shifted from eating out to at home, net sales increased by 11%, while online sales rose 74%. Although Walmart experienced a 5.5% increase in operating expenses, its net income increased by 4%. In the third quarter of 2020, Walmart reported revenue of $135\u00a0billion, representing a year-on-year increase of 5%.\nIn December 2020, Walmart launched a new service, Carrier Pickup, that allows customers to schedule returns. In January 2021, the company launced a fintech startup, with venture partner Ribbit Capital, to provide financial products for consumers and employees. In February, Walmart acquired technology from Thunder Industries, which uses automation to create digital ads, to expand its online marketing capability. In May, Walmart acquired the Israeli startup Zeekit for $200\u00a0million. Zeekit uses AI to allow customers to try on clothing via a virtual platform. In August, Walmart announced it would open its Spark crowdsource delivery to other businesses as a white-label service, competing with Postmates and online food ordering delivery companies.\nIn June 2022, Walmart announced it would acquire Memomi, an AR optical tech company. In August, Walmart announced it would acquire Volt Systems, a vendor management and product tracking software company. Walmart announced it was partnering with Paramount to offer Paramount+ content\nto its Walmart+ subscribers in a bid to better compete with Amazon. In September 2025, Walmart added Peacock to Walmart+, giving consumers an option between Peacock and Paramount+ and switch between the two services every 90 days.\nIn August 2022, Walmart announced that locations were not going back to 24 hours with most stores now open between 6am and 11pm. In January 2023, Walmart announced it would raise its minimum wage for hourly workers from $12 to $14 an hour. Approximately 340,000 employees were expected to receive a raise, effective in March, and Walmart's U.S. average wage was expected to be over $17.50. The company announced it would be adding college degrees and certificates to its Live Better U program.\nIn February 2023, Walmart announced it had made $611\u00a0billion in sales in the previous financial year, up 7%. Profits were up, almost doubled from the previous year. In April, the company announced it would add electric vehicle charging stations at thousands of stores by 2030, on top of the 1,300 existing stations in operation.\nIn January 2024, Walmart announced it would open over 150 stores in the U.S. over the next five years while remodeling 650. This was a reversal for the company, which had been in a period of de-emphasizing new store openings as it focused on online competition, in particular from Amazon, and came amid an overall greater industry focus on traditional retail in the post-pandemic area. In February, the company announced that its \"Project Gigaton\" initiative begun in 2017 to reduce its Scope 3 emissions from suppliers by 1 billion metric tons by 2030 had reached its goal, and 75% of net sales in fiscal year 2023 were from suppliers participating in the initiative. Walmart reported they were planning to remove the self checkout from some stores due to feedback.\nIn August 2024, Walmart announced a new service to transport goods from Asia to U.S. and compete more effectively with Amazon. In November, Walmart announced it was ending its diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) programs, in addition to delisting products designed for transgender minors such as breast binders.\nIn January 2025, Walmart redesigned its logo; it largely stayed the same except the word was made a little bigger, the background darker blue, and the spark slightly bigger.\nOn November 20, 2025, Walmart announced that it will switch its stock exchange listing to from the NYSE to the Nasdaq Global Select Market, marking the largest stock exchange transfer on record. Walmart will begin trading as a Nasdaq-listed security on December 9. The switch underscores how deeply technology is embedded in the company's operations and growth strategy.\nAcquisitions and employee benefits.\nIn February 2024, the company announced that managers would be given stock grants of up to $20,000. Walmart announced a 3\u20131 stock split to make it easier for employees to buy stock. Such rewards for rank-and-file employees are rare in the industry, which analysts say could generate $20 billion in revenue for the average household. The company raised the starting base salary for store managers and increased the bonus plan of up to 200 per cent of their regular salaries.\nWalmart entered into an agreement to acquire Vizio for $2.3billion with the intention to expand its advertising sales in video content that streams for on Vizio devices. Following regulatory approval, the acquisition was finalized on December 3.\nOperating divisions.\nAs of 2016, Walmart's operations are organized into four divisions: Walmart U.S., Walmart International, Sam's Club and Global eCommerce. In the United States, Walmart's stores operate in four formats: discount, Supercenters, Neighborhood Markets, and Sam's Club stores. Walmart International stores include additional formats such as supermarkets, hypermarkets, cash-and-carry stores, home improvement, specialty electronics, restaurants, apparel stores, drugstores, and convenience stores.\nWalmart U.S..\nWalmart U.S. is the company's largest division, accounting for US$, or 65 percent of total sales, for fiscal 2019. It consists of three retail formats that have become commonplace in the United States: Supercenters, Discount Stores, Neighborhood Markets, and other small formats. The discount stores sell a variety of mostly non-grocery products, though emphasis has now shifted towards supercenters, which include more groceries. As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] there are a total of 4,720 Walmart U.S. stores. In the United States, 90 percent of the population resides within 10 miles of a Walmart store. The total number of Walmart U.S. stores and Sam's Clubs combined is 5,320. The president and CEO of Walmart U.S. is John Furner.\nWalmart Supercenter.\nWalmart Supercenters, branded simply as \"Walmart\", are hypermarkets with sizes varying from , but averaging about . These stock general merchandise and a full-service supermarket, including meat and poultry, baked goods, delicatessen, frozen foods, dairy products, garden produce, and fresh seafood. Many Walmart Supercenters also have a garden center, pet shop, pharmacy, Tire &amp; Lube Express, optical center, one-hour photo processing lab, portrait studio, and numerous alcove shops, such as cellular phone stores, hair and nail salons, video rental stores, local bank branches (such as Woodforest National Bank branches in newer locations), and fast food outlets.\nMany Walmart Supercenters currently feature McDonald's or Subway restaurants. In some Canadian locations, Tim Hortons were opened. Recently, in several Supercenters, like the Tallahassee, Florida and the Palm Desert, California locations, Walmart added Burger King to their locations, and the location in Glen Burnie, Maryland, due to its past as a hypermarket called Leedmark, boasts an Auntie Anne's and an Italian restaurant. Some Walmart locations in Canada have Axess Law locations, Mary Brown's, Burger King and McDonald's, and Atlantic Lottery Corporation locations in the Atlantic region. Some U.S. locations have Wendy's, Domino's, Taco Bell, Claire's, and small arcades called GamePlay. Very few U.S. locations have KFC, Hardee's, Papa John's, Dairy Queen, Little Caesars, and A&amp;W Restaurants.\nSome locations also have fuel stations which sell gasoline distributed by Murphy USA (which spun off from Murphy Oil in 2013), Sunoco (\"Optima\"), the Tesoro Corporation (\"Mirastar\"), USA Gasoline, and even now Walmart-branded gas stations.\nThe first Supercenter opened in Washington, Missouri, in 1988. A similar concept, Hypermart USA, had opened a year earlier in Garland, Texas. All Hypermart USA stores were later closed or converted into Supercenters.\nAs of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] there were 3,572 Walmart Supercenters in 49 of the 50 U.S. states, the District of Columbia, and Puerto Rico. Hawaii is the only state to not have a Supercenter location. The largest Supercenter in the world, covering on two floors, is located in Crossgates Commons in Albany, New York.\nA typical supercenter sells approximately 120,000 items, compared to the 35\u00a0million products sold in Walmart's online store.\nThe \"Supercenter\" name has since been phased out, with these stores now simply referred to as \"Walmart\", since the company introduced the new Walmart logo in 2008. However, the branding is still used in Walmart's Canadian stores (spelled as \"Supercentre\" in Canadian English).\nWalmart Discount Store.\nWalmart Discount Stores, also branded as simply \"Walmart\", are discount department stores with sizes varying from , with the average store covering . They carry general merchandise and limited groceries. Some newer and remodeled discount stores have an expanded grocery department, similar to Target's PFresh department. Many of these stores also feature a garden center, pharmacy, Tire &amp; Lube Express, optical center, one-hour photo processing lab, portrait studio, a bank branch, a cell phone store, and a fast food outlet. Some also have gasoline stations. Discount Stores were Walmart's original concept, though they have since been surpassed by Supercenters.\nIn 1990, Walmart opened its first Bud's Discount City location in Bentonville. Bud's operated as a closeout store, much like Big Lots. Many locations were opened to fulfill leases in shopping centers as Walmart stores left and moved into newly built Supercenters. All of the Bud's Discount City stores had closed or converted into Walmart Discount Stores by 1997.\nAt its peak in 1996, there were 1,995 Walmart Discount Stores; as of October 31, 2022, that number had dropped to 365.\nWalmart Neighborhood Market.\nWalmart Neighborhood Market, former also known as \"Neighborhood Market by Walmart\" or informally known as \"Neighborhood Walmart\", is Walmart's chain of stores ranging from and averaging about , about a fifth of the size of a Walmart Supercenter. The first Walmart Neighborhood Market opened ten years after the first Supercenter opened, but Walmart did not heavily focus on this model until the 2010s.\nThe stores predominantly sells groceries, but also features a modest amount of household items and even general merchandise, in a format of a general stores. The focus on three of Walmart's major sales categories: groceries, which account for about 55 percent of the company's revenue, pharmacy, and, at some stores, fuel. For groceries and consumables, the stores sell fresh produce, deli and bakery items, prepared foods, meat, dairy, organic, general grocery and frozen foods, in addition to cleaning products and pet supplies. Some stores offer wine and beer sales and drive-through pharmacies. Some stores, such as one at Midtown Center in Bentonville, Arkansas, offer made-to-order pizza with a seating area for eating. Customers can also use Walmart's site-to-store operation and pick up online orders at Walmart Neighborhood Market stores just like the Supercenters and Discount Stores\nProducts at Walmart Neighborhood Market stores have the same prices as those at Walmart's larger supercenters. A Moody's Investors Service analyst said the wider company's pricing structure gives the chain of grocery stores a \"competitive advantage\" over competitors Whole Foods Market, Kroger and Trader Joe's.\nNeighborhood Market stores expanded slowly at first as a way to fill gaps between Walmart Supercenters and Discount Stores in existing markets. In its first 12 years, the company opened about 180 Walmart Neighborhood Markets. By 2010, Walmart said it was ready to accelerate its expansion plans for the grocery stores. Similar to the Supercenter models, the Neighborhood Market branded had phased out overtime, with several stores now adopting the Walmart Market branding, with the name of the municipality put with \"market\". As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] there were 682 Walmart Neighborhood Markets, each employing between 90 and 95 full-time and part-time workers. The total number of Neighborhood Markets and other small formats combined is 783.\nFormer stores and concepts.\nWalmart opened Supermercado de Walmart locations to appeal to Hispanic communities in the United States. The first one, a store in the Spring Branch area of Houston, opened on April 29, 2009. The store was a conversion of an existing Walmart Neighborhood Market. In 2009, another Supermercado de Walmart opened in Phoenix, Arizona. Both locations closed in 2014. In 2009, Walmart opened \"M\u00e1s Club\", a warehouse retail operation patterned after Sam's Club. Its lone store also closed in 2014.\nWalmart Express was a chain of smaller discount stores with a range of services from groceries to check cashing and gasoline service. The concept was focused on small towns deemed unable to support a larger store and large cities where space was at a premium. Walmart planned to build 15 to 20 Walmart Express stores, focusing on Arkansas, North Carolina, and Chicago, by the end of its fiscal year in January 2012. As of September\u00a02014,[ [update]] Walmart re-branded all 22 of its Express format stores to Neighborhood Markets in an effort to streamline its retail offer. It continued to open new Express stores under the Neighborhood Market name. As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] there were 101 small-format stores in the United States. These include 92 other small formats, 8 convenience stores and 1 pickup location. On January 15, 2016, Walmart announced that it would be closing 269 stores globally, including the 102 Neighborhood Markets that were formerly or originally planned to be Express stores.\nBetween 2002 and 2022, Walmart owned the Amigo supermarkets chain in Puerto Rico. In 2022, Walmart announced that it would sell its Amigo stores to Pueblo Inc. and focus on modernizing its 18 Supercenter and Division 1 formats and seven Sam's Clubs stores.\nInitiatives.\nIn September 2006, Walmart announced a pilot program to sell generic drugs at $4\u00a0per prescription. The program was launched at stores in the Tampa, Florida, area, and by January 2007 had been expanded to all stores in Florida. While the average price of generics is\u00a0$29 per prescription, compared to\u00a0$102 for name-brand drugs, Walmart maintains that it is not selling at a loss, or providing them as an act of charity\u2014instead, they are using the same mechanisms of mass distribution that it uses to bring lower prices to other products. Many of Walmart's low cost generics are imported from India, where they are made by drug makers that include Ranbaxy Laboratories and Cipla.\nOn February 6, 2007, the company launched a \"beta\" version of a movie download service, which sold about 3,000 films and television episodes from all major studios and television networks. The service was discontinued on December 21, 2007, due to low sales.\nIn 2008, Walmart started a pilot program in the small grocery store concept called Marketside in the metropolitan Phoenix, Arizona area. The four stores closed in 2011.\nIn 2015, Walmart began testing a free grocery pickup service, allowing customers to select products online and choose their pickup time. At the store, a Walmart employee loads the groceries into the customer's car. As of December\u00a017, 2017,[ [update]] the service is available in 39 U.S. states.\nIn May 2016, Walmart announced a change to ShippingPass, its three-day shipping service, and that it will move from a three-day delivery to two-day delivery to remain competitive with Amazon. Walmart priced it at 49 dollars per year, compared to Amazon Prime's 99-dollar-per-year price.\nIn June 2016, Walmart and Sam's Club announced that they would begin testing a last-mile grocery delivery that used services including Uber, Lyft, and Deliv, to bring customers' orders to their homes. Walmart customers would be able to shop using the company's online grocery service at grocery.walmart.com, then request delivery at checkout for a small fee. The first tests were planned to go live in Denver and Phoenix. Walmart announced on March 14, 2018, that it would expand online delivery to 100 metropolitan regions in the United States, the equivalent of 40 percent of households, by the end of the year of 2018.\nWalmart's Winemakers Selection private label wine was introduced in June 2018 in about 1,100 stores. The wine, from domestic and international sources, was described by \"Washington Post\" food and wine columnist Dave McIntyre as notably good for the inexpensive ($11 to $16 per bottle) price level.\nIn October 2019, Walmart announced that customers in 2,000 locations in 29 states can use the grocery pickup service for their adult beverage purchases. Walmart will also deliver adult beverages from nearly 200 stores across California and Florida.\nIn February 2020, Walmart announced a new membership program called, \"Walmart+\" to better compete with Amazon Prime. The news came shortly after Walmart announced the discontinuation of its personal shopping service, Jetblack.\nNumbers of stores by state.\nLocations as of October 1, 2022\nWalmart International.\nAs of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] Walmart's international operations comprised 5,266 stores and 800,000 workers in 23\u00a0countries outside the United States. There are wholly owned operations in Argentina, Brazil, Canada, and the UK. With 2.2\u00a0million employees worldwide, the company is the largest private employer in the U.S. and Mexico, and one of the largest in Canada. In fiscal 2019 Walmart's international division sales were US$, or 23.7\u00a0percent of total sales. International retail units range from , while wholesale units range from . Kathryn McLay is the president and CEO of Walmart International.\nCentral America.\nWalmart also owns 51\u00a0percent of the Central American Retail Holding Company (CARHCO), which, as of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] consists of 868 stores, including 263 stores in Guatemala (under the Paiz, Walmart Supercenter, Despensa Familiar, and Maxi Dispensa banners), 102 stores in El Salvador (under the Despensa Familiar, La Despensa de Don Juan, Walmart Supercenter, and Maxi Despensa banners), 111 stores in Honduras (including the Paiz, Walmart Supercenter, Dispensa Familiar, and Maxi Despensa banners), 102 stores in Nicaragua (including the Pali, La Uni\u00f3n, Maxi Pali, and Walmart Supercenter banners), and 290 stores in Costa Rica (including the Maxi Pali, Mas X Menos, Walmart Supercenter, and Pali banners).\nChile.\nIn January 2009, the company acquired a controlling interest in the largest grocer in Chile, Distribuci\u00f3n y Servicio D&amp;S SA. In 2010, the company was renamed Walmart Chile. As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] Walmart Chile operates around 384 stores under the banners Lider, Express de Lider, Superbodega Acuenta, and Central Mayorista.\nMexico.\nWalmart opened its first international store in Mexico in 1991.\nAs of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] Walmart's Mexico division, the largest outside the U.S., consisted of 2,804 stores. Walmart in Mexico operates Walmart Supercenter, Sam's Club, Bodega Aurrera, Mi Bodega Aurrera, Bodega Aurrera Express and Walmart Express.\nCanada.\nWalmart has operated in Canada since it acquired 122\u00a0stores comprising the Woolco division of Woolworth Canada, Inc on January 14, 1994. As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] it operates 402\u00a0locations (including 343\u00a0supercentres and 59 discount stores) and, as of June\u00a02015,[ [update]] it employs 89,358 people, with a local home office in Mississauga, Ontario. Walmart Canada's first three Supercentres (spelled in Canadian English) opened in November 2006 in Ancaster, London, and Stouffville, Ontario.\nIn 2010, approximately one year after its incorporation of Schedule 2 (foreign-owned, deposit-taking) of Canada's \"Bank Act\", Walmart Canada Bank was introduced with the launch of the Walmart (Canada) Rewards MasterCard. Less than ten years later, however, on May 17, 2018, Wal-Mart Canada announced it had reached a definitive agreement to sell Wal-Mart Canada Bank to First National co-founder Stephen Smith and private equity firm Centerbridge Partners, L.P., on undisclosed financial terms, though it added that it would still be issuer of the Walmart (Canada) Rewards MasterCard.\nOn April 1, 2019, Centerbridge Partners, L.P. and Stephen Smith jointly announced the closing of the previously announced acquisition of Wal-Mart Canada Bank and that it was to be renamed Duo Bank of Canada, to be styled simply as Duo Bank. Though exact ownership percentages were never revealed in either company announcement, it has also since been revealed that Duo Bank was reclassified as a Schedule 1 (domestic, deposit-taking) federally chartered bank of the \"Bank Act\" in Canada from the Schedule 2 (foreign-owned or -controlled, deposit-taking) that it had been, which indicates that Stephen Smith, as a noted Canadian businessman, is in a controlling position.\nAfrica.\nOn September 28, 2010, Walmart announced it would buy Massmart Holdings Ltd. of Johannesburg, South Africa in a deal worth over US$ giving the company its first footprint in Africa. As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] it has 411 stores, including 361 stores in South Africa (under the banners Game Foodco, CBW, Game, Builders Express, Builders Warehouse, Cambridge, Rhino, Makro, Builders Trade Depot, Jumbo, and Builders Superstore), 11 stores in Botswana (under the banners CBW, Game Foodco, and Builders Warehouse), 4 stores in Ghana (under the Game Foodco banner), 4 stores in Kenya (under the banners Game Foodco and Builders Warehouse), 3 stores in Lesotho (under the banners CBW and Game Foodco), 2 stores in Malawi (under the Game banner), 6 stores in Mozambique (under the banners Builders Warehouse, Game Foodco, CBW, and Builders Express), 5 stores in Namibia (under the banners Game Foodco and Game), 5 stores in Nigeria (under the banners Game and Game Foodco), 1 store in Eswatini (under the CBW banner), 1 store in Tanzania (under the Game Foodco banner), 1 store in Uganda (under the Game banner), and 7 stores in Zambia (under the banners CBW, Game Foodco, Builders Warehouse, and Builders Express).\nChina.\nWalmart has joint ventures in China and several majority-owned subsidiaries. As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] Walmart China (\u6c83\u5c14\u739b \"W\u00f2'\u0113rm\u01ce\") operates 369 stores under the Walmart Supercenter and Sam's Club banners.\nIn February 2012, Walmart announced that the company raised its stake to 51 percent in Chinese online supermarket Yihaodian to tap rising consumer wealth and help the company offer more products. Walmart took full ownership in July 2015.\nIn October 2016, Walmart launched the Food Safety Collaboration Center in Beijing, China. The goal of this investment is to collaborate with the local government, promote the use of blockchain technology in tracking pork supply in China, and enhance the transparency and safety of the food supply chain.\nIn December 2021, the Chinese Communist Party's Central Commission for Discipline Inspection warned Walmart about removing products made from inputs from Xinjiang in response to the Uyghur Forced Labor Prevention Act.\nIndia.\nIn November 2006, the company announced a joint venture with Bharti Enterprises to operate in India. As foreign corporations were not allowed to enter the retail sector directly, Walmart operated through franchises and handled the wholesale end of the business. The partnership involved two joint ventures\u2014Bharti manages the front end, involving opening of retail outlets while Walmart takes care of the back end, such as cold chains and logistics. Walmart operates stores in India under the name Best Price Modern Wholesale. The first store opened in Amritsar on May 30, 2009. On September 14, 2012, the Government of India approved 51 percent FDI in multi-brand retails, subject to approval by individual states, effective September 20, 2012. Scott Price, Walmart's president and CEO for Asia, told \"The Wall Street Journal\" that the company would be able to start opening Walmart stores in India within two years. Expansion into India faced some significant problems. In November 2012, Walmart admitted to spending US$ lobbying the Indian National Congress; lobbying is conventionally considered bribery in India. Walmart is conducting an internal investigation into potential violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Bharti Walmart suspended a number of employees, rumored to include its CFO and legal team, to ensure \"a complete and thorough investigation\". In October 2013, Bharti and Walmart separated to pursue business independently.\nOn May 9, 2018, Walmart announced its intent to acquire a 77% majority stake in the Indian e-commerce company Flipkart for $16\u00a0billion, in a deal that was completed on August 18, 2018. As of \u00a031, 2022,[ [update]] there are 28 Best Price Modern Wholesale locations.\nSetbacks.\nIn the 1990s, Walmart tried with a large financial investment to get a foothold in both German and Indonesian retail markets.\nWalmart entered Indonesia with the opening of stores in Lippo Supermall (now known as Supermal Karawaci) and Megamall Pluit (now known as Pluit Village) respectively, under a joint-venture agreement with local conglomerate Lippo Group. Both stores closed down due to the 1997 Asian financial crisis.\nIn Germany, Walmart took over supermarket chain Wertkauf with its 21 stores for DM750\u00a0million in 1997 and the following year Walmart acquired 74 InterSPAR stores for DM1.3\u00a0billion. The German market at this point was an oligopoly with high competition among companies which used a similar low price strategy as Walmart. As a result, Walmart's low price strategy yielded no competitive advantage. Walmart's corporate culture was not viewed positively among employees and customers, particularly Walmart's \"statement of ethics\", which attempted to restrict relationships between employees, a violation of articles 1 and 2 of German constitution. The statement also violated German labor laws and led to a public discussion in the media, resulting in a bad reputation among customers. In July 2006, Walmart announced its withdrawal from Germany due to sustained losses. The stores were sold to the German company Metro during Walmart's fiscal third quarter. Walmart did not disclose its losses from its German investment, but they were estimated to be around \u20ac3\u00a0billion.\nIn 2004, Walmart bought the 118\u00a0stores in the Bompre\u00e7o supermarket chain in northeastern Brazil. In late 2005, it took control of the Brazilian operations of Sonae Distribution Group through its new subsidiary, WMS Supermercados do Brasil, thus acquiring control of the Nacional and Mercadorama supermarket chains, the leaders in the Rio Grande do Sul and Paran\u00e1 states, respectively. None of these stores were rebranded. As of \u00a02014,[ [update]] Walmart operated 61 Bompre\u00e7o supermarkets, 39\u00a0Hiper Bompre\u00e7o stores. It also ran 57\u00a0Walmart Supercenters, 27\u00a0Sam's Clubs, and 174 Todo Dia stores. With the acquisition of Bompre\u00e7o and Sonae, by 2010, Walmart was the third-largest supermarket chain in Brazil, behind Carrefour and P\u00e3o de A\u00e7\u00facar.\nWalmart Brasil, the operating company, has its head office in Barueri, S\u00e3o Paulo State, and regional offices in Curitiba, Paran\u00e1; Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul; Recife, Pernambuco; and Salvador, Bahia. Walmart Brasil operates under the banners Todo Dia, Nacional, Bompre\u00e7o, Walmart Supercenter, Maxxi Atacado, Hipermercado Big, Hiper Bompre\u00e7o, Sam's Club, Mercadorama, Walmart Posto (Gas Station), Supermercado Todo Dia, and Hiper Todo Dia. Recently, the company started the conversion process of all Hiper Bompre\u00e7o and Big stores into Walmart Supercenters and Bompre\u00e7o, Nacional and Mercadorama stores into the Walmart Supermercado brand.\nSince August 2018, Walmart Inc. only holds a minority stake in Walmart Brasil, which was renamed Grupo Big on August 12, 2019, with 20% of the company's shares, and private equity firm Advent International holding 80% ownership of the company. On March 24, 2021, it was announced that Carrefour would be acquiring Grupo Big.\nWalmart Argentina was founded in 1995 and operates stores under the banners Walmart Supercenter, Changomas, Mi Changomas, and Punto Mayorista. On November 6, 2020, it was announced that Walmart has sold its Argentine operations to Grupo de Narv\u00e1ez and renamed Hiper Changomas.\nWalmart's UK subsidiary Asda (which retained its name after being acquired by Walmart) is based in Leeds and accounted for 42.7\u00a0percent of 2006 sales of Walmart's international division. In contrast to the U.S. operations, Asda was originally and still remains primarily a grocery chain, but with a stronger focus on non-food items than most UK supermarket chains other than Tesco. In 2010 Asda acquired stores from Netto UK. In addition to small suburban Asda Supermarkets, larger stores are branded Supercentres. Other banners include Asda Superstores, Asda Living, and Asda Petrol Fueling Station. In July 2015, Asda updated its logo featuring the Walmart Asterisks behind the first 'A' in the Logo. In May 2018, Walmart announced plans to sell Asda to rival Sainsbury's for $10.1\u00a0billion. Under the terms of the deal, Walmart would have received a 42% stake in the combined company and about \u00a33\u00a0billion in cash. However, in April 2019, the United Kingdom's Competition and Markets Authority blocked the proposed sale of Asda to Sainsburys.\nOn October 2, 2020, it was announced that Walmart will sell a majority stake of Asda to a consortium of Zuber and Mohsin Issa (the owners of EG Group) and private equity firm TDR Capital for \u00a36.8bn, pending approval from the Competition and Markets Authority. The sale was later approved in February 2021.\nIn Japan, Walmart owned 100 percent of Seiyu (\u897f\u53cb \"Seiy\u016b\") as of 2008.[ [update]] It operates under the Seiyu (Hypermarket), Seiyu (Supermarket), Seiyu (General Merchandise), Livin, and Sunny banners. \nOn November 16, 2020, Walmart announced they would be selling 65% of their shares in the company to the private-equity firm KKR in a deal valuing 329 stores and 34,600 employees at $1.6\u00a0billion. Walmart is supposed to retain 15% and a seat on the board, while a joint-venture between KKR and Japanese company Rakuten Inc. will receive 20%.\nCorruption charges.\nAn April 2012 investigation by \"The New York Times\" reported the allegations of a former executive of Walmart de Mexico that, in September 2005, the company had paid bribes via local fixers to officials throughout Mexico in exchange for construction permits, information, and other favors, which gave Walmart a substantial advantage over competitors. Walmart investigators found credible evidence that Mexican and American laws had been broken. Concerns were also raised that Walmart executives in the United States had \"hushed up\" the allegations. A follow-up investigation by \"The New York Times\", published December 17, 2012, revealed evidence that regulatory permission for siting, construction, and operation of nineteen stores had been obtained through bribery. There was evidence that a bribe of US$ was paid to change a zoning map, which enabled the opening of a Walmart store a mile from a historical site in San Juan Teotihuac\u00e1n in 2004. After the initial article was released, Walmart released a statement denying the allegations and describing its anti-corruption policy. While an official Walmart report states that it had found no evidence of corruption, the article alleges that previous internal reports had indeed turned up such evidence before the story became public. \"Forbes\" magazine contributor Adam Hartung also commented that the bribery scandal was a reflection of Walmart's \"serious management and strategy troubles\", stating, \"[s]candals are now commonplace\u00a0... [e]ach scandal points out that Walmart's strategy is harder to navigate and is running into big problems\".\nIn 2012, there was an incident with CJ's Seafood, a crawfish processing firm in Louisiana that was partnered with Walmart, that eventually gained media attention for the mistreatment of its 40 H-2B visa workers from Mexico. These workers experienced harsh living conditions in tightly packed trailers outside of the work facility, physical threats, verbal abuse, and were forced to work day-long shifts. Many of the workers were afraid to take action about the abuse due to the fact that the manager threatened the lives of their family members in the U.S. and Mexico if the abuse were to be reported. Eight of the workers confronted management at CJ's Seafood about the mistreatment; however, the management denied the abuse allegations and the workers went on strike. The workers then took their stories to Walmart due to their partnership with CJ's. While Walmart was investigating the situation, the workers collected 150,000 signatures of supporters who agreed that Walmart should stand by the workers and take action. In June 2012, the visa workers held a protest and day-long hunger strike outside of the apartment building where a Walmart board member resided. Following this protest, Walmart announced its final decision to no longer work with CJ's Seafood. Less than a month later, the Department of Labor fined CJ's Seafood \"approximately $460,000 in back-pay, safety violations, wage and hour violations, civil damages, and fines for abuses to the H-2B program. The company has since shut down.\"\nAs of December\u00a02012,[ [update]] internal investigations were ongoing into possible violations of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act. Walmart has invested US$ on internal investigations, which expanded beyond Mexico to implicate operations in China, Brazil, and India. The case has added fuel to the debate as to whether foreign investment will result in increased prosperity, or if it merely allows local retail trade and economic policy to be taken over by \"foreign financial and corporate interests\".\nSam's Club.\nSam's Club is a chain of warehouse clubs that sell groceries and general merchandise, often in bulk. Locations generally range in size from , with an average club size of approximately . The first Sam's Club was opened by Walmart, Inc. in 1983 in Midwest City, Oklahoma under the name \"Sam's Wholesale Club\". The chain was named after its founder Sam Walton. As of October 31, 2022, Sam's Club operated 600 membership warehouse clubs and accounted for 11.3% of Walmart's revenue at $57.839\u00a0billion in fiscal year 2019. Christopher Nicholas is the president and CEO of Sam's Club.\nGlobal eCommerce.\nBased in San Bruno, California, Walmart's Global eCommerce division provides online retailing for Walmart, Sam's Club, and all other international brands. There are several locations in the United States in California and Oregon: San Bruno, Sunnyvale, Brisbane, and Portland. Locations outside of the United States include Shanghai (China), Leeds (United Kingdom), and Bangalore (India).\nSubsidiaries.\nPrivate label brands.\nAbout 40 percent of products sold in Walmart are private labels, which are produced for the company through contracts with manufacturers. Walmart began offering private label brands in 1991, with the launch of Sam's Choice, a line of drinks produced by Primo Water for Walmart. Sam's Choice quickly became popular and by 1993, was the third-most-popular beverage brand in the United States. Other Walmart brands include Great Value and Equate in the U.S. and Canada and Smart Price in Britain. A 2006 study talked of \"the magnitude of mind-share Walmart appears to hold in the shoppers' minds when it comes to the awareness of private label brands and retailers\".\nEntertainment.\nIn 2010, the company teamed with Procter &amp; Gamble to produce \"Secrets of the Mountain\" and \"The Jensen Project\", two-hour family movies which featured the characters using Walmart and Procter &amp; Gamble\u2013branded products. \"The Jensen Project\" also featured a preview of a product to be released in several months in Walmart stores. A third movie, \"A Walk in My Shoes\", also aired in 2010 and a fourth is in production. Walmart's director of brand marketing also serves as co-chair of the Association of National Advertisers's Alliance for Family Entertainment.\nOnline commerce acquisitions and plans.\nLaunched in 2009, Walmart's Marketplace stayed dormant until 2016 when Walmart purchased e-commerce company Jet.com, founded in 2014 by Marc Lore, to start competing with Amazon.com. Jet.com has acquired its own share of online retailers such as Hayneedle in March 2016, Shoebuy.com in December 2016, and ModCloth in March 2017. Walmart also acquired Parcel, a delivery service in New York, on September 29, 2017.\nOn February 15, 2017, Walmart acquired Moosejaw, an online active outdoor retailer, for approximately $51\u00a0million. Moosejaw brought with it partnerships with more than 400 brands, including Patagonia, The North Face, Marmot, and Arc'teryx.\nMarc Lore, Walmart's U.S. e-commerce CEO, said that Walmart's existing physical infrastructure of almost 5,000 stores around the U.S. will enhance their digital expansion by doubling as warehouses for e-commerce without increasing overhead. As of 2017,[ [update]] Walmart offers in-store pickup for online orders at 1,000 stores with plans to eventually expand the service to all of its stores.\nOn May 9, 2018, Walmart announced its intent to acquire a 77% controlling stake in the Indian e-commerce website Flipkart for $16\u00a0billion (beating bids by Amazon.com), subject to regulatory approval. Following its completion, the website's management will report to Marc Lore. Completion of the deal was announced on August 18, 2018.\nThe company's partnership with subscription service Kidbox was announced on April 16, 2019.\nOn May 19, 2020, Walmart announced that it was shutting down Jet.com, with all subsequent visitors to the site directed to the Walmart website instead.\nCorporate affairs.\nWalmart is headquartered in the Walmart Home Office complex in Bentonville, Arkansas. In 2025, Walmart closed several U.S. offices and consolidated its U.S. corporate associates into its Bentonville headquarters or its West Coast offices in Sunnyvale, California.\nThe company's business model is based on selling a wide variety of general merchandise at low prices. Doug McMillon became Walmart's CEO on February 1, 2014. He has also worked as the head of Sam's Club and Walmart International. The company refers to its employees as \"associates\". All Walmart stores in the U.S. and Canada also have designated \"greeters\" at the entrance, a practice pioneered by Sam Walton and later imitated by other retailers. Greeters are trained to help shoppers find what they want and answer their questions.\nFor many years, associates were identified in the store by their signature blue vest, but this practice was discontinued in June 2007 and replaced with khaki pants and polo shirts. The wardrobe change was part of a larger corporate overhaul to increase sales and rejuvenate the company's stock price. In September 2014, the uniform was again updated to bring back a vest (paid for by the company) for store employees over the same polos and khaki or black pants paid for by the employee. The vest is navy blue for Walmart employees at Supercenters and discounts stores, lime green for Walmart Neighborhood Market employees, and yellow for self-check-out associates; door greeters, and customer service managers. All three state \"Proud Walmart Associate\" on the left breast and the \"Spark\" logo covering the back. Reportedly one of the main reasons the vest was reintroduced was that some customers had trouble identifying employees. In 2016, self-checkout associates, door greeters and customer service managers began wearing a yellow vest to be better seen by customers. By requiring employees to wear uniforms that are made up of standard \"streetwear\", Walmart is not required to purchase the uniforms or reimburse employees which are required in some states, as long as that clothing can be worn elsewhere. Businesses are only legally required to pay for branded shirts and pants or clothes that would be difficult to wear outside of work.\nUnlike many other retailers, Walmart does not charge slotting fees to suppliers for their products to appear in the store. Instead, it focuses on selling more-popular products and provides incentives for store managers to drop unpopular products.\nFrom 2006 to 2010, the company eliminated its layaway program. In 2011, the company revived its layaway program.\nWalmart introduced its Site-To-Store program in 2007, after testing the program since 2004 on a limited basis. The program allows \"walmart.com\" customers to buy goods online with a free shipping option, and have goods shipped to the nearest store for pickup.\nOn September 15, 2017, Walmart announced that it would build a new headquarters in Bentonville to replace its current 1971 building and consolidate operations that have spread out to 20 different buildings throughout Bentonville.\nAccording to watchdog group Documented, in 2020 Walmart contributed $140,000 to the Rule of Law Defense Fund, a fund-raising arm of the Republican Attorneys General Association.\nBusiness trends.\nFor the fiscal year ending January 31, 2019, Walmart reported net income of US$ on $514\u00a0billion of revenue. The company's international operations accounted for $120\u00a0billion, or 23.7 percent, of its $510\u00a0billion of sales. Walmart is the world's 23rd-largest public corporation, according to the Forbes Global 2000 list, and the largest public corporation when ranked by revenue.\nThe key trends for Walmart are (as of the financial year ending January 31):\nGovernance.\nWalmart is governed by an eleven-member board of directors elected annually by shareholders. Gregory B. Penner, son-in-law of S. Robson Walton and the grandson-in-law of Sam Walton, serves as chairman of the board. Doug McMillon serves as president and chief executive officer, though in November 2025 Walmart announced McMillon would be succeeded by Walmart U.S. president John Furner after the end of its fiscal year on Feb. 1st 2026.\nCurrent members of the board are:\nNotable former members of the board include Hillary Clinton (1985\u20131992) and Tom Coughlin (2003\u20132004), the latter having served as vice chairman. Clinton left the board before the 1992 U.S. presidential election, and Coughlin left in December 2005 after pleading guilty to wire fraud and tax evasion for stealing hundreds of thousands of dollars from Walmart.\nAfter Sam Walton's death in 1992, Don Soderquist, Chief Operating Officer and Senior Vice Chairman, became known as the \"Keeper of the Culture\".\nOwnership.\nWalmart Inc. is a Delaware-domiciled joint-stock company registered with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, with its registered office located in Wolters Kluwer's Corporation Trust Center in Wilmington. As of March\u00a02017,[ [update]] it has 3,292,377,090 outstanding shares. These are held mainly by the Walton family, a number of institutions and funds.\nCompetition.\nIn North America, Walmart's primary competitors include grocery stores and department stores like Target, Kroger, Aldi, Meijer, Trader Joe's, Ingles, Publix, Harris Teeter and Winn Dixie in the United States; Loblaw retail stores, Sobeys, Metro, and Giant Tiger in Canada; and Comercial Mexicana and Soriana in Mexico. Competitors of Walmart's Sam's Club division are Costco and the smaller BJ's Wholesale Club chain. Walmart's move into the grocery business in the late 1990s set it against major supermarket chains in both the United States and Canada. Studies have typically found that Walmart's prices are significantly lower than those of their competitors, and that Walmart's presence is associated with lower food prices for households. Comparisons of performance metrics such as sales per square foot suggest that supermarkets in direct competition with Walmart Supercenters show significant decreases in profit margins, an effect that is strongest in the case of unionized competitors. Between 2000 and 2010, Walmart's entry into new areas often lowered local food prices at other stores. However, recent studies have not found the same effect, suggesting that retailers may have changed their competitive strategies.\nWhile the idea that Walmart destroys small businesses is widely assumed to be true, research so far suggests that Walmart superstores have little effect on smaller retailers such as \"Mom and Pop\" businesses. Differences in impact appear to be specific to the goods sold. Small retailers may experience difficulty if they rely on selling products identical to those at Walmart or if they try to sell at lower prices.\nDollar stores such as Family Dollar and Dollar General have been able to find a small niche market and compete successfully against Walmart. In 2004, Walmart responded by testing its own dollar store concept, a subsection of some stores called \"Pennies-n-Cents\".\nWalmart also had to face fierce competition in some foreign markets. For example, in Germany it had captured just 2\u00a0percent of the German food market following its entry into the market in 1997 and remained \"a secondary player\" behind Aldi with 19\u00a0percent.\nIn May 2006, after entering the South Korean market in 1998, Walmart sold all 16\u00a0of its South Korean outlets to Shinsegae, a local retailer, for US$. Shinsegae re-branded the Walmarts as E-mart stores.\nWalmart struggled to export its brand elsewhere as it rigidly tried to reproduce its model overseas. In China, Walmart hopes to succeed by adapting and doing things preferable to Chinese citizens. For example, it found that Chinese consumers preferred to select their own live fish and seafood; stores began displaying the meat uncovered and installed fish tanks, leading to higher sales.\nCustomer base.\nIn the United States, Walmart's early growth occurred in the Southeast and lower Midwest. More recently, Walmart has expanded throughout the country. The number of Walmart stores per 1,000 people in 2019 was highest in Arkansas, Oklahoma, Louisiana, Alabama and Kansas, and lowest in Hawaii, California, New Jersey, Massachusetts and New York. California and New Jersey were two of the ten states with the largest increases in Supercenters between 2011 and 2020, along with Pennsylvania, Illinois, and Wisconsin.\nWalmart customers display strong customer loyalty and cite low prices as the most important reason for shopping there. Walmart has characterized their shoppers as falling into three main groups: \"value-price shoppers\" (people who like low prices and cannot afford much more), \"brand aspirationals\" (people with low incomes who buy well-known brands in hopes of assuring quality), and \"price-sensitive affluents\" (wealthier shoppers who seek deals). As of 2022[ [update]] the average U.S. Walmart customer earned about $80,000 per year, above the U.S. average personal income of $63,214. Walmart reports that during times of rising inflation, customers become more sensitive to rising food prices, buying less expensive food items such as hot dogs and canned tuna rather than deli cold cuts. They also see more upper-income shoppers looking for bargains.\nWalmart shoppers have been reported to be politically conservative. A poll after the 2004 U.S. presidential election reported that 76\u00a0percent of voters who shopped at Walmart once a week reported voting for George W. Bush while only 23 percent supported senator John Kerry. When measured against similar retailers in the U.S. in 2006, frequent Walmart shoppers were rated the most politically conservative. As of 2014[ [update]] 54\u00a0percent of Americans who preferred to shop at Walmart reported that they opposed same-sex marriage, while 40 percent were in favor, reflecting the store's southern roots.\nDue to its concentration of stores in the Bible Belt, Walmart is known for its \"tradition of tailoring its service to churchgoing customers\". Walmart has carried clean versions of hip-hop audio CDs and in cooperation with The Timothy Plan, placed \"plastic sheathes over suggestive women's periodicals and banned 'lad mags' such as Maxim\" magazine. Walmart also caters to its Christian customer base by selling Christian books and media, such as VeggieTales videos and The Purpose-Driven Life, earning the company over US$ annually.\nIn 2006, Walmart took steps to expand its U.S. customer base, announcing a modification in its U.S. stores from a \"one-size-fits-all\" merchandising strategy to one designed to \"reflect each of six demographic groups\u2014African-Americans, the affluent, empty-nesters, Hispanics, suburbanites, and rural residents\". Around six months later, it unveiled a new slogan:\" \"Saving people money so they can live better lives\"\".\nWalmart has also made steps to appeal to more liberal customers, for example, by rejecting the American Family Association's recommendations and carrying the DVD \"Brokeback Mountain\", a love story between two gay cowboys in Wyoming.\nSales of guns and ammunition.\nWalmart stopped selling handguns in all U.S. states, except for Alaska, in 1993.\nIn 2018, Walmart stopped selling guns and ammunition to persons younger than 21, following a similar move by Dick's Sporting Goods on the same day. In the same year, Walmart stopped selling military-style rifles that were commonly used in mass shootings.\nAs of 2019, Walmart was a major retailer of firearms and ammunition. In 2019, after 23 people were killed in a mass shooting at a Walmart store in El Paso, Texas, Walmart announced that it would stop selling all handgun ammunition and certain short-barreled rifle ammunition. The company also announced that it would stop selling handguns in Alaska, the only state where the company still sold handguns. The move was expected to reduce Walmart's U.S. market share in ammunition from around 20% to around 6\u20139%. Walmart also stated that it was \"respectfully requesting\" that customers not openly carry weapons in Walmart stores, except for authorized law enforcement officers.\nFollowing the fatal police shooting of Walter Wallace Jr. in October 2020, Walmart temporarily removed gun and ammunition displays in thousands of stores across the U.S. from sales floors, grounding their reason in concerns of civil unrest. Company spokesman Kory Lundberg said in a statement that \"We have seen some isolated civil unrest and as we have done on several occasions over the last few years, we have moved our firearms and ammunition off the sales floor as a precaution for the safety of our associates and customers.\" Firearms and ammunition will still be available for purchase on request, but the duration of the removal of both from the sales floor remains undetermined.\nTechnology.\nOpen source software.\nMany Walmart technology projects are coded in the open and available through the Walmart Labs GitHub repository as open-source software under the OSI approved Apache V2.0 license. As of November\u00a02016,[ [update]] 141 public GitHub projects are listed.\nDuring a migration of the walmart.com retail platform to Facebook React and Node.js, the Electrode project was created to power the e-commerce platform which serves 80\u00a0million visitors per month and 15\u00a0million items.\nAlex Grigoryan of Walmart Labs released a statement on Medium.com on October 3, 2016, explaining the details of the applications and the scale that they operate at Walmart.\nBig data analytics.\nAs the largest retailer in the U.S., Walmart collects and analyzes a large amount of consumer data. The big data sets are mined for use in predictive analytics, which allow the company to optimize operations by predicting customer's habits. Walmart's datacenter is unofficially referred to as Area 71.\nIn April 2011, Walmart acquired Kosmix to develop software for analyzing real-time data streams. In August 2012, Walmart announced its Polaris search engine.\nThe amount of data gathered by Walmart has raised privacy concerns.\nCash handling.\nin 2016, Walmart began a drive to automate much of the cash handling process. Walmart began replacing employees who count currency by hand with machines that count 8 bills per second and 3,000 coins a minute. The processing machines, located in the back of stores, allow cashiers to process the money for electronic depositing.\nCharity.\nSam Walton believed that the company's contribution to society was that it operated efficiently, thereby lowering the cost of living for customers, and, therefore, in that sense was a \"powerful force for good\", despite his refusal to contribute cash to philanthropic causes. Having begun to feel that his wealth attracted people who wanted nothing more than a \"handout\", he explained that while he believed his family had been fortunate and wished to use his wealth to aid worthy causes like education, they could not be expected to \"solve every personal problem that comes to [their] attention\". He explained later in his autobiography, \"We feel very strongly that Wal-Mart really is \"not\", and \"should not\" be, in the charity business,\" stating \"any debit has to be passed along to somebody\u2014either shareholders or our customers.\" Since Sam Walton's death in 1992, however, Walmart and the Walmart Foundation dramatically increased charitable giving. For example, in 2005, Walmart donated US$ in cash and merchandise for Hurricane Katrina relief and in 2020 they committed $25\u00a0million to organizations on the frontlines of the COVID-19 pandemic response. Today, Walmart's charitable donations approach US$ each year.\nCOVID-19.\nAs of January 2021, healthcare workers could get vaccines through Walmart in New Mexico and Arkansas. Walmart planned to offer vaccines in Georgia, Indiana, Louisiana, Maryland, New Jersey, South Carolina, Texas, Chicago and Puerto Rico with the target of delivering between 10\u00a0million and 13\u00a0million doses per month at full capacity.\nIn May 2021, Walmart said that starting from May 18 all its fully vaccinated employees could stop wearing masks at work following the guidance from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.\nEconomic impact.\nEffects on customers.\nA 2005 story in \"The Washington Post\" reported that \"Wal-Mart's discounting on food alone boosts the welfare of American shoppers by at least US$ per year.\" A study in 2005 at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) measured the effect on consumer welfare and found that the poorest segment of the population benefits the most from the existence of discount retailers. \nIn 2006, American newspaper columnist George Will stated that In terms of economic effects, \"Wal-Mart and its effects save shoppers more than US$ a year, dwarfing such government programs as food stamps (US$) and the earned income tax credit (US$)\".\nEffects on retailers.\nKenneth Stone, Professor of Economics at Iowa State University, in a paper published in \"Farm Foundation\" (1997), found that some small towns can lose almost half of their retail trade within ten years of a Walmart store opening. Presumably, people who previously shopped in towns without Wal-Mart stores choose to shop in towns with Wal-Mart stores, part of an older pattern in which smaller centers lose retail sales to larger ones. Stone compared the changes to previous competitors that small town shops have faced in the past, such as the development of the railroads, the Sears Roebuck catalog, and shopping malls. He concluded that small towns are more affected by \"discount mass merchandiser stores\" than larger towns and that shop owners who adapt to the ever-changing retail market can \"co-exist and even thrive in this type of environment\". In later research Artz and Stone (2006) reported that in Mississippi the impact of opening a Walmart was much larger on existing retailers in rural communities (17%) than more urban ones (4%). This also suggests that Walmart has achieved its strongest growth in non-metropolitan areas, which tend to be low-income.\nStudies of the impact of Walmart tend to focus on Supercenters rather than Neighborhood Markets. Comparisons of performance metrics such as sales per square foot suggest that supermarkets and other high-volume retailers in direct competition with Walmart Supercenters show significant decreases in profit margins. While Walmart has often been said to be a destroyer of small businesses, much of this is anecdotal. Research so far suggests that Walmart superstores have little effect on smaller retailers such as \"Mom and Pop\" businesses. A 2008 economic analysis published in the journal \"Economic Inquiry\" suggested that \"the process of creative destruction unleashed by Wal\u2010Mart has had no statistically significant long\u2010run impact on the overall size and profitability of the small business sector in the United States\".\nImpact appears to be related to a number of factors, with a key factor being the goods offered for sale. A study by Ailawadi and others (2010) examined the impact of new Walmarts in detail. She reported that median sales dropped 40 percent at similar high-volume stores, 17 percent at supermarkets and 6 percent at drugstores. However, 30 percent of specific product categories at high-volume stores were unaffected. Many retailers reduced prices and cut product selection in an attempt to compete directly with Walmart, in effect attacking its areas of strength. A more successful approach was to track sales, identify vulnerable categories, and increase the range of products in those categories. By including products at both top and bottom price points, and offering temporary promotions on those items, retailers could attract both customers who were price-conscious and those interested in a wider range of options. A small store that specialized in a particular product area could compete effectively against Walmart. Small specialized stores are less effective against big-box category killer chains such as Home Depot and Best Buy electronics.\nSome studies have suggested that the impact a Walmart store has on a local business is correlated to its distance from the store. David Merriman, Joseph Persky, Julie Davis and Ron Baiman (2012) outlined the impacts of Walmart in Chicago. Based on three annual surveys of enterprises within a four-mile radius of a new Chicago Walmart it \"shows that the probability of going out of business was significantly higher for establishments close to that store\". The overall findings of this study reinforce the \"contention that large-city Walmarts, like those in small towns, absorb retail sales from nearby stores without significantly expanding the market\". Ellickson &amp; Grieco (2013) report in the \"Journal of Urban Economics\" that Wal-Marts most strongly affect outlets of larger chains that are within of their location.\nEffects on jobs.\nA 2022 literature review concludes that \"there is no consensus on the impact of Walmart on local employment, but most studies on the topic point to a modest increase in retail employment\". For example, studies at the University of Missouri found that a new store increases net retail employment in the county by 100 jobs in the short term, half of which disappear over five years as other retail establishments close. Similarly, a net increase in employment (55 jobs) was found in a study of West Virginia counties between 1989 and 1998.\nLike other chain stores, Walmart tends to hire local employees for low-skilled jobs with low wages and minimal benefits. This may increase employees' reliance on public assistance programs, effectively transferring costs away from employers onto taxpayers. Studies examining aggregate retail wage data from states and counties, before and after the arrival of Walmart, are mixed. Some results, particularly from nonmetropolitan areas in the South and central United States, suggest lowered wages. Other studies have found no effect (e.g. Pennsylvania) or an increase in wages (e.g. Maryland). A 2004 paper by Goetz and Swaminathan suggested that U.S. counties with Walmart stores suffered increased poverty compared with counties without Wal-Marts. It is difficult to distinguish the effects of opening a Walmart from other factors, some of which may be related to the decision to open a store. Known as endogeneity bias, this makes it difficult to determine whether Walmart chooses to establish itself in communities with greater poverty and joblessness, or creates more poverty and joblessness.\nStudies of socioeconomic well-being, civic participation, and community welfare suggest that large non-locally owned businesses tend to be centralized and vertically integrated, rely on remote sources and support services, and move money, expertise and power away from local communities. Large externally oriented businesses tend to be associated with lower local standards of living, greater inequality, and less social and civic participation. This research is not specific to Walmart, but to large businesses in general.\nIn broader economic terms, the Economic Policy Institute estimated that between 2001 and 2006 Wal-Mart's trade deficit with China alone represented a loss of nearly 200,000 U.S. jobs. During this period, Wal-Mart was responsible for 9.3% of total U.S. imports from China, increasing the U.S. trade deficit by an estimated $17.1\u00a0billion. This represents about 200,000 jobs, most of them in the manufacturing sector (133,000).\nA 2014 story in \"The Guardian\" reported that the Wal-Mart Foundation was boosting its efforts to work with U.S. manufacturers. In February 2014, the Walmart Foundation pledged to support domestic manufacturers by buying US$ worth of American-made products in the next decade. Between 2014 and 2017, the Walmart U.S. Manufacturing Innovation Fund gave $10\u00a0million in grants to research and academic institutions for projects that improve domestic manufacturing. For the 2020 fiscal year, Walmart reported that nearly two-thirds of its merchandise was made, assembled or grown in the United States. As of March 2021, Walmart pledged to buy an additional $350\u00a0billion worth of American-based items over the next decade.\nEffects on productivity.\nA 2001 McKinsey Global Institute study of U.S. labor productivity growth between 1995 and 2000 concluded that \"Wal-Mart directly and indirectly caused the bulk of the productivity acceleration\" in general merchandise, representing 16 percent of total productivity growth in the retail sector.\nWalmart's transformative use of information technology, particularly in supply-chain management, is identified as a major reason for its impact on productivity per man hour. For every dollar spent by Walmart to improve its own technology, an estimated ten dollars has been invested by suppliers throughout its supply chain on their own systems and software. Economist Robert Solow has emphasized the importance of imitation and adaptation: in addition to improving its own efficiency, Walmart's innovations have been adopted by its competitors so that they can compete.\nImpact on the environment.\nWalmart's transportation network is a large contributor to its carbon footprint, with transportation fuel emissions increasing by 10% in 2023 to approximately 15.06 million metric tons of CO2.\nAnother source of environmental concern is refrigerators, which are very important for Walmart's transportation of goods. Walmart's use of refrigerators relies on hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), and hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs), which are potent greenhouse gases. In 2023, refrigerant-related emissions increased by 5.3% due to leaks in equipment across the United States and Mexico. Additionally, Walmart's shipping operations in 2021 produced more greenhouse gases than a coal-fired power station, coming in at 1.7 million metric tons of CO2, underscoring the environmental cost of its logistics. Walmart's practices have faced criticism for contributing to deforestation, specifically in regions that produce palm oil, soy, and beef. Walmart works with suppliers linked to illegal deforestation in critical ecosystems like the Amazon. The company's focus on low-cost, low-quality goods with short lifespans also adds to landfill waste, further harming the environment.\nEnvironmental risk.\nClimate change presents significant risks to Walmart's operations. Extreme weather events such as hurricanes and wildfires can lead to store closures, inventory losses, and disruptions to the supply chain. In 2017, Hurricane Harvey forced Walmart to close over 134 stores in the United States, causing supply chain disruptions and delayed deliveries due to flooding and road closures. In response, Walmart activated emergency systems and implemented advanced forecasting and rerouting to restock essential items in nearby stores. This experience showed Walmart just how important it is to create climate adaptation strategies. Since this event, the company has integrated such strategies into the business model. As climate-related disruptions are expected to increase, Walmart started something called Project Gigaton, which aims to reduce greenhouse gases and focus on energy use, nature, waste, packaging, transportation, and product design, hoping to alleviate some of the pressure of environmental risk on the company. The ongoing risks posed by climate change continue to challenge Walmart's ability to maintain consistent operations, showing the importance of continued adaptation to these environmental pressures.\nLabor relations.\nWith over 2.3 million employees worldwide, Walmart has faced a torrent of lawsuits and issues with regards to its workforce. These issues involve low wages, poor working conditions, inadequate health care, and issues involving the company's strong anti-union policies. In November 2013, the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) announced that it had found that in 13\u00a0U.S. states, Wal-Mart had pressured employees not to engage in strikes on Black Friday, and had illegally disciplined workers who had engaged in strikes. Critics point to Walmart's high turnover rate as evidence of an unhappy workforce, although other factors may be involved. Approximately 70\u00a0percent of its employees leave within the first year. Despite this turnover rate, the company is still able to affect unemployment rates. This was found in a study by Oklahoma State University which states, \"Walmart is found to have substantially lowered the relative unemployment rates of blacks in those counties where it is present, but to have had only a limited impact on relative incomes after the influences of other socio-economic variables were taken into account.\"\nWalmart is the largest private employer in the United States, with 1.6\u00a0million employees as of 2020[ [update]]. Walmart employs almost five times as many people as IBM, the second-largest employer. Walmart employs more African Americans than any other private employer in the United States.\nWhile 4.6% of all retail workers, and 16.5% of all U.S. grocery workers, were unionized as of 2020, Walmart does not employ unionized labor and actively discourages unionization and collective bargaining.\nWalmart rebranded their Associate Education Benefits to Live Better U in March 2019. Live Better U supports associate education at every level and includes $1 a day college program, cost-free high school education, and discounts on higher education programs through partnership with Guild Education.\nIn April 2019, Walmart Inc. announced plans to extend the use of robots in stores in order to improve and monitor inventory, clean floors and unload trucks, part of the company's effort to lower its labor costs. The use of robots has alienated some workers.\nIn June 2019, Walmart Inc. announced the expansion of education benefits to recruit high school students. The incentives include flexible work schedules, free SAT and ACT preparation courses, up to seven hours of free college credit, and a debt-free college degree in three fields from six nonprofit universities.\nGender.\nIn 2007, a gender discrimination lawsuit, \"Dukes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc.\", was filed against Walmart, alleging that female employees were discriminated against in matters regarding pay and promotions. A class action suit was sought, which would have been the nation's largest in history, covering 1.5\u00a0million past and current employees. On June 20, 2011, the United States Supreme Court ruled in Wal-Mart's favor, stating that the plaintiffs did not have enough in common to constitute a class. The court ruled unanimously that because of the variability of the plaintiffs' circumstances, the class action could not proceed as presented, and furthermore, in a 5\u20134 decision that it could not proceed as any kind of class action suit. Several plaintiffs, including the lead plaintiff, Betty Dukes, expressed their intent to file individual discrimination lawsuits separately. Dukes died in 2017. In 2020, Walmart agreed to pay $20\u00a0million, stop using a pre-employment test, and furnish other relief to settle a companywide, sex-based hiring discrimination lawsuit filed by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).\nAccording to a consultant hired by plaintiffs in a sex discrimination lawsuit, in 2001, Wal-Mart's Equal Employment Opportunity Commission filings showed that female employees made up 65 percent of Wal-Mart's hourly paid workforce, but only 33\u00a0percent of its management. Just 35\u00a0percent of its store managers were women, compared to 57 percent at similar retailers. Wal-Mart says comparisons with other retailers are unfair, because it classifies employees differently; if department managers were included in the totals, women would make up 60\u00a0percent of the managerial ranks.\nSexual orientation and gender identity.\nIn the Human Rights Campaign's (HRC) 2002 Corporate Equality Index, a measure of how companies treat LGBT employees and customers, gave Wal-Mart Stores Inc. a score of 14%. By 2017, however, HRC's 2017 Corporate Equality Index gave Wal-Mart Stores Inc. a score of a 100%. In 2003, Walmart added sexual orientation to their anti-discrimination policy. In 2005, Walmart's definition of family began including same-sex partners. In 2006, Walmart announced that \"diversity efforts include new groups of minority, female and gay employees that meet at Walmart headquarters in Bentonville to advise the company on marketing and internal promotion. There are seven business resource groups: women, African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, Native Americans, gays and lesbians, and a disabled group.\" From 2006 to 2008, Walmart was a member of the National Gay &amp; Lesbian Chamber of Commerce. In 2011, Walmart added gender identity to their anti-discrimination policy. Walmart's anti-discrimination policies allow associates to use restroom facilities that corresponds with their gender identity and gender expression. In 2013, Walmart began offering health insurance benefits to domestic partners. In 2015, Doug McMillon, CEO of Walmart, issued a statement opposing House Bill 1228 and asked Governor Asa Hutchinson to veto the bill. In 2016, Walmart began offering full healthcare benefits to its transgender employees.\nCriticism and controversies.\nWalmart has been subject to criticism from various groups and individuals, including labor unions, community groups, grassroots organizations, religious organizations, environmental groups, firearm groups, and the company's own customers and employees. They have protested against the company's policies and business practices, including charges of racial and gender discrimination. Other areas of criticism include the company's foreign product sourcing, treatment of suppliers, employee compensation and working conditions, environmental practices, the use of public subsidies, the company's security policies, and slavery. Walmart denies wrongdoing and maintains that low prices are the result of efficiency.\nAnimal welfare.\nIn 2012 and 2013, undercover investigations by Mercy for Animals showed pigs at Walmart pork suppliers being confined in gestation crates, castrated without anesthetic, and killed by a practice called \"blunt force trauma,\" involving piglets being slammed against concrete floors. Mercy for Animals launched a high-profile campaign to pressure Walmart to stop sourcing crated pork, including protests at Walmart stores in at least 145 cities. The campaign received support from actors James Cromwell, Ryan Gosling, Kristen Bell, and Zooey Deschanel, who signed a letter to Walmart CEO Mike Duke calling on the company to end the use of \"cruel\" gestation crates. In May 2015, Walmart issued animal welfare guidelines suggesting that suppliers give pigs, egg-laying hens, and veal calves more room to move. The guidelines were criticized by animal welfare groups for not being mandatory.\nIn 2024, the shareholder activism organization The Accountability Board authored a shareholder resolution requesting that Walmart publish targets for ending the use of gestation crates in its pork supply chain. The company suggested that shareholders vote against the resolution. At a shareholder meeting in June 2024, the resolution received the support of 12.5% of Walmart investors.\nIn April 2016, Walmart announced plans to eliminate battery cage eggs from its supply chain by 2025. The decision was particularly important because of Walmart's large market share and influence on the rest of the industry. The move was praised by major animal welfare groups but a poultry trade group representative expressed skepticism about the decision's impact. Walmart's cage-free eggs will not come from free range producers, but rather industrial-scale farms where the birds will be allotted between 1 and 1.5 square feet each, a stressful arrangement which can cause cannibalism. Unlike battery cages, the systems of Walmart's suppliers allow the hens to move around, but relative to battery cages they have higher hen mortality rates and present distinct environmental and worker health problems. As of 2023, only 21% of Walmart's eggs were produced in cage-free facilities.\nBusiness practices.\nIn March 2018, Walmart was sued by former Director of Business Development Tri Huynh for claims of reporting misleading e-commerce performance results in favor of the company. Huynh stated the company's move was an attempt to regain lost ground to competitor Amazon.\nIn September 2018, Walmart was sued by Equal Employment Opportunity Commission alleging that Walmart denied requests from pregnant employees to limit heavy lifting.\nIn July 2019, the Walmart subreddit was flooded with pro-union memes in a protest to the firing of an employee who posted confidential material to the subreddit. Many of these posts were angry with Walmart surveying its staff on the Internet. The posting of the union content is in response to the aforementioned alleged anti-union position Walmart has taken in the past.\nIn June 2022, the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) sued Walmart, alleging that the company facilitated money transfer fraud by allowing its money transfer services to be used by scammers who stole hundreds of millions of dollars from customers.\nCrime problems.\nAccording to an August 2016 report by \"Bloomberg Businessweek\", aggressive cost-cutting decisions that began in 2000 when Lee Scott took over as CEO of the company led to a significant increase in crime in stores across the United States. These included the removal of the store's famed greeters, who are in part seen as a theft deterrent at exits, the replacement of many cashiers with self-checkout stations, and the addition of stores at a rate that exceeded the hiring of new employees, which led to a 19% increase in space per employee from a decade previous. While these decisions succeeded in increasing profits 23% in the decade that followed, they also led to an increase in both theft and violent crime.\nIn 2015, under CEO Doug McMillon, Walmart began a company-wide campaign to reduce crime that included spot-checking receipts at exits, stationing employees at self-checkout areas, eye-level security cameras in high-theft areas, use of data analytics to detect credit fraud, hiring off-duty police and private security officers, and reducing calls to police with a program by which first-time offenders caught stealing merchandise below a certain value can avoid arrest if they agree to go through a theft-prevention program.\nLaw enforcement agencies across the United States have noted a burden on resources created by a disproportionate number of calls from Walmart. Experts have criticized the retailer for shifting its security burden onto the taxpayers. Across three Florida counties, approximately 9,000 police calls were logged to 53 Walmart stores but resulted in only a few hundred arrests. In Granite Falls, North Carolina, 92% of larceny calls to local police were from the Walmart store. The trend is similar in rural, suburban, and urban areas. Police are called to Walmart stores 3 to 4 times as much as similar retailers such as Target. Experts say the chain and its razor-thin profit margins rely heavily on police to protect its bottom line. Walmart Supercenters top the list of those most visited by police.\nIn addition to hundreds of thousands of petty crimes, more than 200 violent crimes, including attempted kidnappings, stabbings, shootings, and murders occurred at the 4,500 Walmarts in the U.S. in 2016. In 2019, 23 people were killed in a mass shooting at a Walmart store in El Paso, Texas.\nOn June 27, 2020, a shooting occurred at a Walmart distribution center in Red Bluff, California, United States. One employee was killed and the shooter was killed by officers.\nOn July 26, 2025, a mass stabbing occurred in a Walmart store in Traverse City, Michigan. Eleven people were stabbed, some with life-threatening injuries.\nProduct safety.\nIn 2012, Walmart's pork and mango supply chain was contaminated, resulting in a large number of customers suffering from severe food poisoning. In order to resolve the incident immediately, Walmart recalled all contaminated pork and mangoes and emptied its inventory to prevent further sales.\nIn May 2019, the Center for Inquiry filed a lawsuit in the District of Columbia alleging consumer fraud and the endangering of its customers' health due to Walmart's practice of \"selling homeopathic [products] alongside real medicine, in the same sections in its stores, under the same signs\", according to Nicholas Little, CFI's vice president and general counsel. On May 20, 2020, District of Columbia Superior Court Judge Florence Pan dismissed CFI's lawsuit, claiming that CFI had no standing as a consumer protection organization and failed to identify the specific actions on the part of Walmart that led to harm to consumers. CFI has challenged both of those arguments and is planning an appeal.\nIn November 2021, a federal jury found that Walmart, along with Walgreens and CVS, \"had substantially contributed to\" the opioid crisis. The damages between the three chains in this suit totalled $650\u00a0million. Damages claimed by the lawyers for Lake County and Trumbull County in Ohio were $3.3\u00a0billion.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33591", "revid": "41704487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33591", "title": "Dulles International Airport", "text": "Airport in Dulles, Virginia, US\nWashington Dulles International Airport ( ) () \u2013 commonly known simply as Dulles Airport \u2013 is an international airport serving the United States's capital city, Washington, D.C. and its surrounding area. It is located west of downtown Washington, D.C., in Loudoun and Fairfax counties in Northern Virginia.\nOpened in 1962, the airport is named after John Foster Dulles, an influential secretary of state during the Cold War who briefly represented New York in the United States Senate. Operated by the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority, Dulles occupies ; IAD ranks third in the United States in terms of land area, after Denver International Airport and Dallas Fort Worth International Airport. The \"striking\" and \"iconic\" Eero Saarinen-designed Main Terminal received vast acclaim for its innovative architecture when it was completed and has gone on to win numerous awards.\nDulles is the second busiest of three major airports serving the Washington\u2013Baltimore metropolitan area, behind Baltimore/Washington International Airport (BWI) and ahead of Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport (DCA). As of 2024, it is the 24th-busiest airport in the United States, with 27.3 million enplanements. It had more than 20 million passenger enplanements every year from 2004 to 2019. An average of 60,000 passengers pass through Dulles daily to and from more than 139 destinations around the world. Dulles has the most international passenger traffic of any airport in the Mid-Atlantic outside the New York metropolitan area, including approximately 90% of the international passenger traffic in the Baltimore\u2013Washington region.\nDulles is a hub for United Airlines, and it is frequently used by Star Alliance members that United has codeshare agreements with. Dulles is also a hub for regional operators Mesa, GoJet, and CommuteAir, which operate under the United Express brand.\nHistory.\nOrigins.\nBefore World War II, Hoover Field was the main commercial airport serving Washington, on the site now occupied by the Pentagon and its parking lots. It was replaced by Washington National Airport in 1941, a short distance southeast. After the war, in 1948, the Civil Aeronautics Administration began to consider sites for a second major airport to serve the nation's capital. Congress passed the Washington Airport Act in 1950 to provide funding for a new airport in the region. The initial CAA proposal in 1951 called for the airport to be built in Fairfax County near what is now Burke Lake Park, but protests from residents, as well as the rapid expansion of Washington's suburbs during the time, led to reconsideration of this plan. One competing plan called for the airport to be built in the Pender area of Fairfax County, while another called for the conversion of Andrews Air Force Base in Prince George's County, Maryland, into a commercial airport.\nThe current site was selected by President Eisenhower in 1958; the Dulles name was chosen by Eisenhower's aviation advisor Pete Quesada, who later served as the first head of the Federal Aviation Administration. As a result of the site selection, the unincorporated, largely African-American community of Willard, which once stood in the airport's current footprint, was demolished, and 87 property owners had their holdings condemned.\nDulles was also built over a lesser-known airport named Blue Ridge Airport, chartered in 1938 by the U.S. The airport was Loudoun County's first official airport, consisting of two grass intersecting runways in the shape of an \"X\". The location of the former Blue Ridge Airport sits where the Dulles Air Freight complex and Washington Dulles Airport Marriott now sit today.\nDesign and construction.\nThe civil engineering firm Ammann and Whitney was named lead contractor. The airport was dedicated by President John F. Kennedy and Eisenhower on November 17, As originally opened, the airport had three long runways (current day runways 1C/19C, 1R/19L, and 12/30) and one shorter one (where current taxiway Q is located). Its original name, Dulles International Airport, was changed in 1984 to Washington Dulles International Airport.\nThe main terminal was designed in 1958 by famed Finnish-American architect Eero Saarinen, and it is highly regarded for its graceful beauty, suggestive of flight. The terminal was built without any concourses and gates as all aircraft were parked at remote sites. Passengers were bussed to their aircraft by way of mobile lounges that raised up to the aircraft level; some are still in use today. The first midfield terminal that included gates and jetbridges was constructed in 1985 when New York Air and other airlines began hub operations at Dulles. In the 1990s, the main terminal at Dulles was reconfigured to allow more space between the front of the building and the ticket counters. Additions at both ends of the main terminal more than doubled the structure's length. The original terminal at Taiwan Taoyuan International Airport in Taoyuan, Taiwan, was modeled after the Saarinen terminal at Dulles.\nThe design included a landscaped man-made lake to collect rainwater, a low-rise hotel, and a row of office buildings along the north side of the main parking lot. The design also included a two-level road in front of the terminal to separate arrival and departure traffic and a federally owned limited access highway connecting the terminal to the Capital Beltway (I-495) about to the east; the highway system eventually grew to include a parallel toll road to handle commuter traffic and an extension to connect to I-66. The access road had a wide median strip to allow the construction of a passenger rail line, which opened as an extension of the Washington Metro's Silver Line on November 15, 2022.\nLater developments.\nBy 1985 the original design, featuring mobile lounges to meet each plane, was no longer well-suited to Dulles's role as a hub airport. Instead, midfield concourses were constructed to allow passengers to walk between connecting flights without visiting the main terminal. Mobile lounges were still used for international flights and to transport passengers between the midfield concourses and the main terminal; Concourse C/D was the first to be built, followed by Concourse A/B. A tunnel (consisting of a passenger walkway and moving sidewalks) that links the main terminal and Concourse B was opened in 2004. The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority (MWAA) began a renovation program for the airport including a new security mezzanine with more room for lines.\nA new train system, dubbed AeroTrain and developed by Mitsubishi, began in 2010 to transport passengers between the concourses and the main terminal. The system, which uses rubber tires and travels along a fixed underground guideway, is similar to the people mover systems at Singapore Changi Airport, Hartsfield\u2013Jackson Atlanta International Airport, and Denver International Airport. The train is intended to replace the mobile lounges, which many passengers found crowded and inconvenient. The initial phase includes the main terminal station, a permanent Concourse A station, a permanent Concourse B station, a permanent midfield concourse station (with access to the current temporary C concourse via a tunnel with moving walkways), and a maintenance facility. Mobile lounges continue to serve Concourse D from both the main terminal and Concourse A. Even after AeroTrain is built out and the replacement Concourses C and D are built, the mobile lounges and plane mates will still continue to be used, to transport international arriving passengers to the International Arrivals Building, as well as transport passengers to aircraft parked on hardstands without direct access to jet bridges. Dulles has stated that the wait time for a train does not exceed four minutes, compared to the average 15-minute wait and travel time for mobile lounges.\nUnder the development plan, future phases would see the addition of several new midfield concourses and a new south terminal. A fourth runway (parallel to the existing runways 1 and 19 L&amp;R) opened in 2008, and development plans include a fifth runway to parallel the existing runway 12\u201330. If this runway is built, the current runway will be re-designated as 12L-30R while the new runway will be designated 12R-30L. An expansion of the B concourse, used by many low-cost airlines as well as international arrivals, has been completed, and the building housing Concourses C and D will eventually be knocked down to make room for a more ergonomic building. Because Concourses C and D are temporary concourses, the only way to get to those concourses is via moving walkway from the Concourse C station, which is built in the location of the future gates and Concourse D by mobile lounge from the main terminal.\nIn the short term, United Airlines has constructed a buildout on Concourse C between gate C18 and the AeroTrain entrance for use as a Polaris Lounge for international passengers. Further expansion plans include a new three-story south concourse building above the AeroTrain station for Concourse C, to replace Concourse A regional gates built in 1999.\nDecades-old rules set by Congress that limit the number of takeoffs and landings, as well as distance of routes, at Reagan Airport were intended in part to keep more flights at Dulles. Those rules have been weakened by Congress over the years, however, causing Dulles to lose 200,000 passengers to Reagan between 2011 and 2013.\nIn 2023, construction started on a 100 MW solar power facility, battery and bus charging equipment. It would include the largest airport-based solar and battery development in the U.S. as part of an agreement with Dominion Energy. The solar panels would cover more than on land, equivalent to the consumption of more than 37,000 Northern Virginia homes during peak production.\nOperations and milestones.\nEarly years.\nThe first scheduled flight at Dulles was an Eastern Air Lines Lockheed L-188 Super Electra from Newark International Airport in New Jersey on November 19, 1962. The first scheduled transatlantic nonstop flight to serve the airport commenced just shy of two years later, in June 1964.\nDulles was initially considered a white elephant, being far out of town with few flights; in 1965, Dulles averaged 89 airline operations a day while National Airport (now Reagan) averaged 600 despite not allowing jets. Airport operations grew along with Virginia suburbs and the Dulles Technology Corridor; perimeter and slot restrictions at National forced long-distance flights to use Dulles. In 1969, Dulles had 2.01 million passengers while National had 9.9 million.\nGrowth.\nThe era of wide-body jets began on January 15, 1970, when First Lady Pat Nixon christened a Pan Am Boeing 747-100 at Dulles in the presence of Pan Am chairman Najeeb Halaby. Rather than a traditional champagne bottle, red, white, and blue water was sprayed on the aircraft. Pan Am's first Boeing 747 flight was from New York\u2013JFK to London Heathrow Airport.\nOn December 26, 1973, President Richard Nixon flew from Dulles to Los Angeles on board a United Airlines McDonnell Douglas DC-10 commercial flight instead of on Air Force One. This was due to a nationwide fuel shortage caused at the time by the Arab oil embargo. Less than two years later, on May 24, 1976, supersonic flights between the U.S. and Europe began with the arrival of a British Airways Concorde from London\u2013Heathrow and an Air France Concorde from Paris\u2013Charles De Gaulle; both planes were lined nose-to-nose at Dulles for photos.\nOn June 12, 1983, the Space Shuttle \"Enterprise\" arrived at Dulles atop a modified Boeing 747 after touring Europe and before returning to Edwards Air Force Base. Two years later \"Enterprise\" returned and was placed in a storage hangar near Runway 12/30 to await construction of a planned expansion to the National Air and Space Museum. \"Enterprise\" left Dulles on April 27, 2012, for its new home at the Intrepid Sea, Air &amp; Space Museum in New York City.\nOn June 1, 1985, New York Air began a small hub operation at Dulles, with 35 daily flights to eight cities in Florida and the northeastern United States. Colgan Airways became a feeder carrier for New York Air with additional service to smaller cities known as New York Air Connection. In 1987, the airline merged into Continental Airlines, which maintained the hub operation until 1989. On October 10, 1985, Presidential Airways opened its hub at the airport, and it soon began a series of code-shares \u2013 first with Pan Am from mid-1986 through early 1988, then as Continental Express on behalf of Continental Airlines between mid-1987 and mid-1988, and finally as United Express, on behalf of United Airlines, from mid 1988 until Presidential ceased operations on December 5, 1989.\nUnited hub years, 1986 \u2013 present.\nOn May 1, 1986, United Airlines began service on 16 new domestic routes creating a hub status at Dulles. Many more domestic routes and new overseas routes would later be added. Air Wisconsin and Presidential Airways soon became feeder carriers for United operating as United Express.\nIn 1990, a United States Senate joint resolution to change Dulles International Airport's name to Washington Eisenhower International Airport was proposed by Senator Bob Dole, but the bill did not pass.\nWhen the SR-71 was retired by the military in 1990, one was flown from its birthplace at United States Air Force Plant 42 in Palmdale, California, to Dulles, setting a coast-to-coast speed record at an average ; the trip took 64 minutes. The aircraft was placed in a storage building, and is now displayed at the Smithsonian's adjacent Udvar-Hazy Air and Space Museum.\nIn 1995, the first flight of the Boeing 777-200 in commercial service landed at Dulles; the flight was operated by United Airlines on its transatlantic London Heathrow \u2013 Washington Dulles route.\n21st century.\nThe 2004 launch of low-cost carrier Independence Air propelled IAD from being the 24th-busiest airport in the United States to fourth, and one of the top 30 busiest in the world. Independence Air ceased operations in January 2006, and its space in Concourse A was taken five months later by United Express. Also taking place in 2006 was the introduction of service by Southwest Airlines at IAD.\nSignificant growth required the airport to halt the operations of its original control tower in 2007 for a taller control tower located away from the main terminal. The original tower still exists, though it is no longer used to control the airport's traffic. That year, 24.7 million passengers passed through the airport.\nOn November 20, 2008, a third parallel north\u2013south runway \u2013 Runway 1L/19R \u2013 opened on the west side of the airfield; the original 1L/19R was re-designated 1C/19C. It was the first new runway to be built at Dulles since the airport's construction.\nOn June 6, 2011, the airport received its first Airbus A380 flights when Air France introduced the A380 on its nonstop from Paris Charles de Gaulle Airport during peak season.\nOn April 17, 2012, the Space Shuttle \"Discovery\" was ferried to Dulles mounted to a NASA 747-100 as part of its decommissioning and installation in the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center. A few weeks later, on June 1, the first passenger flight of the Boeing 747-8 Intercontinental \u2013 operated by Lufthansa with service from Frankfurt to Washington \u2013 landed at IAD. Two months later, on August 15, Ethiopian Airlines began operating service to Dulles using the Boeing 787 Dreamliner.\nIn the early 2010s, increased domestic travel from Reagan National Airport eroded some of Dulles's domestic routes. Dulles overtook Reagan in total enplanements in 2019.\nOn October 2, 2014, British Airways began using the Airbus A380 on flights from London\u2013Heathrow to Dulles. Less than two years later, on February 1, 2016, Emirates upgraded its direct flights from Dubai International \u2013 a service previously operated using a Boeing 777 \u2013 to an Airbus A380. British Airways temporarily ended A380 flights in the latter half of the decade, reverting to a 747-400 twice daily during peak season but resumed its once-daily A380 operations during non-peak season in October 2019, before once again ending A380 service to Dulles in early 2020. By 2019, Washington Dulles was one of just fourteen airports in the United States seeing daily operations from and/or having at least one gate and one runway that can accommodate an Airbus A380; the others being Atlanta, Boston, Chicago-O'Hare, Dallas/Fort Worth, Denver, Honolulu, Houston-Intercontinental, Las Vegas, Los Angeles\u2013LAX, Miami, New York\u2013JFK, Orlando and San Francisco.\nOn May 16, 2018, Volaris Costa Rica launched flights to Dulles, becoming the first international low-cost carrier to serve the airport. A few months later, on September 15, Cathay Pacific launched its longest nonstop route connecting Dulles to Hong Kong utilizing an Airbus A350-1000; the service was suspended indefinitely due to the COVID-19 pandemic.\nIn 2019, four new major international routes were added. Alitalia began non-stop service utilizing an Airbus A330 to Rome-Fiumicino, operating five times weekly during the peak summer season, reducing to three times weekly during the winter season. EgyptAir operates a Boeing 787\u20139 with nonstop service to Cairo three times a week year-round. TAP Air Portugal flies five times weekly with nonstop service to Lisbon on board the Airbus A321LR, A330-900 and sometimes the A330-200. By that May, United began non-stop service to Tel-Aviv, initially utilizing a Boeing 777-200ER on a thrice-weekly schedule.\nIn 2020, LOT Polish, Iberia and Swiss were all scheduled to begin service to Dulles, but these were postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. LOT Polish were scheduled to provide Boeing 787 service from Warsaw, Iberia to provide Airbus A330-300 service from Madrid, and Swiss to provide Airbus A330-300 service from Z\u00fcrich. So far only the Iberia and the Swiss routes have been implemented.\nIn 2021, regional airline Southern Airways Express moved their East Coast hub from BWI to Dulles. The airline announced it would operate flights between Dulles and small airports in Pennsylvania and West Virginia, some of them on Essential Air Service contracts. \nOn November 15, 2022, the airport's Washington Metro station opened as part of the Phase 2 extension of the Silver Line, from Wiehle\u2013Reston East station to Ashburn.\nIn 2024, IAD was ranked the 11th best airport in the world by AirHelp, a passenger rights tech company assisting passengers with flight disruptions. Data was compiled for 239 of the world's busiest airports in 69 countries. Data was compiled from May 1, 2023, to April 30, 2024. Criteria was based on on-time performance, customer opinion, and food and shops. Dulles' ranking was an overall 8.22 out of 10.\nBeginning in 2024, an effort by Congress has been made to rename the airport as the Donald J. Trump International Airport, in honor of President Donald J. Trump. In April 2024, a bill was proposed in the United States House of Representatives to rename the airport after Trump, but did not pass. A new bill was introduced in the House of Representatives in January 2025, renewing the proposal to rename Dulles after Trump; this bill was announced a few days after a similar state bill was proposed in Tennessee, to rename Nashville International Airport after Trump.\nAs of February 2025, more than 50 airlines serve the airport. The majority of the market share is United and United Express while other airlines focus on international routes or domestic routes not served by United. Airbus A380 service to Dulles during the current summer season puts the airport in 3rd place for A380 flights in the US, after New York\u2013JFK and Los Angeles\u2013LAX. British Airways and Lufthansa fly the superjumbo to Dulles on a daily schedule from May to October, while Emirates flies the A380 year round. Additionally, Dulles is looking to grow its international destinations in response to the regained demand for Southeast Asian service after the pandemic caused numbers to falter significantly. This growth would target cities like Mumbai, Taipei and Hong Kong.\nOn March 11, 2025, Air China began serving IAD with the Boeing 747-8i from Beijing. Air China up until then served the airport twice weekly with the Boeing 777-300ER. This added a second Air China 747 flight to the US after JFK, which had been the only airport in the United States to receive Air China 747 service.\nMeaning of IAD.\nDulles originally used DIA \u2013 the initials of Dulles International Airport \u2013 as its airport code. When handwritten, DIA was often misread as DCA \u2013 the code for Washington National Airport. This prompted officials to change Dulles Airport's code to IAD \u2013 standing for \"International Airport Dulles.\"\nTerminals.\nThe airport's terminal complex consists of the Main Terminal (which includes four aircraft gates, known as the \"Z\" Gates), and two parallel midfield terminal buildings: Concourses A/B and Concourses C/D. The entire terminal complex has a total of 139 gates \u2013 123 of which have jetways and 16 of which are hardstand locations from which passengers can board or disembark using the airport's plane mate vehicles.\nInter-terminal transportation.\nConceived in early planning sessions in 1959, Dulles is one of a few remaining airports to utilize mobile lounges (also known as \"plane mates\" or \"people movers\"), now only used for transport to the International Arrivals Building as well as transport for Concourse D. They have all been given names based on the postal abbreviations of 50 states, e.g., VA, MD, AK.\nThe Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority has partially phased out the mobile lounge system for inter-terminal passenger movements with the AeroTrain, an underground people mover that currently operates to all of the concourses except concourse D, with a passenger tunnel remaining to concourses A and B. However, the Aerotrain to concourse C stops at a terminal north of the actual concourse, leaving a significant walk from the terminal to concourse after disembarking. Plane mates remain in use to disembark international passengers and carry them to the International Arrivals Building, as well as to transport passengers to and from aircraft on the hard stands that are called H gates (i.e., those parked remotely on the apron without access to jet bridges).\nMain terminal.\nDulles's main terminal houses ticketing on the upper level, baggage claim and U.S. Customs and Border Protection on the lower level, and annexes for the International Arrivals Building for international passenger processing, as well as the four Z gates (used by Air Canada and United Express), H gates, various information kiosks and other support facilities. The main terminal was recognized by the American Institute of Architects in 1966 for its design concept; its roof is a suspended catenary providing a wide enclosed area unimpeded by any columns.\nIts\u00a0main terminal was designed by Eero Saarinen, who also designed the TWA Flight Center at John F. Kennedy International Airport.\nThe main terminal was extended in 1996 to \u2014Saarinen's original design length\u2014which was slightly more than double its originally constructed length of . On September 22, 2009, an expansion to include the International Arrivals Building opened for customs and immigration processing with a capacity to process 2,400 passengers per hour.\nAlso in September 2009, a central security checkpoint was added on a new security mezzanine level of the main terminal. This checkpoint replaced previous checkpoints that were located behind the ticketing areas. Travelers enrolled in TSA PreCheck and CLEAR still use this area to clear security. A separate security checkpoint is available on the baggage claim level for staff only, and previously had access for all passengers as the Dulles Diamond area. Both public security checkpoints connect to escalators to the AeroTrain, which links the main terminal with the A and B concourse and links to a tunnel connecting to the C concourse.\nMidfield terminals.\nAll airlines aside from certain express flights operate out of two linear satellite terminals. Each terminal is divided into two concourses, with the north terminal containing Concourses A and B, and the south terminal containing Concourses C and D.\nConcourses A and B.\nConcourses A and B are located in the midfield terminal building closer to the main terminal. They are utilized by all non-United flights as well as a limited number of United Express flights.\nConcourse A has 47 gates, located in the eastern half of the north midfield terminal. It consists of a permanent ground-level set of gates designed for small planes and United Express flights, and several former Concourse B gates. The concourse is primarily used for international flights. Air France and KLM have a lounge opposite gate A19, Etihad Airways operates a First and Business Class lounge across from gate A15, and Virgin Atlantic has a Clubhouse lounge adjacent to gate A31. Concourse A's AeroTrain station is located between gates A6 and A14.\nConcourse B has 28 gates, located in the western half of the terminal. It is the first of the permanent elevated midfield concourses. Originally constructed in 1998 and designed by Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill and Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum, the B concourse contained 20 gates. In 2003, 4 additional gates were added, followed by a 15-gate expansion in 2008. In addition to the AeroTrain station located between gates B51 and B62, Concourse B is also connected to the main terminal by an underground walkway. Concourse B is used by some international carriers, and is also utilized by almost all non-United domestic and Canada flights. The facility also includes a British Airways Galleries lounge adjacent to the AeroTrain station, a Lufthansa lounge between gates B49 and B51, and a Turkish Airlines lounge near gate B43.\nConcourses C and D.\nConcourses C and D are located in the south midfield terminal, and are used for United Airlines flights, including all mainline flights and most United Express regional flights (save for a few that use Concourse A).\nThese concourses were constructed in 1983 as temporary facilities and designed by Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum. The two concourses have 22 gates each, numbered C1\u2013C28 and D1\u2013D32, with odd-numbered gates on the north side of the building and even numbered gates on the south side. Concourse C composes the eastern half of the terminal and Concourse D composes the western half. The C/D concourses were given a facelift in 2006 that included light-fixture upgrades, new paint finishes, new ceiling grids and tiles, heating and air conditioning replacement, and complete restroom renovations.\nWhile all gates in Concourses C/D can be utilized for both domestic and international departures, all United international arrivals are conducted at gates C1-C14. These gates contain two exit configurations depending on the arriving flight. Domestic passengers and international passengers from airports with U.S. customs pre-clearance exit directly into the concourse, while international arrivals from airports without border pre-clearance are redirected down a sterile corridor to U.S. Customs &amp; Immigration. Passengers arriving from international destinations who are ending their journey at Dulles are then transported by mobile lounge to the International Arrivals Building, while passengers making onward connections are directed to a separate customs facility located on the ground floor of Concourse C. After being screened by TSA at a dedicated security checkpoint within the facility, these passengers then take escalators that deposit them in Concourse C near gate C7.\nA new and permanent C/D concourse (also called \"Tier 2\") is planned as part of the D2 Dulles Development Project. The new building is to include a three-level structure with 44 airline gates and similar amenities to Concourse B. The concourse plan includes a dedicated mezzanine corridor with moving sidewalks to serve international passengers. The design and construction of the new C/D concourse has not been scheduled. When built, it is planned that both terminals will be connected to the main terminal and other concourses via the AeroTrain. To that extent, the AeroTrain station at Concourse C was built at the location where the future Concourse C/D structure is proposed to be built, and is connected to the existing Concourse C via an underground walkway. In April 2022, the Airport Authority published plans for a 14 gate Concourse E to be built atop the AeroTrain station with the purpose of replacing outdoor boarding areas at Concourse A. Construction is expected to cost between $500 million and $800 million and the airport is seeking $230 million grants from the Bipartisan Infrastructure Bill. Construction on the concourse began in August 2024, and it is expected to open in 2026.\nAirline lounges.\nSince many major domestic and international airlines have a large presence at Washington Dulles, there are many airline lounges within the airport:\nGround transportation.\nRoads.\nWashington Dulles is accessible via the Dulles Access Road/Dulles Greenway (State Route 267) and State Route 28. The Access Road is a toll-free, limited access highway owned by the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority (MWAA) to facilitate car access to Washington Dulles from the Capital Beltway and Interstate 66. After it opened, non-airport traffic between Washington and Reston became so heavy that a parallel set of toll lanes were added on the same right-of-way to accommodate non-airport traffic (Dulles Toll Road). The airport-only lanes are both less congested and toll-free. As of November 1, 2008, MWAA assumed responsibility from the Virginia Department of Transportation both for operating the Dulles Toll Road and for the construction of the Silver Line down its median. Route 28, which runs north\u2013south along the eastern edge of the airport, has been upgraded to a limited access highway, with the interchanges financed through a property tax surcharge on nearby business properties. The Dulles Toll Road (VA-267) is extended to the south of Leesburg as the Dulles Greenway.\nPublic transportation.\nWashington Metro service is available to Dulles via the station on the Silver Line. Service began operation on November 15, 2022.\nFairfax Connector bus routes 981 and 983 serve Washington Dulles, connecting to the Herndon\u2013Monroe park &amp; ride lot in Herndon, the Reston Town Center transit in Reston, the Wiehle\u2013Reston East Metro station, and the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center Air and Space Museum. Formerly, the Metrobus 5A route served at the airport.\nMegabus provides service from Dulles to Charlottesville and Blacksburg.\nWashington Flyer has a monopoly to operate cabs from Washington Dulles Airport. Uber and Lyft are popular modes of transport to and from the airport, and MWAA receives a $4 fee per trip, which is included in the quoted fare.\nIn popular culture.\nDulles has been a popular filming location, particularly in its early years when it had relatively low traffic levels in relation to its size and its elaborate design.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33592", "revid": "1306508421", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33592", "title": "Wilson Flagg", "text": "United States Navy admiral\nWilson Falor \"Bud\" Flagg (October 25, 1938\u00a0\u2013 September 11, 2001) was a United States Navy Rear Admiral. On October 15, 1993, he was censured for failing to prevent the 1991 Tailhook conference scandal, effectively ending any chance for further career advancement. Flagg and his wife Darlene were killed on board American Airlines Flight 77 during the September 11 attacks of 2001.\nEarly life.\nWilson Falor Flagg was born October 25, 1938. While in high school, Flagg, known by the nickname \"Bud\", met his future wife, Darlene Ellen \"Dee\" Embree (October 22, 1938 - September 11, 2001). They became sweethearts, and married after Flagg graduated from the United States Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland in June 1961.\nCareer.\nFlagg attended flight school in Pensacola, Florida, and became a Navy pilot in 1962. He served on active duty from 1961 to 1967, including three tours as a fighter pilot in Southeast Asia during the Vietnam War. After leaving active duty, he continued flying the F-8 Crusader, logging more than 3,200 flight hours. He subsequently embarked upon dual careers as an American Airlines captain and an officer in the Naval Reserve.\nHis decorations included the Distinguished Service Medal, the Meritorious Service Medal, the Air Medal and the Navy Commendation Medal with Combat V.\nIn 1987 he became a rear admiral, and was posted at The Pentagon, where he was one of the top officers for the Naval Reserve. In 1993, two years after the 1991 Tailhook Association scandal, he was one of three top officials who received letters of censure for failing to stop extensive incidents of sexual harassment at the association's Las Vegas convention.\nFlagg retired from the Navy in 1995 as a rear admiral and from American Airlines in 1998, although at the time of his death, he still had an office at the Pentagon, for instances in which the Pentagon contacted him for technical advice.\nPersonal life and death.\nThe Flaggs lived in Mississippi, California, and Connecticut before settling in the early 1990s to Daybreak Farm, a Black Angus beef cattle farm in Millwood, Virginia. They also owned a home in Las Vegas, and Dee Flagg was active in Grace Evangelical Lutheran Church in Winchester, Virginia, and the Greenway Garden Club in Clarke County. Both were members of the Blue Ridge Hunt. \nDuring the September 11 attacks in 2001, the Flaggs and their friend, Barbara G. Edwards, were on board American Airlines Flight 77, heading to a family gathering in California. They were killed when it crashed into the Pentagon. The Flaggs were both 62, and were survived by their sons, Marc and Michael, and four grandchildren.\nAt the National 9/11 Memorial, Flagg, his wife and Edwards are memorialized at the South Pool, on Panel S-70.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "33594", "revid": "39606613", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33594", "title": "William S. Burroughs", "text": "American writer and visual artist (1914\u20131997)\nWilliam Seward Burroughs\u00a0II (; February 5, 1914 \u2013 August 2, 1997) was an American writer and visual artist. He is widely considered a primary figure of the Beat Generation and a major postmodern author who influenced both underground and popular culture and literature. Much of Burroughs' work is highly experimental and features unreliable narrators. Also noted as semi-autobiographical, his work often drew from his experiences with drug addiction, and featured his various places of residence as settings in much of his work. With Brion Gysin, Burroughs popularized the cut-up, an aleatory literary technique. His writing also engaged frequent mystical, occult, or otherwise magical themes, constant preoccupations in both his fiction and real life.\nBorn into a wealthy family in St.\u00a0Louis, Missouri, Burroughs attended Harvard University, where he studied English, then anthropology as a postgraduate, and went on to medical school in Vienna. In 1942, he enlisted in the U.S.\u00a0Army to serve during World War\u00a0II. After being turned down by both the Office of Strategic Services and the Navy, he veered into substance abuse, beginning with morphine and developing a heroin addiction that would affect him for the rest of his life. In 1943, he befriended Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac while living in New York City. This liaison would become the foundation of the Beat Generation, later a defining influence on the 1960s counterculture. \nBurroughs found success with his confessional first novel, \"Junkie\" (1953), published under the pen name William Lee. He had largely completed the novel before he killed his second wife, Joan Vollmer, in 1951 in Mexico City; he was convicted of manslaughter \"in absentia\" and received a two-year suspended sentence. His third novel, \"Naked Lunch\" (1959), became the subject of one of the last major literary censorship cases in the United States after its US publisher, Grove Press, was sued for violating a Massachusetts obscenity statute. He also wrote \"The Nova Trilogy\" (1961\u20131964) which extensively featured the cut-up technique, and \"The Red Night Trilogy\": \"Cities of the Red Night\" (1981), \"The Place of Dead Roads\" (1983) and \"The Western Lands\" (1987).\nIn 1983, Burroughs was elected to the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters. In 1984, he was awarded the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by France. Jack Kerouac called Burroughs the \"greatest satirical writer since Jonathan Swift\"; he owed this reputation to his \"lifelong subversion\" of the moral, political, and economic systems of modern American society, articulated in often darkly humorous sardonicism. J. G. Ballard considered Burroughs to be \"the most important writer to emerge since the Second World War,\" while Norman Mailer declared him \"the only American writer who may be conceivably possessed by genius.\" He also collaborated on projects and recordings with numerous performers and musicians, made many appearances in films, and created and exhibited thousands of visual artworks, including his celebrated \"shotgun art\".\nEarly life and education.\nBurroughs was born in 1914, the younger of two sons born to Mortimer Perry Burroughs (June 16, 1885 \u2013 January 5, 1965) and Laura Hammon Lee (August 5, 1888 \u2013 October 20, 1970). Of prominent English ancestry, his family lived in St.\u00a0Louis, Missouri. His grandfather, William Seward Burroughs I, had founded the Burroughs Adding Machine company, which evolved into the Burroughs Corporation. His mother was Laura Hammond Lee Burroughs, whose brother, Ivy Lee, was an advertising pioneer later employed as a publicist for the Rockefellers. His father ran an antiques and gift shop, Cobblestone Gardens, in St.\u00a0Louis and later in Palm Beach, Florida, when they relocated. Burroughs would later write of growing up in a \"family where displays of affection were considered embarrassing\".26\nDuring his childhood, Burroughs developed a lifelong interest in magic and the occult, which would eventually find their way repeatedly into his writings. Significantly, he later described how, as a child, he'd seen an apparition of a green reindeer in the woods, which he identified as a totem animal, as well as a vision of ghostly gray figures at play in his bedroom.\nAs a boy, Burroughs lived on Pershing Avenue (now Pershing Place) in St.\u00a0Louis's Central West End. He attended John Burroughs School in St.\u00a0Louis, where his first published essay \u2014 \"Personal Magnetism\", which revolved around telepathic mind-control \u2014 was printed in the \"John Burroughs Review\" in 1929. He then attended the Los Alamos Ranch School in New Mexico, which was stressful for him. The school was a boarding school for the wealthy, \"where the spindly sons of the rich could be transformed into manly specimens\".44 Burroughs kept journals documenting an erotic attachment to another boy. According to his own account, he destroyed these later, ashamed of their content. He kept his sexual orientation concealed from his family well into adulthood. A common story says that he was expelled from Los Alamos after taking chloral hydrate in Santa Fe with a fellow student. Yet, according to his own account, he left voluntarily: \"During the Easter vacation of my second year I persuaded my family to let me stay in St. Louis.\"\nHarvard University.\nBurroughs finished high school at Taylor School in Clayton, Missouri, and in 1932 left home to pursue an arts degree at Harvard University, where he was affiliated with Adams House. During the summers, he worked as a cub reporter for the \"St. Louis Post-Dispatch\", covering the police docket. He disliked the work, and refused to cover some events, like the death of a drowned child. He lost his virginity in an East St. Louis, Illinois, brothel that summer with a female prostitute whom he regularly patronized.papers, p.62 While at Harvard, Burroughs made trips to New York City and was introduced to the gay subculture there. He visited lesbian dives, piano bars, and the Harlem and Greenwich Village homosexual underground with Richard Stern, a wealthy friend from Kansas City. They would drive from Boston to New York in a reckless fashion. Once, Stern scared Burroughs so badly that he asked to be let out of the vehicle.611\nBurroughs graduated from Harvard in 1936. According to Ted Morgan's \"Literary Outlaw\",\nHis parents, upon his graduation, had decided to give him a monthly allowance of $200 out of their earnings from Cobblestone Gardens, a substantial sum in those days. It was enough to keep him going, and indeed it guaranteed his survival for the next twenty-five years, arriving with welcome regularity. The allowance was a ticket to freedom; it allowed him to live where he wanted to and to forgo employment.\nBurroughs's parents sold the rights to his grandfather's invention and had no share in the Burroughs Corporation. Shortly before the 1929 stock market crash, they sold their stock for $200,000 (equivalent to approximately $ in today's funds).\nEurope and First Marriage.\nAfter Burroughs graduated from Harvard, his formal education ended, except for brief flirtations with graduate study of anthropology at Columbia and medicine in Vienna, Austria. He traveled to Europe and became involved in Austrian and Hungarian Weimar-era gay culture; he picked up young men in steam baths in Vienna and moved in a circle of exiles, homosexuals, and runaways. There, he met Ilse Klapper, born Herzfeld (1900\u20131982), a German Jewish woman fleeing her country's Nazi government. The two were never romantically involved, but Burroughs married her, in Croatia, against the wishes of his parents, to allow her to gain a visa to the United States. She made her way to New York City, and eventually divorced Burroughs, although they remained friends for many years. \nAfter returning to the United States, he held a string of uninteresting jobs. In 1939, his mental health became a concern for his parents, especially after he deliberately severed the last joint of his left little finger at the knuckle to impress a man with whom he was infatuated. This event made its way into his early fiction as the novella \"The Finger\".\nBeginning of the Beats.\nBurroughs enlisted in the U.S. Army early in 1942, shortly after the bombing of Pearl Harbor brought the United States into World War II. But when he was classified as a 1-A infantry, not an officer, he became dejected. His mother recognized her son's depression and got Burroughs a civilian disability discharge \u2013 a release from duty based on the premise that he should have not been allowed to enlist due to previous mental instability. After being evaluated by a family friend, who was also a neurologist at a psychiatric treatment center, Burroughs waited five months in limbo at Jefferson Barracks outside St.\u00a0Louis before being discharged. During that time he met a Chicago soldier also awaiting release, and once Burroughs was free, he moved to Chicago and held a variety of jobs, including one as an exterminator. When two of his friends from St.\u00a0Louis \u2013 University of Chicago student Lucien Carr and his admirer, David Kammerer \u2013 left for New York City, Burroughs followed.\nAddiction and Joan Vollmer.\nIn 1945, Burroughs began living with Joan Vollmer Adams in an apartment they shared with Jack Kerouac and Edie Parker, Kerouac's first wife. Vollmer Adams was married to a G.I. with whom she had a young daughter, Julie Adams.\nBurroughs and Kerouac got into trouble with the law for failing to report a murder involving Lucien Carr, who had killed David Kammerer in a confrontation over Kammerer's incessant and unwanted advances. This incident inspired Burroughs and Kerouac to collaborate on a novel titled \"And the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks\", completed in 1945. The two fledgling authors were unable to get it published during their lifetimes, but the manuscript was eventually published in November\u00a02008 by Grove Press and Penguin Books.\nDuring this time, Burroughs began using morphine and became addicted. He eventually sold heroin in Greenwich Village to support his habit. Vollmer also became an addict, but her drug of choice was Benzedrine, an amphetamine sold over the counter at that time. Because of her addiction and social circle, her husband immediately divorced her after returning from the war. With urging from Allen Ginsberg, and also perhaps Kerouac, Burroughs became intellectually and emotionally linked with Vollmer and by summer\u00a01945, had moved in with Vollmer and her daughter. In spring\u00a01946, Burroughs was arrested for forging a narcotics prescription. Vollmer asked her psychiatrist, Lewis Wolberg, to sign a surety bond for Burroughs's release. As part of his release, Burroughs returned to St.\u00a0Louis under his parents' care, after which he left for Mexico to get a divorce from Ilse Klapper. Meanwhile, Vollmer's addiction led to a temporary psychosis that resulted in her admission to Bellevue Hospital, which endangered the custody of her child. Upon hearing this, Burroughs immediately returned to New York City to gain her release, asking her to marry him. Their marriage was never formalized, but she lived as his common-law wife. \nThey returned to St.\u00a0Louis to visit Burroughs's parents and then moved with her daughter to Texas. Vollmer soon became pregnant with Burroughs's child. Their son, William S. Burroughs Jr., was born in 1947. The family moved briefly to New Orleans in 1948.\nMexico and South America (1950\u20131952).\nIn New Orleans, police stopped Burroughs's car one evening. They found an unregistered handgun belonging to him as well as a letter from Ginsberg that contained details about the sale of marijuana. The police then searched Burroughs\u2019s home, where they discovered his stash of drugs and half a dozen or more firearms. Burroughs fled to Mexico to escape possible detention in Louisiana's Angola State Prison. Vollmer and their children followed him. Burroughs planned to stay in Mexico for at least five years, the length of his charge's statute of limitations. Burroughs also attended classes at the Mexico City College in 1950, studying Spanish, as well as Mesoamerican manuscripts (codices) and the Mayan language with R. H. Barlow.\nKilling of Vollmer.\nTheir life in Mexico was by all accounts an unhappy one. Without heroin and suffering from Benzedrine abuse, Burroughs began to pursue other men as his libido returned, while Vollmer, feeling abandoned, started to drink heavily and mock Burroughs openly. \nOne night, while drinking with friends at a party above the Bounty Bar in Mexico City, a drunk Burroughs allegedly took his handgun from his travel bag and told his wife, \"It's time for our William Tell act.\" There is no indication that they had performed such an action previously. Vollmer, who was also drinking heavily and undergoing amphetamine withdrawal, allegedly obliged him by putting a highball glass on her head. Burroughs shot Vollmer in the head, killing her almost immediately.\nSoon after the incident, Burroughs changed his account, claiming that he had dropped his gun and it had accidentally fired. Burroughs spent 13\u00a0days in jail before his brother came to Mexico City and bribed Mexican lawyers and officials to release Burroughs on bail while he awaited trial for the killing, which was ruled culpable homicide. \nVollmer's daughter, Julie Adams, went to live with her grandmother, and William S. Burroughs\u00a0Jr. went to St.\u00a0Louis to live with his grandparents. Burroughs reported every Monday morning to the jail in Mexico City while his prominent Mexican attorney worked to resolve the case. According to James Grauerholz, two witnesses had agreed to testify that the gun had fired accidentally while he was checking to see if it was loaded, with ballistics experts bribed to support this story.202 Nevertheless, the trial was continuously delayed and Burroughs began to write what would eventually become the short novel \"Queer\" while awaiting his trial. Upon Burroughs's attorney fleeing Mexico in light of his own legal problems, Burroughs decided, according to Ted Morgan, to \"skip\" and return to the United States. He was convicted \"in absentia\" of homicide and was given a two-year suspended sentence.214\nAlthough Burroughs was writing before his murder of Joan Vollmer, this event marked him and, biographers argue, his work for the rest of his life. Vollmer's death also resonated with Allen Ginsberg, who wrote of her in \"Dream Record: June 8, 1955,\" \"Joan, what kind of knowledge have the dead? Can you still love your mortal acquaintances? What do you remember of us?\" In \"Burroughs: The Movie\", Ginsberg claimed that Vollmer had seemed possibly suicidal in the weeks leading up to her death, and he suggested that this may have been a factor in her willingness to take part in the risky William Tell stunt.\n\"The Yage Letters\".\nAfter leaving Mexico, Burroughs drifted through South America for several months, seeking out a drug called yag\u00e9, which promised to give the user telepathic abilities. A book composed of letters between Burroughs and Ginsberg, \"The Yage Letters,\" was published in 1963 by City Lights Books. In 2006, a re-edited version, \"The Yage Letters Redux\", showed that the letters were largely fictionalised from Burroughs's notes.\nBeginning of literary career.\nBurroughs described Vollmer's death as a pivotal event in his life, and one that provoked his writing by exposing him to the risk of possession by a malevolent entity he called \"the Ugly Spirit\":\nI am forced to the appalling conclusion that I would never have become a writer but for Joan's death, and to a realization of the extent to which this event has motivated and formulated my writing. I live with the constant threat of possession, and a constant need to escape from possession, from Control. So the death of Joan brought me in contact with the invader, the Ugly Spirit, and maneuvered me into a life long struggle, in which I have had no choice except to write my way out.\nAs Burroughs makes clear, he meant this reference to \"possession\" to be taken absolutely literally, stating: \"My concept of possession is closer to the medieval model than to modern psychological explanations ... I mean a definite possessing entity.\" Burroughs' writing was intended as a form of \"sorcery\", in his own words \u2013 to disrupt language via methods such as the cut-up technique, and thus protect himself from possession. Later in life, Burroughs described the Ugly Spirit as \"Monopolistic, acquisitive evil. Ugly evil. The ugly American\", and took part in a shamanic ceremony with the explicit aim of exorcising the Ugly Spirit.\nOliver Harris has questioned Burroughs's claim that Vollmer's death catalysed his writing, highlighting the importance for \"Queer\" of Burroughs's traumatic relationship with the boyfriend fictionalized in the story as Eugene Allerton, rather than Burroughs's shooting of Vollmer. In any case, he had begun to write in 1945. Burroughs and Kerouac collaborated on \"And the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks\", a mystery novel loosely based on the Carr\u2013Kammerer situation and that at the time remained unpublished. Years later, in the documentary \"What Happened to Kerouac?\", Burroughs described it as \"not a very distinguished work\". An excerpt of this work, in which Burroughs and Kerouac wrote alternating chapters, was finally published in \"Word Virus\", a compendium of William Burroughs's writing that was published by his biographer after his death in 1997. The complete novel was finally published by Grove Press in 2008.\nBefore killing Vollmer, Burroughs had largely completed his first novel, \"Junkie\", which he wrote at the urging of Allen Ginsberg, who was instrumental in getting the work published as a cheap mass-market paperback. Ace Books published the novel in 1953 as part of an Ace Double under the pen name William Lee, retitling it \"Junkie: Confessions of an Unredeemed Drug Addict\" (it was later republished as \"Junkie\", then in 1977 as \"Junky\", and finally in 2003 as \"Junky: the definitive text of 'Junk',\" edited by Oliver Harris).\nTangier.\nDuring 1953, Burroughs was at loose ends. Due to legal problems, he was unable to live in the cities toward which he was most inclined. He spent time with his parents in Palm Beach, Florida, and in New York City with Allen Ginsberg. When Ginsberg refused his romantic advances, Burroughs went to Rome to meet Alan Ansen on a vacation financed from his parents' continuing support. He found Rome and Ansen's company dreary and, inspired by Paul Bowles' fiction, he decided to head for the Tangier International Zone, where he rented a room and began to write a large body of text that he personally referred to as \"Interzone\".\nTo Burroughs, all signs directed a return to Tangier, a city where drugs were freely available and where financial support from his family would continue. He realized that in the Moroccan culture he had found an environment that synchronized with his temperament and afforded no hindrances to pursuing his interests and indulging in his chosen activities. He left for Tangier in November 1954 and spent the next four years there working on the fiction that would later become \"Naked Lunch\", as well as attempting to write commercial articles about Tangier. He sent these writings to Ginsberg, his literary agent for \"Junkie\", but none were published until 1959 when \"Interzone\", a collection of short stories, was published. Under the strong influence of a marijuana confection known as majoun and a German-made opioid called Eukodol, Burroughs settled in to write. Eventually, Ginsberg and Kerouac, who had traveled to Tangier in 1957, helped Burroughs type, edit, and arrange these episodes into \"Naked Lunch\".\n\"Naked Lunch\".\nWhereas \"Junkie\" and \"Queer\" were conventional in style, \"Naked Lunch\" was his first venture into a nonlinear style. After the publication of \"Naked Lunch\", a book whose creation was to a certain extent the result of a series of contingencies, Burroughs was exposed to Brion Gysin's cut-up technique at the Beat Hotel in Paris in October 1959. He began slicing up phrases and words to create new sentences. At the Beat Hotel, Burroughs discovered \"a port of entry\" into Gysin's canvases: \"I don't think I had ever seen painting until I saw the painting of Brion Gysin.\" The two would cultivate a long-term friendship that revolved around a mutual interest in artworks and cut-up techniques. Scenes were slid together with little care for narrative.\nExcerpts from \"Naked Lunch\" were first published in the United States in 1958. The novel was initially rejected by City Lights Books, the publisher of Ginsberg's \"Howl\", and Olympia Press publisher Maurice Girodias, who had published English-language novels in France that were controversial for their subjective views of sex and antisocial characters. Nevertheless, Ginsberg managed to get excerpts published in \"Black Mountain Review\" and \"Chicago Review\" in 1958. Irving Rosenthal, student editor of \"Chicago Review\", a quarterly journal partially subsidized by the university, promised to publish more excerpts from \"Naked Lunch\", but he was fired from his position in 1958 after \"Chicago Daily News\" columnist Jack Mabley called the first excerpt obscene. Rosenthal went on to publish more in his newly created literary journal \"Big Table No.\u00a01\"; however, the United States Postmaster General ruled that copies could not be mailed to subscribers on the basis of obscenity laws. John Ciardi did get a copy and wrote a positive review of the work, prompting a telegram from Allen Ginsberg praising the review. This controversy made \"Naked Lunch\" interesting to Girodias again, and he published the novel in 1959.\nAfter the novel was published, it became notorious across Europe and the United States, garnering interest from not just members of the counterculture of the 1960s, but also literary critics such as Mary McCarthy. Once published in the United States, \"Naked Lunch\" was prosecuted as obscene by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, followed by other states. In 1966, the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court declared the work \"not obscene\" on the basis of criteria developed largely to defend the book. The case against Burroughs's novel still stands as the last obscenity trial against a work of literature \u2013 that is, a work consisting of words only, and not including illustrations or photographs \u2013 prosecuted in the United States.\nThe \"Word Hoard\", the collection of manuscripts that produced \"Naked Lunch\", also produced parts of the later works \"The Soft Machine\" (1961), \"The Ticket That Exploded\" (1962), and \"Nova Express\" (1964). These novels feature extensive use of the cut-up technique that influenced all of Burroughs's subsequent fiction to a degree. During Burroughs's friendship and artistic collaborations with Gysin and Ian Sommerville, the technique was combined with images, Gysin's paintings, and sound, via Sommerville\u2019s tape recorders. Burroughs was so dedicated to the cut-up method that he often defended his use of the technique before editors and publishers, most notably Dick Seaver at Grove Press in the 1960s425 and Holt, Rinehart &amp; Winston in the 1980s. The cut-up method, because of its random or mechanical basis for text generation, combined with the possibilities of mixing in text written by other writers, deemphasizes the traditional role of the writer as creator or originator of a string of words, while simultaneously exalting the importance of the writer's sensibility as an editor. In this sense, the cut-up method may be considered as analogous to the collage method in the visual arts. New restored editions of The Nova Trilogy (or Cut-Up Trilogy), edited by Oliver Harris (President of the European Beat Studies Network) and published in 2014, included notes and materials to reveal the care with which Burroughs used his methods and the complex histories of his manuscripts.\nParis and the \"Beat Hotel\".\nBurroughs moved into a rundown hotel in the Latin Quarter of Paris in 1959 when \"Naked Lunch\" was still looking for a publisher. Tangier, with its political unrest, and criminals with whom he had become involved, became dangerous to Burroughs. He went to Paris to meet Ginsberg and talk with Olympia Press. He left behind a criminal charge which eventually caught up with him in Paris. Paul Lund, a British former career criminal and cigarette smuggler whom Burroughs met in Tangier, was arrested on suspicion of importing narcotics into France. Lund gave up Burroughs, and evidence implicated Burroughs in the importation of narcotics into France. When the Moroccan authorities forwarded their investigation to French officials, Burroughs faced criminal charges in Paris for conspiracy to import opiates. It was during this impending case that Maurice Girodias published \"Naked Lunch\"; its appearance helped to get Burroughs a suspended sentence, since a literary career, according to Ted Morgan, is a respected profession in France.\nThe \"Beat Hotel\" was a typical European-style boarding house hotel, with common toilets on every floor, and a small place for personal cooking in the room. Life there was documented by the photographer Harold Chapman, who lived in the attic room. This shabby, inexpensive hotel was populated by Gregory Corso, Ginsberg and Peter Orlovsky for several months after \"Naked Lunch\" first appeared.\nBurroughs's time at the Beat Hotel was dominated by occult experiments \u2013 \"mirror-gazing, scrying, trance and telepathy, all fuelled by a wide variety of mind-altering drugs\". Later, Burroughs would describe \"visions\" obtained by staring into the mirror for hours at a time \u2013 his hands transformed into tentacles, or his whole image transforming into some strange entity, or visions of far-off places, or of other people rapidly undergoing metamorphosis. It was from this febrile atmosphere that the famous cut-up technique emerged.\nThe actual process by which \"Naked Lunch\" was published was partly a function of its \"cut-up\" presentation to the printer. Girodias had given Burroughs only ten days to prepare the manuscript for print galleys, and Burroughs sent over the manuscript in pieces, preparing the parts in no particular order. When it was published in this authentically random manner, Burroughs liked it better than the initial plan. International rights to the work were sold soon after, and Burroughs used the $3,000 advance from Grove Press to buy drugs (equivalent to approximately $ in today's funds). \"Naked Lunch\" was featured in a 1959 \"Life\" magazine cover story, partly as an article that highlighted the growing Beat literary movement. During this time Burroughs found an outlet for material otherwise rendered unpublishable in Jeff Nuttall's \"My Own Mag\". Also, poetry by Burroughs appeared in the avant garde little magazine \"Nomad\" at the beginning of the 1960s.\nThe London years.\nBurroughs left Paris for London in 1960 to visit Dr. Dent, a well-known English medical doctor who spearheaded a reputedly painless heroin withdrawal treatment using the drug apomorphine. Dent's apomorphine cure was also used to treat alcoholism, although it was held by several people who undertook it to be no more than straightforward aversion therapy. Burroughs, however, was convinced. Following his first cure, he wrote a detailed appreciation of apomorphine and other cures, which he submitted to \"The British Journal of Addiction\" (Vol. 53, 1956) under the title \"Letter From A Master Addict To Dangerous Drugs\"; this letter is appended to many editions of \"Naked Lunch\".\nThough he ultimately relapsed, Burroughs ended up working out of London for six years, traveling back to the United States on several occasions, including one time escorting his son to the Lexington Narcotics Farm and Prison after the younger Burroughs had been convicted of prescription fraud in Florida. In the \"Afterword\" to the compilation of his son's two previously published novels \"Speed\" and \"Kentucky Ham\", Burroughs writes that he thought he had a \"small habit\" and left London quickly without any narcotics because he suspected the US customs would search him very thoroughly on arrival. He claims he went through the most excruciating two months of opiate withdrawal while seeing his son through his trial and sentencing, traveling with Billy to Lexington, Kentucky from Miami to ensure that his son entered the hospital that he had once spent time in as a volunteer admission. Earlier, Burroughs revisited St.\u00a0Louis, Missouri, taking a large advance from \"Playboy\" to write an article about his trip back to St. Louis, one that was eventually published in \"The Paris Review\", after Burroughs refused to alter the style for \"Playboy\"\u2019s publishers. In 1968 Burroughs joined Jean Genet, John Sack, and Terry Southern in covering the 1968 Democratic National Convention for \"Esquire\" magazine. Southern and Burroughs, who had first become acquainted in London, would remain lifelong friends and collaborators. In 1972, Burroughs and Southern unsuccessfully attempted to adapt \"Naked Lunch\" for the screen in conjunction with American game-show producer Chuck Barris.\nBurroughs supported himself and his addiction by publishing pieces in small literary presses. His avant-garde reputation grew internationally as hippies and college students discovered his earlier works. He developed a close friendship with Antony Balch and lived with a young hustler named John Brady who continuously brought home young women despite Burroughs's protestations. In the midst of this personal turmoil, Burroughs managed to complete two works: a novel written in screenplay format, \"The Last Words of Dutch Schultz\" (1969); and the traditional prose-format novel \"The Wild Boys\" (1971).\nIt was during his time in London that Burroughs began using his \"playback\" technique in an attempt to place curses on various people and places who had drawn his ire, including the Moka coffee bar and the London HQ of Scientology. Burroughs himself related the Moka coffee bar incident:\nHere is a sample operation carried out against the Moka Bar at 29 Frith Street, London, W1, beginning on August 3, 1972. Reverse Thursday. Reason for operation was outrageous and unprovoked discourtesy and poisonous cheesecake. Now to close in on the Moka Bar. Record. Take pictures. Stand around outside. Let them see me. They are seething around in there ... Playback would come later with more pictures ... Playback was carried out a number of times with more pictures. Their business fell off. They kept shorter and shorter hours. October 30, 1972, the Moka Bar closed. The location was taken over by the Queen's Snack Bar.\nIn the 1960s, Burroughs joined and then left the Church of Scientology. In talking about the experience, he claimed that the techniques and philosophy of Scientology helped him and that he felt that further study of Scientology would produce great results. He was skeptical of the organization itself, and felt that it fostered an environment that did not accept critical discussion. His subsequent critical writings about the church and his review of \"\" by Robert Kaufman led to a battle of letters between Burroughs and Scientology supporters in the pages of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine.\nReturn to United States.\nIn 1974, concerned about his friend's well-being, Allen Ginsberg gained for Burroughs a contract to teach creative writing at the City College of New York. Burroughs successfully withdrew from heroin use and moved to New York. He eventually found an apartment, affectionately dubbed \"The Bunker\", on the Lower East Side of Manhattan at 222 Bowery. The dwelling was a partially converted YMCA gym, complete with lockers and communal showers. The building fell within New York City rent control policies that made it extremely cheap; it was only about four hundred dollars a month until 1981 when the rent control rules changed, doubling the rent overnight. Burroughs added \"teacher\" to the list of jobs he did not like, as he lasted only a semester as a professor; he found the students uninteresting and without much creative talent. Although he needed income desperately, he turned down a teaching position at the University at Buffalo for $15,000 a semester. \"The teaching gig was a lesson in never again. You were giving out all this energy and nothing was coming back.\"477 His savior was the newly arrived twenty-one-year-old bookseller and Beat Generation devotee James Grauerholz, who worked for Burroughs part-time as a secretary as well as in a bookstore. Grauerholz suggested the idea of reading tours. Grauerholz had managed several rock bands in Kansas and took the lead in booking for Burroughs reading tours that would help support him throughout the next two decades. It raised his public profile, eventually aiding in his obtaining new publishing contracts. Through Grauerholz, Burroughs became a monthly columnist for the noted popular culture magazine \"Crawdaddy\", for which he interviewed Led Zeppelin's Jimmy Page in 1975. Burroughs decided to relocate back to the United States permanently in 1976. He then began to associate with New York cultural players such as Andy Warhol, John Giorno, Lou Reed, Patti Smith, and Susan Sontag, frequently entertaining them at the Bunker; he also visited venues like CBGB to watch the likes of Patti Smith perform. Throughout early 1977, Burroughs collaborated with Southern and Dennis Hopper on a screen adaptation of \"Junky\". It was reported in \"The New York Times\" that Burroughs himself would appear in the film. Financed by a reclusive acquaintance of Burroughs, the project lost traction after financial problems and creative disagreements between Hopper and Burroughs.\nIn 1976, he appeared in Rosa von Praunheim's New York documentary \"Underground &amp; Emigrants\".\nOrganized by Columbia professor Sylv\u00e8re Lotringer, Giorno, and Grauerholz, the Nova Convention was a multimedia retrospective of Burroughs's work held from November 30 to December 2, 1978, at various locations throughout New York. The event included readings from Southern, Ginsberg, Smith, and Frank Zappa (who filled in at the last minute for Keith Richards, then entangled in a legal problem), in addition to panel discussions with Timothy Leary and Robert Anton Wilson and concerts featuring The B-52's, Suicide, Philip Glass, and Debbie Harry and Chris Stein.\nIn 1976, Burroughs was having dinner with his son, William S. \"Billy\" Burroughs Jr., and Allen Ginsberg in Boulder, Colorado, at Ginsberg's Buddhist poetry school (Jack Kerouac School of Disembodied Poetics) at Chogyam Trungpa's Naropa University when Billy began to vomit blood. Burroughs Sr. had not seen his son for over a year and was alarmed at his appearance when Billy arrived at Ginsberg's apartment. Although Billy had successfully published two short novels in the 1970s and was deemed by literary critics like Ann Charters as a bona fide \"second generation beat writer\", his brief marriage to a teenage waitress had disintegrated. Billy was a constant drinker, and there were long periods when he was out of contact with any of his family or friends. The diagnosis was liver cirrhosis so complete that the only treatment was a rarely performed liver transplant operation. Fortunately, the University of Colorado Medical Center was one of two places in the nation that performed transplants under the pioneering work of Dr. Thomas Starzl. Billy underwent the procedure and beat the thirty-percent survival odds. His father spent time in 1976 and 1977 in Colorado, helping Billy through additional surgeries and complications. Ted Morgan's biography asserts that their relationship was not spontaneous and lacked real warmth or intimacy. Allen Ginsberg was supportive to both Burroughs and his son throughout the long period of recovery.\nIn London, Burroughs had begun to write what would become the first novel of a trilogy, published as \"Cities of the Red Night\" (1981), \"The Place of Dead Roads\" (1983), and \"The Western Lands\" (1987). Grauerholz helped edit \"Cities\" when it was first rejected by Burroughs's long-time editor Dick Seaver at Holt Rinehart, after it was deemed too disjointed. The novel was written as a straight narrative and then chopped up into a more random pattern, leaving the reader to sort through the characters and events. This technique differed from the author's earlier cut-up methods, which were accidental from the start. Nevertheless, the novel was reassembled and published, still without a straight linear form, but with fewer breaks in the story. The trilogy featured time-travel adventures in which Burroughs's narrators rewrote episodes from history to reform mankind.565 Reviews were mixed for \"Cities\". Novelist and critic Anthony Burgess panned the work in \"Saturday Review\", saying Burroughs was boring readers with repetitive episodes of pederast fantasy and sexual strangulation that lacked any comprehensible world view or theology; other reviewers, like J. G. Ballard, argued that Burroughs was shaping a new literary \"mythography\".565\nIn 1981, Billy Burroughs died in Florida. He had cut off contact with his father several years before, even publishing an article in \"Esquire\" magazine claiming his father had poisoned his life and claiming that he had been molested as a fourteen-year-old by one of his father's friends while visiting Tangier. The liver transplant had not cured his urge to drink, and Billy suffered from serious health complications years after the operation. After he had stopped taking his transplant rejection drugs, he was found near the side of a Florida highway by a stranger. He died shortly afterward. Burroughs was in New York when he heard from Allen Ginsberg of Billy's death.\nBurroughs, by 1979, was once again addicted to heroin. The cheap heroin that was easily purchased outside his door on the Lower East Side \"made its way\" into his veins, coupled with \"gifts\" from the overzealous if well-intentioned admirers who frequently visited the Bunker. Although Burroughs would have episodes of being free from heroin, from this point until his death he was regularly addicted to the drug. In an introduction to \"\", James Grauerholz (who managed Burroughs's reading tours in the 1980s and 1990s) mentions that part of his job was to deal with the \"underworld\" in each city to secure the author's drugs.\nLater years in Kansas.\nBurroughs moved to Lawrence, Kansas, in 1981, taking up residence at 1927 Learnard Avenue where he would spend the rest of his life. He once told a Wichita Eagle reporter that he was content to live in Kansas, saying, \"The thing I like about Kansas is that it's not nearly as violent, and it's a helluva lot cheaper. And I can get out in the country and fish and shoot and whatnot.\" In 1984, he signed a seven-book deal with Viking Press after he signed with literary agent Andrew Wylie. This deal included the publication rights to the unpublished 1952 novel \"Queer\". With this money he purchased a small bungalow for $29,000.596 He was finally inducted into the American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters in 1983 after several attempts by Allen Ginsberg to get him accepted. He attended the induction ceremony in May 1983. Lawrence Ferlinghetti remarked the induction of Burroughs into the Academy proved Herbert Marcuse's point that capitalistic society had a great ability to incorporate its one-time outsiders.577\nBy this point, Burroughs was a counterculture icon. In his final years, he cultivated an entourage of young friends who replaced his aging contemporaries. In the 1980s he collaborated with performers ranging from Bill Laswell's Material and Laurie Anderson to Throbbing Gristle. Burroughs and R.E.M. collaborated on the song \"Star Me Kitten\" on the \"\" album. A collaboration with musicians Nick Cave and Tom Waits resulted in a collection of short prose, \"Smack My Crack\", later released as a spoken-word album in 1987. In 1989, he appeared with Matt Dillon in Gus Van Sant's film, \"Drugstore Cowboy\". In 1990, he released the spoken word album \"Dead City Radio,\" with musical backup from producers Hal Willner and Nelson Lyon, and alternative rock band Sonic Youth. He collaborated with Tom Waits and director Robert Wilson on \"The Black Rider\", a play that opened at the Thalia Theatre in Hamburg in 1990 to critical acclaim, one that was later performed across Europe and the US. In 1991, with Burroughs's approval, director David Cronenberg adapted \"Naked Lunch\" into a feature film, which opened to critical acclaim. Burroughs also collaborated with Kurt Cobain in 1992 to record \"The 'Priest' They Called Him\", based on a recording Burroughs sent Cobain of his short story \"The Junky's Christmas\".\nDuring 1982, Burroughs developed a painting technique whereby he created abstract compositions by placing spray paint cans in front of blank surfaces, and then shooting at the paint cans with a shotgun. These splattered and shot panels and canvasses were first exhibited in the Tony Shafrazi Gallery in New York City in 1987. By this time he had developed a comprehensive visual art practice, using ink, spray paint, collage and unusual things such as mushrooms and plungers to apply the paint. He created file-folder paintings featuring these mediums as well as \"automatic calligraphy\" inspired by Brion Gysin. He originally used the folders to mix pigments before observing that they could be viewed as art in themselves. He also used many of these painted folders to store manuscripts and correspondence in his personal archive\nUntil his last years, he prolifically created visual art. Burroughs's work has since been featured in more than fifty international galleries and museums including Royal Academy of the Arts, Centre Pompidou, Guggenheim Museum, ZKM Karlsruhe, Sammlung Falckenberg, New Museum, Irish Museum of Modern Art, Los Angeles County Museum, and Whitney Museum of American Art.\nAccording to Ministry frontman Al Jourgensen, \"We hung out at Burroughs's house one time in '93. So he decides to shoot up heroin and he takes out this utility belt full of syringes. Huge, old-fashioned ones from the '50s or something. Now, I have no idea how an 80 year old guy finds a vein, but he knew what he was doing. So we're all laying around high and stuff and then I notice in the pile of mail on the coffee table that there's a letter from the White House. I said 'Hey, this looks important.' and he replies 'Nah, it's probably just junk mail.' Well, I open the letter and it's from President Clinton inviting Burroughs to the White House for a poetry reading. I said 'Wow, do you have any idea how big this is!?' So he says 'What? Who's president nowadays?' and it floored me. He didn't even know who our current president was.\"\nIn 1990, Burroughs was honored with a star on the St. Louis Walk of Fame.\nIn June 1991, Burroughs underwent triple bypass surgery.\nHe became a member of a chaos magic organization, the Illuminates of Thanateros, in 1993.\nHe was a voice actor in the 1995 video game \"The Dark Eye\" based on the works of Edgar Allan Poe, in which he recites \"Annabel Lee\" and \"The Masque of the Red Death\".\nBurroughs's last filmed performance was in the music video for \"Last Night on Earth\" by Irish rock band U2, filmed in Kansas City, Missouri, directed by Richie Smyth and also featuring Sophie Dahl.\nPolitical beliefs.\nThe only newspaper columnist Burroughs admired was Westbrook Pegler, a right-wing opinion shaper for the William Randolph Hearst newspaper chain.170 Burroughs believed in frontier individualism, which he championed as \"our glorious frontier heritage on minding your own business.\" Burroughs came to equate liberalism with bureaucratic tyranny, viewing government authority as a collective of meddlesome forces legislating the curtailment of personal freedom. According to his biographer Ted Morgan, his philosophy for living one's life was to adhere to a laissez-faire path, one without encumbrances \u2013 in essence a credo shared with the capitalist business world.55 His abhorrence of the government did not prevent Burroughs from using its programs to his own advantage. In 1949 he enrolled in Mexico City College under the GI Bill, which paid for part of his tuition and books and provided him with a seventy-five-dollar-per-month stipend. He maintained, \"I always say, keep your snout in the public trough.\"173\nBurroughs was a gun enthusiast and owned several shotguns, a Colt .45 and a .38 Special. Sonic Youth vocalist Thurston Moore recounted meeting Burroughs: \"he had a number of \"Guns and Ammo\" magazines laying about, and he was only very interested in talking about shooting and knifing ... I asked him if he had a Beretta and he said: 'Ah, that's a ladies' pocket-purse gun. I like guns that shoot and knives that cut.'\" Hunter S. Thompson gave him a one-of-a-kind .454 caliber pistol. Burroughs was also a staunch supporter of the Second Amendment, being quoted as saying: \"I sure as hell wouldn't want to live in a society where the only people allowed guns are the police and the military.\"\nMagical beliefs.\nBurroughs had a longstanding preoccupation with magic and the occult, dating from his earliest childhood, and was insistent throughout his life that we live in a \"magical universe\". As he himself explained:\nIn the magical universe there are no coincidences and there are no accidents. Nothing happens unless someone wills it to happen. The dogma of science is that the will cannot possibly affect external forces, and I think that's just ridiculous. It's as bad as the church. My viewpoint is the exact contrary of the scientific viewpoint. I believe that if you run into somebody in the street it's for a reason. Among primitive people they say that if someone was bitten by a snake he was murdered. I believe that.\nOr, speaking in the 1970s:\nSince the word \"magic\" tends to cause confused thinking, I would like to say exactly what I mean by \"magic\" and the magical interpretation of so-called reality. The underlying assumption of magic is the assertion of \"will\" as the primary moving force in this universe \u2013 the deep conviction that nothing happens unless somebody or some being wills it to happen. To me this has always seemed self evident ... From the viewpoint of magic, no death, no illness, no misfortune, accident, war or riot is accidental. There are no accidents in the world of magic.\nHis was not an idle interest: Burroughs practiced magic in his everyday life, seeking out mystical visions through practices like scrying, taking measures to protect himself from possession, and attempting to lay curses on those who had crossed him. Burroughs spoke openly about his magical practices, and his engagement with the occult is attested by a number of interviews, as well as personal accounts from those who knew him.\nBiographer Ted Morgan has argued: \"As the single most important thing about Graham Greene was his viewpoint as a lapsed Catholic, the single most important thing about Burroughs was his belief in the magical universe. The same impulse that led him to put out curses was, as he saw it, the source of his writing ... To Burroughs behind everyday reality there was the reality of the spirit world, of psychic visitations, of curses, of possession and phantom beings.\"\nBurroughs insisted that his writing itself had a magical purpose. This was particularly true when it came to his use of the cut-up technique. Burroughs was adamant that the technique had a magical function, stating \"the cut ups are not for artistic purposes\". Burroughs used his cut-ups for \"political warfare, scientific research, personal therapy, magical divination, and conjuration\" \u2013 the essential idea being that the cut-ups allowed the user to \"break down the barriers that surround consciousness\". As Burroughs himself stated:\nI would say that my most interesting experience with the earlier techniques was the realization that when you make cut-ups you do not get simply random juxtapositions of words, that they do mean something, and often that these meanings refer to some future event. I've made many cut-ups and then later recognized that the cut-up referred to something that I read later in a newspaper or a book, or something that happened ... Perhaps events are pre-written and pre-recorded and when you cut word lines the future leaks out.\nIn the final decade of his life, Burroughs became heavily involved in the chaos magic movement. Burroughs's magical techniques \u2013 the cut-up, playback, etc. \u2013 had been incorporated into chaos magic by such practitioners as Phil Hine, Dave Lee and Genesis P-Orridge. P-Orridge in particular had known and studied under Burroughs and Brion Gysin for over a decade. This led to Burroughs contributing material to the book \"Between Spaces: Selected Rituals &amp; Essays From The Archives Of Templum Nigri Solis\" Through this connection, Burroughs came to personally know many of the leading lights of the chaos magic movement, including Hine, Lee, Peter J. Carroll, Ian Read and Ingrid Fischer, as well as Douglas Grant, head of the North American section of chaos magic group the Illuminates of Thanateros (IOT). Burroughs's involvement with the movement further deepened, as he contributed artwork and other material to chaos magic books, addressed an IOT gathering in Austria, and was eventually fully initiated into the Illuminates of Thanateros. As Burroughs's close friend James Grauerholz states: \"William was very serious about his studies in, and initiation into the IOT ... Our longtime friend, Douglas Grant, was a prime mover.\"\nDeath.\nBurroughs died August 2, 1997, at age 83, in Lawrence, Kansas, from complications of a heart attack he had suffered the previous day. He was interred in the family plot in Bellefontaine Cemetery in St.\u00a0Louis, Missouri, with a marker bearing his full name and the epitaph \"American Writer\". His grave lies to the right of the white granite obelisk of William Seward Burroughs\u00a0I (1857\u20131898).\nPosthumous works.\nSince 1997, several posthumous collections of Burroughs's work have been published. A few months after his death, a collection of writings spanning his entire career, \"Word Virus\", was published (according to the book's introduction, Burroughs himself approved its contents prior to his death). Aside from numerous previously released pieces, \"Word Virus\" also included what was promoted as one of the few surviving fragments of \"And the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks\", a novel by Burroughs and Kerouac. The complete Kerouac/Burroughs manuscript \"And the Hippos Were Boiled in Their Tanks\" was published for the first time in November 2008.\nA collection of journal entries written during the final months of Burroughs's life was published as the book \"Last Words\" in 2000. Publication of a memoir by Burroughs entitled \"Evil River\" by Viking Press has been delayed several times; after initially being announced for a 2005 release, online booksellers indicated a 2007 release, complete with an ISBN (), but it remains unpublished.\nNew enlarged or unexpurgated editions of numerous texts have been published in recent years as \"Restored Text\" or \"Redux\" editions all containing additional material and essays on the works or incorporating material edited out of previous versions. Beginning with Barry Miles and James Grauerholz's 2003 edition of \"Naked Lunch\", followed by Oliver Harris's reconstructions of three trilogies of writings. The first of these are the early writings: \"Junky:the definitive text of \"Junk\"\" (2003), \"Queer: 25th-Anniversary Edition\" (2010) and \"The Yage Letters Redux\" (2006). Following the publication of the latter in December 2007, Ohio State University Press released \"Everything Lost: The Latin American Journals of William S. Burroughs\" also edited by Harris, the book contains transcriptions of journal entries made by Burroughs during the time of composing \"Queer\" and \"The Yage Letters\", with cover art and review information. There followed \"restored text\" versions of some of Burroughs's best known novels \"The Soft Machine, The Ticket that Exploded\" and \"Nova Express\" (styled \"the Cut Up Trilogy\" officially here for the first time) from Penguin in 2014, and of Burroughs's more obscure collaborative poetic experiments of 1960 \"Minutes to Go: Redux\" and \"The Exterminator: Redux\" by Moloko Press in 2020. These books, originally pamphlets, are bulked out to three times their original size and the \"trilogy\" is complete with the completely new \"BATTLE INSTRUCTIONS\" an allied experimental collaboration, composited by Harris from unpublished drafts and recordings of the same period.\nLiterary style and periods.\nBurroughs's major works can be divided into four different periods. The dates refer to the time of writing, not publication, which in some cases was not until decades later:\nBurroughs also produced numerous essays and a large body of autobiographical material, including a book with a detailed account of his own dreams (\"My Education: A Book of Dreams\").\nReaction to critics and view on criticism.\nSeveral literary critics treated Burroughs's work harshly. For example, Anatole Broyard and Philip Toynbee wrote devastating reviews of some of his most important books. In a short essay entitled \"A Review of the Reviewers\", Burroughs answers his critics in this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Critics constantly complain that writers are lacking in standards, yet they themselves seem to have no standards other than personal prejudice for literary criticism. ... such standards do exist. Matthew Arnold set up three criteria for criticism: 1. What is the writer trying to do? 2. How well does he succeed in doing it? ... 3. Does the work exhibit \"high seriousness\"? That is, does it touch on basic issues of good and evil, life and death and the human condition. I would also apply a fourth criterion ... \"Write about what you know.\" More writers fail because they try to write about things they don't know than for any other reason.\u2014\u200a\nBurroughs clearly indicates here that he prefers to be evaluated against such criteria over being reviewed based on the reviewer's personal reactions to a certain book. Always a contradictory figure, Burroughs nevertheless criticized Anatole Broyard for reading authorial intent into his works where there is none, which sets him at odds both with New Criticism and the old school as represented by Matthew Arnold.\nPhotography.\nBurroughs used photography extensively throughout his career, both as a recording medium in planning his writings, and as a significant dimension of his own artistic practice, in which photographs and other images feature as significant elements in cut-ups. With Ian Sommerville, he experimented with photography's potential as a form of memory-device, photographing and rephotographing his own pictures in increasingly complex time-image arrangements.\nLegacy.\nBurroughs is frequently counted among the great writers of the 20th century. Norman Mailer described Burroughs as the \"only American novelist living today who may conceivably be possessed by genius\". Beyond the influence of his prose, Burroughs is also noted for his concepts and attitude. Prominent admirers of his work have included British critic and biographer Peter Ackroyd, the rock critic Lester Bangs, the philosopher Gilles Deleuze and the authors Michael Moorcock, J. G. Ballard, Angela Carter, Jean Genet, William Gibson, Alan Moore, Kathy Acker, and Ken Kesey. German writer Carl Weissner, who translated Burroughs for German readers, frequently wrote cut-up texts in a manner reminiscent of Burroughs.\nBurroughs continues to be named as an influence by contemporary writers of fiction. Both the New Wave and, especially, the cyberpunk schools of science fiction are indebted to him. Admirers from the late 1970s \u2013 early 1980s milieu of this subgenre include William Gibson and John Shirley. The British slipstream fiction magazine \"Interzone\" (launched in 1982) was named in tribute to his work. He is also cited as a major influence by musicians Roger Waters, David Bowie, Patti Smith, Genesis P-Orridge, Ian Curtis, Lou Reed, Laurie Anderson, Todd Tamanend Clark, John Zorn, Tom Waits, Gary Numan, and Kurt Cobain. A number of musical groups across a variety of genres use band names that are direct references to Burroughs' works, including Soft Machine, The Insect Trust, Steely Dan, two bands called Naked Lunch (one British and one Austrian), Interzone, Thin White Rope, Clem Snide, and Success Will Write Apocalypse Across the Sky.\nIra Silverberg commented on the writer's development in the film \"\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Usually, the most radical work tends to come from the upper classes, because they're trying so hard to shop so hard to get away from their roots. So he's a fascinating character uniquely American in that regard. I don't think that work could have existed had he not been breaking away from an incredibly patrician Midwestern background.\nDrugs, homosexuality, and death, common among Burroughs's themes, have been taken up by Dennis Cooper, of whom Burroughs said, \"Dennis Cooper, God help him, is a born writer\". Cooper, in return, wrote, in his essay 'King Junk', \"along with Jean Genet, John Rechy, and Ginsberg, [Burroughs] helped make homosexuality seem cool and highbrow, providing gay liberation with a delicious edge\". Splatterpunk writer Poppy Z. Brite has frequently referenced this aspect of Burroughs's work. Burroughs's writing continues to be referenced years after his death; for example, a November 2004 episode of the TV series \"\" included an evil character named Dr.\u00a0Benway (named for an amoral physician who appears in a number of Burroughs's works.) This is an echo of the hospital scene in the movie \"Repo Man,\" made during Burroughs's life-time, in which both Dr.\u00a0Benway and Mr.\u00a0Lee (a Burroughs pen name) are paged.\nBurroughs had an impact on twentieth-century esotericism and occultism as well, most notably through disciples like Peter Lamborn Wilson and Genesis P-Orridge. Burroughs is also cited by Robert Anton Wilson as the first person to notice the \"23 Enigma\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I first heard of the '23\u00a0Enigma' from William S. Burroughs, author of \"Naked Lunch\", \"Nova Express\", etc. According to Burroughs, he had known a certain Captain Clark, around 1960 in Tangier, who once bragged that he had been sailing 23\u00a0years without an accident. That very day, Clark's ship had an accident that killed him and everybody else aboard. Furthermore, while Burroughs was thinking about this crude example of the irony of the gods that evening, a bulletin on the radio announced the crash of an airliner in Florida, USA. The pilot was another Captain Clark and the flight was Flight\u00a023.\u2014\u200a\nSome research suggests that Burroughs is arguably the progenitor of the 2012 phenomenon, a belief of New Age Mayanism that an apocalyptic shift in human consciousness would occur at the end of the Mayan Long Count calendar in 2012. Although never directly focusing on the year 2012 himself, Burroughs had an influence on early 2012 proponents such as Terence McKenna and Jose Arg\u00fcelles, and as well had written about an apocalyptic shift of human consciousness at the end of the Long Count as early as 1960's \"The Exterminator\". \nBurroughs appears on the cover of The Beatles' 1967 album \"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band\", where he can be seen in the middle of the second row.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nInterviews"}
{"id": "33596", "revid": "18024122", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33596", "title": "Windsor, Ontario", "text": "City in Ontario, Canada\nWindsor ( ) is a city in southwestern Ontario, Canada. It is situated on the south bank of the Detroit River directly across from the U.S city of Detroit, Michigan. Geographically located within but administratively independent of Essex County, it is the southernmost city in Canada and marks the southwestern end of the Quebec City\u2013Windsor Corridor. The city's population was 229,660 at the 2021 census, making it the third-most populated city in Southwestern Ontario, after London and Kitchener. This represents a 5.7 percent increase from Windsor's 2016 population census of 217,188. \nThe Detroit\u2013Windsor urban area is North America's most populous trans-border conurbation. Linking the Great Lakes Megalopolis, the Ambassador Bridge border crossing is the busiest commercial crossing on the Canada\u2013United States border, carrying about one-quarter of the two countries' trade volume.\nWindsor is a major contributor to Canada's automotive industry and is culturally diverse. Known as the \"Automotive Capital of Canada\", Windsor's industrial and manufacturing heritage is responsible for how the city has developed through the years.\nHistory.\nEarly settlement.\nAt the time when the first Europeans arrived in the 17th century, the Detroit River region was inhabited by the Huron, Odawa, Potawatomi and Iroquois First Nations. The land along the Detroit River was part of the Three Fires Confederacy between the Ojibwe, Potawatomi, and Odawa and was referred to as \"Wawiiatanong\" or \"Wawiiatanong Ziibi\" meaning \"where the river bends\" in Anishinaabemowin.\nLater settlement.\nA French agricultural settlement was established at the site of Windsor in 1749. It is the oldest continually inhabited European-founded settlement in Canada west of Montreal. The area was first named \"la Petite C\u00f4te\" (\"Little Coast\"\u2014as opposed to the longer coastline on the Detroit side of the river). Later it was called \"La C\u00f4te de Mis\u00e8re\" (\"Poverty Coast\") because of the sandy soils near LaSalle.\nWindsor's French-Canadian heritage is reflected in French street names such as Ouellette, Drouillard, Pelissier, Fran\u00e7ois, Pierre, Langlois, Marentette, and Lauzon. The current street system (a grid with elongated blocks) reflects the \"Canadien\" method of agricultural land division, where the farms were long and narrow, fronting along the river. Today, the name of the north\u2013south street often shows the name of the family that farmed the land where the street is today. The street system of outlying areas is consistent with the British system for granting land concessions. There is a sizeable French-speaking minority in Windsor and the surrounding area, particularly in the Lakeshore, Tecumseh and LaSalle areas.\nIn 1797, after the American Revolution, the settlement of \"Sandwich\" was established. It was later renamed Windsor, after the town in Berkshire, England. The Sandwich neighbourhood on Windsor's west side is home to some of the city's oldest buildings, including Mackenzie Hall, originally built as the Essex County Courthouse in 1855. Today, this building is a community centre. The city's oldest building is the Duff-Baby House, built in 1792. It is owned by Ontario Heritage Trust and houses government offices.\n19th century.\nThe Fran\u00e7ois Baby House in downtown Windsor was built in 1812 and houses Windsor's Community Museum dedicated to local history.\nWindsor was the site of a battle during the 1838 Upper Canada Rebellion. It was attacked by a band of 400 Americans and rebels from Detroit who burned a steamboat and two or three houses before being routed by the local militia. Later that year, Windsor also served as a theatre for the Patriot War.\nIn 1846, Windsor had a population of about 300. Two steamboats offered service to Detroit. The barracks were still in operation. There were various tradespeople and other occupations, including bank agencies and post offices. The city's access to the Canada\u2013US border made it an essential stop for refugee enslaved people gaining freedom in the northern United States along the Underground Railroad. Many went across the Detroit River to Windsor to escape pursuit by slave catchers. There were estimated to be 20,000 to 30,000 African-American refugees who settled in Canada, with many settling in Essex County, Ontario.\nWindsor was incorporated as a village in 1854 (the same year the village was connected to the rest of Canada by the Grand Trunk Railway/Canadian National Railway), then became a town in 1858, and gained city status in 1892.\nThe Windsor Police Service was established on July 1, 1867.\nA fire consumed much of Windsor's downtown core on October 12, 1871, destroying over 100 buildings.\nThe \"Windsor Star\" Centennial Edition in 1992 covered the city's past, its success as a railway centre, and its contributions to World War I and World War II fighting efforts. It also recalled the naming controversy in 1892 when Windsor aimed to become a city. The most popular names listed in the naming controversy were \"South Detroit\", \"The Ferry\" (from the ferries that linked Windsor to Detroit), \"Windsor\", and Richmond (the runner-up in popularity). \"Windsor\" was chosen to promote the heritage of new English settlers in the city and to recognize Windsor Castle in Berkshire, England. However, \"Richmond\" was a popular name used until World War II, mainly by the local post office.\n20th century.\nSandwich, Ford City and Walkerville were separate legal entities (towns) until 1935. They are now historic neighbourhoods of Windsor. Ford City was incorporated as a village in 1912; it became a town in 1915 and a city in 1929. Walkerville was incorporated as a town in 1890. Sandwich was established in 1817 as a town with no municipal status. It was incorporated as a town in 1858 (the same year as neighbouring Windsor).\nWindsor annexed these three towns in 1935. The nearby villages of Ojibway and Riverside were incorporated in 1913 and 1921, respectively. Both were annexed by Windsor in 1966. During the 1920s, alcohol prohibition was enforced in Michigan while alcohol was legal in Ontario. Rum-running in Windsor was a common practice then.\nOn October 25, 1960, a massive gas explosion destroyed the building housing the Metropolitan Store on Ouellette Avenue. Ten people were killed, and at least one hundred were injured. The \"Windsor Star\" commemorated the 45th anniversary of the event on October 25, 2005.\nClimate.\nWindsor has a humid continental climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Dfa\") which closely borders a humid subtropical climate (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfa\") using the isotherm for the Riverside weather station due to a January mean temperature being right about that temperature, with four distinct seasons. Among cities in Ontario, Windsor has the warmest climate. The mean annual temperature is at the Airport, Downtown, among the warmest in Canada primarily due to its hot summers. Some locations in coastal and lower mainland British Columbia have a slightly higher mean annual temperature due to milder winter conditions there. The coldest temperature ever recorded in Windsor was on January 29, 1873, and the warmest was on June 25, 1988.\nWinters in Windsor are cold. The January mean temperature averages Airport, Downtown. Occasional bitter cold outbreaks do occur, often accompanied by wind chills exacerbating the feel to exposed skin, these tend to be short-lived. The city occasionally sees lake-effect snow that originates from distant Lake Michigan. Snow cover is intermittent throughout the winter; on average, there are 46 days each year with at least some measurable snow falling. There are typically three to five major snowfalls each winter.\nSummers are very warm to hot and humid, with a July mean temperature of Airport, Downtown (with the highest climatological Summer mean temperature average in Canada). \nThe humidex (combined feel of temperature and humidity) reaches or higher on over 70 days in an average summer; the highest recorded humidex in Ontario of , occurred on June 20, 1953 in Windsor. Thunderstorms are common during summer and occur on average 32 days per year, some of them severe with high winds, heavy rainfall, flooding, intense lightning, hail and less often, tornadic activity Windsor has the highest number of days per year with lightning, haze, and daily maximum humidex over of cities in Canada. Windsor has Canada's warmest climatological Fall season, with the highest mean temperatures for September, October and November. Precipitation is generally well-distributed throughout the year, on average driest in February, wettest in July. There are 2,261 sunshine average sunshine hours per year, or 52% of possible.\nFlooding and other emergencies.\nWindsor experienced historic flooding in 2016, 2017 and 2019. In 2016, the mayor of Windsor, Drew Dilkens, declared a state of emergency because of the disastrous flooding that occurred. In spring of 2019 Windsor applied for disaster mitigation funding following widespread flooding.\nA previous state of emergency in Windsor was called in 2013 when a fire broke out at a plastic recycling warehouse. This state of emergency was called due to poor air quality caused by the fire.\nIn 2017, Windsor was noted on Environment Canada's top 10 list of weather events. In late August 2017, Windsor faced a storm that left of rain in 32 hours.\nTornadoes.\nAs the Canadian city with the highest number of days that experience severe thunderstorms and lightning, Windsor has historically been subject to tornadoes and severe weather. Notably, Windsor is located in the middle of \"Tornado Alley\". The strongest and deadliest tornado to touch down in Windsor was an F4 in 1946. Windsor was the only Canadian city to experience a tornado during the 1974 Super Outbreak, an F3 which killed nine people when it destroyed the Windsor Curling Club. The city was grazed by the 1997 Southeast Michigan tornado outbreak, with one tornado (an F1) forming east of the city. Tornadoes have been recorded crossing the Detroit River (in 1946 and 1997), and waterspouts are regularly seen over Lake St. Clair and Lake Erie, especially in autumn.\nOn April 25, 2009, an F0 tornado briefly touched down in the eastern part of the city, causing minor damage to nearby buildings, most notably a CUPE union hall.\nTwo tornadoes (an F1 and an F2) touched down in the evening of August 24, 2016, causing damage in parts of Windsor as well as LaSalle.\nCityscape.\nOuellette Avenue is the historic main commercial street in downtown Windsor. It runs north\u2013south, perpendicular to the Detroit River, and divides the city into east and west sections. Roads that cross Ouellette Avenue include the directional components East and West after their names. Address numbers on east\u2013west roads in Windsor increase by 100 for each block travelled away from Ouellette Avenue and address numbers on north\u2013south roads increase by 100 for each block travelled away from the Detroit River. In areas where the river curves, some numbers on north\u2013south roads are skipped. For consistency across the city, all address numbers on north\u2013south roads reset at either 600 for streets west of Walker Road or 800 for those to the east, where the road crosses Wyandotte Street (which roughly parallels the Detroit River).\nWindsor's Department of Parks and Recreation maintains of green space, 180 parks, of trails, of sidewalks, 60 parking lots, vacant lands, natural areas and forest cover within the city of Windsor. The largest park is Mic Mac Park, which can accommodate many activities, including baseball, soccer, biking, and sledding. Windsor has numerous bike trails, the largest being the Ganatchio Trail on the city's far east side. In recent years, the city council has pushed for adding bicycle lanes on city streets to provide links throughout the existing trail network.\nThe Windsor trail network is linked to the LaSalle Trail in the west end and is to eventually be connected to the Chrysler Canada Greenway (part of the Trans Canada Trail). The current greenway is a former railway corridor converted into a multi-use recreational trail, underground utility corridor and natural green space. It begins south of Oldcastle and continues south through McGregor, Harrow, Kingsville, and Ruthven. The Greenway is a fine trail for hiking, biking, running, birding, cross-country skiing and, in some areas, horseback riding. It connects natural areas, rich agricultural lands, historically and architecturally significant structures, and award-winning wineries. A separate landscaped trail traverses the riverfront between downtown and the Ambassador Bridge. Part of this trail winds through Windsor Sculpture Park, which displays various modern and post-modern sculptures. Families of elephants (see picture), penguins, horses, and many other themed sculptures are found in the park. Some other popular exhibits include the Chicken and Egg, Consophia, and Eve's Apple.\nEconomy.\nWindsor's economy is primarily based on manufacturing, tourism, education, and government services.\nThe city is one of Canada's major automobile manufacturing centres and is home to the headquarters of Stellantis Canada. Automotive facilities include the Stellantis Canada minivan assembly plant, two Ford Motor Company engine plants, and several tool and die and automotive parts manufacturers. As of 2025, automotive manufacturing industries accounted for 7.3% of total jobs in the Windsor \u2013 Sarnia Corridor. The city's leaders warned the public of potential \"catastrophic\" repercussions to the economy, due to its reliance on the auto sector. \nWindsor has a well-established tourism industry. Caesars Windsor, one of the largest casinos in Canada, ranks as one of the largest local employers. It has been a significant draw for U.S. visitors since opening in 1994 (as Casino Windsor). Further, the Quebec City \u2013 Windsor Corridor contains 18\u00a0million people, with 51% of the Canadian population and three out of the five largest metropolitan areas, according to the 2011 Census.\nThe city has an extensive riverfront parks system and fine restaurants, such as those on Erie Street in Windsor's Little Italy, \"Via Italia\". This is another popular tourist destination. The Lake Erie North Shore Wine Region in Essex County has enhanced tourism in the region.\nBoth the University of Windsor and St. Clair College are significant local employers and have enjoyed substantial growth and expansion in recent years. A full-program satellite medical school of the University of Western Ontario at the University of Windsor opened in 2008. In 2013, the university completed construction of a $112 million (~$ in 2024) facility for its Faculty of Engineering.\nWindsor is the headquarters of Hiram Walker &amp; Sons Limited, now owned by Pernod Ricard. Hiram Walker founded its historic distillery in 1858 in what was then Walkerville, Ontario.\nThe diversifying economy is also represented by companies involved in pharmaceuticals, alternative energy, insurance, internet, and software. Windsor is also home to the Windsor Salt Mine and the Great Lakes Regional office of the International Joint Commission.\nTechnology.\nThere are a few established tech companies that have been in the region for years. Among them are Cypher Systems Group, a computer-based hardware wholesaler and software developer; AlphaKor Group, a technology company that provides IT services, custom software and mobile apps; and Red Piston, a media solutions company. There are also a few successful startups in area, including Sirved, a tech company that is building a restaurant discovery app; and Hackforge, a tech company that has built an app to compare hospital drive times, and has hosted a variety of tech-focused community events, such as a Wikipedia Hackathon.\nThe non-profit WEtech Alliance provides startups and local entrepreneurs with resources to get new technology companies started in the city.\nIn 2019, Dan Gilbert and Quicken Loans bought a building in Windsor with a plan to restore it. Once completed, Quicken Loans will employ 50\u2013100 people, mainly in the technology sector.\u00a0Many are hoping that this is a catalyst for more companies to establish tech business in Windsor.\nLG and Stellantis have broken ground on a new alternative energy plant called Nextstar Energy.\nLargest private-sector employers.\nSource:\nPoverty.\nDue to a strong reliance on the manufacturing sector, Windsor has experienced high levels of poverty and unemployment\u2014the highest in Southwestern Ontario. According to a study by an advocacy organization, Windsor West (one of Windsor's electoral districts) ranks 13th highest in poverty rates amongst the 338 federal ridings of Canada and 33% of its children live below the poverty line. Another researcher reported that Wards 2 (Sandwich/University District/West End) and 3 (City Centre) register some of the highest poverty rates at 44.65% and 44.94%, while wards 4 (Walkerville) and 8 (East Windsor) also register high poverty rates at 28.78% and 28.74% respectively.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Windsor had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nAt the census metropolitan area (CMA) level in the 2021 census, the Windsor CMA had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nWindsor attracts many immigrants from around the world. In 2016, in the city, 27.7% of the population was foreign-born, while in the metropolitan area, 22.9% was foreign-born; this is the fourth-highest proportion for a Canadian metropolitan area. Visible minorities makeup 25.7% of the population, making it the most diverse city in Ontario outside of the Greater Toronto Area.\nIn 2016, Windsor's population was 48.8% male and 51.2% female. Children under 15 accounted for 16.3% of the city population compared to 16.6% for Canada. Persons of age 65 years and over accounted for 17.6% of the population in Windsor compared to 16.9% for Canada. The median age in Windsor is 41.4 years compared to 41.2 years for Canada.\nLanguage.\nThe population of Windsor is primarily English-speaking, with 88.5% of residents knowing only English and 8.8% of residents knowing both English and French.\nCrime.\nWindsor has a low violent crime rate and one of the lowest murder rates in Canada. In 2017, the Crime Severity Index for the Windsor Metropolitan Area was 71.7, compared to the Canadian national rate of 72.9. Of the five safest communities in Canada, four of them are in the Windsor Metropolitan Area (Amherstburg, LaSalle, Tecumseh, and Lakeshore). Windsor has made national headlines for its lack of homicides. There were no homicides in the city for a 27-month period ending in November 2011. Since 2016, reports of sexual assaults within Windsor, have increased by 20%, reports of robbery by 23%, reports of breaking and entering by 3% and reports of motor vehicle theft by 13%.\nGovernment.\nWindsor's history as an industrial centre has given the New Democratic Party (NDP) a dedicated voting base. During federal and provincial elections, Windsorites have maintained their local representation in the respective legislatures. The Liberal Party of Canada also has a solid electoral history in the city. Canada's 21st Prime Minister, Paul Martin, was born in Windsor. His father, Paul Martin Sr., a federal cabinet minister in several portfolios through the Liberal governments of the 1940s, 1950s and 1960s, was first elected to the House of Commons from a Windsor riding in the 1930s. Martin Sr. practised law in the city and the federal building on Ouellette Avenue is named after him. Eugene Whelan was a Liberal cabinet minister and one-time Liberal party leadership candidate elected from Essex County from the 1960s to the early 1980s, as well as Mark MacGuigan of Windsor-Walkerville riding, who also served as External Affairs, and later Justice minister in the early 1980s. Deputy Prime Minister Herb Gray represented Windsor as an MP from 1962 through 2003, winning thirteen consecutive elections, making him the longest-serving MP in Canadian history. A bust of Herb Gray is at the foot of Ouellette Avenue near Dieppe Park in downtown Windsor. The Rt. Hon. Herb Gray Parkway is named after him.\nCurrent representation.\nThe current mayor of Windsor is Drew Dilkens. Windsor is governed under the Council-Manager form of local government and includes the elected City Council, mayor, and an appointed Chief Administrative Officer. The city is divided into ten wards, with one councillor representing each ward. The mayor serves as the city's chief executive officer and functions as its ceremonial head. In August 2009, Windsor City Council approved a 10-ward electoral system for the 2010 civic election, with one councillor elected in each ward. Previously, there were two councillors elected in each ward, and there were only five wards. The plan doubled the number of wards, which had been unchanged for 30 years.\nAt the provincial and federal levels, Windsor is divided into two ridings: Windsor West and Windsor\u2014Tecumseh. The city is currently represented in the Legislative Assembly of Ontario by NDP MPP Lisa Gretzky (Windsor West) and Progressive Conservative MPP Andrew Dowie (Windsor\u2014Tecumseh). In federal Parliament, Windsor is currently represented by Conservative Party of Canada MP Harb Gill (Windsor West) and Conservative Party of Canada MP Kathy Borrelli (Windsor\u2014Tecumseh).\nCulture and tourism.\nWindsor tourist attractions include the Windsor International Film Festival, Caesars Windsor, a lively downtown club scene, Little Italy, the Windsor Symphony Orchestra, the Art Windsor-Essex gallery, the Odette Sculpture Park, Windsor Light Music Theatre, Adventure Bay Water Park, and Ojibway Park. As a border settlement, Windsor was a site of conflict during the War of 1812, a significant entry point into Canada for refugees from slavery via the Underground Railroad and a significant source of liquor during American Prohibition. Two sites in Windsor have been designated as National Historic Sites of Canada: the Sandwich First Baptist Church, a church established by Underground Railroad refugees, and Fran\u00e7ois B\u00e2by House, an important War of 1812 site now serving as Windsor's Community Museum.\nThe Capitol Theatre in downtown Windsor had been a venue for feature films, plays and other attractions since 1929 until it declared bankruptcy in 2007. The theatre is now used for live orchestral concerts, lectures and dance performances. The Tea Party is a progressive rock band which has been based in Windsor since its foundation in 1990.\nWindsor's nickname is the \"Rose City\" or the \"City of Roses\". The Liebeszauber (Love's Magic) rose has been designated as the City of Windsor Rose. Windsor is noted for the several large parks and gardens found on its waterfront. The Queen Elizabeth II Sunken Garden is at Jackson Park in the central part of the city. A World War II era Avro Lancaster was displayed on a stand in the middle of Jackson Park for over four decades but has since been removed for restoration. This park is now home to a mounted Spitfire replica and a Hurricane replica.\nOf the parks lining Windsor's waterfront, the largest is the stretch overlooking the Detroit skyline. It extends from the Ambassador Bridge to the Hiram Walker Distillery. The western portion of the park contains the Windsor Sculpture Park, which features over 30 large-scale contemporary sculptures for public viewing, along with the Canadian Vietnam Veterans Memorial. The central portion contains Dieppe Gardens, Civic Terrace and Festival Plaza, and the eastern portion is home to the Bert Weeks Memorial Gardens. Further east along the waterfront is Coventry Gardens, across from Detroit's Belle Isle. The focal point of this park is the Charles Brooks Memorial Peace Fountain, which floats in the Detroit River and has a coloured light display at night. The fountain is the largest of its kind in North America and symbolizes the peaceful relationship between Canada and the United States.\nEach summer, Windsor co-hosts the two-week-long Windsor-Detroit International Freedom Festival, which culminates in a gigantic fireworks display that celebrates Canada Day and the Fourth of July. The fireworks display is among the world's largest and takes place on the final Monday in June over the Detroit River between the two downtowns. Each year, the event attracts over a million spectators to both sides of the riverfront. Windsor and Detroit also jointly cohost the annual Detroit Windsor International Film Festival. At the same time, festivals exclusive to Windsor include the Multicultural Council of Windsor and Essex County Carrousel by the River and Carrousel Around the City, Bluesfest International Windsor and Windsor Pride.\nFollowing the 2008 Red Bull Air Race World Championship in Detroit, Michigan, Windsor successfully put in a bid to become the first Canadian city to host the event. Red Bull touted the 2009 race in Windsor as one of the most exciting in the seven-year history of the Red Bull Air Race World Championship, and on January 22, 2010, it was announced Windsor would be a host city for the 2010 and 2011 circuits, along with a select group of major international cities that includes Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, Perth, Australia and New York City. The event attracted 200,000 fans to the Detroit River waterfront in 2009. The Red Bull air races were cancelled worldwide for 2011.\nDubbed the Great Canadian Flag Project, Windsor erected a flagpole to fly a 60 feet by by nine metres) Canadian flag in celebration of the 150th anniversary of Canada. Spotlights illuminate the flag at night, with a smaller flag to fly during periods of strong winds. As of January 14, 2017, $300,000 had been raised for the project, including $150,000 from the federal government.\nWindsor has often been the place where many metro Detroiters find what is forbidden in the United States. With a minimum legal drinking age of 21 in Michigan and 19 in Ontario, a significant number of 19 and 20-year-old Americans frequent Windsor's bars. The city also became a gambling attraction with Caesars Windsor's opening in 1994, five years before casinos opened in Detroit. One can also purchase Cuban cigars, Cuban rum, less-costly prescription drugs, absinthe, certain imported foods, and other items not available in the United States. In addition, some same-sex couples from the United States chose to marry in Windsor prior to 2015, when same-sex marriage was legalized in all 50 U.S. states.\nWindsor is also known for its own style of pizza, characterized by its thin crust using cornmeal and flour, high-fat cheese, shredded pepperoni, and canned mushrooms.\nMedia.\nWindsor and its surrounding area have been served by the \"Windsor Star\" since 1888. The regional newspaper is the only daily in Windsor and Essex County and has attracted the highest readership per capita in its circulation range of any Canadian metropolitan newspaper.\nThe \"Windsor Independent\" is an alternative newspaper published once a month. It features reviews, news, politics, arts, culture, and entertainment.\nWindsor is considered part of the Detroit television and radio market for territorial rights. Due to this fact and its proximity to Toledo and Cleveland, radio and television broadcasters in Windsor are accorded a special status by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission, exempting them from many of the Canadian content (\"CanCon\") requirements most broadcasters in Canada are required to follow. The CanCon requirements are sometimes blamed in part for the decline in popularity of Windsor radio station CKLW, a 50,000-watt AM radio station that in the late 1960s (prior to the advent of CanCon) had been the top-rated radio station not only in Detroit and Windsor but also in Toledo and Cleveland.\nWindsor has also been exempt from concentration of media ownership rules. Except for Blackburn Radio-owned stations CJWF-FM and a rebroadcaster of Chatham's CKUE-FM in Windsor, all other current commercial media outlets are owned by a single company, Bell Media.\nThe city is home to one campus radio station, CJAM-FM, situated on the University of Windsor campus.\nWindsor is also served by a few informational news websites including windsoriteDOTca News, a local news site; Radio Betna, a Middle Eastern community-based web radio station; and YQG Rocks, which is one of the only media to review entertainment shows since the retirement of Windsor Star critic Ted Shaw.\n\"The Windsor Local\" is a local site and mobile app.\nEducation.\nWindsor youth attend schools in the Greater Essex County District School Board (prior to 1998, the Windsor Board of Education), the Windsor-Essex Catholic District School Board, Conseil scolaire catholique Providence and Conseil scolaire Viamonde. Independent faith-based schools include Maranatha Christian Academy (JK-12), Canadian Christian Academy (JK-12), Acad\u00e9mie Ste. C\u00e9cile International School (JK-12, including International Baccalaureate), First Lutheran Christian Academy (JK-8), and Windsor Adventist Elementary School. The non-denominational Lakeview Montessori School is a private school as well. The Canada South Science City serves the Elementary School Curriculum's Science and Technology component.\nWindsor is home to four International Baccalaureate recognized schools: Assumption College School (a Catholic high school), Acad\u00e9mie Ste. C\u00e9cile International School (a private school), \u00c9cole secondaire E.J. Lajeunesse (a francophone Catholic high school), and Riverside Secondary School (a public high school). Kennedy Collegiate Institute and Vincent Massey Secondary School are renowned in Southern Ontario for their notable accomplishments nationally in mathematics and computer science. Kennedy was built in 1929 in the central part of the city next to Jackson Park. It is sometimes called the castle because of the unique architecture of its gymnasium at the rear of the school.\nPost-secondary institutions.\nThe University of Windsor is Canada's southernmost university. It is a research-oriented, comprehensive university with a student population of 16,000 full-time graduate and undergraduate students. Now entering its most ambitious capital expansion since its founding in 1963, the University of Windsor recently opened the Anthony P. Toldo Health Education &amp; Learning Centre, which houses the Schulich School of Medicine &amp; Dentistry. With the help of $40 million in Ontario government funding, the university also has recently finished construction of a , $112-million Centre for Engineering Innovation; a structure that establishes revolutionary design standards across Canada and beyond. The university is just east of the Ambassador Bridge, south of the Detroit River. \nIn Spring 2011, it was announced the University of Windsor would move its music and visual art programs downtown to be housed in the historic Armouries building and former Greyhound Bus Depot at Freedom Way and University Ave E. The move intended to bring an additional 500 students into the downtown core daily. The university also brought its School of Social Work to the old Windsor Star buildings on Ferry and Pitt Streets, bringing an additional 1,000 students into the downtown.\nWindsor is also home to St. Clair College that has a student population of 6,500 full-time students. Its main campus is in Windsor, and it also has campuses in Chatham and Wallaceburg. In 2007, St. Clair College opened a satellite campus in downtown Windsor in the former Cleary International Centre. In April 2010, St. Clair College added to its downtown Windsor presence with the addition of its MediaPlex school. Together, they bring over one thousand students into the downtown core daily. The college also opened the TD Student Centre on the corner of Victoria Avenue and University Avenue in 2012. \nMore recently, Coll\u00e8ge Bor\u00e9al opened an access centre and small campus to their Ouellette Avenue location. This small campus offers access to many Coll\u00e8ge Bor\u00e9al programmes as well as immigration and integration assistance for francophones in the area. Coll\u00e8ge Bor\u00e9al is Windsor's only francophone post-secondary institution, providing service for a small but notable population of Franco-Ontarians within the Windsor-Tecumseh-Belle River area.\nFrom 1995 to 2001, the city was home to a satellite campus of the defunct francophone Coll\u00e8ge des Grands-Lacs.\nPublic libraries.\nThe Windsor Public Library offers education, entertainment, and community history materials, programs, and services. The main branch coordinates a literacy program for adults who need functional literacy upgrading. The local historical archives are here.\nHealth systems.\nThere are two hospitals in Windsor: H\u00f4tel-Dieu Grace Healthcare, formally H\u00f4tel-Dieu Grace Hospital, and Windsor Regional Hospital. H\u00f4tel-Dieu Grace Healthcare is the result of an amalgamation of Grace Hospital and H\u00f4tel-Dieu in 1994. The merger occurred due to the Government of Ontario's province-wide policy to consolidate resources into Local Health Integrated Networks, or LHINs. This was to eliminate duplicate services and allocate resources more efficiently across the region. The policy resulted in the closure of many community-based and historically important hospitals across the province. At this time, Hotel-Dieu Hospital does not do surgeries, nor does it have emergency room services. Its focus has moved away from traditional hospital services and provides more supportive healthcare.\nWindsor Regional Hospital has formal and informal agreements with Detroit-area hospitals. For instance, pediatric neurosurgery is no longer performed in Windsor. Leamington District Memorial Hospital in Leamington, Ontario serves much of Essex County and, along with the Windsor institutions, shares resources with the Chatham-Kent Health Alliance.\nOver eighteen thousand Windsor residents are employed in the health care profession.\nTransportation.\nWindsor is the western terminus of both Highway 401, Canada's busiest highway, and Via Rail's Quebec City\u2013Windsor Corridor. Windsor's Via station is the nation's sixth-busiest in terms of passenger volumes.\nWindsor has a municipal highway, E.C. Row Expressway, running east\u2013west through the city. Consisting of of highway and nine interchanges, the expressway is the fastest way for commuters to travel across the city. E.C. Row Expressway is mentioned in the Guinness Book of Records as the shortest freeway, which took the longest time to build, as it took more than 15 years to complete. The expressway stretches from Windsor's far west end at Ojibway Parkway east to Banwell Road on the city's border with Tecumseh.\nThe majority of development in the city of Windsor and the neighbouring town of Tecumseh stretches along the water instead of inland. As a result, there is a lack of major east\u2013west arteries compared to north\u2013south arteries. Only Riverside Drive, Wyandotte Street, Tecumseh Road, County Road 42/Cabana Road and the E.C. Row Expressway serve the almost from the west end of Windsor eastward. All of these roads, especially the E.C. Row Expressway, are burdened with east\u2013west commuter traffic from the development in the city's east end and suburbs further east.\nThere are eight north\u2013south roads interchanging with the expressway: Huron Church Road, Dominion Boulevard, Dougall Avenue, Howard Avenue, Walker Road, Central Avenue, Jefferson Boulevard, and Lauzon Parkway. Traffic backups on some of these north\u2013south roads at the E.C. Row Expressway are common, mainly at Dominion, Dougall, Howard, and Walker as the land south of the expressway and east of Walker is occupied by Windsor airport and there has been little development.\nWindsor's many rail crossings intersect with these north\u2013south thoroughfares. In October 2008, the Province of Ontario completed a grade separation at Walker Road and the CP Rail line. Another grade separation was completed in November 2010 at Howard Avenue and the CP Rail line. In both cases, the road travels under the rail line, and both have below-grade intersections with an east\u2013west street. These were planned as parts of the \"Let's Get Windsor-Essex Moving\" project funded by the Province of Ontario to improve local transportation infrastructure.\nWindsor is connected to Essex and Leamington via Highway 3 and is well connected to the other municipalities and communities throughout Essex County via the county road network. Nearly 20,000 vehicles travel on Highway 3 in Essex County daily. It is the main route to work for many Leamington, Kingsville and Essex residents.\nWindsor is linked to the United States by the Ambassador Bridge, the Detroit\u2013Windsor Tunnel, a Canadian Pacific Railway tunnel, and the Detroit\u2013Windsor Truck Ferry. In terms of goods volume, the Ambassador Bridge is North America's No. 1 international border crossing: 27% of all trade between Canada and the United States crosses at the Ambassador Bridge.\nWindsor has a bike trail network including the (Riverfront Bike Trail, Ganatchio Bike Trail, and Little River Extension). They have become a blend of parkland and transportation, as people use the trails to commute to work or across downtown on their bicycles.\nAirports.\nThe city is served by Windsor International Airport, a regional airport with scheduled commuter air service by Air Canada Express, Porter Airlines, WestJet, and Sunwing, along with heavy general aviation traffic. The majority of destinations are within Ontario except seasonal routes to Calgary, Alberta and a variety of Caribbean destinations.\nThe Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport is approximately across the border in Romulus, Michigan and is the airport of choice for many Windsor residents as it has regular flights to a larger variety of destinations than Windsor Airport.\nShuttle buses and cars are within driving distance to larger airports like London International Airport, John C. Munro Hamilton International Airport and to Canada's busiest airport and international hub Toronto Pearson International Airport.\nWaterways.\nThe Port of Windsor, which covers of shoreline along the Detroit River, is part of the Great Lakes/Saint Lawrence Seaway System. Accessible to both Lake freighters and ocean-going vessels, the port is the third largest Canadian Great Lakes port in terms of shipments behind only Hamilton and Thunder Bay. Cargos include a wide range of products such as aggregates, salt, grain, fluorspar, lumber, steel, petroleum, vehicles and heavy lift equipment.\nTransit.\nBus.\nA public transport bus service is provided by Transit Windsor. The Windsor International Transit Terminal, opened in 2007, is Transit Windsor's hub; intercity buses from Toronto, London, and Detroit also stop here.\nRail.\nWindsor has a long history with rail travel in both passenger service and freight due to the Michigan Central Railway Tunnel. Intercity passenger railway service is provided by Via Rail throughout the region via the Windsor Railway Station. The region also used to have a second station, the Windsor Michigan Central Railroad Depot \u2013 before it was destroyed in a fire \u2013 which historically served the Canada Southern Railway, New York Central Railroad and Amtrak.\nBridges to Detroit.\nA major and controversial issue is the amount of traffic to and from the Ambassador Bridge. The number of vehicles crossing the bridge has doubled since 1990. However, the total volume of traffic has been declining since the September 11 attacks.\nAccess to the Ambassador Bridge is via two municipal roads: Huron Church Road and Wyandotte Street. A large portion of the traffic consists of tractor-trailers. There have been, at times, a wall of trucks up to long on Huron Church Road. This road cuts through the city's west end, and the trucks are the source of many complaints about noise, pollution and pedestrian hazards. In 2003, a single mother of three, Jacqueline Bouchard, was struck and killed by a truck at the corner of Huron Church and Girardot Avenue in front of Assumption College Catholic High School, a tragedy argued to be due to a lack of practical safety precautions.\nWindsor City Council hired traffic consultant Sam Schwartz to produce a proposal for a solution to this traffic problem. City councillors overwhelmingly endorsed the proposal and it was presented to the federal government as a \"Made in Windsor\" solution. Not all of the surrounding residents supported the plan. One problem with the plan is the proposed road would cut through protected green spaces such as the Ojibway Prairie Reserve.\nIn 2005, the Detroit River International Crossing (DRIC\u00a0\u2014 a joint Canadian-American committee studying the options for expanding the border crossing) announced its preferred option was to extend Highway 401 directly westward to a new bridge spanning the Detroit River and interchange with Interstate 75 somewhere between the existing Ambassador Bridge span and Wyandotte.\nOn April 9, 2010, the City of Windsor, along with local cabinet ministers Dwight Duncan and Sandra Pupatello of the Province of Ontario, announced a final decision had been made in the plans to construct the Windsor-Essex Parkway, the new Highway 401 extension leading to a future crossing. The announcement indicated the project would be the most expensive road ever built in Canada on a per kilometre basis. It included commitments to enhance green space design through the use of berming, landscaping, and other aesthetic treatments. As part of negotiations with the City of Windsor (who threatened legal action in pursuit of more tunnelling and green space of the route), the province agreed to additional funding to infrastructure projects in Windsor-Essex; this includes money for the improvement of the plaza of the Canadian side of the Windsor-Detroit tunnel, the widening and other improvements of Walker Rd between Division Rd and E.C. Row Expressway, and the environmental assessment and preliminary design of a future extension of Lauzon Parkway to Highway 401.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nWindsor has several sister cities:\nSports.\nWindsor's sports fans tend to support the major professional sports league teams in either Detroit or Toronto. Still, the city itself is home to one professional team, the Windsor Express of the Basketball Super League. The Express was an expansion team of the National Basketball League (NBL) that began play in the 2012\u201313 season, with home games played at the WFCU Centre. On April 17, 2014, the Express won their first championship of NBL-Canada against the Island Storm in the 7th game of their final series, 121\u2013106. Windsor is also home for the following youth, minor league and post-secondary teams\nWindsor is also home to youth soccer teams like Windsor FC Nationals and other leagues like the Windsor Roller Derby league.\nCanadian Premier League.\nOn the 10th of January 2022, it was announced Windsor would be the home of a new Canadian Premier League team. The announcement saw the league's first commissioner, David Clanachan, step down from his position to focus on bringing a professional soccer team to his hometown.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33597", "revid": "35126782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33597", "title": "Western Samoa", "text": ""}
{"id": "33598", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33598", "title": "Work breakdown structure", "text": "Deliverable-orientated breakdown of a project into smaller components\nA work-breakdown structure (WBS) in project management and systems engineering is a breakdown of a project into smaller components. It is a key project management element that organizes the team's work into manageable sections. The Project Management Body of Knowledge defines the work-breakdown structure as a \"hierarchical decomposition of the total scope of work to be carried out by the project team to accomplish the project objectives and create the required deliverables.\"\nA WBS provides the necessary framework for detailed cost estimation and control while providing guidance for schedule development and control.\nOverview.\nWBS is a hierarchical and incremental decomposition of the project into deliverables (from major ones such as phases to the smallest ones, sometimes known as work packages). It is a tree structure, which shows a subdivision of effort required to achieve an objective, for example, a program, project, and contract. In a project or contract, the WBS is developed by starting with the end objective and successively subdividing it into manageable components in terms of size, duration, and responsibility (e.g., systems, subsystems, components, tasks, subtasks, and work packages) which include all steps necessary to achieve the objective.\nThe work breakdown structure provides a common framework for the natural development of the overall planning and control of a contract and is the basis for dividing work into definable increments from which the statement of work can be developed and technical, schedule, cost, and labor hour reporting can be established.\nA work breakdown structure permits the summing of subordinate costs for tasks, materials, etc., into their successively higher level \"parent\" tasks, materials, etc. For each element of the work breakdown structure, a description of the task to be performed is generated. This technique (sometimes called a \"system breakdown structure\") is used to define and organize the total scope of a project.\nThe WBS is organized around the primary products of the project (or planned outcomes) instead of the work needed to produce the products (planned actions). Since the planned outcomes are the desired ends of the project, they form a relatively stable set of categories in which the costs of the planned actions needed to achieve them can be collected. A well-designed WBS makes it easy to assign each project activity to one and only one terminal element of the WBS. In addition to its function in cost accounting, the WBS also helps map requirements from one level of system specification to another, for example, a cross-reference matrix mapping functional requirements to high level or low-level design documents.\nThe WBS may be displayed horizontally in outline form or vertically as a tree structure (like an organization chart).\nThe development of the WBS normally occurs at the start of a project and precedes detailed project and task planning. Through &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Progressive elaboration, an iterative process in project management knowledge, the details of project management plan and amount of information will increase, and initial estimates of items such as project scope description, planning, budget, etc. will become more accurate. It also helps the project team to make the project plan with more details.\nTypes.\nPMI's Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures identifies two major types of work breakdown structures.\nDeliverable-oriented WBS.\nDeliverable-oriented WBS, also known as Product breakdown structure uses key deliverables to group each work in the project.\nPhase-oriented WBS.\nPhase-oriented WBS groups the work under key phases or stages of project lifecycle.\nHistory.\nThe concept of work breakdown structure was developed with the Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) by the United States Department of Defense (DoD). PERT was introduced by the U.S. Navy in 1957 to support the development of its Polaris missile program. While the term \"work breakdown structure\" was not used, this first implementation of PERT did organize the tasks into product-oriented categories.\nBy June 1962, DoD, NASA, and the aerospace industry published a document for the PERT/COST system, which described the WBS approach. This guide was endorsed by the Secretary of Defense for adoption by all services. In 1968, the DoD issued \"Work Breakdown Structures for Defense Materiel Items\" (MIL-STD-881), a military standard requiring the use of work breakdown structures across the DoD.\nThe document has been revised several times. As of May 2023, the most recent revision is F, released 13 May 2022. The version history and current revision of the standard are posted on the Defense Logistics Agency (DLA) ASSIST web site.https:// It includes WBS definitions for specific defense materiel commodity systems and addresses WBS elements that are common to all systems.\nDefense Materiel Item categories from MIL-STD-881F are:\nThe common elements identified in MIL-STD-881F, Appendix K are: Integration, assembly, test, and checkout; Systems engineering; Program management; System test and evaluation; Data; Peculiar support equipment; Common support equipment; Operational/Site activation; Contractor Logistics Support; Industrial facilities; Initial spares and repair parts. The standard also includes additional common elements unique to Space Systems, Launch Vehicle Systems, and Strategic Missile Systems.\nIn 1987, the Project Management Institute (PMI) documented expanding these techniques across non-defense organizations. The \"Project Management Body of Knowledge\" (PMBOK) Guide provides an overview of the WBS concept, while the \"Practice Standard for Work Breakdown Structures\" is comparable to the DoD standard but is intended for more general application.\nDesign principles.\n100% rule.\nAn important design principle for work breakdown structures is called the 100% rule. It has been defined as follows:\nThe 100% rule states that the WBS includes 100% of the work defined by the project scope and captures all deliverables \u2013 internal, external, interim \u2013 in terms of the work to be completed, including project management. The 100% rule is one of the most important principles guiding the development, decomposition, and evaluation of the WBS. The rule applies at all levels within the hierarchy: the sum of the work at the \"child\" level must equal 100% of the work represented by the \"parent\", and the WBS should not include any work that falls outside the actual scope of the project, that is, it cannot include more than 100% of the work... It is important to remember that the 100% rule also applies to the activity level. The work represented by the activities in each work package must add up to 100% of the work necessary to complete the work package.\nMutually exclusive elements.\nMutually exclusive: In addition to the 100% rule, there must be no overlap in scope definition between different elements of a work breakdown structure. This ambiguity could result in duplicated work or miscommunications about responsibility and authority. Such overlap could also confuse project cost accounting.\nPlan outcomes, not actions.\nIf the work breakdown structure designer attempts to capture any action-oriented details in the WBS, the designer will likely include either too many actions or too few actions. Too many actions will exceed 100% of the parent's scope, and too few will fall short of 100% of the parent's scope. The best way to adhere to the 100% rule is to define WBS elements in terms of outcomes or results, not actions. This also ensures that the WBS is not overly prescriptive of methods, allowing for greater ingenuity and creative thinking on the part of the project participants. When a project provides professional services, a common technique is to capture all planned deliverables to create a deliverable-oriented WBS. Work breakdown structures that subdivide work by project phases (e.g. preliminary design phase, critical design phase) must ensure that phases are clearly separated by a deliverable also used in defining entry and exit criteria (e.g., an approved preliminary or critical design review).\nProduct breakdown structure (PBS).\nFor new product development projects, the most common technique to ensure an outcome-oriented WBS is to use a product breakdown structure (PBS).\nFeature-driven development.\nFeature-driven software projects may use a similar technique as the WBS, which is to use a feature breakdown structure.\nLevel of detail.\nOne must decide when to stop dividing work into smaller elements. For most projects, a hierarchy of two to four levels will suffice. This will assist in determining the duration of activities necessary to produce a deliverable defined by the WBS. There are several heuristics or \"rules of thumb\" used when determining the appropriate duration of an activity or group of activities necessary to produce a specific deliverable defined by the WBS.\nWork package.\nAccording to the Project Management Institute, a work package is the \"lowest level of the work breakdown structure for which cost and duration are estimated and managed.\"\nA work package at the activity level is a task that:\nWBS dictionary.\nIf the WBS element names are ambiguous, a WBS dictionary can help clarify the distinctions between WBS elements. The WBS Dictionary describes each component of the WBS with milestones, deliverables, activities, scope, and sometimes dates, resources, costs, quality.\nAccording to the Project Management Institute, the WBS dictionary is defined as a \"document that provides detailed deliverable, activity, and scheduling information about each component in the work breakdown structure.\"\nCoding scheme.\nIt is common for work breakdown structure elements to be numbered sequentially to reveal the hierarchical structure. The purpose of the numbering is to provide a consistent approach to identifying and managing the WBS across like systems regardless of vendor or service. For example, 1.1.2 Propulsion (in the example below) identifies this item as a Level 3 WBS element, since there are three numbers separated by two decimal points. A coding scheme also helps WBS elements to be recognized in any written context, such as progress tracking, scheduling, or billing, and allows for mapping to the WBS Dictionary. It is a preferred practice that the Statement of work or other contract descriptive include the same section terms and hierarchical structure as the WBS.\nA practical example of the WBS coding scheme is\n\"1.0 Aircraft System\"\n\"1.1 Air Vehicle\"\n\"1.1.1 Airframe\"\n\"1.1.1.1 Airframe Integration, Assembly, Test, and Checkout\"\n\"1.1.1.2 Fuselage\"\n\"1.1.1.3 Wing\"\n\"1.1.1.4 Empennage\"\n\"1.1.1.5 Nacelle\"\n\"1.1.1.6 Other Airframe Components 1..n (Specify)\"\n\"1.1.2 Propulsion\"\n\"1.1.3 Vehicle Subsystems\"\n\"1.1.4 Avionics\"\n\"1.2 System Engineering\"\n\"1.3 Program Management\"\n\"1.4 System Test and Evaluation\"\n\"1.5 Training\"\n\"1.6 Data\"\n\"1.7 Peculiar Support Equipment\"\n\"1.8 Common Support Equipment\"\n\"1.9 Operational/Site Activation\"\n\"1.10 Industrial Facilities\"\n\"1.11 Initial Spares and Repair Parts\"\nTerminal element.\nThe lowest element in a tree structure, a terminal element, is one that is not further subdivided. In a Work Breakdown Structure such elements (activity or deliverable), also known as work packages, are the items that are estimated in terms of resource requirements, budget and duration; linked by dependencies; and schedule. At the juncture of the WBS element and organization unit, control accounts and work packages are established, and performance is planned, measured, recorded, and controlled. A WBS can be expressed down to any level of interest. Three levels are the minimum recommended, with additional levels for and only for items of high cost or high risk, and two levels of detail at cases such as systems engineering or program management, with the standard showing examples of WBS with varying depth such as software development at points going to 5 levels or fire-control system to 7 levels.\nConsistent to norms.\nThe higher WBS structure should be consistent with whatever norms or template mandates exist within the organization or domain. For example, shipbuilding for the U.S. Navy must respect that the nautical terms and their hierarchy structure put into MIL-STD are embedded in Naval Architecture and that matching Navy offices and procedures have been built to match this naval architecture structure, so any significant change of WBS element numbering or naming in the hierarchy would be unacceptable.\nExample.\nThe adjacent figure shows a work breakdown structure construction technique that demonstrates the 100% rule and the \"progressive elaboration\" technique. At WBS Level 1 it shows 100 units of work as the total scope of a project to design and build a custom bicycle. At WBS Level 2, the 100 units are divided into seven elements. The number of units allocated to each element of work can be based on effort or cost; it is not an estimate of task duration.\nThe three largest elements of WBS Level 2 are further subdivided at Level 3. The two largest elements at Level 3 each represent only 17% of the total scope of the project. These larger elements could be further subdivided using the \"progressive elaboration\" technique described above.\nThis is an example of the product-based approach (which might be end-product or deliverable or work-based), as compared to phased approach (which might be gated stages in a formal Systems development life cycle), or forced events (e.g. quarterly updates or a fiscal year rebudgeting), or a skills/roles based approach.\nWBS design can be supported by software (e.g. a spreadsheet) to allow automatic rolling up of point values. Estimates of effort or cost can be developed through discussions among project team members. This collaborative technique builds greater insight into scope definitions, underlying assumptions, and consensus regarding the level of granularity required to manage the projects.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33599", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33599", "title": "William Marsh Rice", "text": "American businessman and philanthropist (1816\u20131900)\nWilliam Marsh Rice (March 14, 1816 \u2013 September 23, 1900) was an American businessman and entrepreneur who made his fortune in Texas. He is best known for leaving his fortune to fund the establishment of Rice University in Houston, Texas. \nHis death in 1900 captured national attention, drawing widespread media coverage of the complex events surrounding it. Rice was murdered by his valet, Charles F. Jones, as part of a conspiracy orchestrated by attorney Albert T. Patrick. The goal of the conspiracy was to forge Rice's will and claim his fortune. Patrick was sentenced to death for his role in the plot.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Marsh Rice was born on March 14, 1816, in Springfield, Massachusetts, the third of ten children of David and Patty (n\u00e9e Hall) Rice.\nRice left school at the age of fifteen to begin working as a general store clerk in Springfield. By the time he was twenty-one, Rice was operating his own store. Following the economic downturn caused by the Panic of 1837, Rice relocated to Houston, Texas, in search of new business opportunities in the new Republic of Texas.\nUpon arriving in Houston, Rice\u2019s first business venture was at the Milam Hotel, where he provided and served liquor at the hotel\u2019s bar in exchange for three dollars a day plus room and board.\nRice\u2019s plan to open a mercantile business in Houston was met with setbacks when his merchandise was lost at sea. He worked as a clerk to earn the necessary funds to continue his business ambitions. Rice received a license for his mercantile business in 1840 and took on Ebenezer Nichols as a business partner. They opened the Rice and Nichols general store in Houston, which was the foundation for what would later become William M. Rice and Company.\nLater life.\nRice made his fortune by investing in land, real estate, lumber, railroads, cotton, and other prospects in Texas and Louisiana. In 1860, his total property, which included fifteen enslaved persons, was worth $750,000. According to the 1860 census, Rice was then the richest man in Houston. He invested in business firms in Houston; in 1895, he was listed in the city directories as \"Capitalist. Owner of Capitol Hotel and Capitol Hotel Annex Building, President of Houston Brick Works Company.\" Rice was a member of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows. \nRice married Margaret Bremond, daughter of Paul Bremond (Houston and Texas Central Railway) and Harriet Martha Sprouls, in 1850 in Houston. The 1860 census places William and Margaret Rice in Houston's 2nd Ward. Clerks are also identified in the same census report; thus the location is most likely Rice's merchant business. Margaret was 16 years Rice's junior. She died, at age 31, in 1863 in Houston. Rice is also reported to have lived in Matamoros, Mexico, in 1863. Whether there is a connection to the timing of Margaret's death to his living in Matamoros is not clear. By 1865, he was reported as living back in Houston. While living in Houston, Rice served on the Harris County Slave Patrol.\nRice lived in Houston until around 1865, when he moved to New York (but did not own a home there). He built a house on a estate in Dunellen, New Jersey, and moved there in 1872. He became a resident of New York again in 1882.\nRice married Julia E. Brown (nee Elizabeth Baldwin) on June 26, 1867. Baldwin was the sister of Charlotte Rice, the wife of William Rice's brother Frederick. \nIn the early 1870s, his company built a railroad through the area of what is now the now the city of Rice, Texas (between Corsicana and Ennis, Texas). He donated land to the city for a church and a cemetery. \nOn January 28, 1882, William Rice drafted a will, instructing the executors to pay over to the trustees, the Governor and the Judge, funds from his estate for the establishment of \"The William M. Rice Orphans Institute.\" The next year, he began spending more time in Houston, reuniting with old acquaintances. After an 1886 or 1887 meeting with a C. Lombardi, Rice decided that the benefits of his wealth should be enjoyed by the children of the city where he made his fortune. In 1891, Rice decided that he would not establish an Orphans Institute at the Dunellen estate, but would instead found the William M. Rice Institute for the Advancement of Literature, Science and Art in Houston, Texas. The Institute's charter was signed by all the original trustees, except for Rice, on May 18, 1891, and certified by the State of Texas the following day. Rice donated land to the now incorporated city of Rice located between Corsicana and Ennis, Texas.\nRice's marriage to Elizabeth was \"stormy\", and during the 1890s, she consulted an attorney regarding the possibility of a divorce. She died \"hopelessly insane\" in Waukesha, Wisconsin, on July 24, 1896.\nRice was an eccentric. In his later years, he ate no meat and rarely any vegetables. His diet consisted of bouillon and eggs.\nDeath and scandal.\nIn 1893, Rice made a new will, naming as executors Captain James A. Baker (a lawyer who often worked for him), William M. Rice Jr. (his nephew), and John D. Bartine. The value of Rice's estate at the time was estimated at about $4.6\u00a0million (equivalent to $\u00a0million in 2024).\nThe new will stipulated his estate was to be divided into two equal parts. One half was go to the creation of the Rice Institute, and the other half was to be divided such that 50% would go to wife Elizabeth Baldwin Rice, and the remaining 50% would be distributed to his four other beneficiaries.\nFollowing the death of his wife in July 1896, a new will was executed on September 26, 1896, which allocated $80,000 to his brother Frederick and $100,000 each to his two sisters. The remainder of the estate was to be used to establish the Rice Institute. The ensuing legal battles over the estate of Elizabeth Rice set the stage for a crime that would become one of the earliest sensational crimes of the 20th century.\nBefore her death, she had secretly signed a will that stipulated the distribution of half of the couple's estate. She assumed that she would have half of the couple's estate under the laws of Texas. The next four years saw a great deal of litigation over the will of Elizabeth Rice. The executor of Elizabeth's will was O. T. Holt, assisted by Albert T. Patrick, formerly an attorney in Houston, but working in New York at the time. Under a false identity, Patrick interviewed Rice, who would not otherwise have seen him due to his professional relationship with Elizabeth Rice. Patrick was attempting to establish Rice's domicile in Texas, and not in New York, which would have provided a more favorable bequest for Mrs. Rice. Despite revealing his identity in 1900, to Rice's anger, the two men continued to have dealings.\nPlotting to take control of Rice's estate and become the beneficiary of his fortune, Patrick prepared a fake will, forging Rice's signature on it. The fraudulent document named William Rice Jr. and James Baker Jr. as executors, but replaced John Bartine's name with Patrick's. He made bequests to a number of relatives and friends of Rice and of his own, hoping to involve as many interested parties as possible. In the words of James A. Baker Sr.:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... Mr. William M. Rice, Jr., the nephew of William Marsh Rice, and one of the attorneys of Mr. Rice (Captain Baker) were named as executors not only of the first, or genuine will of Mr. Rice, but in the second or so-called Patrick will; that each of them received greater benefits under the second will then [\"sic\"] under the first; and while he, Patrick, was named as residuary legatee under the second will, yet he was in fact a trustee, to take over the property of the estate and administer it in carrying out a number of secret trusts verbally declared by Mr. Rice.\nWilliam Rice was living alone in his apartment at 500 Madison Avenue, New York. His butler and valet, Charles F. Jones, had worked for him for a number of years.\nOn September 24, 1900, James Baker received a telegram from Jones, stating:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mr. Rice died last night under the care of a physician. Certificate of death old age, extreme nervousness. Funeral tomorrow morning at nine o'clock. Interment at Waukesha beside his wife. Wire when you are coming.\nDespite the contents of this telegram, a second communique, from Rice's bankers, warned that the multi-millionaire had died under peculiar circumstances, and that his body was to be cremated.\nOn September 23, 1900, Rice was found dead by Charles Jones. Rice was presumed to have died in his sleep. Shortly thereafter, a bank teller noticed a suspiciously large check bearing the late Rice's signature and made out to Rice's New York City lawyer, Albert T. Patrick, but with Albert's name misspelled \"Abert\". Soon, Patrick made an announcement that Rice had changed his will right before his death, leaving the bulk of his fortune to Patrick rather than to his Institute. A subsequent investigation led by the District Attorney of New York resulted in the arrests of Patrick and of Jones, who had been persuaded to administer chloroform to Rice while he slept.\nCourt testimony would later show that Jones and Patrick had conspired to murder Rice on September 23. The will was proved a forgery. Patrick was sentenced to death, spending four years on death row at Sing Sing Prison before having his sentence commuted by Governor Frank Higgins in 1906. He received a full pardon from Governor John A. Dix six years later. Patrick died in Tulsa, Oklahoma on February 11, 1940, aged 74.\nCharles Jones was given freedom in exchange for his confession and testimony against Patrick. After the trial, he remained in seclusion until November 16, 1954. On that date, at age 79, he died by suicide in Baytown, Texas, where he lived.\nRice's body was eventually cremated, and the urn of his ashes was kept in the vault of the business office of the Trustees of the Institute until it was deposited beneath the monument erected in his memory on the campus of the Institute. In 1930, John Angel completed the Founder's Memorial at Rice University \u2014 depicting a seated William Marsh Rice \u2014 in line with specifications by architect Ralph Adams Cram.\nLegacy.\nRice left the bulk of his estate to the founding of a free institute of higher education in Houston, Texas. Opening in 1912 as \"William Marsh Rice Institute for the Advancement of Letters, Science, and Art\", it is known today as Rice University. In his will, Rice mandated that the university to bear his name would be for \"the white men and women of Houston.\" This request was eventually overruled, and Raymond L. Johnson \u2014 Rice University's first black student \u2014 was admitted in 1964.\nThe Rice School in Houston is also named after William Marsh Rice.\nA film, \"The Trust\", depicts the story of William Marsh Rice's murder and the role of his attorney, James A. Baker Sr., in uncovering the truth.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
