{"id": "33277", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33277", "title": "William Morris", "text": "English textile artist, author, and socialist (1834\u20131896)\nWilliam Morris (24 March 1834\u00a0\u2013 3 October 1896) was an English textile designer, poet, artist, writer, and socialist activist associated with the British Arts and Crafts movement. He was a major contributor to the revival of traditional British textile arts and methods of production. His literary contributions helped to establish the modern fantasy genre, while he campaigned for socialism in \"fin de si\u00e8cle\" Great Britain.\nMorris was born in Walthamstow, Essex, to a wealthy middle-class family. He came under the strong influence of medievalism while studying classics at Oxford University, where he joined the Birmingham Set. After university, he married Jane Burden, and developed close friendships with Pre-Raphaelite artists and poets such as Dante Gabriel Rossetti, Algernon Charles Swinburne, and Edward Burne-Jones, as well as with Neo-Gothic architect Philip Webb. Webb and Morris designed Red House in Kent where Morris lived from 1859 to 1865, before moving to Bloomsbury, central London. In 1861, Morris founded the Morris, Marshall, Faulkner &amp; Co. decorative arts firm with Burne-Jones, Rossetti, Webb, and others, which became highly fashionable and much in demand. The firm profoundly influenced interior decoration throughout the Victorian period, with Morris designing tapestries, wallpaper, fabrics, furniture, and stained glass windows. In 1875, he assumed total control of the company, which was renamed Morris &amp; Co.\nFrom 1871, Morris rented the rural retreat of Kelmscott Manor, Oxfordshire, while also retaining a main home in London. He was greatly influenced by visits to Iceland with Eir\u00edkur Magn\u00fasson, and he produced a series of English-language translations of Icelandic Sagas. He also achieved success with the publication of his epic poems and novels, namely \"The Earthly Paradise\" (1868\u20131870), \"A Dream of John Ball\" (1888), the utopian \"News from Nowhere\" (1890), and the fantasy romance \"The Well at the World's End\" (1896). In 1877, he founded the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings to campaign against the damage caused by architectural restoration. By the influence of medievalism and Christian socialism in the 1850s he became a sceptic of industrial capitalism. After reading works of Henry George, Alfred Russel Wallace, and Karl Marx in the 1880s Morris became a committed revolutionary socialist activist until his final acceptance of parliamentary socialism at 1896. He founded the Socialist League in 1884 after an involvement in the Social Democratic Federation (SDF), but he broke with that organisation in 1890. In 1891, he founded the Kelmscott Press to publish limited-edition, illuminated-style print books, a cause to which he devoted his final years.\nMorris is recognised as one of the most significant cultural figures of Victorian Britain. He was best known in his lifetime for his poetry, although he posthumously became better known for his designs. The William Morris Society founded in 1955 is devoted to his legacy, while multiple biographies and studies of his work have been published. Many of the buildings associated with his life are open to visitors, much of his work can be found in art galleries and museums, and his designs are still in production.\nEarly life.\nYouth: 1834\u20131852.\nMorris was born at Elm House in Walthamstow, Essex, on 24 March 1834. Raised into a wealthy middle-class family, he was named after his father, a financier who worked as a partner in the Sanderson &amp; Co. firm, bill brokers in the City of London. His mother was Emma Morris (n\u00e9e Shelton), who descended from a wealthy bourgeois family from Worcester. Morris was the third of his parents' surviving children; their first child, Charles, had been born in 1827 but died four days later. Charles had been followed by the birth of two girls, Emma in 1829 and Henrietta in 1833, before William's birth. These children were followed by the birth of siblings Stanley in 1837, Rendall in 1839, Arthur in 1840, Isabella in 1842, Edgar in 1844, and Alice in 1846. The Morris family were followers of the evangelical Protestant form of Christianity, and William was baptised four months after his birth at St Mary's Church, Walthamstow.\nAs a child, Morris was kept largely housebound at Elm House by his mother; there, he spent much time reading, favouring the novels of Walter Scott. Aged six, Morris moved with his family to the Georgian Italianate mansion at Woodford Hall, Woodford, Essex, which was surrounded by 50 acres of land adjacent to Epping Forest. He took an interest in fishing with his brothers as well as gardening in the Hall's grounds, and spent much time exploring the Forest, where he was fascinated both by the Iron Age earthworks at Loughton Camp and Ambresbury Banks and by the Early Modern Hunting Lodge at Chingford. He also took rides through the Essex countryside on his pony, and visited the various churches and cathedrals throughout the country, marveling at their architecture. His father took him on visits outside of the county, for instance to Canterbury Cathedral, the Chiswick Horticultural Gardens, and to the Isle of Wight, where he adored Blackgang Chine. Aged nine, he was then sent to Misses Arundale's Academy for Young Gentlemen, a nearby preparatory school; although initially riding there by pony each day, he later began boarding, intensely disliking the experience.\nIn 1847, Morris's father died unexpectedly. From this point, the family relied upon continued income from the copper mines at Devon Great Consols, and sold Woodford Hall to move into the smaller Water House. In February 1848 Morris began his studies at Marlborough College in Marlborough, Wiltshire, where he gained a reputation as an eccentric nicknamed \"Crab\". He despised his time there, being bullied, bored, and homesick. He did use the opportunity to visit many of the prehistoric sites of Wiltshire, such as Avebury and Silbury Hill, which fascinated him. The school was Anglican in faith and in March 1849 Morris was confirmed by the Bishop of Salisbury in the college chapel, developing an enthusiastic attraction towards the Anglo-Catholic movement and its Romanticist aesthetic. At Christmas 1851, Morris was removed from the school and returned to Water House, where he was privately tutored by the Reverend Frederick B. Guy, Assistant Master at the nearby Forest School.\nOxford and the Birmingham Set: 1852\u20131856.\nIn June 1852 Morris entered Exeter College at Oxford University, although, since the college was full, he went into residence only in January 1853. He disliked the college and was bored by the manner in which they taught him Classics. Instead he developed a keen interest in medieval history and medieval architecture, inspired by the many medieval buildings in Oxford. This interest was tied to Britain's growing Medievalist movement, a form of Romanticism that rejected many of the values of Victorian industrial capitalism. For Morris, the Middle Ages represented an era with strong chivalric values and an organic, pre-capitalist sense of community, both of which he deemed preferable to his own period. This attitude was compounded by his reading of Thomas Carlyle's book \"Past and Present\" (1843), in which Carlyle championed medieval values as a corrective to the problems of Victorian society. Under this influence, Morris's dislike of contemporary capitalism grew, and he came to be influenced by the work of Christian socialists Charles Kingsley and Frederick Denison Maurice.\nAt the college, Morris met fellow first-year undergraduate Edward Burne-Jones, who became his lifelong friend and collaborator. Although from very different backgrounds, they found that they had a shared attitude to life, both being keenly interested in Anglo-Catholicism and Arthurianism.\nThrough Burne-Jones, Morris joined a group of undergraduates from Birmingham who were studying at Pembroke College: William Fulford (1831\u20131882), Richard Watson Dixon, Charles Faulkner, and Cormell Price. They were known among themselves as the \"Brotherhood\" and to historians as the Birmingham Set. Morris was the most affluent member of the Set, and was generous with his wealth toward the others. Like Morris, the Set were fans of the poet Alfred, Lord Tennyson, and would meet together to recite the plays of William Shakespeare.\nMorris was heavily influenced by the writings of the art critic John Ruskin, being particularly inspired by his chapter \"On the Nature of Gothic Architecture\" in the second volume of \"The Stones of Venice\"; he later described it as \"one of the very few necessary and inevitable utterances of the century\". Morris adopted Ruskin's philosophy of rejecting the tawdry industrial manufacture of decorative arts and architecture in favour of a return to hand-craftsmanship, raising artisans to the status of artists, creating art that should be affordable and hand-made, with no hierarchy of artistic mediums. Ruskin had achieved attention in Victorian society for championing the art of a group of painters who had emerged in London in 1848 calling themselves the Pre-Raphaelite Brotherhood. The Pre-Raphaelite style was heavily Medievalist and Romanticist, emphasising abundant detail, intense colours and complex compositions; it greatly impressed Morris and the Set. Influenced both by Ruskin and by John Keats, Morris began to spend more time writing poetry, in a style that was imitative of much of theirs.\nBoth he and Burne-Jones were influenced by the Romanticist milieu and the Anglo-Catholic movement, and decided to become clergymen in order to found a monastery where they could live a life of chastity and dedication to artistic pursuit, akin to that of the contemporary Nazarene movement. However, as time went on Morris became increasingly critical of Anglican doctrine and the idea faded. In summer 1854, Morris travelled to Belgium to look at medieval paintings, and in July 1855 went with Burne-Jones and Fulford across northern France, visiting medieval churches and cathedrals. It was on this trip that he and Burne-Jones committed themselves to \"a life of art\". For Morris, this decision resulted in a strained relationship with his family, who believed that he should have entered either commerce or the clergy. On a subsequent visit to Birmingham, Morris discovered Thomas Malory's \"Le Morte d'Arthur\", which became a core Arthurian text for him and Burne-Jones. In January 1856, the Set began publication of \"The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine\", designed to contain \"mainly Tales, Poetry, friendly critiques and social articles\". Funded mainly by Morris, who briefly served as editor and heavily contributed to it with his own stories, poems, reviews and articles, the magazine lasted for twelve issues, and garnered praise from Tennyson and Ruskin.\nApprenticeship, the Pre-Raphaelites, and marriage: 1856\u20131859.\nHaving passed his finals and been awarded a BA, Morris began an apprenticeship with the Oxford-based Neo-Gothic architect George Edmund Street in January 1856. His apprenticeship focused on architectural drawing, and there he was placed under the supervision of the young architect Philip Webb, who became a close friend. Morris soon relocated to Street's London office, in August 1856 moving into a flat in Bloomsbury in Central London with Burne-Jones, an area perhaps chosen for its avant-garde associations. Morris was fascinated by London but dismayed at its pollution and rapid expansion into neighbouring countryside, describing it as \"the spreading sore\".\nWilliam Morris became increasingly fascinated with the idyllic Medievalist depictions of rural life which appeared in the paintings of the Pre-Raphaelites, and spent large sums of money purchasing such artworks. Burne-Jones shared this interest, but took it further by becoming an apprentice to one of the foremost Pre-Raphaelite painters, Dante Gabriel Rossetti; the three soon became close friends. Through Rossetti, Morris came to associate with poet Robert Browning, and the artists Arthur Hughes, Thomas Woolner, and Ford Madox Brown. Tired of architecture, Morris abandoned his apprenticeship, with Rossetti persuading him to take up painting instead, which he chose to do in the Pre-Raphaelite style. Morris aided Rossetti and Burne-Jones in painting the Arthurian murals at the Oxford Union, although his contributions were widely deemed inferior and unskilled compared to those of the others. At Rossetti's recommendation, Morris and Burne-Jones moved in together to the flat at Bloomsbury's No. 17 Red Lion Square by November 1856. Morris designed and commissioned furniture for the flat in a medieval style, much of which he painted with Arthurian scenes in a direct rejection of mainstream artistic tastes.\nMorris also continued writing poetry and began designing illuminated manuscripts and embroidered hangings. In March 1857 Bell and Dandy published a book of Morris's poems, \"The Defence of Guenevere\", which was largely self-funded by the author. It did not sell well and garnered few reviews, most of which were unsympathetic. Disconcerted, Morris would not publish again for a further eight years. In October 1857 Morris met Jane Burden, a woman from a poor working-class background, at a theatre performance. Rossetti initially asked her to model for him. Controversially both Rossetti and Morris were smitten with her; Morris, however, began a relationship with her and they were engaged in spring 1858; Burden would later admit that she had never loved Morris. They were married in a low-key ceremony held at St Michael at the North Gate church in Oxford on 26 April 1859, before honeymooning in Bruges, Belgium, and settling temporarily at 41 Great Ormond Street, London.\nCareer and fame.\nRed House and the Firm: 1859\u20131865.\nMorris desired a new home for himself and his family resulting in the construction of the Red House in the Kentish hamlet of Upton near Bexleyheath, ten miles from central London. The building's design was a co-operative effort, with Morris focusing on the interiors and the exterior being designed by Webb, for whom the House represented his first commission as an independent architect. Named after the red bricks and red tiles from which it was constructed, Red House rejected architectural norms by being L-shaped. Influenced by various forms of contemporary Neo-Gothic architecture, the House was nevertheless unique, with Morris describing it as \"very mediaeval in spirit\". Situated within an orchard, the house and garden were intricately linked in their design. It took a year to construct, and cost Morris \u00a34000 at a time when his fortune was greatly reduced by a dramatic fall in the price of his shares. Burne-Jones described it as \"the beautifullest place on Earth.\"\nAfter construction, Morris invited friends to visit, most notably Burne-Jones and his wife Georgiana, as well as Rossetti and his wife Lizzie Siddal. They aided him in painting decoration on the furniture, walls, and ceilings, much of it based on Arthurian tales, the Trojan War, and Geoffrey Chaucer's stories, while he also designed floral embroideries for the rooms. They also spent much time playing tricks on each other, enjoying games like hide and seek, and singing while accompanied by the piano. Siddall stayed at the House during summer and autumn 1861 as she recovered from a traumatic miscarriage and an addiction to laudanum; she would die of an overdose in February 1862.\nIn April 1861, Morris founded a decorative arts company, Morris, Marshall, Faulkner &amp; Co., with six other partners: Burne-Jones, Rossetti, Webb, Ford Madox Brown, Charles Faulkner, and Peter Paul Marshall. Operating from premises at No. 6 Red Lion Square, they referred to themselves as \"the Firm\" and were intent on adopting Ruskin's ideas of reforming British attitudes to production. They hoped to reinstate decoration as one of the fine arts and adopted an ethos of affordability and anti-elitism. For additional staff, they employed boys from the Industrial Home for Destitute Boys in Euston, central London, many of whom were trained as apprentices.\nAlthough working within the Neo-Gothic school of design, they differed from Neo-Gothic architects like George Gilbert Scott who simply included certain Gothic features on modern styles of building; instead they sought to return completely to Medieval Gothic methods of craftmanship. The products created by the Firm included furniture, architectural carving, metalwork, stained glass windows, and murals. Their stained glass windows proved a particular success in the firm's early years as they were in high demand for the surge in the Neo-Gothic construction and refurbishment of churches, many of which were commissioned by the architect George Frederick Bodley. Despite Morris's anti-elitist ethos, the Firm soon became increasingly popular and fashionable with the bourgeoisie, particularly following their exhibit at the 1862 International Exhibition in South Kensington, where they received press attention and medals of commendation. However, they faced much opposition from established design companies, particularly those belonging to the Neo-Classical school.\nMorris was slowly abandoning lithography and painting, recognising that his work lacked a sense of movement; none of his paintings are dated later than 1862. Instead he focused his energies on designing wallpaper patterns, the first being \"Trellis\", designed in 1862. His designs were produced from 1864 by Jeffrey and Co. of Islington, who created them for the Firm under Morris's supervision. Morris retained an active interest in various groups, joining the Hogarth Club, the Mediaeval Society, and the Corps of Artist Volunteers, the latter in contrast to his later pacifism.\nMeanwhile, Morris's family continued to grow. In January 1861, Morris and Janey's first daughter was born: named Jane Alice Morris, she was commonly known as \"Jenny\". Jenny was followed in March 1862 by the birth of their second daughter, Mary \"May\" Morris. Morris was a caring father to his daughters, and years later they both recounted having idyllic childhoods. However, there were problems in Morris's marriage as Janey became increasingly close to Rossetti, who often painted her. It is unknown if their affair was ever sexual, although by this point other members of the group were noticing Rossetti and Janey's closeness.\nImagining the creation of an artistic community at Upton, Morris helped develop plans for a second house to be constructed adjacent to Red House in which Burne-Jones could live with his family; the plans were abandoned when Burne-Jones's son Christopher died from scarlet fever. By 1864, Morris had become increasingly tired of life at Red House, being particularly unhappy with the 3 to 4 hours spent commuting to his London workplace on a daily basis. He sold Red House, and in autumn 1865 moved with his family to No. 26 Queen Square in Bloomsbury, the same building to which the Firm had moved its base of operations earlier in the summer.\nQueen Square and \"The Earthly Paradise\": 1865\u20131870.\nAt Queen Square, the Morris family lived in a flat directly above the Firm's shop. They were joined by Janey's sister Elizabeth Burden and a number of household servants. Meanwhile, changes were afoot at the Firm as Faulkner left, and to replace him they employed a business manager, Warrington Taylor, who would remain with them till 1866. Taylor pulled the Firm's finances into order and spent much time controlling Morris and ensuring that he worked to schedule. During these years the Firm carried out a number of high-profile designs; from September 1866 to January 1867, they redecorated the Armoury and Tapestry Room in St James's Palace, in the latter year also designing the Green Dining Room at the South Kensington Museum (it is now the Morris Room at the Victoria and Albert Museum). The Firm's work received increasing interest from people in the United States, resulting in Morris's acquaintance with Henry James and Charles Eliot Norton. However, despite its success, the Firm was not turning over a large net profit, and this, coupled with the decreasing value of Morris's stocks, meant that he had to decrease his spending.\nJaney's relationship with Rossetti had continued, and by the late 1860s gossip regarding their affair had spread about London, where they were regularly seen spending time together. Morris biographer Fiona MacCarthy argued that it was likely that Morris had learned of and accepted the existence of their affair by 1870. In this year he developed an affectionate friendship with Aglaia Coronio, the daughter of wealthy Greek refugees, although there is no evidence that they had an affair. Meanwhile, Morris's relationship with his mother had improved, and he would regularly take his wife and children to visit her at her house in Leyton. He also went on various holidays; in the summer of 1866 he, Webb, and Taylor toured the churches of northern France.\nIn August 1866 Morris joined the Burne-Jones family on their holiday in Lymington, while in August 1867 both families holidayed together in Oxford. In August 1867 the Morrises holidayed in Southwold, Suffolk, while in the summer of 1869 Morris took his wife to Bad Ems in Rhineland-Palatinate, central Germany, where it was hoped that the local health waters would aid her ailments. While there, he enjoyed walks in the countryside and focused on writing poetry.\nMorris had continued to devote much time to writing poetry. In 1867 Bell and Dandy published Morris's epic poem, \"The Life and Death of Jason\", at his own expense. The book was a retelling of the ancient Greek myth of the hero Jason and his quest to find the Golden Fleece. In contrast to Morris's former publication, \"The Life and Death of Jason\" was well received, resulting in the publishers paying Morris a fee for the second edition.\nFrom 1865 to 1870, Morris worked on another epic poem, \"The Earthly Paradise\". Designed as a homage to Chaucer, it consisted of 24 stories, adopted from an array of different cultures, and each by a different narrator; set in the late 14th century, the synopsis revolved around a group of Norsemen who flee the Black Death by sailing away from Europe, on the way discovering an island where the inhabitants continue to venerate the ancient Greek gods. Published in four parts by F. S. Ellis, it soon gained a cult following and established Morris's reputation as a major poet.\nKelmscott Manor and Iceland: 1870\u20131875.\nBy 1870, Morris had become a public figure in Britain, resulting in repeated press requests for photographs, which he despised. That year, he also reluctantly agreed to sit for a portrait by establishment painter George Frederic Watts. Morris was keenly interested in Icelandic literature, having befriended the Icelandic theologian Eir\u00edkur Magn\u00fasson. Together they produced prose translations of the Eddas and Sagas for publication in English. Morris also developed a keen interest in creating handwritten illuminated manuscripts, producing 18 such books between 1870 and 1875, the first of which was \"A Book of Verse\", completed as a birthday present for Georgina Burne-Jones. 12 of these 18 were handwritten copies of Nordic tales such as \"Halfdan the Black\", \"Frithiof the Bold\", and \"The Dwellers of Eyr\". Morris deemed calligraphy to be an art form, and taught himself both Roman and italic script, as well as learning how to produce gilded letters. In November 1872 he published \"Love is Enough\", a poetic drama based on the story \"The Dream of Macsen Wledig\" in the Medieval Welsh text, the \"Mabinogion\". Illustrated with Burne-Jones woodcuts, it was not a popular success. By 1871, he had begun work on a novel set in the present, \"The Novel on Blue Paper\", which was about a love triangle; it would remain unfinished and Morris later asserted that it was not well written.\nBy early summer 1871, Morris began to search for a house outside London where his children could spend time away from the city's pollution. He settled on Kelmscott Manor in the village of Kelmscott, Oxfordshire, obtaining a joint tenancy on the building with Rossetti in June. Morris adored the building, which was constructed \"circa\" 1570, and would spend much time in the local countryside. In contrast, Rossetti was unhappy at Kelmscott, and eventually suffered a mental breakdown. Morris divided his time between London and Kelmscott; however, when Rossetti was there he would not spend more than three days at a time at the latter. He became fed up with his family home in Queen Square, deciding to obtain a new house in London. Although retaining a personal bedroom and study at Queen Square, he relocated his family to Horrington House in Turnham Green Road, West London, in January 1873. This allowed him to be far closer to the home of Burne-Jones, with the duo meeting on almost every Sunday morning for the rest of Morris's life.\nLeaving Jane and his children with Rossetti at Kelmscott, in July 1871 Morris left for Iceland with Faulkner, W. H. Evans, and Eir\u00edkur. Sailing from the Scottish port of Granton aboard a Danish mail boat, they proceeded to the island via T\u00f3rshavn in the Faroe Islands before arriving at Reykjav\u00edk, where they disembarked. There they met the President of the Althing, J\u00f3n Sigur\u00f0sson, with Morris being sympathetic to the Icelandic independence movement. From there, they proceeded by Icelandic horse along the south coast to Berg\u00fe\u00f3rshvoll, \u00de\u00f3rsm\u00f6rk, Geysir, \u00deingvellir, and then back to Reykjav\u00edk, where they departed back to Britain in September. In April 1873, Morris and Burne-Jones holidayed in Italy, visiting Florence and Siena. Although generally disliking the country, Morris was interested in the Florentine Gothic architecture. Soon after, in July, Morris returned to Iceland, revisiting many of the sites he had previously seen, but then proceeding north to Vatna glacier and Flj\u00f3tsdalur. His two visits to the country profoundly influenced him, in particular in his growing leftist opinions; he would comment that these trips made him realise that \"the most grinding poverty is a trifling evil compared with the inequality of classes.\"\nMorris and Burne-Jones then spent time with one of the Firm's patrons, the wealthy George Howard, 9th Earl of Carlisle and his wife Rosalind, at their medieval home in Naworth Castle, Cumberland. In July 1874, the Morris family then took Burne-Jones's two children with them on their holiday to Bruges, Belgium. However, by this point Morris's friendship with Rossetti had seriously eroded, and in July 1874 their acrimonious falling out led Rossetti to leave Kelmscott, with Morris's publisher F.S. Ellis taking his place. With the company's other partners drifting off to work on other projects, Morris decided to consolidate his own control of the Firm and become sole proprietor and manager. In March 1875, he paid \u00a31000 each in compensation to Rossetti, Brown, and Marshall, although the other partners waived their claims to financial compensation. That month, the Firm was officially disbanded and replaced by Morris &amp; Co, although Burne-Jones and Webb would continue to produce designs for it in future. This accomplished, he resigned his directorship of the Devon Great Consols, selling his remaining shares in the company.\nTextile experimentation and political embrace: 1875\u20131880.\nNow in complete control of the Firm, Morris took an increased interest in the process of textile dyeing and entered into a co-operative agreement with Thomas Wardle, a silk dyer who operated the Hencroft Works in Leek, Staffordshire. As a result, Morris would spend time with Wardle at his home on various occasions between summer 1875 and spring 1878. Deeming the colours to be of inferior quality, Morris rejected the chemical aniline dyes which were then predominant, instead emphasising the revival of organic dyes, such as indigo for blue, walnut shells and roots for brown, and cochineal, kermes, and madder for red. Living and working in this industrial environment, he gained a personal understanding of production and the lives of the proletariat, and was disgusted by the poor living conditions of workers and the pollution caused by industry; these factors greatly influenced his political views. After learning the skills of dyeing, in the late 1870s Morris turned his attention to weaving, experimenting with silk weaving at Queen's Square.\nIn the Spring of 1877, the Firm opened a store at No. 449 Oxford Street and obtained new staff who were able to improve its professionalism; as a result, sales increased and its popularity grew. By 1880, Morris &amp; Co. had become a household name, having become very popular with Britain's upper and middle classes. The Firm was obtaining increasing numbers of commissions from aristocrats, wealthy industrialists, and provincial entrepreneurs, with Morris furnishing parts of St James's Palace and the chapel at Eaton Hall. As a result of his growing sympathy for the working-classes and poor, Morris felt personally conflicted in serving the interests of these individuals, privately describing it as \"ministering to the swinish luxury of the rich\".\nContinuing with his literary output, Morris translated his own version of Virgil's \"Aeneid\", titling it \"The Aeneids of Vergil\" (1876). Although many translations were already available, often produced by trained Classicists, Morris claimed that his unique perspective was as \"a poet not a pedant\". He also continued producing translations of Icelandic tales with Magn\u00fasson, including \"Three Northern Love Stories\" (1875) and \"V\u00f6luspa Saga\" (1876). In 1877 Morris was approached by Oxford University and offered the largely honorary position of Professor of Poetry. He declined, asserting that he felt unqualified, knowing little about scholarship on the theory of poetry.\nIn summer 1876, Jenny Morris was diagnosed with epilepsy. Refusing to allow her to be societally marginalised or institutionalised, as was common in the period, Morris insisted that she be cared for by the family. When Janey took May and Jenny to Oneglia in Italy, the latter suffered a serious seizure, with Morris rushing to the country to see her. They then proceeded to visit a number of other cities, including Venice, Padua, and Verona, with Morris attaining a greater appreciation of the country than he had on his previous trip. In April 1879 Morris moved the family home again, this time renting an 18th-century mansion on Hammersmith's Upper Mall in West London that was owned by the novelist George MacDonald. Morris named it Kelmscott House and re-decorated it according to his own taste. In the House's grounds he set up a workshop, focusing on the production of hand-knotted carpets. Excited that both of his homes were along the course of the River Thames, in August 1880 he and his family took a boat trip along the river from Kelmscott House to Kelmscott Manor.\nMorris became politically active in this period, coming to be associated with the radicalist current within British liberalism. He joined the Eastern Question Association (EQA) and was appointed the group's treasurer in November 1876. EQA had been founded by campaigners associated with the centre-left Liberal Party who opposed Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli's alliance with the Ottoman Empire; the Association highlighted the Ottoman massacre of Bulgarians and feared that the alliance would lead Disraeli to join the Ottomans in going to war with the Russian Empire. Morris took an active role in the EQA campaign, authoring the lyrics for the song \"Wake, London Lads!\" to be sung at a rally against military intervention. Morris eventually became disillusioned with the EQA, describing it as being \"full of wretched little personalities\". He nevertheless joined a regrouping of predominantly working-class EQA activists, the National Liberal League, becoming their treasurer in summer 1879; the group remained small and politically ineffective, with Morris resigning as treasurer in late 1881, shortly before the group's collapse.\nHowever, his discontent with the British liberal movement grew following the election of the Liberal Party's William Ewart Gladstone to the Premiership in 1880. Morris was particularly angered that Gladstone's government did not reverse the Disraeli regime's occupation of the Transvaal, introduced the Coercion Bill, and oversaw the Bombardment of Alexandria. Morris later related that while he had once believed that \"one might further real Socialistic progress by doing what one could on the lines of ordinary middle-class Radicalism\", following Gladstone's election he came to realise \"that Radicalism is on the wrong line, so to say, and will never develope [sic] into anything more than Radicalism: in fact that it is made for and by the middle classes and will always be under the control of rich capitalists\".\nIn 1876, Morris visited the Church of St John the Baptist, Burford, where he was appalled at the restoration conducted by his old mentor, G. E. Street. He recognised that these programs of architectural restoration led to the destruction or major alteration of genuinely old features in order to replace them with \"sham old\" features, something which appalled him. To combat the increasing trend for restoration, in March 1877 he founded the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (SPAB), which he personally referred to as \"Anti-Scrape\". As he adopted the role of honorary secretary and treasurer, most of the other early members of SPAB were his friends, while the group's program was rooted in Ruskin's \"The Seven Lamps of Architecture\" (1849). As part of SPAB's campaign, Morris tried to build connections with art and antiquarian societies and the custodians of old buildings, and also contacted the press to highlight his cause. He was particularly strong in denouncing the ongoing restoration of Tewkesbury Abbey and was vociferous in denouncing the architects responsible, something that deeply upset Street. Turning SPAB's attention abroad, in Autumn 1879 Morris launched a campaign to protect St Mark's Basilica in Venice from restoration, garnering a petition with 2000 signatures, among whom were Disraeli, Gladstone, and Ruskin.\nLater life.\nMerton Abbey and the Social Democratic Federation: 1881\u20131884.\nIn summer 1881, Morris took out a lease on the seven-acre former silk weaving factory, the Merton Abbey Works, next to the River Wandle on the High Street at Merton, Southwest London (not to be confused with the adjacent Merton Abbey Mills, home of the Liberty Print Works.) After he moved his workshops to the site, the premises were used for weaving, dyeing, and creating stained glass; within three years, 100 craftsmen were employed there. Working conditions at the Abbey were better than at most Victorian factories. However, despite Morris's ideals, there was little opportunity for the workers to display their own individual creativity. Morris had initiated a system of profit sharing among the Firm's upper clerks, however this did not include the majority of workers, who were instead employed on a piecework basis. Morris was aware that, in retaining the division between employer and employed, the company failed to live up to his own egalitarian ideals, but he defended this, asserting that it was impossible to run a socialist company within a competitive capitalist economy. The Firm itself was expanding, opening up a store in Manchester in 1883 and holding a stand at that year's Foreign Fair in Boston.\nJaney's relationship with Rossetti had continued through a correspondence and occasional visits, although she found him extremely paranoid and was upset by his addiction to chloral. She last saw him in 1881, and he died in April the following year. Morris described his mixed feelings toward his deceased friend by stating that he had \"some of the very greatest qualities of genius, most of them indeed; what a great man he would have been but for the arrogant misanthropy which marred his work, and killed him before his time\". In August 1883, Janey was introduced to the poet Wilfrid Scawen Blunt, with whom she embarked on a second affair, which Morris might have been aware of.\nIn January 1881, Morris was involved in the establishment of the Radical Union, an amalgam of radical working-class groups which hoped to rival the Liberals, and became a member of its executive committee. However, he soon rejected liberal radicalism completely and moved toward socialism. In this period, British socialism was a small, fledgling and vaguely defined movement, with only a few hundred adherents. Britain's first socialist party, the Democratic Federation (DF), had been founded in 1881 by Henry Hyndman, an adherent of the socio-political ideology of Marxism, with Morris joining the DF in January 1883. Morris began to read voraciously on the subject of socialism, including Henry George's \"Progress and Poverty\", Alfred Russel Wallace's \"Land Nationalisation\", and Karl Marx's \"Das Kapital\", although admitted that Marx's economic analysis of capitalism gave him \"agonies of confusion on the brain\". Instead he preferred the writings of William Cobbett and Sergius Stepniak, although he also read the critique of socialism produced by John Stuart Mill.\nIn May 1883, Morris was appointed to the DF's executive committee, and was soon elected to the position of treasurer. Devoting himself to the socialist cause, he regularly lectured at meetings across Britain, hoping to gain more converts, although was regularly criticised for doing so by the mainstream press. In November 1883 he was invited to speak at University College, Oxford, on the subject of \"Democracy and Art\" and there began espousing socialism; this shocked and embarrassed many members of staff, earning national press coverage. With other DF members, he travelled to Blackburn, Lancashire in February 1884 amid the great cotton strike, where he lectured on socialism to the strikers. The following month he marched in a central London demonstration commemorating the first anniversary of Marx's death and the thirteenth anniversary of the Paris Commune.\nMorris aided the DF using his artistic and literary talents; he designed the group's membership card, and helped author their manifesto, \"Socialism Made Plain\", in which they demanded improved housing for workers, free compulsory education for all children, free school meals, an eight-hour working day, the abolition of national debt, nationalisation of land, banks, and railways, and the organisation of agriculture and industry under state control and co-operative principles. Some of his DF comrades found it difficult to reconcile his socialist values with his position as proprietor of the Firm, although he was widely admired as a man of integrity. The DF began publishing a weekly newspaper, \"Justice\", which soon faced financial losses that Morris covered. Morris also regularly contributed articles to the newspaper, in doing so befriending another contributor, George Bernard Shaw.\nHis socialist activism monopolised his time, forcing him to abandon a translation of the Persian \"Shahnameh\". It also led to him seeing far less of Burne-Jones, with whom he had strong political differences; although once a republican, Burne-Jones had become increasingly conservative, and felt that the DF were exploiting Morris for his talents and influence. While Morris devoted much time to trying to convert his friends to the cause, of Morris's circle of artistic comrades, only Webb and Faulkner fully embraced socialism, while Swinburne expressed his sympathy with it.\nIn 1884, the DF renamed itself the Social Democratic Federation (SDF) and underwent an internal reorganisation. However, the group was facing an internal schism between those (such as Hyndman), who argued for a parliamentary path toward socialism, and those (like Morris) who deemed the Houses of Parliament intrinsically corrupt and capitalist. Personal issues between Morris and Hyndman were exacerbated by their attitude to British foreign policy; Morris was staunchly anti-imperialist while Hyndman expressed patriotic sentiment encouraging some foreign intervention. The division between the two groups developed into open conflict, with the majority of members sharing Morris's position. In December 1884 Morris and his supporters \u2013 most notably Ernest Belfort Bax and Edward Aveling \u2013 left the SDF; the first major schism of the British socialist movement.\nSocialist League: 1884\u20131889.\nIn December 1884, Morris founded the Socialist League (SL) with other SDF defectors. He composed the SL's manifesto with Bax, describing their position as that of \"Revolutionary International Socialism\", advocating proletarian internationalism and world revolution while rejecting the concept of socialism in one country. In this, he committed himself to \"making Socialists\" by educating, organising, and agitating to establish a strong socialist movement; calling on activists to boycott elections, he hoped that socialists would take part in a proletariat revolution and help to establish a socialist society. Bax taught Morris more about Marxism, and introduced him to Marx's collaborator, Friedrich Engels; Engels thought Morris honest but lacking in practical skills to aid the proletarian revolution. Morris remained in contact with other sectors of London's leftist community, being a regular at the socialist International Club in Shoreditch, East London, however he avoided the recently created Fabian Society, deeming it too middle-class. Although a Marxist, he befriended prominent anarchist activists Stepniak and Peter Kropotkin, and came to be influenced by their anarchist views, to the extent that biographer Fiona MacCarthy described his approach as being \"Marxism with visionary libertarianism\".\nAs the leading figure in the League, Morris embarked on a series of speeches and talks on street corners, in working men's clubs, and in lecture theatres across England and Scotland. He also visited Dublin, there offering his support for Irish nationalism, and formed a branch of the League at his Hammersmith house. By the time of their first conference in July 1885, the League had eight branches across England and had affiliations with several socialist groups in Scotland. However, as the British socialist movement grew it faced increased opposition from the establishment, with police frequently arresting and intimidating activists. To combat this, the League joined a Defence Club with other socialist groups, including the SDF, for which Morris was appointed treasurer. Morris was passionate in denouncing the \"bullying and hectoring\" that he felt socialists faced from the police, and on one occasion was arrested himself after fighting back against a police officer; a magistrate dismissed the charges. The Black Monday riots of February 1886 led to increased political repression against left-wing agitators, and in July Morris was again arrested and fined for public obstruction while preaching socialism on the streets.\nMorris oversaw production of the League's monthly\u2014soon to become weekly\u2014newspaper, \"Commonweal\", serving as its editor for six years, during which time he kept it financially afloat. First published in February 1885, it would contain contributions from such prominent socialists as Engels, Shaw, Paul Lafargue, Wilhelm Liebknecht, and Karl Kautsky, with Morris also regularly writing articles and poems for it. In \"Commonweal\" he serialised a 13-episode poem, \"The Pilgrims of Hope\", which was set in the period of the Paris Commune. From November 1886 to January 1887, Morris's novel \"A Dream of John Ball\" was serialised in \"Commonweal\". Set in Kent during the Peasants' Revolt of 1381, it contained strong socialist themes, although it proved popular among those of different ideological viewpoints, resulting in its publication in book form by Reeves and Turner in 1888. Shortly after, a collection of Morris's essays, \"Signs of Change\", was published.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOur business\u00a0[...] is the making of Socialists, \"i.e.\" convincing people that Socialism is good for them and is possible. When we have enough people of that way of thinking, \"they\" will find out what action is necessary for putting their principles in practice. Therefore, I say, make Socialists. We Socialists can do nothing else that is useful.\"\n\u2014 William Morris\nFrom January to October 1890, Morris serialised his novel \"News from Nowhere\" in \"Commonweal\", resulting in improved circulation for the paper. In March 1891 it was published in book form, before being translated into Dutch, French, Swedish, German and Italian by 1900 and becoming a classic among Europe's socialist community. Combining utopian socialism and soft science fiction, the book tells the tale of a contemporary socialist, William Guest, who falls asleep and awakens in the early 21st century, discovering a future society based on common ownership and democratic control of the means of production. In this society there is no private property, no big cities, no authority, no monetary system, no divorce, no courts, no prisons, and no class systems; it was a depiction of Morris's ideal socialist society.\nMorris had also continued with his translation work; in April 1887, Reeves and Turner published the first volume of Morris's translation of Homer's \"Odyssey\", with the second following in November. Venturing into new territory, Morris also authored and starred in a play \"The Tables Turned; Or Nupkins Awakened\", which was performed at a League meeting in November 1887. It told the story of socialists who are put on trial in front of a corrupt judge; the tale ends with the prisoners being freed by a proletariat revolution. In June 1889, Morris travelled to Paris as the League's delegate to the International Socialist Working Men's Congress, where his international standing was recognised by his being chosen as English spokesman by the Congress committee. The Second International emerged from the Congress, although Morris was distraught at its chaotic and disorganised proceedings.\nAt the League's Fourth Conference in May 1888, factional divisions became increasingly apparent between Morris's anti-parliamentary socialists, the parliamentary socialists, and the anti-statist anarchists; the Bloomsbury Branch were expelled for supporting parliamentary action. Under the leadership of Charles Mowbray, the League's anarchist wing was growing and called on the League to embrace violent action in trying to overthrow the capitalist system. By autumn 1889 the anarchists had taken over the League's executive committee and Morris was stripped of the editorship of \"Commonweal\" in favour of the anarchist Frank Kitz. This alienated Morris from the League, which had also become a financial burden for him; he had been subsidising its activities with \u00a3500 a year, a very large sum of money at the time. By the autumn of 1890, Morris left the Socialist League, with his Hammersmith branch seceding to become the independent Hammersmith Socialist Society in November 1890.\nThe Kelmscott Press and Morris's final years: 1889\u20131896.\nThe work of Morris &amp; Co. continued during Morris's final years, producing an array of stained glass windows designed by Burne-Jones and the six narrative tapestry panels depicting the quest for the Holy Grail for Stanmore Hall, Shropshire. Morris's influence on Britain's artistic community became increasingly apparent as the Art Workers' Guild was founded in 1884, although at the time he was too preoccupied with his socialist activism to pay it any attention. Although the proposal faced some opposition, Morris was elected to the Guild in 1888, and to the position of master in 1892. Morris similarly did not offer initial support for the Arts and Crafts Exhibition Society, but changed his opinion after the success of their first exhibit, held in Regent Street in October 1888. Giving lectures on tapestries for the group, in 1892 he was elected president. At this time, Morris re-focused his attentions on preservation campaigning; those causes he championed including the structures of St Mary's Church in Oxford, Blythburgh Church in Suffolk, Peterborough Cathedral, and Rouen Cathedral.\nAlthough his socialist activism had decreased, he remained involved with the Hammersmith Socialist Society, and in October 1891 oversaw the creation of a short-lived newsletter, the \"Hammersmith Socialist Record\". Coming to oppose factionalism within the socialist movement, he sought to rebuild his relationship with the SDF, appearing as a guest lecturer at some of their events and supporting SDF candidate George Lansbury when he stood in the Wandsworth by-election of February 1894. In 1893 the Hammersmith Socialist Society co-founded the Joint Committee of Socialist Bodies with representatives of the SDF and Fabian Society; Morris helped draw up its \"Manifesto of English Socialists\". He offered support for leftist activists on trial, including a number of militant anarchists whose violent tactics he nevertheless denounced. He also began using the term \"communism\" for the first time, stating that \"Communism is in fact the completion of Socialism: when that ceases to be militant and becomes triumphant, it will be communism.\" In December 1895 he gave his final open-air talk at Stepniak's funeral, where he spoke alongside the socialist Eleanor Marx, trade unionist Keir Hardie, and anarchist Errico Malatesta. Liberated from internal factional struggles, he retracted his anti-parliamentary position and worked for socialist unity, giving his last public lecture in January 1896 on the subject of \"One Socialist Party.\"\nIn December 1888, the Chiswick Press published Morris's \"The House of the Wolfings\", a fantasy story set in Iron Age Europe which provides a reconstructed portrait of the lives of Germanic-speaking Gothic tribes. It contained both prose and aspects of poetic verse. A sequel, \"The Roots of the Mountains\", followed in 1889. Over the coming years he would publish a string of other poetic works: \"The Story of the Glittering Plain\" (1890), \"The Wood Beyond the World\" (1894), \"The Well at the World's End\" (1896), \"The Water of the Wondrous Isles\" (1897) and \"The Sundering Flood\" (1898). He also embarked on a translation of the Anglo-Saxon tale \"Beowulf\"; because he could not fully understand Old English, his poetic translation was based largely on that already produced by Alfred John Wyatt. On publication, Morris's archaizing \"Beowulf\" was critically panned. Following the death of the sitting Poet Laureate of Great Britain and Ireland, Alfred, Lord Tennyson, in October 1892, Morris was offered the position but turned it down, disliking its associations with the monarchy and political establishment; instead the position went to Alfred Austin.\nIn January 1891, Morris founded the Kelmscott Press, a private press which would go on to publish the celebrated \"Kelmscott Chaucer\". By the early 1890s, Morris was increasingly ill and living largely as an invalid; aside from his gout, he also exhibited signs of epilepsy. In August 1891, he took his daughter Jenny on a tour of Northern France to visit the medieval churches and cathedrals. Back in England, he spent an increasing amount of time at Kelmscott Manor. Seeking treatment from the prominent doctor William Broadbent, he was prescribed a holiday in the coastal town of Folkestone. In December 1894 he was devastated upon learning of his 90-year-old mother's death.\nIn July 1896, Morris went on a cruise to Norway with construction engineer John Carruthers, during which he visited Vads\u00f8 and Trondheim; during the trip his physical condition deteriorated and he began experiencing hallucinations. Returning to Kelmscott House, he became a complete invalid, being visited by friends and family, before dying of tuberculosis on the morning of 3 October 1896. Obituaries appearing throughout the national press reflected that at the time, Morris was widely recognised primarily as a poet. Mainstream press obituaries trivialised or dismissed his involvement in socialism, although the socialist press focused largely on this aspect of his career. His funeral was held on 6 October, during which his corpse was carried from Hammersmith to Paddington rail station, where it was transported to Oxford, and from there to Kelmscott, where it was buried in the churchyard of St George's Church.\nPersonal life.\nMorris's biographer E. P. Thompson described him as having a \"robust bearing, and a slight roll in his walk\", alongside a \"rough beard\" and \"disordered hair\". The author Henry James described Morris as \"short, burly, corpulent, very careless and unfinished in his dress\u00a0... He has a loud voice and a nervous restless manner and a perfectly unaffected and businesslike address. His talk indeed is wonderfully to the point and remarkable for clear good sense.\" Morris's first biographer Mackail described him as being both \"a typical Englishman\" and \"a typical Londoner of the middle class\" albeit one who was transformed into \"something quite individual\" through the \"force of his genius\". MacCarthy described Morris's lifestyle as being \"late Victorian, mildly bohemian, but bourgeois\", with Mackail commenting that he exhibited many of the traits of the bourgeois Victorian class: \"industrious, honest, fair-minded up their lights, but unexpansive and unsympathetic\". Although he generally disliked children, Morris also exhibited a strong sense of responsibility towards his family. Mackail nevertheless thought he \"was interested in things much more than in people\" and that while he did have \"lasting friendships\" and \"deep affections\", he did not allow people to \"penetrate to the central part of him.\"\nPolitically, Morris was a staunch revolutionary socialist and anti-imperialist, and although raised a Christian he came to be an atheist. He came to reject state socialism and large centralised control, instead emphasising localised administration within a socialist society. Later political activist Derek Wall suggested that Morris could be classified as an ecosocialist. Morris was greatly influenced by Romanticism, with Thompson asserting that Romanticism was \"bred into his bones, and formed his early consciousness.\" Thompson argued that this \"Romantic Revolt\" was part of a \"passionate protest against an intolerable social reality\", that of the industrial capitalism of Britain's Victorian era. He believed that it led to little more than a \"yearning nostalgia or a sweet complaint\" and that Morris became \"a realist and a revolutionary\" only when he adopted socialism in 1882. Mackail was of the opinion that Morris had an \"innate Socialism\" which had \"penetrated and dominated all he did\" throughout his life. Given the conflict between his personal and professional life and his socio-political views, MacCarthy described Morris as \"a conservative radical\".\nMorris's behaviour was often erratic. He was of a nervous disposition, and throughout his life relied on networks of male friends to aid him in dealing with this. Morris's friends nicknamed him \"Topsy\" after a character in \"Uncle Tom's Cabin\". He had a wild temper and when sufficiently enraged could suffer seizures and blackouts. Rossetti was known to taunt Morris to enrage him for the amusement of himself and their other friends. Biographer Fiona MacCarthy suggests that Morris suffered from a form of Tourette's syndrome. In later life he suffered from gout, a common complaint among middle-class men in the Victorian period.\nMorris's ethos was that one should \"have nothing in your houses that you do not know to be useful or believe to be beautiful.\" He also held to the view that \"No work which cannot be done with pleasure in the doing is worth doing\" and adopted as his motto \"As I can\" from the fifteenth-century Flemish painter Jan van Eyck.\nWork.\nLiterature.\nBesides being an artist William Morris was a prolific writer of poetry, fiction, essays, and translations of ancient and medieval texts. His first poems were published when he was 24 years old, and he was polishing his final novel, \"The Sundering Flood\", at the time of his death. His daughter May's edition of Morris's \"Collected Works\" (1910\u20131915) runs to 24 volumes, and two more were published in 1936.\nMorris began publishing poetry and short stories in 1856 through \"The Oxford and Cambridge Magazine\" which he founded with his friends and financed while at university. His first volume, \"The Defence of Guenevere and Other Poems\" (1858), was the first book of Pre-Raphaelite poetry to be published. The dark poems, set in a sombre world of violence, were coolly received by the critics, and he was discouraged from publishing more for a number of years. \"The Haystack in the Floods\", one of the poems in that collection, is probably now one of his better-known poems. It is a grimly realistic piece set during the Hundred Years War in which the doomed lovers Jehane and Robert have a last parting in a convincingly portrayed rain-swept countryside. One early minor poem was \"Masters in this Hall\" (1860), a Christmas carol written to an old French tune. Another Christmas-themed poem is \"The Snow in the Street\", adapted from \"The Land East of the Sun and West of the Moon\" in \"The Earthly Paradise\".\nMorris met Eir\u00edkur Magn\u00fasson in 1868, and began to learn the Icelandic language from him. Morris published translations of \"The Saga of Gunnlaug Worm-Tongue\" and \"Grettis Saga\" in 1869, and the \"Story of the Volsungs and Niblungs\" in 1870. An additional volume was published under the title of \"Three Northern Love Stories\" in 1873.\nIn the last nine years of his life, Morris wrote a series of imaginative fictions usually referred to as the \"prose romances\". These novels\u00a0\u2013 including \"The Wood Beyond the World\" and \"The Well at the World's End\"\u00a0\u2013 have been credited as important milestones in the history of fantasy fiction, because, while other writers wrote of foreign lands, or of dream worlds, or the future (as Morris did in \"News from Nowhere\"), Morris's works were the first to be set in an entirely invented fantasy world. These were attempts to revive the genre of medieval romance, and written in imitation of medieval prose. Morris's prose style in these novels has been praised by Edward James, who described them as \"among the most lyrical and enchanting fantasies in the English language.\"\nOn the other hand, L. Sprague de Camp considered Morris's fantasies to be not wholly successful, partly because Morris eschewed many literary techniques from later eras. In particular, De Camp argued the plots of the novels are heavily driven by coincidence; while many things just happened in the romances, the novels are still weakened by the dependence on it. Nevertheless, large subgenres of the field of fantasy have sprung from the romance genre, but indirectly, through their writers' imitation of William Morris.\nEarly fantasy writers like Lord Dunsany, E. R. Eddison and James Branch Cabell were familiar with Morris's romances. \"The Wood Beyond the World\" is considered to have heavily influenced C. S. Lewis's Narnia series, while J. R. R. Tolkien was inspired by Morris's reconstructions of early Germanic life in \"The House of the Wolfings\" and \"The Roots of the Mountains\". The young Tolkien attempted a retelling of the story of Kullervo from the \"Kalevala\" in the style of \"The House of the Wolfings\"; Tolkien considered much of his literary work to have been inspired by an early reading of Morris, even suggesting that he was unable to better Morris's work; the names of characters such as \"Gandolf\" and the horse Silverfax appear in \"The Well at the World's End\".\nSir Henry Newbolt's medieval allegorical novel \"Aladore\" was influenced by Morris's fantasies. James Joyce also drew inspiration from his work.\nTextile design.\nDuring his lifetime, Morris produced items in a range of crafts, mainly those to do with furnishing, including over 600 designs for wall-paper, textiles, and embroideries, over 150 for stained glass windows, three typefaces, and around 650 borders and ornamentations for the Kelmscott Press. He emphasised the idea that the design and production of an item should not be divorced from one another, and that where possible those creating items should be designer-craftsmen, thereby both designing and manufacturing their goods. In the field of textile design, Morris revived a number of dead techniques, and insisted on the use of good quality raw materials, almost all natural dyes, and hand processing. He also observed the natural world first hand to gain a basis for his designs, and insisted on learning the techniques of production prior to producing a design.\nMackail asserted that Morris became \"a manufacturer not because he wished to make money, but because he wished to make the things he manufactured.\" Morris &amp; Co.'s designs were fashionable among Britain's upper and middle-classes, with biographer Fiona MacCarthy asserting that they had become \"the safe choice of the intellectual classes, an exercise in political correctitude.\" The company's unique selling point was the range of different items that it produced, as well as the ethos of artistic control over production that it emphasised.\nIt is likely that much of Morris's preference for medieval textiles was formed\u00a0\u2013 or crystallised\u00a0\u2013 during his brief apprenticeship with G. E. Street. Street had co-written a book on \"Ecclesiastical Embroidery\" in 1848, and was a staunch advocate of abandoning faddish woolen work on canvas in favour of more expressive embroidery techniques based on Opus Anglicanum, a surface embroidery technique popular in medieval England.\nHe was also fond of hand-knotted Persian carpet and advised the South Kensington Museum in the acquisition of fine Kerman carpets.\nMorris taught himself embroidery, working with wool on a frame custom-built from an old example. Once he had mastered the technique he trained his wife Jane, her sister Bessie Burden and others to execute designs to his specifications. When \"embroideries of all kinds\" were offered through Morris, Marshall, Faulkner &amp; Co. catalogues, church embroidery became and remained an important line of business for its successor companies into the twentieth century. By the 1870s, the firm was offering both embroidery patterns and finished works. Following in Street's footsteps, Morris became active in the growing movement to return originality and mastery of technique to embroidery, and was one of the first designers associated with the Royal School of Art Needlework with its aim to \"restore Ornamental Needlework for secular purposes to the high place it once held among decorative arts.\"\nMorris took up the practical art of dyeing as a necessary adjunct of his manufacturing business. He spent much of his time at Staffordshire dye works mastering the processes of that art and making experiments in the revival of old or discovery of new methods. One result of these experiments was to reinstate indigo dyeing as a practical industry and generally to renew the use of those vegetable dyes, such as the red derived from madder, which had been driven almost out of use by the anilines. Dyeing of wools, silks, and cottons was the necessary preliminary to what he had much at heart, the production of woven and printed fabrics of the highest excellence; and the period of incessant work at the dye-vat (1875\u20131876) was followed by a period during which he was absorbed in the production of textiles (1877\u20131878), and more especially in the revival of carpet-weaving as a fine art.\nMorris's patterns for woven textiles, some of which were also machine made under ordinary commercial conditions, included intricate double-woven furnishing fabrics in which two sets of warps and wefts are interlinked to create complex gradations of colour and texture. Morris long dreamed of weaving tapestries in the medieval manner, which he called \"the noblest of the weaving arts.\" In September 1879 he finished his first solo effort, a small piece called \"Cabbage and Vine\".\nWhile Morris is well known for his opposition to industrial production techniques he none the less designed and produced several textile pieces for the Jacquard loom.\nBook illustration and design.\nNineteenth- and twentieth-century avant-garde artistic movements took an interest in the typographical arts, greatly enriching book design and illustration. Morris's designs, like the work of the Pre-Raphaelite painters with whom he was associated, referred frequently to medieval motifs. In 1891, he founded the Kelmscott Press, which by the time it closed in 1898 had produced more than fifty works using traditional printing methods, a hand-driven press and hand-made paper. They included his masterpiece, an edition of the \"Works of Geoffrey Chaucer\" with illustrations by Edward Burne-Jones. Morris invented three distinctive typefaces\u00a0\u2013 Golden, Troy, and Chaucer, with the text being framed with intricate floral borders similar to illuminated medieval manuscripts. His work inspired many small private presses in the following century.\nMorris's aesthetic and social values became a leading force in the Arts and Crafts Movement. The Kelmscott Press influenced much of the fine press movement in England and the United States during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. It brought the need for books that were aesthetic objects as well as words to the attention of the reading and publishing worlds.\nAt Kelmscott Press, the book-making was under his constant supervision and practical assistance. It was his ambition to produce a perfect work to restore all the beauty of illuminated lettering, richness of gilding and grace of binding that used to make a volume the treasure of a king. His efforts were constantly directed towards giving the world at least one book that exceeded anything that had ever appeared. Morris designed his type after the best examples of early printers, what he called his \"golden type\" which he copied after Jenson, Parautz, Coburger and others. With this in mind, Morris chose the paper which he adapted to his subject with the same care with which he selected his material for binding. As a result, only the wealthy could purchase his lavish works; Morris realized that creating works in the manner of the Middle Ages was difficult in a profit-grinding society.\nLegacy.\nPresident of the William Morris Society Hans Brill referred to Morris as \"one of the outstanding figures of the nineteenth century\", while Linda Parry termed him the \"single most important figure in British textile production\".\nAt the time of Morris's death, his poetry was known internationally and his company's products were found all over the world. In his lifetime, he was best known as a poet, although by the late twentieth century he was primarily known as a designer of wallpapers and fabrics.\nHe was a major contributor to the revival of traditional British textile arts and methods of production. Morris's ethos of production was an influence on the Bauhaus movement. Another aspect of Morris's preservationism was his desire to protect the natural world from the ravages of pollution and industrialism, causing some historians of the green movement to regard Morris as an important forerunner of modern environmentalism.\nAymer Vallance was commissioned to produce the first biography of Morris, published in 1897, after Morris's death, per the latter's wishes. This presented the creation of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings as Morris's greatest achievement. Morris's next biographer was Burne-Jones's son-in-law John William Mackail, who authored the two-volume \"Life of William Morris\" (1899) in which he provided a sympathetic portrayal of Morris that largely omitted his political activities, treating them as a passing phase that Morris overcame.\nMacCarthy's biography, \"William Morris: A Life for Our Time\", was first published by Faber and Faber in 1994, and a paperback edition was published in 2010. For the 2013 Venice Biennale, artist Jeremy Deller selected Morris as the subject of a large-scale mural titled \"We Sit Starving Amidst our Gold\", in which Morris returns from the dead to hurl the yacht of Russian billionaire Roman Abramovich into the waves of an ocean.\nMacCarthy curated the \"Anarchy &amp; Beauty\" exhibition\u2014a commemoration of Morris's legacy\u2014for the National Portrait Gallery in 2014, for which she recruited around 70 artists who were required to undertake a test on Morris's \"News from Nowhere\" to be accepted. Writing for \"The Guardian\" prior to the opening of the exhibition on 16 October 2014, MacCarthy asserted:\nMorris has exerted a powerful influence on thinking about art and design over the past century. He has been the constant niggle in the conscience. How can we combat all this luxury and waste? What drove him into revolutionary activism was his anger and shame at the injustices within society. He burned with guilt at the fact that his \"good fortune only\" allowed him to live in beautiful surroundings and to pursue the work he adored.\n\"Anarchy &amp; Beauty\"'s arts and crafts section featured Morris's own copy of the French edition of Karl Marx's \"Das Kapital\" handbound in a gold-tooled leather binding that MacCarthy describes as \"the ultimate example of Morris's conviction that perfectionism of design and craftsmanship should be available to everyone.\"\nIn 2014, the Metropolitan Museum of Art exhibited \"William Morris: Textiles and Wallpaper\", displaying early decorative arts the Morris, Marshall, Faulkner, and Company and later Morris &amp; Company produced.\nIn 2016, Arts Catalyst commissioned British artist and academic David Mabb to produce a work responding to the use of Morris' designs in the living quarters aboard British nuclear submarines from the 1960s to the 1990s. The resulting work, \"A Provisional Monument to Nuclear Disarmament\", was exhibited first at KARST in Plymouth and later at the Bildmuseet in Umea, Sweden.\nIn 2025, the William Morris Gallery opened the exhibition \"Morris Mania\", examining how Morris' designs became globally recognised.\nNotable collections and house museums.\nA number of galleries and museums house important collections of Morris's work and decorative items commissioned from Morris &amp; Co. The William Morris Gallery in Walthamstow, England, is a public museum devoted to Morris's life, work and influence. The William Morris Society is based at Morris's final London home, Kelmscott House, Hammersmith, and is an international members society, museum and venue for lectures and other Morris-related events. The Art Gallery of South Australia is \"fortunate in holding the most comprehensive collection of Morris &amp; Co. furnishings outside Britain\". The collection includes books, embroideries, tapestries, fabrics, wallpapers, drawings and sketches, furniture and stained glass, and forms the focus of two published works (produced to accompany special exhibitions).\nThe former \"green dining room\" at the Victoria and Albert Museum is now its \"Morris Room\". The V&amp;A's British Galleries house other decorative works by Morris and his associates.\nOne of the meeting rooms in the Oxford Union, decorated with the wallpaper in his style, is named the Morris Room.\nWightwick Manor in the West Midlands, England, is a notable example of the Morris &amp; Co. style, with lots of original Morris wallpapers, fabrics, carpets, and furniture, May Morris art and embroidery, De Morgan tiles, and Pre-Raphaelite works of art, managed by the National Trust. Standen in West Sussex, England, was designed by Webb between 1892 and 1894 and decorated with Morris carpets, fabrics and wallpapers. The illustrator Edward Linley Sambourne chose to decorate his London family home 18 Stafford Terrace with many Morris &amp; Co wallpapers, which have been preserved and can still be seen today. Morris's homes Red House and Kelmscott Manor have been preserved. Red House was acquired by the National Trust in 2003 and is open to the public. Kelmscott Manor is owned by the Society of Antiquaries of London and is open to the public.\nThe Huntington Library, Art Collections and Botanical Gardens in San Marino, California, acquired the collection of Morris materials amassed by Sanford and Helen Berger in 1999. The collection includes stained glass, wallpaper, textiles, embroidery, drawings, ceramics, more than 2000 books, original woodblocks, and the complete archives of both Morris, Marshall, Faulkner &amp; Co. and Morris &amp; Co. These materials formed the foundation for the 2002 exhibition \"William Morris: Creating the Useful and the Beautiful\" and the 2003 exhibition \"The Beauty of Life: William Morris and the Art of Design\" and accompanying publication.\nA Greater London Council blue plaque at Red House commemorates Morris and architect Philip Webb.\n7, Hammersmith Terrace is the former home of Sir Emery Walker, a close friend and colleague of Morris. The house is decorated in the Arts &amp; Crafts style, including with extensive collections of Morris wallpaper, furniture, and textiles. 7, Hammersmith Terrace is operated by the Emery Walker Trust, and is open to the public for tours.\nIn 2013, the Cary Graphic Arts Collection at Rochester Institute of Technology bought William Morris's London-built Hopkinson &amp; Cope Improved Albion press (No. 6551) at auction for $233,000. This printing press was specially reinforced to produce Morris's \"Chaucer\" in 1896. Other owners of Morris's Albion press include Frederic Goudy and J. Ben Lieberman.\nIn 2023, Walthamstow F.C. launched a new home football shirt with Admiral Sports featuring a William Morris print. The shirt was widely regarded as one of the best kit launches of the year and eventually won the Wood Pencil D&amp;AD award for Printed Graphic.\nLiterary works.\nCollected poetry, fiction, and essays.\nAlthough best known for textile designs, Morris was notable for his work within the field of literature. His writings include:\nTranslations.\nMorris's \"Beowulf\" was one of the first translations of the Old English poem into modern English.\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33278", "revid": "27206853", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33278", "title": "Woody Guthrie", "text": "American singer-songwriter (1912\u20131967)\nWoodrow Wilson Guthrie (; July 14, 1912\u00a0\u2013 October 3, 1967) was an American singer, songwriter, and composer widely considered one of the most significant figures in American folk music. His work focused on themes of American socialism and anti-fascism and has inspired many generations politically and musically with songs such as \"This Land Is Your Land\" and \"Tear the Fascists Down\".\nGuthrie wrote hundreds of country, folk, and children's songs, along with ballads and improvised works. \"Dust Bowl Ballads\", Guthrie's album of songs about the Dust Bowl period, was included on \"Mojo\"'s list of 100 Records That Changed the World, and many of his recorded songs are archived in the Library of Congress. Songwriters who have acknowledged Guthrie as an influence include Steve Earle, Bob Dylan, Lou Reed, Phil Ochs, Johnny Cash, Bruce Springsteen, Donovan, Robert Hunter, Harry Chapin, John Mellencamp, Pete Seeger, Andy Irvine, Joe Strummer, Billy Bragg, Dropkick Murphys, Jerry Garcia, Bob Weir, Jeff Tweedy, Tom Paxton, Brian Fallon, Sean Bonnette, and Sixto Rodr\u00edguez. Guthrie frequently performed with the message \"This machine kills fascists\" displayed on his guitar.\nGuthrie was brought up by middle-class parents in Okemah, Oklahoma. He left Okemah in 1929, after his mother, suffering from the Huntington\u2019s disease that would later kill him too, was institutionalized. Guthrie followed his wayward father to Pampa, Texas, where he was running a flophouse. Though Guthrie lived there for just eight years, the town's influence on him and his music was undeniable. He married at 20, but with the advent of the dust storms that marked the Dust Bowl period, he left his wife and three children to join the thousands of Texans and Okies who were migrating to California looking for employment. He worked at the Los Angeles radio station KFVD, achieving some fame from playing hillbilly music, befriended Will Geer and John Steinbeck, and wrote a column for the communist newspaper \"People's World\" from May 1939 to January 1940.\nThroughout his life, Guthrie was associated with United States communist groups, although he apparently did not belong to any. With the outbreak of World War II and the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop non-aggression pact the Soviet Union had signed with Germany in 1939, the anti-Stalin owners of KFVD radio were not comfortable with Guthrie's political leanings after he wrote a song praising the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact and the Soviet invasion of Poland. He left the station and went to New York, where he wrote and recorded his 1940 album \"Dust Bowl Ballads\", based on his experiences during the 1930s, which earned him the nickname the \"Dust Bowl Troubadour\". In February 1940, he wrote his most famous song, \"This Land Is Your Land\", a response to what he felt was the overplaying of Irving Berlin's \"God Bless America\" on the radio.\nGuthrie married three times and fathered eight children. His son Arlo Guthrie became nationally known as a musician. Guthrie died in 1967 from complications of Huntington's disease, inherited from his mother. His first two daughters also died of the disease.\nEarly life.\nGuthrie was born July 14, 1912, in Okemah, a small town in Okfuskee County, Oklahoma, the son of Nora Belle (n\u00e9e Sherman) and Charles Edward Guthrie. His parents named him after Woodrow Wilson, then Governor of New Jersey and the Democratic candidate who was elected as President of the United States in fall 1912. Charles Guthrie was an industrious businessman, owning at one time up to 30 plots of land in Okfuskee County. He was actively involved in Oklahoma politics and was a conservative Democratic candidate for office in the county. Charles Guthrie was reportedly involved in the 1911 lynching of Laura and L. D. Nelson. (Woody Guthrie wrote three songs about the event in the 1960s. He said that his father, Charles, became a member of the Ku Klux Klan during its revival beginning in 1915.)\nThree significant fires impacted Guthrie's early life. In 1909, one fire caused the loss of his family's home in Okemah a month after it was completed. When Guthrie was seven, his sister Clara died after setting her clothes on fire during an argument with her mother, and, later, in 1927, their father was severely burned in a fire at home. Guthrie's mother, Nora, was afflicted with Huntington's disease, although the family did not know this at the time. What they could see was dementia and muscular degeneration.\nWhen Woody was 14, Nora was committed to the Oklahoma Hospital for the Insane. At the time his father Charles was living and working in Pampa, Texas, to repay debts from unsuccessful real estate deals. Woody and his siblings were on their own in Oklahoma; they relied on their eldest brother Roy for support. The 14-year-old Woody Guthrie worked odd jobs around Okemah, begging meals and sometimes sleeping at the homes of family friends.\nGuthrie had a natural affinity for music, learning old ballads and traditional English and Scottish songs from the parents of friends. Guthrie befriended an African-American shoeshine boy named George, who played blues on his harmonica. After listening to George play, Guthrie bought his own harmonica and began playing along with him. He used to busk for money and food. Although Guthrie did not do well as a student and dropped out of high school in his senior year before graduation, his teachers described him as bright. He was an avid reader on a wide range of topics.\nIn 1929, Guthrie's father sent for Woody to join him in Texas, but little changed for the aspiring musician. Guthrie, then 18, was reluctant to attend high school classes in Pampa; he spent most of his time learning songs by busking on the streets and reading in the library at Pampa's city hall. He regularly played at dances with his father's half-brother Jeff Guthrie, a fiddle player. His mother died in 1930 of complications of Huntington's disease while still in the Oklahoma Hospital for the Insane. In 1931 Guthrie met his first wife, Mary Jennings, the younger sister of his musician friend Matt Jennings. They married in Pampa in 1933.\nCareer.\n1930s.\nDuring the Dust Bowl period, Guthrie joined the thousands of Okies and others who migrated to California to look for work, leaving his wife and children in Texas. Many of his songs are concerned with the conditions faced by working-class people.\nDuring the latter part of that decade in Los Angeles, he achieved fame with radio partner Maxine \"Lefty Lou\" Crissman as a broadcast performer of commercial hillbilly music and traditional folk music. Guthrie was making enough money to send for his family to join him from Texas. While appearing on the radio station KFVD, owned by a populist-minded New Deal Democrat, Frank W. Burke, Guthrie began to write and perform some of the protest songs that he eventually released on his album \"Dust Bowl Ballads\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis song is Copyrighted in U.S., under Seal of Copyright #154085, for a period of 28 years, and anybody caught singin' it without our permission, will be mighty good friends of ourn, cause we don't give a dern. Publish it. Write it. Sing it. Swing to it. Yodel it. We wrote it, that's all we wanted to do.\n\u2014Written by Guthrie in the late 1930s on a songbook distributed to listeners of his Los Angeles radio show \"Woody and Lefty Lou\", who wanted the words to his recordings.\nWhile at KFVD, Guthrie met newscaster Ed Robbin. Robbin was impressed with a song Guthrie wrote about political activist Thomas Mooney, wrongly convicted in a case that was a cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre of the time. Robbin, who became Guthrie's political mentor, introduced Guthrie to socialists and communists in Southern California, including Will Geer. He also introduced Guthrie to writer John Steinbeck. Robbin remained Guthrie's lifelong friend and helped Guthrie book benefit performances in the communist circles in Southern California.\nNotwithstanding Guthrie's later claim that \"the best thing that I did in 1936 was to sign up with the Communist Party\", he was never a member of the party. Guthrie was identified as a fellow traveler\u2014an outsider who agreed with the platform of the party while avoiding party discipline.(\"by whom\"?) Guthrie wrote a column for the communist newspaper \"People's World\". The column, titled \"Woody Sez\", appeared a total of 174\u00a0times from May 1939 to January 1940. \"Woody Sez\" was not explicitly political, but it covered current events as observed by Guthrie. He wrote the columns in an exaggerated hillbilly dialect and usually included a small comic. These columns were published posthumously as a collection.\nWith the outbreak of World War II and publicity about the non-aggression pact the Soviet Union had signed with Germany in 1939, the owners of KFVD radio did not want its staff \"spinning apologia\" for the Soviet Union. They fired both Robbin and Guthrie. Without the daily radio show, Guthrie's employment chances declined, and he returned with his family to Pampa, Texas. Although Mary was happy to return to Texas, Guthrie preferred to accept Will Geer's invitation to New York City and headed east.\n1940s: Building a legacy.\nNew York City.\nArriving in New York, Guthrie, known as \"the Oklahoma cowboy\", was embraced by its folk music community. For a time, he slept on a couch in Will Geer's apartment. Guthrie made his first recordings\u2014several hours of conversation and songs recorded by the folklorist Alan Lomax for the Library of Congress\u2014as well as an album, \"Dust Bowl Ballads,\" for Victor Records in Camden, New Jersey.\nIn February 1940, he wrote his most famous song, \"This Land Is Your Land\", as a response to what he felt was an overplaying of Irving Berlin's \"God Bless America\" on the radio. Guthrie thought the lyrics were unrealistic and complacent. He adapted the melody from an old gospel song, \"Oh My Loving Brother\", which had been adapted by the country group the Carter Family for their song \"Little Darling Pal Of Mine\". Guthrie signed the manuscript with the comment, \"All you can write is what you see.\" Although the song was written in 1940, it was four years before he recorded it for Moses Asch in April 1944. Sheet music was produced and given to schools by Howie Richmond sometime later.\nIn March 1940, Guthrie was invited to play at a benefit hosted by the John Steinbeck Committee to Aid Farm Workers, to raise money for migrant workers. There he met the folk singer Pete Seeger, and the two men became good friends. Seeger accompanied Guthrie back to Texas to meet other members of the Guthrie family. He recalled an awkward conversation with Mary Guthrie's mother, in which she asked for Seeger's help to persuade Guthrie to treat her daughter better.\nFrom April 1940, Guthrie and Seeger lived together in the Greenwich Village loft of sculptor Harold Ambellan and his fianc\u00e9e. Guthrie had some success in New York at this time as a guest on CBS's radio program \"Back Where I Come From\" and used his influence to get a spot on the show for his friend Huddie \"Lead Belly\" Ledbetter. Ledbetter's Tenth Street apartment was a gathering spot for the musician circle in New York at the time, and Guthrie and Ledbetter were good friends, as they had busked together at bars in Harlem.\nIn November 1941, Seeger introduced Guthrie to his friend the poet Charles Olson, then a junior editor at the fledgling magazine \"Common Ground\". The meeting led to Guthrie writing the article \"Ear Players\" in the Spring 1942 issue of the magazine. The article marked Guthrie's debut as a published writer in the mainstream media.\nIn September 1940, Guthrie was invited by the Model Tobacco Company to host their radio program \"Pipe Smoking Time\". Guthrie was paid $180 a week, an impressive salary in 1940. He was finally making enough money to send regular payments back to Mary. He also brought her and the children to New York, where the family lived briefly in an apartment on Central Park West. The reunion represented Woody's desire to be a better father and husband. He said, \"I have to set [\"sic\"] real hard to think of being a dad.\" Guthrie quit after the seventh broadcast, claiming he had begun to feel the show was too restrictive when he was told what to sing. Disgruntled with New York, Guthrie packed up Mary and his children in a new car and headed west to California.\nChoreographer Sophie Maslow developed \"Folksay\" as an elaborate mix of modern dance and ballet, which combined folk songs by Woody Guthrie with text from Carl Sandburg's 1936 book-length poem \"The People, Yes\". The premiere took place in March 1942 at the Humphrey-Weidman Studio Theatre in New York City. Guthrie provided live music for the performance, which featured Maslow and her New Dance Group. Two and a half years later, Maslow brought \"Folksay\" to early television under the direction of Leo Hurwitz. The same group performed the ballet live in front of CBS TV cameras. The 30-minute broadcast aired on WCBW, the pioneer CBS television station in New York City (now WCBS-TV), from 8:15\u20138:45\u00a0pm ET on November 24, 1944. Featured were Maslow and the New Dance Group, which included among others Jane Dudley, Pearl Primus, and William Bales. Woody Guthrie and fellow folk singer Tony Kraber played guitar, sang songs, and read text from \"The People, Yes\". The program received positive reviews and was performed on television over WCBW a second time in early 1945.\nPacific Northwest.\nIn May 1941, after a brief stay in Los Angeles, Guthrie moved to Portland, Oregon, in the neighborhood of Lents, on the promise of a job. Gunther von Fritsch was directing a documentary about the Bonneville Power Administration's construction of the Grand Coulee Dam on the Columbia River, and needed a narrator. Alan Lomax had recommended Guthrie to narrate the film and sing songs onscreen. The original project was expected to take 12 months, but as filmmakers became worried about casting such a political figure, they minimized Guthrie's role. The Department of the Interior hired him for one month to write songs about the Columbia River and the construction of the federal dams for the documentary's soundtrack. Guthrie toured the Columbia River and the Pacific Northwest. Guthrie said he \"couldn't believe it, it's a paradise\", which appeared to inspire him creatively. In one month Guthrie wrote 26 songs, including three of his most famous: \"Roll On, Columbia, Roll On\", \"Pastures of Plenty\", and \"Grand Coulee Dam\". The surviving songs were released as \"Columbia River Songs\". The film \"Columbia\" was not completed until 1949 (see below). At the conclusion of the month in Oregon and Washington, Guthrie wanted to return to New York. Tired of the continual uprooting, Mary Guthrie told him to go without her and the children. Although Guthrie would see Mary again, once on a tour through Los Angeles with the Almanac Singers, it was essentially the end of their marriage. Divorce was difficult, since Mary was a Catholic, but she reluctantly agreed in December 1943.\nAlmanac Singers.\nFollowing the conclusion of his work in the Northwest, Guthrie corresponded with Pete Seeger about Seeger's newly formed folk-protest group, the Almanac Singers. Guthrie returned to New York with plans to tour the country as a member of the group. The singers originally worked out of a loft in New York City hosting regular concerts called \"hootenannies\", a word Pete and Woody had picked up in their cross-country travels. The singers eventually outgrew the space and moved into the cooperative Almanac House in Greenwich Village.\nInitially, Guthrie helped write and sing what the Almanac Singers termed \"peace\" songs while the Nazi\u2013Soviet Pact was in effect. After Hitler's invasion of the Soviet Union, the group wrote anti-fascist songs. The members of the Almanac Singers and residents of the Almanac House were a loosely defined group of musicians, though the core members included Guthrie, Pete Seeger, Millard Lampell and Lee Hays. In keeping with common utopian ideals, meals, chores and rent at the Almanac House were shared. The Sunday hootenannies were good opportunities to collect donation money for rent. Songs written in the Almanac House had shared songwriting credits among all the members, although in the case of \"Union Maid\", members would later state that Guthrie wrote the song, ensuring that his children would receive residuals.\nIn the Almanac House, Guthrie added authenticity to their work, since he was a \"real\" working class Oklahoman. \"There was the heart of America personified in Woody ... And for a New York Left that was primarily Jewish, first or second generation American, and was desperately trying to get Americanized, I think a figure like Woody was of great, great importance\", a friend of the group, Irwin Silber, would say. Woody routinely emphasized his working-class image, rejected songs he felt were not in the country blues vein he was familiar with, and rarely contributed to household chores. House member Agnes \"Sis\" Cunningham, another Okie, would later recall that Woody \"loved people to think of him as a real working class person and not an intellectual\". Guthrie contributed songwriting and authenticity in much the same capacity for Pete Seeger's post-Almanac Singers project \"People's Songs\", a newsletter and booking organization for labor singers, founded in 1945.\n\"Bound for Glory\".\nGuthrie was a prolific writer, penning thousands of pages of unpublished poems and prose, many written while living in New York City. After a recording session with Alan Lomax, Lomax suggested Guthrie write an autobiography. Lomax thought Guthrie's descriptions of growing up were some of the best accounts he had read of American childhood. During this time, Guthrie met Marjorie Mazia (the professional name of Marjorie Greenblatt), a dancer in New York who would become his second wife. Mazia was an instructor at the Martha Graham Dance School, where she was assisting Sophie Maslow with her piece \"Folksay\". Based on the folklore and poetry collected by Carl Sandburg, \"Folksay\" included the adaptation of some of Guthrie's \"Dust Bowl Ballads\" for the dance. Guthrie continued to write songs and began work on his autobiography. The end product, \"Bound for Glory\", was completed with editing assistance by Mazia and was first published by E.P. Dutton in 1943. It is told in the artist's down-home dialect. The \"Library Journal\" complained about the \"too careful reproduction of illiterate speech\". However, Clifton Fadiman, reviewing the book in \"The New Yorker\", remarked that \"Someday people are going to wake up to the fact that Woody Guthrie and the ten thousand songs that leap and tumble off the strings of his music box are a national possession, like Yellowstone and Yosemite, and part of the best stuff this country has to show the world.\"\nThis book was the inspiration for the movie \"Bound for Glory\", starring David Carradine, which won the 1976 Academy Award for Original Music Score for Original Song Score and Its Adaptation or Adaptation Score, and the National Board of Review Award for Best Actor, among other accolades.\nIn 1944, Guthrie met Moses \"Moe\" Asch of Folkways Records, for whom he first recorded \"This Land Is Your Land\". Over the next few years, he recorded \"Worried Man Blues\", along with hundreds of other songs. These recordings would later be released by Folkways and Stinson Records, which had joint distribution rights. The Folkways recordings are available (through the Smithsonian Institution online shop); the most complete series of these sessions, culled from dates with Asch, is titled \"The Asch Recordings\".\nWorld War II years.\nGuthrie believed performing his anti-fascist songs and poems in the United States was the best use of his talents.\nLabor for Victory.\nIn April 1942, \"Time\" magazine reported that the AFL (American Federation of Labor) and the Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO) had agreed to a joint radio production, called \"Labor for Victory\". NBC agreed to run the weekly segment as a \"public service\". The AFL and CIO presidents William Green and Philip Murray agreed to let their press chiefs, Philip Pearl and Len De Caux, narrate on alternate weeks. The show ran on NBC radio on Saturdays 10:15\u201310:30\u00a0pm, starting on April 25, 1942. \"Time\" wrote, \"De Caux and Pearl hope to make the Labor for Victory program popular enough for an indefinite run, using labor news, name speakers and interviews with workmen. Labor partisanship, they promise, is out.\" Writers for \"Labor for Victory\" included: Peter Lyon, a progressive journalist; Millard Lampell (born Allan Sloane), later an American movie and television screenwriter; and Morton Wishengrad, who worked for the AFL.\nFor entertainment on CIO episodes, De Caux asked singer and songwriter Woody Guthrie to contribute to the show. \"Personally, I would like to see a phonograph record made of your 'Girl in the Red, White, and Blue.'\" The title appears in at least one collection of Guthrie records. Guthrie consented and performed solo two or three times on this program (among several other WWII radio shows, including \"Answering You\", \"Labor for Victory\", \"Jazz in America\", and \"We the People\"). On August 29, 1942, he performed \"The Farmer-Labor Train\", with lyrics he had written to the tune of \"Wabash Cannonball\". (In 1948, he reworked the \"Wabash Cannonball\" melody as \"The Wallace-Taylor Train\" for the 1948 Progressive National Convention, which nominated former U.S. Vice President Henry A. Wallace for president.) The Almanac Singers (of which Guthrie and Lampell were co-founders) appeared on \"The Treasury Hour\" and CBS Radio's \"We the People\". The latter was later produced as a television series. (Also, Marc Blitzstein's papers show that Guthrie made some contributions to four CIO episodes (dated June 20, June 27, August 1, August 15, 1948) of \"Labor for Victory.\") While \"Labor for Victory\" was a milestone in theory as a national platform, in practice it proved less so. Only 35 of 104 NBC affiliates carried the show. Episodes included the announcement that the show represented \"twelve million organized men and women, united in the high resolve to rid the world of Fascism in 1942\". Speakers included Donald E. Montgomery, then \"consumer's counselor\" at the U.S. Department of Agriculture.\nMerchant Marine.\nGuthrie lobbied the United States Army to accept him as a USO performer instead of conscripting him as a soldier in the draft. When Guthrie's attempts failed, his friends Cisco Houston and Jim Longhi persuaded the singer to join the U.S. Merchant Marine in June 1943. He made several voyages aboard merchant ships SS \"William B. Travis\", SS \"William Floyd\", and SS \"Sea Porpoise\", while they traveled in convoys during the Battle of the Atlantic. He served as a mess man and dishwasher, and frequently sang for the crew and troops to buoy their spirits on transatlantic voyages. His first ship, \"William B. Travis\", hit a mine in the Mediterranean Sea, killing one person aboard, but the ship sailed to Bizerte, Tunisia under her own power.\nHis last ship, \"Sea Porpoise\", took troops from the United States to England and France for the D-Day invasion. Guthrie was aboard when the ship was torpedoed off Utah Beach by the German submarine U-390 on July 5, 1944, injuring 12 of the crew. Guthrie was unhurt and the ship stayed afloat; \"Sea Porpoise\" returned to England, where she was repaired at Newcastle. In July 1944, she returned to the United States.\nGuthrie was an active supporter of the National Maritime Union, one of many unions for wartime American merchant sailors. Guthrie wrote songs about his experience in the Merchant Marine but was never satisfied with them. Longhi later wrote about Guthrie's marine experiences in his book \"Woody, Cisco and Me\". The book offers a rare first-hand account of Guthrie during his Merchant Marine service, at one point describing how Guthrie referred to his guitar as a \"Hoping Machine\". But later during duty aboard the troop ship, Guthrie built an actual \"Hoping Machine\" made of cloth, whirligigs and discarded metal attached to a railing at the stern, aimed at lifting the soldiers' spirits. In 1945, the government decided that Guthrie's association with communism excluded him from further service in the Merchant Marine; he was drafted into the U.S. Army.\nWhile he was on from the Army, Guthrie married Marjorie. After his discharge, they moved into a house on Mermaid Avenue in Coney Island and over time had four children: daughters Cathy and Nora; and sons Arlo and Joady. Cathy died as a result of a fire at the age of four, and Guthrie suffered a serious depression from his grief. Arlo and Joady followed in their father's footsteps as singer-songwriters.\nWhen his family was young, Guthrie wrote and recorded \"Songs to Grow on for Mother and Child\", a collection of children's music, which includes the song \"Goodnight Little Arlo (Goodnight Little Darlin')\", written when Arlo was about nine years old. During 1947, he wrote \"House of Earth\", an historical novel containing explicit sexual material, about a couple who build a house made of clay and earth to withstand the Dust Bowl's brutal weather. He could not get it published. It was published posthumously in 2013, by Harper, under actor Johnny Depp's publishing imprint, Infinitum Nihil.\nGuthrie was also a prolific sketcher and painter, his images ranging from simple, impressionistic images to free and characterful drawings, typically of the people in his songs.\nIn 1949, Guthrie's music was used in the documentary film \"Columbia River\", which explored government dams and hydroelectric projects on the river. Guthrie had been commissioned by the US Bonneville Power Administration in 1941 to write songs for the project, but it had been postponed by World War II.\nPost-war: Mermaid Avenue.\nThe years immediately after the war when he lived on Mermaid Avenue were among Guthrie's most productive as a writer. His extensive writings from this time were archived and maintained by Marjorie and later his estate, mostly handled by his daughter Nora. Several of the manuscripts also contain writing by a young Arlo and the other Guthrie children.\nDuring this time Ramblin' Jack Elliott studied extensively under Guthrie, visiting his home and observing how he wrote and performed. Elliott, like Bob Dylan later, idolized Guthrie. He was inspired by the singer's idiomatic performance style and repertoire. Because of the decline caused by Guthrie's progressive Huntington's disease, Arlo Guthrie and Bob Dylan both later said that they had learned much of Guthrie's performance style from Elliott. When asked about this, Elliott said, \"I was flattered. Dylan learned from me the same way I learned from Woody. Woody didn't teach me. He just said, If you want to learn something, just steal it\u2014that's the way I learned from Lead Belly.\"\nLater life and death.\nDeteriorating health due to Huntington's.\nBy the late 1940s, Guthrie's health was declining, and his behavior was becoming extremely erratic. He received various diagnoses (including alcoholism and schizophrenia). In 1952, it was finally determined that he was suffering from Huntington's disease, a genetic disorder inherited from his mother. Believing him to be a danger to their children because of his behavior, Marjorie suggested he return to California without her. They eventually divorced.\nUpon his return to California, Guthrie lived at the Theatricum Botanicum, a summer-stock type theatre founded and owned by Will Geer. Together with singers and actors who had been blacklisted by HUAC, he waited out the anti-communist political climate.\nAs his health worsened, he met and married his third wife, Anneke van Kirk. They had a child, Lorina Lynn. The couple moved to Fruit Cove, Florida, where they briefly lived. They lived in a bus on land called Beluthahatchee, owned by his friend Stetson Kennedy. Guthrie's arm was hurt in an accident when gasoline used to start the campfire exploded. Although he regained movement in the arm, he was never able to play the guitar again. In 1954, the couple returned to New York, living in the Beach Haven apartment complex owned and operated by Fred Trump in Gravesend, Brooklyn; Guthrie composed there the song \"Old Man Trump\". Shortly after, Anneke filed for divorce, a result of the strain of caring for Guthrie. Anneke left New York after arranging for friends to adopt Lorina Lynn. Lorina had no further contact with her birth parents. She died in a car crash in California in 1973 at the age of 19. After the divorce, Guthrie's second wife, Marjorie, re-entered his life and cared for him until his death.\nIncreasingly unable to control his muscles, Guthrie was hospitalized at Greystone Park Psychiatric Hospital in Morris County, New Jersey, from 1956 to 1961; at Brooklyn State Hospital (now Kingsboro Psychiatric Center) in East Flatbush until 1966; and finally at Creedmoor Psychiatric Center in Queens Village, New York, until his death in 1967. Marjorie and the children visited Guthrie at Greystone every Sunday. They answered fan mail and the children played on the hospital grounds. Eventually, a longtime fan of Guthrie invited the family to his nearby home for the Sunday visits. This lasted until Guthrie was moved to the Brooklyn State Hospital, which was closer to Howard Beach, New York, where Marjorie and the children then lived.\nDuring the final few years of his life, Guthrie had become isolated except for family. By 1965, he was unable to speak, often moving his arms or rolling his eyes to communicate. The progression of Huntington's threw Guthrie into extreme emotional states, causing him to lash out at those nearby and to damage a prized book collection of Anneke's. Huntington's symptoms include uncharacteristic aggression, emotional volatility, and social disinhibition.\nGuthrie's death increased awareness of the disease. Marjorie helped found the Committee to Combat Huntington's Disease, which became the\u00a0Huntington's Disease Society of America. None of Guthrie's three surviving children with Marjorie have developed symptoms of Huntington's.\nHis son Bill (with his first wife Mary Guthrie) died in an auto-train accident in Pomona, California, at the age of 23. His two daughters with Mary, Gwendolyn and Sue, both inherited Huntington's disease and died at age 41.\nFolk revival and death.\nIn the late 1950s and early 1960s, a new generation of young people were inspired by folk singers such as Guthrie. The American Folk Revival was beginning to take place, focused on the issues of the day, such as the civil rights movement and Free Speech Movement. Pockets of folk singers were forming around the country in places such as Cambridge, Massachusetts, and the Greenwich Village neighborhood of New York City. One of Guthrie's visitors at Greystone Park was the 19-year-old Bob Dylan, who idolized Guthrie. Dylan wrote of Guthrie's repertoire: \"The songs themselves were really beyond category. They had the infinite sweep of humanity in them.\" After learning of Guthrie's whereabouts, Dylan regularly visited him.\nWoody Guthrie died at Creedmoor Psychiatric Center of complications of Huntington's disease on October 3, 1967. According to a Guthrie family legend, he was listening to his son Arlo's \"Alice's Restaurant\", a recording of which Arlo had delivered to Woody's bedside, shortly before he died. His remains were cremated and scattered at sea. By the time of Guthrie's death, his work had been discovered by a new audience, introduced to them through Dylan, Pete Seeger, Ramblin' Jack Elliott, his ex-wife Marjorie, and other new members of the folk revival, including his son Arlo Guthrie.\nFor a December 3, 1944, radio show, Guthrie wrote a script explaining why he sang the kinds of songs he did, reading it on air:\nI hate a song that makes you think that you are not any good. I hate a song that makes you think that you are just born to lose. Bound to lose. No good to nobody. No good for nothing. Because you are too old or too young or too fat or too slim too ugly or too this or too that. Songs that run you down or poke fun at you on account of your bad luck or hard traveling.\nI am out to fight those songs to my very last breath of air and my last drop of blood. I am out to sing songs that will prove to you that this is your world and that if it's hit you pretty hard and knocked you for a dozen loops, no matter what color, what size you are, how you are built, I am out to sing the songs that make you take pride in yourself and in your work.\nPersonal life.\nMarriage and family.\nAt age 20, Guthrie met and married his first wife, Oklahoma-born Mary Jennings (1917\u20132014), in Texas in 1931. They had three children together: Gwendolyn, Sue, and Bill.\nBill died at the age of 23 as the result of an automobile accident. The daughters both died of Huntington's disease at the age of 41, in the 1970s. Evidently the disease had been passed on from their father, although Guthrie himself was diagnosed with the condition later in life, in 1952, when he was 43 years old. Guthrie and Mary divorced sometime between 1943 and 1945.\nOn November 13, 1945, Guthrie married Marjorie Greenblatt. They had four children: sons Arlo and Joady and daughters Nora and Cathy. After Guthrie was admitted to Brooklyn State Hospital in 1952, doctors advised Marjorie to divorce him and take custody of the children because of Woody's raging paranoia and occasional violent acts against family members. They were divorced in 1953. Despite the divorce, she remained close to Woody for the rest of his life and supervised all of his complex health needs.\nAfter his discharge from the hospital, Guthrie had a romantic relationship with Anneke van Kirk from late 1952, marrying her in 1953 and having a daughter, Lorinna Lynn. However, due to his deteriorating condition, this relationship led to their divorce just one year later. Guthrie had a total of eight children over his three relationships.\nPolitical views and relation to the Communist Party.\nSocialism had an important impact on the work of Woody Guthrie. In the introduction to Will Kaufman\u2019s book \"Woody Guthrie an American Radical\", Kaufman writes, \"Woody Guthrie spent his productive life on the warpath-against poverty, political oppression, censorship, capitalism, fascism, racism, and, ultimately, war itself.\" Guthrie would time and time again back these beliefs up in his lyrics, specifically against capitalism at the height of the depression in the United States.\nGuthrie never publicly declared himself a communist, though he was closely associated with the Communist Party. Kaufman writes: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As he once claimed: \"If you call me a Communist, I am very proud because it takes a wise and hard-working person to be a Communist\" (quoted in Klein, p. 303). Klein also writes that Guthrie applied to join the Communist Party, but his application was turned down. In later years, he'd say, \"I'm not a Communist, but I've been in the red all my life.\" He took great delight in proclaiming his hopes for a communist victory in the Korean War and more than once expressed his admiration for Stalin. Unlike his musical prot\u00e9g\u00e9, Pete Seeger, Guthrie never offered any regret for his Stalinism.\nThe matter of Guthrie's membership in the Communist Party, however, remains controversial. Scholar Ronald Radosh has written:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSimilarly, writer and historian Aaron J. Leonard, in an article detailing Guthrie's Party membership for the History News Network, quoted Pete Seeger:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On the other hand, Sis Cunningham, who was a much more disciplined person than either me or Woody, was in a Greenwich Village Branch of the Party. She got Woody in. She probably said, 'I'll see Woody acts responsibly.' And so Woody was briefly in the Communist Party.\nIn his book \"The Folk Singers and the Bureau\", Leonard also documents how the FBI treated Guthrie as if he were a member, adding him to various iterations of their Security Index and keeping him on it till well into the early 1960s.\nAfter the Molotov\u2013Ribbentrop Pact, Guthrie took an antiwar U-turn and wrote one song describing the Soviet invasion of Poland as a favor to Polish farmers and another attacking President Roosevelt's loans to Finland to help it defend against the Soviet Union's invasion in the 1939 Winter War. His attitude switched again in 1941 after the Nazis invaded the Soviet Union.\nMusical legacy.\nWoody Guthrie Foundation.\nThe Woody Guthrie Foundation is a non-profit organization that serves as administrator and caretaker of the Woody Guthrie Archives. The archives house the largest collection of Guthrie material in the world. In 2013, the archives were relocated from New York City to the Woody Guthrie Center in Tulsa, Oklahoma, after being purchased by the Tulsa-based George Kaiser Foundation. The Center officially opened on April 27, 2013. The Woody Guthrie Center features, in addition to the archives, a museum focused on the life and the influence of Guthrie through his music, writings, art, and political activities. The museum is open to the public; the archives are open only to researchers by appointment. The archives contains thousands of items related to Guthrie, including original artwork, books, correspondence, lyrics, manuscripts, media, notebooks, periodicals, personal papers, photographs, scrapbooks, and other special collections.\nGuthrie's unrecorded written lyrics housed at the archives have been the starting point of several albums including the Wilco and Billy Bragg albums \"Mermaid Avenue\" and \"Mermaid Avenue Vol. II\", created in 1998 sessions at the invitation of Guthrie's daughter Nora. Blackfire interpreted previously unreleased Guthrie lyrics. Jonatha Brooke's 2008 album, \"The Works\", includes lyrics from the Woody Guthrie Archives set to music by Jonatha Brooke. The various artists compilation \"Note of Hope: A Celebration of Woody Guthrie\" was released in 2011. Jay Farrar, Will Johnson, Anders Parker, and Yim Yames recorded her father's lyrics for \"New Multitudes\" to honor the 100th anniversary of his birth and a was also released.\nFolk Festival.\nThe Woody Guthrie Folk Festival, also known as \"WoodyFest\", has been held annually since 1998 in mid-July to commemorate Guthrie's life and music. The festival is held on the weekend closest to Guthrie's birth date (July 14) in Guthrie's hometown of Okemah, Oklahoma. Planned and implemented annually by the Woody Guthrie Coalition, a non-profit corporation, its goal is to preserve Guthrie's musical legacy. The Woody Guthrie Coalition commissioned a local Creek Indian sculptor to cast a full-body bronze statue of Guthrie and his guitar, complete with the guitar's well-known message reading, \"This machine kills fascists\". The statue, sculpted by artist Dan Brook, stands along Okemah's main street in the heart of downtown and was unveiled in 1998, the inaugural year of the festival.\nJewish songs.\nGuthrie's second wife, Marjorie Mazia, was born Marjorie Greenblatt, and her mother Aliza Greenblatt was a well-known Yiddish poet. Guthrie wrote numerous Jewish lyrics that can be linked to his close collaborative relationship with Aliza Greenblatt, who lived near Guthrie and his family in Brooklyn in the 1940s. Guthrie, the Oklahoma troubadour, and Greenblatt, the Jewish wordsmith, often discussed their artistic projects and critiqued each other's works, finding common ground in their shared love of culture and social justice. Their collaboration flourished in 1940s Brooklyn, where Jewish culture was interwoven with music, modern dance, poetry, and anti-fascist, pro-labor, socialist activism. Guthrie was inspired to write songs that arose from this unlikely relationship; he identified the problems of Jews with those of his fellow Oklahomans and other oppressed peoples.\nThese lyrics were rediscovered by Nora Guthrie and were set to music by the Jewish Klezmer group The Klezmatics with the release of \"Happy Joyous Hanukkah\" on JMG Records in 2007. The Klezmatics also released \"Wonder Wheel\u00a0\u2013 Lyrics by Woody Guthrie\", an album of spiritual lyrics put to music composed by the band. The album, produced by Danny Blume, was awarded a Grammy Award for Best Contemporary World Music Album.\nLegacy.\nSince his death, artists have paid tribute to Guthrie by covering his songs or by dedicating songs to him. On January 20, 1968, three months after Guthrie's death, Harold Leventhal produced \"A Tribute to Woody Guthrie\" at New York City's Carnegie Hall. Performers included Jack Elliott, Pete Seeger, Tom Paxton, Bob Dylan and The Band, Judy Collins, Arlo Guthrie, Richie Havens, Odetta, and others. Leventhal repeated the tribute on September 12, 1970, at the Hollywood Bowl. Recordings of both concerts were eventually released as LPs and later combined into one CD. A film of the Hollywood Bowl concert was discovered and issued as a DVD in 2019: \"Woody Guthrie All-Star Tribute Concert 1970\"\u2014(MVD Visual. MVD2331D, 2019).\nThe Irish folk singer Christy Moore was also strongly influenced by Woody Guthrie in his seminal 1972 album \"Prosperous\", giving renditions of \"The Ludlow Massacre\" and Bob Dylan's \"Song to Woody\". Dylan also penned the poem \"Last Thoughts on Woody Guthrie\" as a tribute. Andy Irvine\u2014Moore's bandmate in Irish folk group Planxty and lifelong admirer of Guthrie\u2014wrote his tribute song \"\" (released on the album \"Rain on the Roof\"), which includes the chorus from a song Guthrie recorded in March 1944: \"\". In 1986, Irvine also recorded both parts of Guthrie's \"The Ballad of Tom Joad\" together as a complete song\u2014under the title of \"Tom Joad\"\u2014on the first album released by his other band, Patrick Street. Bruce Springsteen also performed a cover of Guthrie's \"This Land is Your Land\" on his live album \"Live 1975\u20131985\". In the introduction to the song, Springsteen referred to it as \"just about one of the most beautiful songs ever written\".\nIn 1979, Sammy Walker's LP \"Songs From Woody's Pen\" was released by Folkways Records. Though the original recordings of these songs date back more than 30 years, Walker sings them in a traditional folk-revivalist manner reminiscent of Guthrie's social conscience and sense of humor. Speaking of Guthrie, Walker said: \"I can't think of hardly anyone who has had as much influence on my own singing and songwriting as Woody.\"\nIn September 1996, Cleveland's Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and Museum and Case Western Reserve University cohosted \"Hard Travelin': The Life and Legacy of Woody Guthrie\", a 10-day conference of panel sessions, lectures, and concerts. The conference became the first in what would become the museum's annual American Music Masters Series conference. Highlights included Arlo Guthrie's keynote address, a Saturday night musical jamboree at Cleveland's Odeon Theater, and a Sunday night concert at Severance Hall, the home of the Cleveland Orchestra. Musicians performing over the course of the conference included Arlo Guthrie, Bruce Springsteen, Billy Bragg, Pete Seeger, Ramblin' Jack Elliott, the Indigo Girls, Ellis Paul, Jimmy LaFave, Ani DiFranco, and others. In 1999, Wesleyan University Press published a collection of essays from the conference and DiFranco's record label, Righteous Babe, released a compilation of the Severance Hall concert, \"Til We Outnumber 'Em\", in 2000.\nFrom 1999 to 2002, the Smithsonian Institution Traveling Exhibition Service presented the traveling exhibit, \"This Land Is Your Land: The Life and Legacy of Woody Guthrie\". In collaboration with Nora Guthrie, the Smithsonian exhibition draws from rarely seen objects, illustrations, film footage, and recorded performances to reveal a complex man who was at once poet, musician, protester, idealist, itinerant hobo, and folk legend.\nIn 2003, Jimmy LaFave produced a Woody Guthrie tribute show called \"Ribbon of Highway, Endless Skyway\". The ensemble show toured around the country and included a rotating cast of singer-songwriters individually performing Guthrie's songs. Interspersed between songs were Guthrie's philosophical writings read by a narrator. In addition to LaFave, members of the rotating cast included Ellis Paul, Slaid Cleaves, Eliza Gilkyson, Joel Rafael, husband-wife duo Sarah Lee Guthrie (Woody Guthrie's granddaughter) and Johnny Irion, Michael Fracasso, and The Burns Sisters. Oklahoma songwriter Bob Childers, sometimes called \"the Dylan of the Dust\", served as narrator.\nWhen word spread about the tour, performers began contacting LaFave, whose only prerequisite was to have an inspirational connection to Guthrie. Each artist chose the Guthrie songs that he or she would perform as part of the tribute. LaFave said, \"It works because all the performers are Guthrie enthusiasts in some form\". The inaugural performance of the Ribbon of Highway tour took place on February 5, 2003, at the Ryman Auditorium in Nashville. The abbreviated show was a featured segment of \"Nashville Sings Woody\", yet another tribute concert to commemorate the music of Woody Guthrie held during the Folk Alliance Conference. The cast of \"Nashville Sings Woody\", a benefit for the Woody Guthrie Foundation and Archives, also included Arlo Guthrie, Marty Stuart, Nanci Griffith, Guy Clark, Ramblin' Jack Elliott, Janis Ian, and others.\nWoody and Marjorie Guthrie were honored at a musical celebration featuring Billy Bragg and the band Brad on October 17, 2007, at Webster Hall in New York City. Steve Earle also performed. The event was hosted by actor/activist Tim Robbins to benefit the Huntington's Disease Society of America to commemorate the organization's 40th\u00a0Anniversary.\nIn \"I'm Not There\", a 2007 biographical movie about Bob Dylan, one of the characters introduced in the film as segments of Dylan's life is a young African-American boy who calls himself \"Woody Guthrie\". The purpose of this particular character was a reference to Dylan's youthful obsession with Guthrie. The fictional Woody also reflects the fictitious autobiographies that Dylan constructed during his early career as he established his own artistic identity. In the film there is even a scene where the fictional Woody visits the real Woody Guthrie as he lies ill and dying in a hospital in New York (a reference to the times when a nineteen-year-old Dylan would regularly visit his idol, after learning of his whereabouts, while he was hospitalized in New York in the 1960s). Later, a sketch on \"Saturday Night Live\" would spoof these visits, alleging that Dylan stole the line, \"They'll stone you for playing your guitar!\" from Guthrie.\nPete Seeger had the Sloop \"Woody Guthrie\" built for an organization he founded, the Hudson River Sloop Clearwater. It was launched in 1978. Now operated by the Beacon Sloop Club, it serves to educate people about sailing and the history and environs of the Hudson River.\nIn 1988, Woody Guthrie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame, and, in 2000, he was honored with the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. Guthrie was inducted into the Oklahoma Music Hall of Fame in 1997. In 2006, Guthrie was inducted into the Oklahoma Hall of Fame. In 1987, \"Roll on Columbia\" was chosen as the official Washington State Folk Song, and in 2001 Guthrie's \"Oklahoma Hills\" was chosen to be the official state folk song of Oklahoma.\nOn June 26, 1998, as part of its Legends of American Music series, the United States Postal Service issued 45 million 32-cent stamps honoring folk musicians Huddie Ledbetter, Guthrie, Sonny Terry and Josh White. The four musicians were represented on sheets of 20\u00a0stamps.\nIn July 2001, CB's Gallery in New York City began hosting an annual Woody Guthrie Birthday Bash concert featuring multiple performers. This event moved to the Bowery Poetry Club in 2007 after CB's Gallery and CBGB, its parent club, closed. The final concert in the series took place on July 14, 2012, Guthrie's 100th birthday.\nIn January 2005, Canadian hip-hop artist Buck 65 released \"This Right Here Is Buck 65\". Track 8 is a cover of \"Talking Fishing Blues\".\nIn 2006, The Klezmatics set Jewish lyrics written by Guthrie to music. The resulting album, \"Wonder Wheel\", won the Grammy award for best contemporary world music album.\nOn February 10, 2008, \"\", a rare live recording released in cooperation with the Woody Guthrie Foundation, was the recipient of a Grammy Award in the category Best Historical Album. Less than two years later, Guthrie was again nominated for a Grammy in the same category with the 2009 release of \"My Dusty Road\" on Rounder Records.\nIn the centennial year of Guthrie's birth, another album of newly composed songs on his lyrics has been released: \"New Multitudes\". On March 10, 2012, there was a tribute concert at the Brady Theater in Tulsa, Oklahoma. John Mellencamp, Arlo Guthrie, Sarah Lee Guthrie &amp; Johnny Irion, the Del McCoury Band and the Flaming Lips performed.\nThe Grammy Museum held a tribute week in April 2012 and the Songwriters Hall of Fame a tribute in June. A four-disc box \"Mermaid Avenue: The Complete Sessions\" by Billy Bragg and Wilco, with 17 unreleased songs and a documentary, was planned for April release.\nOn July 10, 2012, Smithsonian Folkways released \"Woody at 100: The Woody Guthrie Centennial Collection\", a 150-page large-format book with three CDs containing 57 tracks. The set also contains 21 previously unreleased performances and six never before released original songs, including Woody's first known\u2014and recently discovered\u2014recordings from 1937. The box set received two nominations for the 55th Annual Grammy Awards, including Best Historical Album and Best Boxed Or Special Limited Edition Package. It also won an Independent Music Award for Best Compilation Album in 2013.\nFrom February 18 through May 22, 2022, the Morgan Library &amp; Museum in Manhattan held an exhibition titled https://\nOn September 30, 2022, Dropkick Murphys released \"This Machine Still Kills Fascists\". The acoustic album consists of ten songs featuring unused lyrics by Guthrie. Nora Guthrie, Woody's daughter, reached out to the band giving them exclusive access to her father's archives. \"I collected lyrics on all kinds of topics \u2026 lyrics that seemed to be needed to be said \u2014 or screamed \u2014 today. Ken Casey is a master at understanding Woody's lyrics, which can be complicated, long, deadly serious, or totally ridiculous. DKM is capable of delivering them all\" Nora Guthrie said.\nIn 2025, folk musician and professor Ellen Stekert released the archival album \"Camera Three\", recorded in 1959 for the CBS news show of the same name, which included a version of the previously unknown and undocumented Guthrie song \"High Floods &amp; Low Waters\".\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading and listening.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33279", "revid": "15881234", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33279", "title": "County Wicklow", "text": "County in Ireland\nCounty Wicklow ( ; ) is a county in Ireland. The last of the traditional 32 counties, having been formed as late as 1606, it is part of the Eastern and Midland Region and the province of Leinster. It is bordered by the Irish Sea to the east and the counties of Wexford to the south, Carlow to the southwest, Kildare to the west, and South Dublin and D\u00fan Laoghaire\u2013Rathdown to the north.\nWicklow is named after its county town of Wicklow, which derives from the name (Old Norse for \"Vikings' Meadow\"). Wicklow County Council is the local authority for the county, which had a population of 155,258 at the 2022 census. Colloquially known as the \"Garden of Ireland\" for its scenery\u2014which includes extensive woodlands, nature trails, beaches, and ancient ruins while allowing for a multitude of walking, hiking, and climbing options\u2014it is the 17th largest of Ireland's 32 counties by area and the 16th largest by population. It is also the fourth largest of Leinster's 12 counties by size and the fifth largest in terms of population.\nHistory.\nMissions and monasteries.\nDuring the 5th century Saint Palladius, a bishop from Britain or Gaul was sent to 'the Irish believing in Christ.' He and his companions landed at Wicklow harbour in the year 431 AD. Palladius founded three ancient churches at Donard, Tigroney and Colbinstown. Along with him came two clerics named St. Sylvester and Solonius who died and were buried at Donard. The local tribe in the area were called Cualann and their chief, a man named Naithi was opposed to these Christian missionaries. Despite this hostility however Palladius seems to have gained support elsewhere as he was able to erect those three churches in the Wicklow area. After a rather unsuccessful stay in the county St. Palladius departed Ireland and journeyed to Scotland.\nA large number of early Irish saints male and female founded churches, monasteries and convents in Wicklow. Among them were St. Kevin, St. Dagan, St. Ernan, St. Credan, St. Baotan and the holy women St. Cainnear, St. Ceoltigherna, St. Fledh, St. Tartinna, St. Coine and St. Croine. The ancient monastery of Glendalough is located in the county.\n17th century onwards.\nCounty Wicklow was the last of the traditional counties of Ireland to be shired in 1606 from land previously part of counties Dublin and Carlow. Established as a distinct county, it was aimed at controlling local groups such as the O'Byrnes. The \"Military Road\", stretching from Rathfarnham to Aghavannagh crosses the mountains, north to south, and was built by government forces to assist them in defeating the rebels still active in the Wicklow Mountains following the failed Irish Rebellion of 1798. It provided them with access to an area that had been a hotbed of Irish rebellion for centuries. Several barracks to house the soldiers were built along the route; in 1974 the Glencree Centre for Peace and Reconciliation was opened alongside the remains of Glencree barracks. Battalions of the Irish Army use firing ranges in County Wicklow for tactical exercises, especially the largest one in the Glen of Imaal which was previously used by the British Army prior to independence.\nThere was a brief Wicklow gold rush in the year 1795 near the village of Woodenbridge that lasted for a month, during which as many as 80 kilograms of gold was recovered by unlicensed prospectors before the government took over.\nDuring the Cromwellian conquest of Ireland, local authorities immediately surrendered without a fight. During the Irish Rebellion of 1798, some of the United Irishmen insurgents took refuge in the Wicklow Mountains, resulting in clashes between British forces and rebels commanded by Joseph Holt near Aughrim and later at Arklow.\nThe boundaries of the county were extended in 1957 by the Local Government Act which \"detached lands from the County of Dublin and from the jurisdiction and powers of the Council of the County of Dublin\" near Bray and added them to the County of Wicklow.\nIrish language.\nWicklow was the first county in Ireland to lose the Irish language, with only around 2% of people speaking it in the 1770s. It was spoken on the Western slopes of the Wicklow Mountains in the 1790s. Andrew and Hannah Byrne of Glenealy, who both died in 1830, were among the last native speakers in the county.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nWicklow is part of the Eastern and Midland Region of Ireland, within the province of Leinster. It is bounded by four counties, Dublin to the north; Kildare and Carlow to the west; Wexford to the south; and the Irish Sea to the east. Wicklow is the 17th largest of Ireland's 32 traditional counties by land area, and the 16th most populous. It is the fourth largest of Leinster's 12 counties by size and the fifth most populous. The county is named after the town of Wicklow, located approximately south of Dublin, the capital city of Ireland.\nThe Wicklow Mountains are Ireland's largest continuous upland area and occupy a significant portion of the county, spanning the entire centre of Wicklow and stretching into Dublin and Wexford at their southern and northern fringes. Lugnaquilla, at above sea level, is the tallest peak in the range, the highest mountain in Ireland outside of County Kerry, and Ireland's 13th-highest mountain overall. The Wicklow Mountains National Park, located in the middle of the county, is a dedicated protected area covering , making it the largest national park in Ireland. The Wicklow Way was the first long-distance trail in the State, and crosses the range for .\nGeology.\nThe Wicklow Mountains are centred on the Leinster batholith and are primarily composed of granite surrounded by an envelope of mica-schist and much older rocks such as quartzite. Covering , the Leinster batholith is the most expansive mass of intrusive igneous rock in Ireland or Britain. The oldest rocks in the county are the quartzites of the Bray Group that include Bray Head and the Little Sugar Loaf and Great Sugar Loaf mountains. These metamorphosed from sandstone deposited in the deep waters of the primeval Iapetus Ocean during the Cambrian period (542-488 million years ago).\nAs with much of Ireland, Wicklow's terrain was sculpted by successive periods of glaciation during the quaternary. Weathering and erosion by ice carved out long valleys known as glens (from the Irish \"gleann\") such as Glenmacnass, Glen of the Downs, Glenmalure, Glen of Imaal, Glencree and Glendalough. The Irish Sea Ice-Sheet began to retreat shortly after the Last Glacial Maximum ca. 20,000\u201323,000 years ago but significant ice masses persisted in the Wicklow Mountains for another 4,000\u20137,000 years.\nHydrology.\nMajor rivers include the River Liffey, Ireland's 8th-longest river, which rises near Tonduff mountain and flows through the centre of Dublin City, reaching the Irish Sea at Dublin Bay. Its biggest tributary by volume, the River Dodder, rises along the northern slope of Kippure in the far north of the county, while the Kings River joins at Blessington Lakes. Multiple other Liffey tributaries flow within the county.\nThe River Slaney, which starts at Lugnaquilla, flows west and then south before reaching St George's Channel at Wexford town. The Avonmore and Avonbeg rivers join to form the Avoca River at the \"Meeting of the Waters\" in the Vale of Avoca. The River Derreen in the south of the county defines a section of the border with Carlow.\nMost of the county's lakes (or loughs) are glacially derived ribbon and corrie lakes found in scenic trough valleys surrounded by mountains, making them popular with tourists. Notable lakes in the county include Glendalough Upper Lake, Lough Tay ('The Guinness Lake'), Lough Ouler ('The Heart-shaped Lake'), Lough Bray, Lough Dan and Lough Nahanagan.\nPoulaphouca Reservoir is the largest of Wicklow's lakes, covering in the west of the county. It is the largest artificial lake in Ireland and was created following the damming of the River Liffey at Poulaphouca in 1940. The village of Ballinahown was completed submerged by the reservoir and its 70 families were relocated. Ruins of the old village including buildings, fences and farm machinery can be seen during droughts when water levels in the reservoir diminish. The lower Vartry Reservoir, constructed between 1862 and 1868, is the county's second largest lake.\nCoast.\nWicklow has a relatively short coastline, at in length. Wicklow's coastline is mostly straight, with few sizable bays or inlets and no offshore islands, giving it a shorter coastline than smaller counties like Louth and Dublin. Wicklow Head is the county's most prominent coastal headland, and is also the most easterly mainland point of the Republic of Ireland. Wicklow's east coast is a popular domestic summer holiday destination, and the county has numerous beaches including Brittas Bay, Clogga Beach, The Cove, Silver Strand Beach, Sallymount Bay Beach, Ennereilly Beach, Newcastle Beach, Arklow's Porter's Rock Beach and South Beach, Greystones North and South Beaches, Bray Strand, and Magheramore Beach.\nForest.\nThe county has roughly of wooded area, the 8th highest total forest cover in Ireland. In terms of forest cover as a proportion of land area, Wicklow ranks second in the country, at 18.5%. Known as the \"Garden of Ireland\", Wicklow was historically the county with the highest percentage of woodlands. The 2017 National Forestry Inventory revealed that County Leitrim had overtaken it for the first time. Wicklow is in a temperate broadleaf and mixed forests biome, although the majority of Wicklow's forests are commercial conifers. The economic tree line in the region is around , above which hill farming and blanket bog dominates.\nUrban development.\nIn terms of urban development, Wicklow County Council imposes the most stringent planning restrictions in Ireland. In order to build a house outside of the main towns, a person must be \"born and bred in the area, or have lived there for a period of 10 years\" and must also demonstrate that the house is for their own housing needs, rather than for resale. Further, potential buyers in rural areas must be approved by the council before the homeowner is allowed to sell to them. The primary justification for these restrictions is to avoid one-off housing or other poorly planned developments which could put a strain on the county's infrastructure and degrade its natural environment.\nClimate.\nThe climate of Wicklow is temperate oceanic (K\u00f6ppen climate classification \"Cfb\" in most areas, and \"Cfc\" oceanic subpolar in some highland areas), with cool, humid summers, and mild, wet winters. The climate of the eastern portion of the county is moderated by the Irish Sea and averages milder winters and cooler summers, while the western inland portion along the Kildare border experiences warmer summers and colder winters. The county's upland interior experiences significantly lower temperatures and higher rainfall year-round. Snow typically falls from December to March, but most low-lying and coastal areas see only a few days of lying snow per year, or may see no snow at all during some winters. The Wicklow Mountains region is the snowiest part of Ireland and can experience 50 or more days of snowfall each year.\nThe county experiences a narrow annual temperature range. Typical daytime highs range from throughout the county in July and August, with overnight lows in the range, although temperatures in the mountains can be lower. Mean January temperatures range from on the coast to at high elevations. Precipitation is fairly evenly distributed throughout the year, although the wettest months (October and November) receive roughly twice as much rain as the driest months (February, March and April). The driest area of Wicklow is the northeast corner of the county, which is protected from the prevailing south-westerly winds by the Wicklow Mountains and receives around of rainfall per year. The coastal region of County Dublin immediately to the north is the driest location in all of Ireland as a result of the rain shadow created by the mountains.\nEasterly winds can occur between February and May, and are often associated with extreme snowfall events such as the 2018 \"Beast from the East\" and the \"Big Snow of 1947\". Much of Wicklow is very vulnerable to heavy snowfall and the county is typically the hardest hit by such events, with some areas recording over of snow. During the winter of 1947, residents of Rathdrum called upon the Irish Red Cross to drop them food parcels by plane as the village had been inaccessible by road for over a month due to heavy snow.\nWicklow is occasionally affected by hurricanes, although they are usually extratropical storms by the time they reach Ireland. On 24 August 1986, during Hurricane Charley, of rain fell over a 24-hour period at Kippure on the Wicklow-Dublin border, the greatest daily rainfall total ever recorded in Ireland. The hurricane caused severe flooding and up to 1,000 homes had to be evacuated in Bray alone. Other major floods in Wicklow which resulted in loss of life occurred in 1886\u201387, 1931, 1965 and 2011.\nSubdivisions.\nBaronies.\nThere are eight historic baronies in the county. While baronies continue to be officially defined units, they are no longer used for administrative purposes. Their official status is illustrated by Placenames Orders made since 2003, where official Irish names of baronies are listed under \"Administrative units\". The largest barony in Wicklow is Lower Talbotstown, at , and the smallest barony is Rathdown, at .\nTowns and villages.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nDemographics.\nPopulation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2016 census, the resident population of Wicklow was 142,425, a 4.2% increase since the Census of Ireland 2011. The county's population is one of the fastest growing in the country, increasing 38.7 percent in the 20 years between 1996 and 2016. However, its share of the Mid East's population has steadily fallen as Meath and Kildare have experienced even more rapid population growth. While Bray remains by far the largest town in the county, improved transport links to Dublin such as upgrades to the M11 and the completion of the M50 in 2005 encouraged the growth of towns further south. Between 2002 and 2016 Bray grew by 5.3 percent. By contrast, over the same period Arklow grew by 32.2 percent, Greystones grew by 53.3 percent and Rathnew grew by 133.9%.\nThe most densely populated areas of the county are concentrated in the northeast, with over 50 percent of Wicklow's residents living within of the Dublin border. Many of the county's largest urban areas are clustered in this region along an axis stretching from Bray to Newtownmountkennedy, which incorporates Greystones, Delgany, Enniskerry, Kilmacanogue, Kilpedder and Kilcoole. Outside of this region, Wicklow, Rathnew and Arklow are the only sizable towns in the eastern portion of the county, while Blessington is the only large settlement in west Wicklow.\nThe county's interior is very sparsely populated, with only a few small settlements located in the foothills of the Wicklow Mountains such as Rathdrum, Laragh, Roundwood and Tinahely. Most small areas in central Wicklow have a population density of less than 20 people per km2, compared with an average of 77 people per km2 in the county as a whole.\nThe gender makeup of the county in 2016 was 50.74% female and 49.26% male. 29.0% of the population were under the age of 19; 58% were between the ages of 19 and 64; and 13.0% were 65 years of age or older.\nWhites of any ethnic background constituted 95.2% of the population in 2016: 86.0% were White Irish, 0.6% Irish Traveller, and 8.6% White of any other background.\nAsians were the second largest ethnic group, comprising 1.6% of the county's population, followed by mixed race or other backgrounds at 1.2%. Just over 2,300 people (1.6%) did not state their ethnicity.\nAccounting for just 0.4% of the population, Wicklow has by far the lowest percentage of black residents in the Greater Dublin Area. The 2016 census recorded 524 black residents in Wicklow, of which 408 (78%) were of African descent and 116 (22%) were of other black backgrounds.\nUrban areas.\nThe 2016 census recorded that 65 percent of County Wicklow's residents lived in urban areas (settlements with a population greater than 1,500) and 35 percent lived in rural areas. Of County Wicklow's rural population, roughly 26 percent (36,800 people) live in the open countryside outside of any designated settlements, while 9 percent (13,032 people) live in settlements with less than 1,500 people. According to the CSO report \"Urban and Rural Life in Ireland 2019\", County Wicklow (alongside County Kildare) has the highest proportion of residents living in satellite towns.\nThe 10 largest settlements in the county are listed below. The county town is marked in bold.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMigration.\nAs of 2016, around 85% of Wicklow's population was born within the Republic of Ireland, and a further 0.9% was born in Northern Ireland. Just over 38% of Wicklow's usually resident population was born within the county, making it the second least indigenous county in Ireland, after Meath. While around 35% of the county's population was born in neighbouring Dublin, it is likely that a significant portion of these are Wicklow natives who were born in one of Dublin's many hospitals.\nPeople born in the United Kingdom are by far the largest immigrant group, comprising 5.9% of Wicklow's population (8,388 people). Of this group, only around half (4,045 people) stated that they were either UK or dual Irish-UK citizens. The Poles are the second largest immigrant group, constituting 2.0% of the county's population. The census recorded 2,905 Polish citizens in Wicklow, of which 2,759 were born in Poland. The fastest growing major immigrant groups between 2011 and 2016 were Romanians, Indians and Filipinos. There was also a large increase in the number of Brazilians (+107%), Italians (+59%) and Spaniards (+53%) living in Wicklow over this period.\nReligion.\nThe 2016 census showed that religious affiliation in Wicklow was as follows: Catholic 73%, Irreligion 13.3%, Other Christian 8.8%, Other stated religions 3.1%, and not stated 1.8%.\nThe single largest religious denomination in 2016 was the Roman Catholic Church, with 103,947 adherents. This is a 4.4% decrease from the 2011 census. Catholicism in Wicklow reached its peak percentage in the 1961 census, when 87.5% of the population identified as Catholic. As of 2016, Wicklow is the second least Catholic county in the State, and among the most irreligious.\nOther Christian denominations comprised 8.8% of the population. As a proportion of population, Wicklow has the largest Church of Ireland affiliation of any county in the Republic of Ireland, at 6.2%, although this figure was historically much higher. The 1901 census recorded that just under 20% of Wicklow's population was affiliated with the Church of Ireland. In 2016 Greystones had the highest percentage of Protestants in the State (10.5%), and was also Ireland's least religious town, with 18.3% of residents stating they did not follow any religion.\nJust over 0.5% of the population adhered to smaller Protestant denominations such as Presbyterian, Apostolic and Pentecostal. A further 1.05% of respondents stated that they were \"Christian\" but did not specify any denomination. Eastern Orthodox is the fastest growing of the major Christian denominations, increasing from 840 adherents in 2011 to 1,317 in 2016, a 56.7% increase.\nThe largest non-Christian religions were Islam (0.4%) and Hinduism (0.16%). All other stated religions constituted 2.5% of the population, and 1.8% of respondents did not state their religion.\nEconomy.\nBuilt environment.\nWicklow is home to several major water supply and hydroelectric facilities. The Turlough Hill pumped-storage scheme, a significant civil engineering project, was carried out in the mountains in the 1960s and 1970s.\nLeisure and tourism.\nWicklow, often called \"The Garden of Ireland\", has been a popular tourist destination for many years, due to its scenery, beaches, walking, hiking and climbing options, and attractions including the ruins of the monastic city of Glendalough, Wicklow Gaol and water-based activities on reservoirs and the coast.\nThe Wicklow Way is the oldest waymarked long-distance walking trail in Ireland.\nThe popular annual mass participation bike ride Wicklow 200 has taken place in the county every year since 1982.\nGovernance and politics.\nLocal government.\nThe local government authority is Wicklow County Council which returns 32 councillors from six local electoral areas: Arklow, Baltinglass, Bray East, Bray West, Greystones, and Wicklow. Wicklow County Council sends three members to the Eastern and Midland Regional Assembly, where it is part of the Eastern Strategic Planning Area.\nFormer districts.\nCounty Wicklow was formerly divided into the rural districts of Baltinglass No. 1, Rathdown No. 2, Rathdrum, and Shillelagh, and the urban districts of Arklow, Bray and Wicklow. The rural districts were abolished in 1925. Greystones, in the former rural district of Rathdown No. 2, was given town commissioners in 1984. The urban districts of Arklow, Bray and Wicklow and the town commissioners of Greystones became town councils in 2002. All town councils in Ireland were abolished in 2014.\nNational politics.\nThe whole county is in the D\u00e1il constituency of Wicklow (5 seats).\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nWicklow has a well-maintained network of regional roads which connect the county's western portion to its eastern portion, cross-cutting the Wicklow Mountains from east to west. Several north-south regional roads also traverse the mountains, providing amenity access to the county's interior.\nThe county is also serviced by a National secondary road (N81) in western Wicklow, and a National primary road (N11) in eastern Wicklow which becomes a motorway at Junction 14 north of Ashford. The N11/M11 is the main route used by Wicklow commuters heading northbound to Dublin. Southbound traffic can also be heavy on weekends due to the influx of Dublin visitors into Wicklow and Wexford.\nMajor routes include:\nCulture.\nArchitecture.\nThe vernacular architecture of County Wicklow conformed to that of Ireland as a whole. Unlike neighbouring County Wexford however, Wicklow was not a county generally associated with thatched roofing. Historian Christiaan Corlett contends that thatch was \"formerly very common in Wicklow until about the 1930s\", when afterwards \"during the 1930s, 40s and 50s the fashion in Wicklow was to replace thatch roofs with galvanised ones\". Sometimes the old thatched roof was kept in place underneath the sheets of galvanising to act as a layer of insulation and dampen the noise of heavy rain.\nMedia.\nMermaid, County Wicklow Arts Centre is based in Bray. Mermaid is the county's hub of artistic activity and creation, offering a programme in many art forms: visual arts, theatre productions, opera, dance performances, arthouse cinema, comedy and a music programme. Two of the county's festivals take place in Arklow, the Arklow Music Festival and the Arklow Seabreeze Festival.\nThe county is a popular film-making location in Ireland. Bray is home to Ardmore Studios, where many of Ireland's best known feature films, including John Boorman's \"Excalibur\" and \"Zardoz\", Jim Sheridan's Oscar-winning \"In the Name of the Father\", \"Rawhead Rex\", and several Neil Jordan films, have been shot. The BBC series \"Ballykissangel\" was also filmed in County Wicklow. Scenes from the movie \"P.S. I Love You\" were shot in the Wicklow Mountains National Park while several scenes from other movies, from \"Barry Lyndon\" to \"Haywire\", have been filmed in the county.\nMedia.\nFilming locations.\nMuch of the television series \"Vikings\", (Amazon Prime), was filmed at Ashford Studios in the county, particularly scenes that required a green screen for subsequent CGI work. Some on-location filming was done elsewhere in the county. For example, certain scenes for Vikings (season 6) were filmed at and Powerscourt Waterfall and Powerscourt Estate and in Lough Tay. Ashford Studios was also the base for production of this final season. The spinoff from the series, \"Vikings: Valhalla\" (Netflix), is also based at Ashford Studios.\nFrom 2016 to 2018, most of Into the Badlands (TV series) was filmed in County Wicklow.\n, announced by Netflix in 2019, was also shot in the county and based at Ardmore Studios, Bray.\nDisenchanted, an Walt Disney Pictures film, was also filmed in the town of Greystones and Enniskerry village. The latter location being notable because the entire village was decorated for the production and closed to the public for certain days.\nPlaces of interest.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTwinning.\nCounty Wicklow is twinned with W\u00fcrzburg, Germany and Seminole County, Florida, USA.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33282", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33282", "title": "Coregonus", "text": "Genus of fishes\nCoregonus is a diverse genus of fish in the salmon family (Salmonidae). The \"Coregonus\" species are known as whitefishes. The genus contains at least 68 described extant taxa, but the true number of species is a matter of debate. The type species of the genus is \"Coregonus lavaretus\".\nMost \"Coregonus\" species inhabit lakes and rivers, and several species, including the Arctic cisco (\"C.\u00a0autumnalis\"), the Bering cisco (\"C.\u00a0laurettae\"), and the least cisco (\"C.\u00a0sardinella\") are anadromous, moving between salt water and fresh water.\nMany whitefish species or ecotypes, especially from the Great Lakes and the Alpine lakes of Europe, have gone extinct over the past century or are endangered. Among 12 freshwater fish considered extinct in Europe, 6 are \"Coregonus\". All \"Coregonus\" species are protected under appendix III of the Bern Convention, and Annex IV of the EC Habitats Directive (92/43/EEC)\nTaxonomy.\nPhylogenetic evidence indicates that the most basal member of the genus is the highly endangered Atlantic whitefish (\"C. huntsmani\"), which is endemic to a single river basin in Nova Scotia, Canada. The Atlantic whitefish is thought to have diverged from the rest of the genus during the mid-Miocene, about 15 million years ago.\nThe genus was previously subdivided into two subgenera \"Coregonus\" (\"true whitefishes\") and \"Leucichthys\" (\"ciscoes\"), \"Coregonus\" comprising taxa with sub-terminal mouth and usually a benthic feeding habit, \"Leucichthys\" those with terminal or supra-terminal mouth and usually a pelagic plankton-feeding habit. This classification is not natural however: based on molecular data, ciscoes comprise two distinct lineages within the genus. Moreover, the genus \"Stenodus\" is not phylogenetically distinct from \"Coregonus\"; although \"Stenodus\" occupies a basal position within the genus, phylogenetic evidence indicates that \"C. huntsmani\" is even more basal than it.\nThe scientific name given to this genus of fish comes from the Greek \u03ba\u03cc\u03c1\u03b7 (\"k\u00f3r\u0113\") \"daughter ; eye pupil\" and \u03b3\u03c9\u03bd\u03af\u03b1 (\"g\u014dn\u00eda\") \"angle\", because their pupil makes an angle, even though they share this feature with a large number of other fish.\nSpecies diversity.\nThere is much uncertainty and confusion in the classification of the many species of this genus. Particularly, one extreme view of diversity recognises just two main species in Northern and Central Europe, the common whitefish \"C. lavaretus\" and the vendace \"C. albula\", whereas others would divide these into numerous, often narrowly distributed species. A drastic increase in number of recognized species occurred in 2007, when a review advocated that more than 50 local European populations should be considered as distinct based on morphological differences. It has been estimated that several of them are very young, having separated from each other less than 15,000 years ago. Many of these were primarily defined based on number of gill rakers. Although this largely is hereditary, the number is highly variable (even within single populations and species), can change relatively fast in response to changes and genetic studies have shown that they often are of limited use in predicting relationships among populations (a large difference in gill raker number does not necessarily equal a distant relationship). Genetic differences between several of the recently proposed species, even ones that are relatively distinct morphologically, are very limited and sometimes they are not monophyletic. Various \"Coregonus\", whether regarded as separate species or not, readily interbreed with each other. A review of whitefish in the United Kingdom found that the identification key provided in 2007 did not match most individuals and that solid evidence for more than one species in that region is lacking.\nMany European lakes have more than one \"Coregonus\" morph differing in ecology and morphology (especially gill rakers). Such morphs are sometimes partially reproductively isolated from each other, leading to suggestions of recognizing them as separate but clinal species. The morphs or clinal species may rapidly disappear (in 15 years or less, equalling three \"Coregonus\" generations) by merging into a single in response to changes in the habitat. A similar pattern can be seen in North America where the ciscoes of the \"Coregonus artedi\" complex in the Great Lakes and elsewhere comprise several, often co-occurring morphs or ecotypes, whose taxonomic status remains controversial.\nSpecies.\nIn 2017, FishBase listed 78 species, including the more than 50 proposed for Europe in 2007. Some of these are recently extinct (marked with a dagger, \"\u2020\") and \"C. reighardi\" is likely extinct.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33284", "revid": "40863318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33284", "title": "Wuxia", "text": "Genre of Chinese fiction\n ( , literally \"martial arts and chivalry\") is a genre of Chinese fiction concerning the adventures of martial artists in ancient China. Although is traditionally a form of historical fantasy literature, its popularity has caused it to be adapted for such diverse art forms as Chinese opera, manhua, television dramas, films, donghua and video games. It forms part of popular culture in many Chinese-speaking communities around the world. According to Hong Kong film director, producer, and movie writer Ronny Yu, wuxia movies are not to be confused with martial arts movies.\nThe word \"\" is a compound composed of the elements (, literally \"martial\", \"military\", or \"armed\") and (, literally \"chivalrous\", \"vigilante\" or \"hero\"). A martial artist who follows the code of is often referred to as a (, literally \"follower of \") or (, literally \"wandering \"). In some translations, the martial artist is referred to as a () or (), either of which can be interpreted as a \"swordsman\" or \"swordswoman\", even though they may not necessarily wield a sword.\nHeroes in wuxia fiction typically do not serve a lord, hold military rank, or belong to the aristocracy. They often originate from the lower social classes of ancient Chinese society. A code of chivalry usually requires wuxia heroes to right and redress wrongs, fight for righteousness, remove oppressors, and bring retribution for past misdeeds. Chinese traditions may be compared to martial codes from other cultures, such as the Japanese samurai .\nHistory.\nEarlier precedents.\nEven though the term \"wuxia\" as the name of a genre is a recent coinage, stories about xia date back more than 2,000 years. Wuxia stories have their roots in some early youxia tales from 300\u2013200 BC. The Legalist philosopher Han Fei spoke disparagingly of youxias in his book \"Han Feizi\" in the chapter \"On Five 'Maggot' Classes\" about five social classes in the Spring and Autumn period. Some well-known stories include Zhuan Zhu's assassination of King Liao of Wu, and most notably, Jing Ke's attempt on the life of the King of Qin (who later became Qin Shi Huang). In Volume 86 of the \"Records of the Grand Historian\" (\"Shi Ji\"), Sima Qian mentioned five notable assassins \u2013 Cao Mo, Zhuan Zhu, Yu Rang, Nie Zheng and Jing Ke \u2013 in the Warring States period who undertook tasks of conducting political assassinations of aristocrats and nobles. These assassins were known as \"cike\" (\u523a\u5ba2; literally \"stabbing guests\"). They usually rendered their loyalties and services to feudal lords and nobles in return for rewards such as riches and women. In Volume 124 of the \"Shi Ji\", Sima Qian detailed several embryonic features of xia culture from his period. These popular phenomena were also documented in other historical records such as the \"Book of Han\" and the \"Book of the Later Han\".\nXiake stories made a turning point in the Tang dynasty (618\u2013907) and returned in the form of \"chuanqi\" (\u50b3\u5947; literally \"legendary tales\"). Stories from that era, such as \"Nie Yinniang\" (\u8076\u96b1\u5a18), \"The Kunlun Slave\", \"Thirteenth Madame Jing\" (\"\u834a\u5341\u4e09\u5a18\"), \"Red String\" (\u7d05\u7dda) and \"The Bearded Warrior\" (\u866c\u9aef\u5ba2), served as prototypes for modern wuxia stories. They featured fantasies and isolated protagonists \u2013 usually loners \u2013 who performed daring heroic deeds. During the Song dynasty (960\u20131279), similar stories circulated in the \"huaben\", short works that were once thought to have served as prompt-books for \"shuochang\" (traditional Chinese storytelling).\nThe genre of the martial or military romance also developed during the Tang dynasty. In the Ming dynasty (1368\u20131644), Luo Guanzhong and Shi Nai'an wrote \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\" and \"Water Margin\" respectively, which are among the Great Classical Novels of Chinese literature. The former is a romanticised historical retelling of the events in the late Eastern Han dynasty and the Three Kingdoms period, while the latter criticises the deplorable socio-economic status of the late Northern Song dynasty. \"Water Margin\" is often seen as the first full-length proto-wuxia novel: the portrayal of the 108 heroes, and their code of honour and willingness to become outlaws rather than serve a corrupt government, played an influential role in the development of jianghu (Jianghu is the setting that wuxia stories inhabit. Literally meaning \"rivers and lakes\", Jianghu settings are fictionalized versions of China which focus on social underworlds and the marginalized figures which inhabit them.\") culture in later centuries. \"Romance of the Three Kingdoms\" is also seen as a possible early antecedent and contains classic close-combat descriptions that were later emulated by wuxia writers in their works\nIn the Qing dynasty (1644\u20131911), further developments were the \"gong'an\" (\u516c\u6848; literally \"public case\") and related detective novels, where xia and other heroes, in collaboration with a judge or magistrate, solved crimes and battled injustice. The Justice Bao stories from \"Sanxia Wuyi\" (\u4e09\u4fe0\u4e94\u7fa9; later extended and renamed to \"Qixia Wuyi\") and \"Xiaowuyi\" (\u5c0f\u4e94\u7fa9), incorporated much of social justice themes of later wuxia stories. Xiayi stories of chivalrous romance, which frequently featured female heroes and supernatural fighting abilities, also surfaced during the Qing dynasty. Novels such as \"Shi Gong'an Qiwen\" (\u65bd\u516c\u6848\u5947\u805e) and \"Ern\u00fc Yingxiong Zhuan\" (\u5152\u5973\u82f1\u96c4\u50b3) have been cited as the clearest nascent wuxia novels.\nThe term \"wuxia\" as a genre label itself first appeared at the end of the Qing dynasty, a calque of the Japanese \"buky\u014d\", a genre of oft-militaristic and bushido-influenced adventure fiction. The term was brought to China by writers such as Liang Qichao and students who hoped that China would modernise its military and place emphasis on martial virtues, and it quickly became entrenched as the term used to refer to xiayi and other predecessors of wuxia proper. In Japan, however, the term \"buky\u014d\" faded into obscurity.\nMany wuxia works produced during the Ming and Qing dynasties were lost due to the governments' crackdown on and banning of such works. Wuxia works like \"Water Margin\" were deemed responsible for brewing anti-government sentiments, which led to rebellions in those eras. The departure from mainstream literature also meant that patronage of this genre was limited to the masses and not to the literati, which led to the stifling of the development of the wuxia genre. Nonetheless, the wuxia genre remained enormously popular with the common people.\n20th century.\nThe modern wuxia genre rose to prominence in the early 20th century after the May Fourth Movement of 1919. A new literature evolved, calling for a break with Confucian values, and the xia emerged as a symbol of personal freedom, defiance to Confucian tradition, and rejection of the Chinese family system.\nXiang Kairan (pen name Pingjiang Buxiaosheng) became the first notable wuxia writer, with his debut novel being \"The Peculiar Knights-Errant of the Jianghu\" (\u6c5f\u6e56\u5947\u4fe0\u50b3). It was serialised from 1921 to 1928 and was adapted into the first wuxia film, \"The Burning of the Red Lotus Temple\" (1928). Zhao Huanting (\u8d99\u7165\u4ead), who wrote \"Chronicles of the Loyal Knights-Errant\" (\u5947\u4fe0\u7cbe\u5fe0\u50b3, serialised 1923\u201327), was another well-known wuxia writer based in Shanghai. Starting from the 1930s, wuxia works proliferated and its centre shifted to Beijing and Tianjin in northern China. The most prolific writers there were collectively referred to as the \"Five Great Masters of the Northern School\" (\u5317\u6d3e\u4e94\u5927\u5bb6): Huanzhulouzhu, who wrote \"The Swordspeople from Shu Mountains\" (\u8700\u5c71\u528d\u4fe0\u50b3); Gong Baiyu (\u5bae\u767d\u7fbd), who wrote \"Twelve Coin Darts\" (\u5341\u4e8c\u91d1\u9322\u93e2); Wang Dulu, who wrote \"The Crane-Iron Pentalogy\" (\u9e64\u9244\u4e94\u90e8\u4f5c); Zheng Zhengyin (\u90d1\u8a3c\u56e0), who wrote \"The King of Eagle Claws\" (\u9e70\u722a\u738b); Zhu Zhenmu (\u6731\u8c9e\u6728), who wrote \"The Seven 'Kill' Stele\" (\u4e03\u6bba\u7891).\nWuxia fiction was banned at various times during the Republican era and these restrictions stifled the growth of the genre. In 1949, China also banned martial arts novels as vulgar reading. In Taiwan, the government banned several wuxia works in 1959. Despite this, wuxia prevailed in other Chinese-speaking regions. In Hong Kong, between the 1960s and 1980s, the genre entered a golden age. Writers such as Liang Yusheng and Louis Cha (Jin Yong) spearheaded the founding of a \"new school\" of the wuxia genre that differed largely from its predecessors. They wrote serials for newspapers and magazines. They also incorporated several fictional themes such as mystery and romance from other cultures. In Taiwan, Wolong Sheng, Sima Ling, Zhuge Qingyun (\u8af8\u845b\u9752\u96f2), Shiao Yi (\u8427\u9038) and Gu Long became the region's best known wuxia writers. After them, writers such as Woon Swee Oan and Huang Yi rose to prominence in a later period. Chen Yu-hui is a contemporary female wuxia novelist who made her debut with the novel \"The Tian-Guan Duo Heroes\" (\u5929\u89c0\u96d9\u4fe0).\nThere have also been works created after the 1980s which attempt to create a post-wuxia genre. Yu Hua, one of the more notable writers from this period, published a counter-genre short story titled \"Blood and Plum Blossoms\", in which the protagonist goes on a quest to avenge his murdered father.\nInfluence and dissemination.\nAs works from Hong Kong, Taiwan, and mainland China gained popularity in Asia in the 20th and 21st centuries, creators in Korea, Japan, and Southeast Asia began to draw influence from them, including from Wuxia and other martial arts genres.\nThemes, plots and settings.\nModern wuxia stories are largely set in ancient or pre-modern China. The historical setting can range from being quite specific and important to the story, to being vaguely defined, anachronistic, or mainly for use as a backdrop. Elements of fantasy, such as the use of magic powers and appearance of supernatural beings, are common in some wuxia stories but are not a prerequisite of the wuxia genre. However, the martial arts element is a definite part of a wuxia tale, as the characters must know some form of martial arts. Themes of romance are also strongly featured in some wuxia tales.\nA typical wuxia story features a young male protagonist who experiences a tragedy \u2013 such as the loss of his loved ones \u2013 and goes on to undertake several trials and tribulations to learn several forms of martial arts from various fighters. At the end of the story, he emerges as a powerful fighter whom few can equal. He uses his abilities to follow the code of xia and mends the ills of the jianghu. For instance, the opening chapters of some of Jin Yong's works follow a certain pattern: a tragic event occurs, usually one that costs the lives of the newly introduced characters, and then it sets events into motion that will culminate in the primary action of the story.\nOther stories use different structures. For instance, the protagonist is denied admission into a martial arts school. He experiences hardships and trains secretly and waits until there is an opportunity for him to show off his skills and surprise those who initially looked down on him. Some stories feature a mature hero with powerful martial arts abilities confronting an equally powerful antagonist as his nemesis. The plot will gradually meander to a final dramatic showdown between the protagonist and his nemesis. These types of stories were prevalent during the era of anti-Qing revolutionaries.\nCertain stories have unique plots, such as those by Gu Long and Huang Yi. Gu Long's works have an element of mystery and are written like detective stories. The protagonist, usually a formidable martial artist and intelligent problem-solver, embarks on a quest to solve a mystery such as a murder case. Huang Yi's stories are blended with science fiction.\nDespite these genre-blending elements, wuxia is primarily a historical genre of fiction. Notwithstanding this, wuxia writers openly admit that they are unable to capture the entire history of a course of events and instead choose to structure their stories along the pattern of the protagonist's progression from childhood to adulthood instead. The progression may be symbolic rather than literal, as observed in Jin Yong's \"The Smiling, Proud Wanderer\", where Linghu Chong progresses from childish concerns and dalliances into much more adult ones as his unwavering loyalty repeatedly thrusts him into the rocks of betrayal at the hands of his inhumane master.\nCode of xia.\nThe eight common attributes of the xia are listed as benevolence, justice, individualism, loyalty, courage, truthfulness, disregard for wealth, and desire for glory. Apart from individualism, these characteristics are similar to Confucian values such as \"ren\" (; \"benevolence\", \"kindness\"), \"zhong\" (; \"loyalty\"), \"yong\" (; \"courage\", \"bravery\") and \"yi\" (; \"righteousness\"). The code of xia also emphasises the importance of repaying benefactors after having received deeds of \"en\" (; \"grace\", \"favour\") from others, as well as seeking \"chou\" (; \"vengeance\", \"revenge\") to bring villains to justice. However, the importance of vengeance is controversial, as a number of wuxia works stress Buddhist ideals, which include forgiveness, compassion and a prohibition on killing. While borrowing ideas from the better known Confucian values, the root of xia originated from the lesser known Mohism, which in the Warring States period saw a few Mohists stood up to defend kingdoms being attacked by other kingdoms.\nIn the jianghu, martial artists are expected to be loyal to their master (shifu). This gives rise to the formation of several complex trees of master-apprentice relations as well as the various schools such as Shaolin and Wudang. If there are any disputes between fighters, they will choose the honourable way of settling their issues through fighting in duels.\nSkills and abilities.\nThe martial arts in wuxia stories are based on wushu techniques and other real life Chinese martial arts. In wuxia tales, however, the mastery of such skills are highly exaggerated to superhuman levels of achievement and prowess.\nThe following is a list of skills and abilities a typical fighter in a wuxia story possesses:\nIn wuxia stories, characters attain the above skills and abilities by devoting themselves to years of diligent study and exercise, but can also have such power conferred upon them by a master who transfers his energy to them. The instructions to mastering these skills through training are found in secret manuals known as \"miji\" (\u79d8\u7b08). In some stories, specific skills can be learned by spending several years in seclusion with a master or training with a group of fighters.\n\"Menpai\".\n\"Menpai\" () is often translated as sect, school, society, church, house, or cult. Members of the same \"menpai\" follow the guidance and train under the same leader. If the members of the \"menpai\" are related, then it can be translated as clan. Since some of the \"menpai\" are religiously affiliated, \"sect\" has come to be a common translation for the non-family based \"menpai\". However, it would be inaccurate to use sect to denote \"menpais\" that are not associated with religion.\nLiterature.\nNotable modern wuxia writers include:\nComics.\nNew and original wuxia writings have dwindled significantly in modern times, particularly so as patronage and readerships of the genre decimated due to readily available alternatives in entertainment such as DVDs, gaming consoles, and other newer forms of entertainment. However, the genre has persisted in the form of manhua (Chinese comics) in places like Hong Kong and Taiwan, with the core essentials of the wuxia genre living on in weekly editions equivalent to the Japanese manga.\nSome notable comic artists are listed as follows:\nFilm and television.\nThe earliest wuxia films date back to the 1920s. Extant early wuxia films produced in China include \"Red Heroine\" (1929), \"Woman Warrior White Rose\" (1929), and \"Woman Warrior of the Wild River 6: Rumble at Deerhorn Gully\" (1930), the sixth film in a series. \"Hua Mu Lan\" (1939), another surviving film, is considered a representative of the second wave of wuxia films, during the Anti-Japanese War. Films directed by King Hu and produced by the Shaw Brothers Studio featured sophisticated action choreography using wire and trampoline assisted acrobatics combined with sped-up camera techniques. The storylines in the early films were loosely adapted from existing literature.\nCheng Pei-pei, Jimmy Wang and Connie Chan are among the better known wuxia movie stars in the 1960s\u201370s, when films made by King Hu and the Shaw Brothers Studio were most prominent. More recent wuxia movie actors and actresses include Jet Li, Brigitte Lin, Michelle Yeoh, Donnie Yen, Tony Leung and Zhang Ziyi. Yuen Woo-ping is a choreographer who achieved fame by crafting action-sequences in wuxia films.\nWuxia was introduced to Hollywood studios in 2000 by Ang Lee's \"Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon\", though influence of the genre was previously seen in the United States in the 1970s television series \"Kung Fu\". Following in Lee's footsteps, Zhang Yimou made \"Hero\", targeted for the international market in 2002, \"House of Flying Daggers\" in 2004, \"Curse of the Golden Flower\" in 2006 and \"Shadow\" in 2018. Western audiences were also introduced to wuxia through Asian television stations in larger cities, which featured miniseries such as \"Warriors of the Yang Clan\" and \"Paradise\", often with English subtitles.\n\"Ash Is Purest White\" (Chinese: \u6c5f\u6e56\u513f\u5973; 'Sons and Daughters of Jianghu'), a 2018 Chinese drama directed by Jia Zhangke, is a modern film that refers to the underworld interpretation of jianghu. It was selected to compete for the Palme d'Or at the 2018 Cannes Film Festival. The story is loosely based on the leader of a gang from Jia Zhangke's childhood, whom he had admired as a role model. Like the rest of Jia's films, it opened to widespread acclaim.\nThere have been Western attempts at the genre, such as the 2008 film \"The Forbidden Kingdom\", which starred Jackie Chan, Jet Li and Michael Angarano; other movies including wuxia elements are the first three in \"The Matrix\" film series (1999\u20132003, the fourth film from 2021 was choreographed by Joshua Grothe) and the \"\" from 2003 to 2004, all of which were choreographed by Yuen Woo-ping. Perhaps the most successful example was DreamWorks Animation's media franchise \"Kung Fu Panda\". Created as an earnest, if humorous, emulation by producers who were knowledgeable admirers of the genre, the series has been particularly hailed in China as an excellent contribution to the form. From the 1990s\u20132000s, Hong Kong stars Daniel Wu and Stephen Fung have worked with AMC Networks to bring wuxia to a US television audience with \"Into the Badlands\", which premiered in 2015 and ran for three seasons.\nIn 2013, Keanu Reeves directed and starred as the main antagonist in \"Man of Tai Chi\", with Tiger Chen as a martial artist attending underground fights. The \"Mulan\" remake in 2020 was Disney's attempt in making a wuxia movie. In 2021, Marvel's \"Shang-Chi\" opens with a wuxia sequence and has action sequences inspired by Jackie Chan.\nVideo games.\nSome notable wuxia video games of the action RPG genre include \"The Legend of Sword and Fairy\", \"Xuan-Yuan Sword\", \"Jade Empire\", and \"Kingdom of Paradise\", all of which blend wuxia with elements of Chinese mythology and fantasy. \"The Legend of Sword and Fairy\", in particular, expanded into a franchise of eight video games, two of which were adapted into the television series \"Chinese Paladin\" (2005) and \"Chinese Paladin 3\" (2009). There are also MMORPGs, such as \"JX Online 3\", \"Heroes of Kung Fu\" and \"Age of Wulin\", and hack and slash games, such as \"Bujingai\" and \"Heavenly Sword\".\nGames adapted from the works of wuxia writers include \"Heroes of Jin Yong\", an RPG based on characters in Jin Yong's novels; \"Dragon Oath\", an MMORPG inspired by Jin Yong's \"Demi-Gods and Semi-Devils\"; and \"Martial Kingdoms\", a strategy game featuring several martial arts schools which commonly appear in wuxia fiction.\nThe wuxia genre continues to be drawn as a pool of inspiration or source material for Chinese video game studios. In June 2022, Tencent's Lightspeed Studio released a demo trailer on \"Code: To Jin Yong\". In the following month, Everstone Studio unveiled \"Where Winds Meet\", a game compared to \"Ghost of Tsushima\" and \"Assassin's Creed\". 2023 saw the release of \"Hero's Adventure: Road to Passion\" in November, a wuxia-inspired open world RPG, as well as \"Wandering Sword\" in September, a RPG featuring an art style reminiscent of HD-2D.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33285", "revid": "279219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33285", "title": "Wu xia film", "text": ""}
{"id": "33287", "revid": "43070105", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33287", "title": "Words of Mormon", "text": "Book of the Book of Mormon\nThe Words of Mormon is one of the books that make up the Book of Mormon, a text that is held sacred in the Latter Day Saint movement. It consists of a single chapter of eighteen verses and is the only book in the text which is not titled as a \"book.\" According to the text, it is a comment inserted by the prophet Mormon while compiling the records which became the Book of Mormon.\nTextually, Words of Mormon serves to link the Small Plates of Nephi, which precede it in the current printed version, but which would have been placed after Mormon's full record in the golden plates, with the rest of the Book of Mormon.\nNarrative.\nMormon explains that, while abridging the history of the Nephites, he came across the Small Plates of Nephi and decided to make them an appendix to his finished work. He then briefly summarises the reign of King Benjamin, the last king named in the Small Plates.\nMormon writes that King Benjamin, wielding the sword of Laban, stood against the Lamanites. With his efforts, and wisdom, and the help of the prophets, King Benjamin established peace in the land. Mormon also talks about how false Christs went among the people and were confounded. \nInterpretation.\nSuggested purposes.\nWords of Mormon verses 12\u201318 have continuity with the first part of Mosiah; Jack M. Lyon and Kent R. Minson hypothesize it was originally dictated as part of a now missing portion of the Book of Mosiah. Brant Gardner suggests that Joseph Smith wrote verses 12\u201318 as a summary or bridge back into the large plates and that these verses were not part of the original dictation. In another perspective, religious studies scholar Grant Hardy states that that Mormon's mention of King Benjamin links the Book of Omni with the Book of Mosiah. \nMormon narrates that he doesn't know why he is including the small plates with the large ones. Latter Day Saints believe that the inclusion serves as a replacement for the 116 pages that were lost during translation of the Book of Mormon. Author Benjamin Keogh suggests that Mormon's explanation indicates that he views the inclusion of the small plates as an appendix to the larger record. Keogh further suggests that, for the small plates, Words of Mormon may serve a similar purpose as the title page of the Book of Mormon.\nStyle.\nDonald W. Parry broke up the Book of Mormon into its chiastic and other poetic patterns. In Words of Mormon, he identified two instances of chiasmus: The first appears in verses 3-11 with an \"ABcbcacababCDEFFEDCBabcA\" pattern; the second is in verses 15\u201316 with an \"abcabc\" pattern.\nIn an article about the Words of Mormon, theologian Benjamin Keogh searched for meaning in Mormon's frequent use of \"these\". He suggested that Mormon may be referencing prophets, holy men, or the plates themselves.\nSuggested prejudice.\nThe authors Fatimah Salleh and Margaret Hemming claim that throughout the narrative of the Book of Mormon the Nephites are prejudiced toward the Lamanites. They point out that in Words of Mormon the author calls the Lamanites the brethren of his people, and avoids calling them his own brethren. This, Salleh and Hemming claim, is connected to Nephite prejudice.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33288", "revid": "32001896", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33288", "title": "Well-founded set", "text": ""}
{"id": "33289", "revid": "32001896", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33289", "title": "Well-ordered set", "text": ""}
{"id": "33290", "revid": "50453463", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33290", "title": "Wis\u0142awa Szymborska", "text": "Polish poet and Nobel laureate (1923\u20132012)\nMaria Wis\u0142awa Anna Szymborska (; 2 July 1923\u00a0\u2013 1 February 2012) was a Polish poet, essayist, translator, and recipient of the 1996 Nobel Prize in Literature. Born in Prowent (now part of K\u00f3rnik in west-central Poland), she resided in Krak\u00f3w until the end of her life. In Poland, Szymborska's books have reached sales rivaling prominent prose authors, though she wrote in a poem, \"Some Like Poetry\" (\"Niekt\u00f3rzy lubi\u0105 poezj\u0119\"), that \"perhaps\" two in a thousand people like poetry.\nSzymborska was awarded the 1996 Nobel Prize in Literature \"for poetry that with ironic precision allows the historical and biological context to come to light in fragments of human reality\". She became better known internationally as a result. Her work has been translated into many European languages, as well as into Arabic, Hebrew, Japanese, Persian and Chinese.\nLife.\nWis\u0142awa Szymborska was born on 2 July 1923 in Prowent, the second daughter of Wincenty Szymborski and Anna (n\u00e9e Rottermund) Szymborska. Her father was, at that time, the steward of Count W\u0142adys\u0142aw Zamoyski, a Polish patriot and charitable patron. After Zamoyski's death in 1924, her family moved to Toru\u0144, and in 1931 to Krak\u00f3w, where she lived and worked until her death in early 2012.\nWhen World War II broke out in 1939, she continued her education in underground classes. From 1943, she worked as a railroad employee and managed to avoid being deported to Germany as a forced labourer. During this time, her career as an artist began, with illustrations for an English-language textbook. She also began writing stories and occasional poems. In 1945, she began studying Polish literature before switching to sociology at Jagiellonian University in Krak\u00f3w. There, she became involved in the local writing scene, and met and was influenced by Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz. In March 1945, she published her first poem, \"Szukam s\u0142owa\" (\"Looking for words\"), in the daily newspaper \"Dziennik Polski\". Her poems continued to be published in various newspapers and periodicals for a number of years. In 1948, she quit her studies without a degree, due to poor financial circumstances; the same year, she married poet Adam W\u0142odek, whom she divorced in 1954. They remained close until W\u0142odek's death in 1986. Their union was childless. Around the time of her marriage, she was working as a secretary for an educational biweekly magazine as well as an illustrator. Her first book was to be published in 1949, but did not pass censorship as it \"did not meet socialist requirements\".\nSzymborska adhered to the People's Republic of Poland's (PRL) official ideology early in her career. For example, during the Polish anti-religious campaign, she signed an infamous 1953 political petition condemning Polish priests accused of treason in a Krak\u00f3w show trial. Her early work supported socialist themes, as seen in her debut collection \"Dlatego \u017cyjemy\" (\"That is what we are living for\"), containing the poems \"Lenin\" and \"M\u0142odzie\u017cy buduj\u0105cej Now\u0105 Hut\u0119\" (\"For the Youth who are building Nowa Huta\"), about the construction of a Stalinist industrial town near Krak\u00f3w. She became a member of the ruling Polish United Workers' Party.\nAlthough initially close to the official party line, as the Polish Communist Party shifted from the Stalinist communists to \"national\" communists, Szymborska grew estranged from socialist ideology and renounced her earlier political work. Although she did not officially leave the Communist party until 1966, she began to establish contacts with dissident intellectuals. As early as 1957, she befriended Jerzy Giedroyc, the editor of the influential Paris-based \u00e9migr\u00e9 journal \"Kultura\", to which she contributed. In 1964, she opposed a Communist-backed protest to \"The Times\" against independent intellectuals, demanding freedom of speech instead.\nIn 1953, Szymborska joined the staff of the literary review magazine \"\u017bycie Literackie\" (\"Literary Life\"), where she continued to work until 1981 and from 1968 had a book review column, \"Lektury Nadobowi\u0105zkowe\". Many of her essays from this period were later published in book form. From 1981 to 1983, she was an editor of the Krak\u00f3w-based monthly periodical \"NaGlos\" (\"OutLoud\"). In the 1980s, she intensified her oppositional activities, contributing to the samizdat periodical \"Arka\" under the pseudonym \"Sta\u0144czyk\u00f3wna\", as well as to \"Kultura\". In the early 1990s, with a poem published in \"Gazeta Wyborcza\", she supported the vote of no confidence in the first non-Communist government that brought former Communists back to power. The last collection published while Szymborska was still alive, \"Dwukropek\", was chosen as the best book of 2006 by readers of Poland's \"Gazeta Wyborcza\". She also translated French literature into Polish, in particular Baroque poetry and the works of Agrippa d'Aubign\u00e9, a Huguenot soldier-poet during the French Wars of Religion. In the Germanosphere, Szymborska is closely associated with \u0141\u00f3d\u017a-born literary translator Karl Dedecius, who did much to popularize postwar Polish literature there.\nDeath and last works.\nSurrounded by friends and relatives, Szymborska died peacefully of lung cancer in her sleep at home in Krak\u00f3w in 2012, aged 88. She was working on new poetry at the time of her death, but was unable to arrange her final poems for publication in the way she wanted. Her last poetry was published later in 2012. In 2013, the Wis\u0142awa Szymborska Award was established in honour of her legacy.\nIn 2024, the https:// president Micha\u0142 Rusinek signed an agreement with Polskie Radio's OFF Radio Krakow for the rights to use her voice recordings for generated speech to be used for an interview-like programme. The programme, broadcast on 29 October that year, was swiftly condemned by both Polish audiences and media producers.\nThemes.\nSzymborska frequently employed literary devices such as ironic precision, paradox, contradiction, and understatement to illuminate philosophical themes and obsessions. Many of her poems feature war and terrorism.\nShe wrote from unusual points of view, such as a cat in the newly empty apartment of its dead owner. Her reputation rests on a relatively small body of work, fewer than 350 poems. When asked why she had published so few poems, she said, \"I have a trash can in my home\".\nPop culture.\nSzymborska's poem \"Buffo\" was set to music by Barbara Maria Zakrzewska-Nikiporczyk in 1985.\nHer poem \"Love at First Sight\" was used in the film \"Turn Left, Turn Right\", starring Takeshi Kaneshiro and Gigi Leung. Krzysztof Kie\u015blowski's film \"\" was also inspired by \"Love at First Sight\".\nIn her last year, Szymborska collaborated with Polish jazz trumpeter Tomasz Sta\u0144ko, who dedicated his record \"Wis\u0142awa\" (ECM, 2013) to her memory, taking inspiration from their collaboration and her poetry.\nSzymborska's poem \"People on the Bridge\" was made into a film by Beata Po\u017aniak. It was shown worldwide and at a New Delhi film festival. As an award, it was screened 36 more times in 18 Indian cities.\nThe poem \"Nothing Twice\" (\"Nic dwa razy\") has inspired multiple musical adaptations, including \u0141ucja Prus's performance at the 1965 Sopot International Song Festival and Maanam's song \"Nic dwa razy\", from their 1994 album \"R\u00f3\u017ca\". In 2022, Sanah adapted the poem into a song as part of her project based on Polish poetry, \"Sanah \u015bpiewa Poezyje\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Quotations related to at Wikiquote"}
{"id": "33291", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33291", "title": "WYSIWYG", "text": "Acronym for \"what you see is what you get\" in computing\nIn computing, WYSIWYG ( ; what you see is what you get) is software that allows content to be edited in a form that resembles its appearance when printed or displayed as a finished product, such as a printed document, web page, or slide presentation. WYSIWYG implies a user interface that allows the user to view something very similar to the result while the document is being created. In general, WYSIWYG implies the ability to directly manipulate the layout of a document without having to type or remember names of layout commands.\nHistory.\nBefore the adoption of WYSIWYG techniques, text appeared in editors using the system standard typeface and style with little indication of layout (margins, spacing, etc.). Users were required to enter special non-printing \"control codes\" (now referred to as markup \"code tags\") to indicate that some text should be in boldface, italics, or a different typeface or size. In this environment there was very little distinction between text editors and word processors.\nThese applications typically used an arbitrary markup language to define the codes/tags. Each program had its own special way to format a document, and it was a difficult and time-consuming process to change from one word processor to another.\nThe use of markup tags and codes remains popular today in some applications due to their ability to store complex formatting information. When the tags are made visible in the editor, however, they occupy space in the unformatted text, and as a result can disrupt the desired layout and flow.\nBravo, a document preparation program for the Alto produced at Xerox PARC by Butler Lampson, Charles Simonyi and colleagues in 1974, is generally considered to be the first program to incorporate the WYSIWYG technology, displaying text with formatting (e.g. with justification, fonts, and proportional spacing of characters). The Alto monitor (72 PPI, based on the typographic unit) was designed so that one full page of text could be seen and then printed on the first laser printers. When the text was laid out on the screen, 72 PPI font metric files were used, but when printed, 300 PPI files were used. As a result, one would occasionally find characters and words that are slightly off\u2014a problem that would continue up to this day.\nBravo was released commercially, and the software eventually included in the Xerox Star can be seen as a direct descendant of it.\nIn late 1978, in parallel with but independent of the work at Xerox PARC, Hewlett-Packard developed and released the first commercial WYSIWYG software application for producing overhead slides (or what today are referred to as presentation graphics). The first release, named BRUNO (after an HP sales training puppet), ran on the HP 1000 minicomputer, taking advantage of HP 2640\u2014HP's first bitmapped computer terminal. BRUNO was then ported to the HP-3000 and re-released as \"HP Draw\".\nBy 1981, MicroPro advertised that its WordStar word processor had WYSIWYG, but its display was limited to displaying styled text in WYSIWYG fashion; bold and \"italic\" text would be represented on screen, instead of being surrounded by tags or special control characters. In 1983, the \"Weekly Reader\" advertised its Stickybear educational software with the slogan \"what you see is what you get\", with photographs of its Apple II graphics, but home computers of the 1970s and early 1980s lacked the sophisticated graphics capabilities necessary to display WYSIWYG documents, meaning that such applications were usually confined to limited-purpose, high-end workstations (such as the IBM Displaywriter System) that were too expensive for the general public to afford. As improving technology allowed the production of cheaper bitmapped displays, WYSIWYG software started to appear in more popular computers, including LisaWrite for the Apple Lisa, released in 1983, and MacWrite for the Apple Macintosh, released in 1984.\nThe Apple Macintosh system was originally designed so that the screen resolution and the resolution of the ImageWriter dot-matrix printers sold by Apple were easily scaled: 72 PPI for the screen and 144 DPI for the printers. Thus, the scale and dimensions of the on-screen display in programs such as MacWrite and MacPaint were easily translated to the printed output. If the paper were held up to the screen, the printed image would be the same size as the on-screen image, but at twice the resolution. As the ImageWriter was the only model of printer physically compatible with the Macintosh printer port, this created an effective closed system. Later, when Macs using external displays became available, the resolution was fixed to the size of the screen to achieve 72 DPI. These resolutions often differed from the VGA-standard resolutions common in the PC world at the time. Thus, while a Macintosh monitor had the same 640\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0480 resolution as a PC, a screen would be fixed at 832\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0624 rather than the 800\u00a0\u00d7\u00a0600 resolution used by PCs. With the introduction of third-party dot-matrix printers as well as laser printers and multisync monitors, resolutions deviated from even multiples of the screen resolution, making true WYSIWYG harder to achieve.\nEtymology.\nThe phrase \"what you see is what you get\", from which the acronym derives, was a catchphrase popularized by Flip Wilson's drag persona Geraldine, first appearing in September 1969, then regularly in the early 1970s on \"The Flip Wilson Show\". The phrase was a statement demanding acceptance of Geraldine's entire personality and appearance.\nAs it relates to computing, there are multiple claims to first use of the phrase:\nVariations.\nMany variations are used only to illustrate a point or make a joke, and have very limited real use. Some that have been proposed include the following:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33292", "revid": "6727347", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33292", "title": "Wire-frame model", "text": "Representation of a 3D object with only its edges rendered\nIn 3D computer graphics, a wire-frame model (also spelled wireframe model) is a visual representation of a three-dimensional (3D) physical object. It is based on a polygon mesh or a volumetric mesh, created by specifying each edge of the physical object where two mathematically continuous smooth surfaces meet, or by connecting an object's constituent vertices using (straight) lines or curves. \nThe object is projected into screen space and rendered by drawing lines at the location of each edge. The term \"wire frame\" comes from designers using metal wire to represent the three-dimensional shape of solid objects. 3D wireframe computer models allow for the construction and manipulation of solids and solid surfaces. 3D solid modeling efficiently draws higher quality representations of solids than conventional line drawing.\nUsing a wire-frame model allows for the visualization of the underlying design structure of a 3D model. Traditional two-dimensional views and drawings/renderings can be created by the appropriate rotation of the object, and the selection of hidden-line removal via cutting planes.\nSince wire-frame renderings are relatively simple and fast to calculate, they are often used in cases where a relatively high screen frame rate is needed (for instance, when working with a particularly complex 3D model, or in real-time systems that model exterior phenomena). \nWhen greater graphical detail is desired, surface textures can be added automatically after the completion of the initial rendering of the wire frame. This allows a designer to quickly review solids, or rotate objects to different views without the long delays associated with more realistic rendering, or even the processing of faces and simple flat shading.\nThe wire frame format is also well-suited and widely used in programming tool paths for direct numerical control (DNC) machine tools.\nHand-drawn wire-frame-like illustrations date back as far as the Italian Renaissance. Wire-frame models were also used extensively in video games to represent 3D objects during the 1980s and early 1990s, when \"properly\" filled 3D objects would have been too complex to calculate and draw with the computers of the time. Wire-frame models are also used as the input for computer-aided manufacturing (CAM).\nThere are three main types of 3D computer-aided design (CAD) models; \"wire frame\" is the most abstract and least realistic. The other types are \"surface\" and \"solid\". The wire-frame method of modelling consists of only lines and curves that connect the points or vertices and thereby define the edges of an object.\nSimple example of wireframe model.\nAn object is specified by two tables: (1) Vertex Table, and, (2) Edge Table. \nThe vertex table consists of three-dimensional coordinate values for each vertex with reference to the origin. \nEdge table specifies the start and end vertices for each edge.\nA naive interpretation could create a wire-frame representation by simply drawing straight lines between the screen coordinates of the appropriate vertices using the edge list.\nUnlike representations designed for more detailed rendering, face information is not specified (it must be calculated if required for solid rendering). \nAppropriate calculations have to be performed to transform the 3D coordinates of the vertices into 2D screen coordinates. \nTechnical communication explosions.\n In the field of technical communications, technical writers working in mechanical engineering are often assigned to modify, or \"explode\", engineering models and provide part callouts. CAD wireframe explosions are used to simplify assembly and/or maintenance instructions. Having this capability allows technical writers to independently custom-orient CAD models to improve complex procedural step comprehension.\nSpecial CAD software is normally used for this very specialized work and is often available through major CAD software developers. In recent years, however, many new programs for this work are available through smaller developers who specialize in CAD rendering tools.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33293", "revid": "599654", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33293", "title": "WIPO Copyright Treaty", "text": "1996 treaty on copyright law\nThe World Intellectual Property Organization Copyright Treaty (WIPO Copyright Treaty or WCT) is an international treaty on copyright law adopted by the member states of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) in 1996. It provides additional protections for copyright to respond to advances in information technology since the formation of previous copyright treaties before it. As of August 2023, the treaty has 115 contracting parties. The WCT and WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, are together termed WIPO \"internet treaties\".\nHistory.\nDuring the earlier stages of negotiations, the WCT was seen as a protocol to the Berne Convention, constituting an update of that agreement since the 1971 Stockholm Conference. However, as any amendment to the Berne Convention required unanimous consent of all parties, the WCT was conceptualized as an additional treaty which supplemented the Berne Convention. The collapse of negotiations around the extension of the Berne Convention during the 1980s saw the shifting of the forum to the GATT, resulting in the TRIPS Agreement. Thus, the nature of any copyright treaty by the World Intellectual Property Organization became considerably narrower, being limited to addressing the challenges posed by digital technologies.\nProtection granted by the Treaty.\nThe WCT emphasizes the incentive nature of copyright protection, claiming its importance to creative endeavours. It ensures that computer programs are protected as literary works (Article 4), and that the arrangement and selection of material in databases is protected (Article 5). It provides authors of works with control over their rental and distribution in Articles 6 to 8, which they may not have under the Berne Convention alone. It also prohibits circumvention of technological measures for the protection of works (Article 11) and unauthorized modification of rights management information contained in works (Article 12).\nThe treaty has been criticised for being too broad (for example in its prohibition of circumvention of technical protection measures, even where such circumvention is used in the pursuit of legal and fair use rights) and for applying a \"one size fits all\" standard to all signatory countries, despite their widely differing stages of economic development and knowledge industry.\nImplementation.\nThe WIPO Copyright Treaty is implemented in United States law by the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA). By Decision 2000/278/EC of 16 March 2000, the Council of the European Union approved the treaty on behalf of the European Community. European Union Directives which largely cover the subject matter of the treaty are: Directive 91/250/EC, creating copyright protection for software; Directive 96/9/EC on copyright protection for databases; and Directive 2001/29/EC, prohibiting devices for circumventing \"technical protection measures\", such as digital rights management (also known as DRM).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33294", "revid": "41651886", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33294", "title": "World Intellectual Property Organization", "text": "Specialised agency of the United Nations\nThe World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO; (OMPI)) is one of the 15 specialized agencies of the United Nations (UN). Pursuant to the 1967 Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization, WIPO was created to promote and protect intellectual property (IP) across the world by cooperating with countries as well as international organizations. It began operations on 26 April 1970 when the convention entered into force. The current Director General is Singaporean Daren Tang, former head of the Intellectual Property Office of Singapore, who began his term on 1 October 2020.\nWIPO's activities include: hosting forums to discuss and shape international IP rules and policies, providing global services that register and protect IP in different countries, resolving transboundary IP disputes, helping connect IP systems through uniform standards and infrastructure, and serving as a general reference database on all IP matters; this includes providing reports and statistics on the state of IP protection or innovation both globally and in specific countries. WIPO also works with governments, nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), and individuals to utilize IP for socioeconomic development.\nWIPO administers 26 international treaties that concern a wide variety of intellectual property issues, ranging from the protection of audiovisual works to establishing international patent classification. It is governed by the General Assembly and the Coordination Committee, which together set policy and serve as the main decision making bodies. The General Assembly also elects WIPO's chief administrator, the Director General, currently Daren Tang of Singapore, who took office on 1 October 2020. WIPO is administered by a Secretariat that helps carry out its day-to-day activities.\nHeadquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, WIPO has \"external offices\" around the world, including in Algiers (Algeria); Rio de Janeiro (Brazil); Beijing (China), Tokyo (Japan); Abuja (Nigeria); Moscow (Russia); and Singapore (Singapore). Unlike most UN organizations, WIPO does not rely heavily on assessed or voluntary contributions from member states; 95 percent of its budget comes from fees related to its global services.\nWIPO currently has 194 member states, including 190 UN member states and the Cook Islands, Holy See and Niue; Palestine has permanent observer status. The only non-members, among the countries recognized by the UN are the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau and South Sudan.\nHistory.\nPre BIRPI.\n1883 \u2013 Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.\nThe Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property was adopted in 1883 and was one of the first intellectual property treaties. It established a Union for the protection of industrial property. Additionally, it applies to a wide range of industrial property including patents, trademarks, utility models, industrial designs, trade names, service marks, geographical indications as well as the \"repression of unfair competition\". The Paris Convention was the first international agreement to protect the works of creators in other countries.\nMoving on, the Convention was adopted in diplomatic conferences held in Paris in 1880 and 1883, it was then signed on 20 March 1883, on behalf of Brazil, France, Guatemala, Netherlands, Portugal, Serbia, Spain and Switzerland, Belgium, Italy and El Salvador. It consisted of the Convention proper, which contains 19 articles, and the \"Protocole de cl\u00f4ture\" (Final Protocol), which is almost the same length as the Convention proper.\nThe \"International Bureau\" established by the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property later became part of BIRPI and later WIPO.\n1886 \u2013 Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works.\nThe Berne Convention was adopted in 1886, it deals with copyright, the protection of works and rights of authors and rights holders. It provides creators including writers, poets, painters, musicians with ways to control how and by who their works are used and the terms of use. It also contains provisions on minimum protections and special provisions for developing countries. The Convention follows three basic principles; that works originating in one of the Contracting States must be given the same protection in each of the other Contracting States (principle of \"national treatment\"), that there is automatic protection and no formal process is required and that protection under the convention is independent of protection in the country of origin of the work (principle of \"independence\" of protection). The \"International Bureau\" was created to oversee the Berne Convention and later became part of BIRPI and later WIPO.\n1891 \u2013 Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks.\nIn 1891 nine of the 14 States to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property created the first \"special arrangements for the protection of industrial property\". Along with the Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement (1989) it created the Madrid System, the primary international system for facilitating the registration of trademarks in multiple jurisdictions around the world.\nBIRPI.\nThe Bureaus created to administer the Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works and the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property were under \"the high supervision\" (\"haute surveillance\") of the Government of the Swiss Confederation. In 1893 the Swiss government combined them with the same director and same staff as United International Bureaux for the Protection of Intellectual Property, \"Bureaux internationaux r\u00e9unis pour la protection de la propri\u00e9t\u00e9 intellectuelle\" (BIRPI). BIRPI was the predecessor of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) which superseded it 87 years later, in 1970.\nFormation of WIPO.\nWIPO was formally created by the Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization, which entered into force on 26 April 1970. WIPO allowed members who were part of the Berne Convention, Paris Convention or a member of the United Nations system including the United Nations, any of its specialized agencies, the International Atomic Energy Agency or the International Court of Justice.\nThat date is commemorated annually as World Intellectual Property Day, which raises awareness of the importance of IP. Under Article 3 of this convention, WIPO seeks to \"promote the protection of intellectual property throughout the world\". WIPO became a specialized agency of the UN in 1974. The Agreement between the United Nations and the World Intellectual Property Organization notes in Article 1 that WIPO is responsible:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;for promoting creative intellectual activity and for facilitating the transfer of technology related to industrial property to the developing countries in order to accelerate economic, social and cultural development, subject to the competence and responsibilities of the United Nations and its organs, particularly the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the United Nations Development Programme and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization, as well as of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and of other agencies within the United Nations system.\nThe Agreement marked a transition for WIPO from the mandate it inherited in 1967 from BIRPI, to promote the protection of intellectual property, to one that involved the more complex task of promoting technology transfer and economic development.\nWIPO joining the United Nations.\nIn 1974 WIPO became a specialized agency of the United Nations through a bilateral agreement between WIPO and the UN approved by the General Assembly of WIPO on 27 September 1974, and by the UN General Assembly on 17 December 1974. A protocol was signed by then Secretary-General of the United Nations, Kurt Waldheim and then Director General of WIPO \u00c1rp\u00e1d Bogsch on 21 January 1975. The Agreement became effective on 17 December 1974.\nThe relative importance of WIPO in global IP governance decreased after the United States incorporated intellectual property matters into the Uruguay Round of the GATT Negotiations in the 1980s.182\nWIPO Development agenda.\nIn October 2004, WIPO agreed to adopt a proposal offered by Argentina and Brazil, the \"Proposal for the Establishment of a Development Agenda for WIPO\"\u2014from the Geneva Declaration on the Future of the World Intellectual Property Organization. This proposal was well supported by developing countries. The agreed \"WIPO Development Agenda\" (composed of over 45 recommendations) was the culmination of a long process of transformation for the organization from one that had historically been primarily aimed at protecting the interests of rightholders, to one that has increasingly incorporated the interests of other stakeholders in the international intellectual property system as well as integrating into the broader corpus of international law on human rights, environment and economic cooperation.\nA number of civil society bodies have been working on a draft Access to Knowledge (A2K) treaty which they would like to see introduced.\nIn 2009, WIPO started drafting future treaties on intellectual property and genetic resources, traditional knowledge and folklore in relation with indigenous peoples and local communities.\nIn December 2011, WIPO published its first World Intellectual Property Report on the Changing Face of Innovation, the first such report of the new Office of the Chief Economist. WIPO is also a co-publisher of the Global Innovation Index.\nRecent events.\nIn 2016, WIPO initiated the High-Level Conference on Intellectual Property for BRI Countries.187 WIPO Director General Francis Gurry encouraged countries participating in the Belt and Road Initiative to use WIPO tools like its global IP services and databases and to join WIPO-administered IP treaties.187\nIn September 2020 China blocked the Wikimedia Foundation from observer status at WIPO citing the existence of a Wikimedia affiliate in Taiwan. According to the Chinese statement \"there is reason to believe that this foundation has been carrying out political activities through its member organizations which could undermine the state's sovereignty and territorial integrity.\" China again rejected Wikimedia's bid, for the same reason, in 2021, 2023, 2024, and 2025.\nWIPO, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the WTO launched on 11 April 2022 their new Trilateral COVID-19 Technical Assistance Platform. This new tool aims to help members and WTO accession candidates address their capacity building needs to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Platform provides members and accession candidates with a single contact form which they can use to reach out to the trilateral organizations.\nGlobal services.\nPatent Cooperation Treaty.\nThe Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) (1970) established a service which assists individuals, companies, and institutions in seeking patent protection internationally for their inventions. It also helps patent offices with their patent granting decisions and facilitates public access to technical information relating to those inventions. 153 countries are currently party to the PCT.\nUnder the PCT, an applicant can file one PCT application in one language, at one patent office, within 12 months from the date of the earliest patent application which has been filed for the same invention (the \"priority date\"). This one PCT application has the same legal effect as filing separate regional or national patent applications in all PCT member countries.\nPCT applications are processed in a standardized manner as provided in the Treaty and Regulations, including an international search for documents relevant to the potential patentability of the invention and international publication. Granting patents remains under the control of the regional or national patent Offices in the \"national phase\".\nUsing the PCT, patent applicants can postpone paying national and regional patent-related fees while they learn about the likelihood of obtaining a patent, benefitting from the additional time and information to help them decide whether, and in which countries, to pursue patents.\nMadrid System.\nThe Madrid System for the International Registration of Marks serves as a means to seek protection for trademarks worldwide, in over 120 countries. Created in 1891, the Madrid System is now governed by the Madrid Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of Marks (1989). In order to become a member of the Madrid System, a state or intergovernmental organization must already be a party to the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property (1883).\nThe Madrid System is a centralized trademark registration system: through a single application, in one language and with one set of fees (in one currency, the Swiss franc), protection can be obtained in member states and intergovernmental organizations. International registrations can then be modified, renewed or expanded, centrally through WIPO (rather than through each separate IP Office).\nThe Madrid System can only be used by a natural person or a legal entity, which is a national, is domiciled or has a company in the territory of a member of the Madrid System.\nLisbon System.\nThe Lisbon System for the International Registration of Appellations of Origin and Geographical indications provides a means of obtaining international protection for a geographical indication or an appellation of origin. Geographical indications and appellations of origin are intellectual property rights which identify a product that originates from a specific geographical area and that has characteristics that are attributable to its geographical origin. Comt\u00e9 cheese (France), Chulucanas pottery (Peru), Tequila (Mexico), Porto (Portugal), Herend porcelain (Hungary), and Kampot pepper (Cambodia) are examples of appellations of origin and geographical indications registered under the Lisbon System. Through a single registration and one set of fees, protection can be obtained in the other countries (and intergovernmental organizations, such as the European Union) covered by the Lisbon System.\nThe Lisbon System includes the Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International Registration of 1958 ('the Lisbon Agreement') and, its latest revision, the Geneva Act of the Lisbon Agreement on Appellations of Origin and Geographical Indications of 2015 ('the Geneva Act') form the Lisbon System. Registrations under the Lisbon System are published in the official bulletin and can be searched through the Lisbon Express Database.\nWIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center.\nThe WIPO Arbitration and Mediation Center was established in 1994 as an international resource for alternatives to court litigation of intellectual property and technology disputes. It offers alternative dispute resolution (ADR) options including mediation, arbitration, and expert determination to resolve international commercial disputes between private parties. It is an administrator of cases and a provider of legal and policy expertise. The Center also provides domain name dispute resolution services under the WIPO-designed UDRP. It is based in Geneva, Switzerland and since 2010 the Center has had an office at Maxwell Chambers in Singapore.\nHague System.\nThe WIPO Hague System for the International Registration of Industrial Designs provides an international mechanism for securing protection of up to 100 designs in multiple countries or regions, through a single international application, filed in one language and using one currency (Swiss francs).\nInternational design applications are filed directly through WIPO, according to the requirements and procedures established by the Hague Agreement. The domestic legal framework of each designated contracting party governs the design protection provided by the resulting international registrations.\nAccording to the rules laid out by the Hague Agreement, anyone who is a national of, or who has a domicile, habitual residence or real and effective industrial or commercial establishment in any Hague System contracting party \u2013 including any country of the European Union or the African Intellectual Property Organization \u2013 can use the Hague System. The Hague System does not require the applicant to file a national or regional design application.\nOn 5 February 2020, China officially deposited its accession documents for entering the Hague System for the International Registration of Industrial Designs and the Marrakesh Treaty (which increases the accessibility of publications to people with visual impairment), before the commencement of the Beijing Olympic Winter Games. The accession will take effect on 5 May 2022.\nChina became the 68th contracting party to the Geneva Act (1999) of the Hague Agreement and, therefore, the 77th member of the Hague System.\nFunding.\nWIPO, unlike other UN agencies, derives most of its income from fees for the Global IP services it provides as opposed to Member States contributions. In 2020, WIPO's revenue amounted to CHF 468.3 million. In 2020 WIPO generated over 94.3% of its revenue from fees that are paid by users of its intellectual property services for patents, trademarks and industrial designs due to international demand for intellectual property titles. These services are provided through the Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) (providing 76.6% of revenue), Madrid System (providing 16.3% of revenue) and Hague System (providing 1.4% of revenue).\nGovernance and normative work.\nWIPO Assemblies.\nWIPO Assemblies develop global intellectual property agreements through bringing stakeholders together. The main policy and decision making bodies of WIPO are the Coordination Committee and the General Assembly. Twenty-two Assemblies, the Unions administered by WIPO, and other bodies of the Member States of WIPO meet in ordinary or extraordinary sessions in autumn. The General Assembly appoints the Director General through nomination by the Coordination Committee. Any of the policy and decision making bodies can constitute Permanent Committees or Standing Committees.\nStanding Committees.\nStanding committees are ad hoc groups of experts established for a given purpose and acting as a place for policy discussions and negotiations on the future development of intellectual property. Any WIPO Standing Committee or other bodies also decide to establish a working group to examine a question in more detail, make suggestions or give advice on any subject within the competence of the Organization.\nWIPO administered treaties.\nWIPO administers , including the WIPO Convention.\nIntellectual property protection treaties.\nIntellectual property protection treaties define internationally agreed basic standards of intellectual property (IP) protection in each country.\nGlobal protection system treaties.\nGlobal protection system treaties govern WIPO's services, ensuring that one international registration or filing will have effect in any of the relevant signatory States.\nClassification treaties.\nClassification treaties that create classification systems that organize information concerning inventions, trademarks and industrial designs.\nPolicy work.\nGenetic resources, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions.\nFor years, many local communities, Indigenous peoples and governments have sought effective intellectual property (IP) protection for traditional cultural expressions (folklore) and traditional knowledge as tradition-based forms of ingenuity and creativity. As a living body of knowledge developed, sustained and passed on from generation to generation within a community, it is not easily protected under the current IP system, which typically grants protection for a limited period to new inventions and original works as private rights. Some genetic resources, too, are linked to traditional knowledge and related practices through their use and conservation by Indigenous peoples and local communities. Although genetic resources, as encountered in nature, are not eligible for IP protection, inventions based on or developed with the use of genetic resources may be patentable. Since 2010, the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore (IGC) has been negotiating the text of one or several legal instruments on the matter.\nGlobal health.\nWIPO Re:Search is a public-private partnership between WIPO and the non-profit BIO Ventures for Global Health focused on early-stage medical research and development against neglected tropical diseases (NTDs), malaria and tuberculosis. It has 150 members, including eight of the world's largest pharmaceutical companies. WIPO Re:Search supports collaborations between scientific institutions and pharmaceutical companies all over the world with the goal to advance research for medicines, treatment methods and diagnostic techniques against the neglected tropical diseases that affect over 1 billion people worldwide. Through these collaborations as well as its fellowship program, WIPO Re:Search provides shared compound libraries, repurposing methods, capacity building and works on the growth of international scientific networks.\nGreen technologies.\nWIPO GREEN is a free to access online marketplace for sustainable technology. It consists of three main elements: WIPO GREEN online database of green technologies and needs, WIPO GREEN Acceleration Projects, and WIPO GREEN partners network. It has a network of 146 partners and aims to bring together organizations in green technology help the implementation and diffusion of green technologies around the world. The WIPO GREEN database is an online platform where green technology inventors can promote their products and businesses, organizations, governments who are looking for green technologies can explain their needs and seek collaboration with providers. WIPO GREEN 'acceleration projects' are organized annually in different countries or regions of the world, in collaboration with local organizations. These projects usually address a particular field and connect providers and seekers of green technologies.\nWIPO Judicial Institute.\nThe WIPO Judicial Institute was established in 2019 to coordinate and lead WIPO's work with national and regional judiciaries. This work includes convening international meetings between judges, implementing judicial capacity building activities, producing resources and publications for use by judges, and administering the WIPO Lex database that provides free public access to intellectual property (IP) laws, treaties and judicial decisions from around the world. WIPO has also established an advisory board of Judges, currently comprising 12 members who serve in their personal capacity.\nWIPO Academy.\nThe WIPO Academy is the training arm of the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), it was established in 1998. It offers intellectual property (IP) education, training and IP skills-building to government officials, inventors, creators, business professionals, small and medium enterprises (SMEs), academics, students and individuals interested in IP. The Academy hosts IP courses through its four programs: the Professional Development Program, University Partnerships, Distance Learning and WIPO Summer Schools.\nThe Standing Committee on Copyright and Related Rights.\nThe Standing Committee on Copyright and Related Rights (SCCR) was created in the 1998 to examine issues in the field of copyright and related rights on substantive law and harmonization. The Committee includes all member states of WIPO, some member states of the United Nations who are not members of WIPO, and a number of non-governmental and intergovernmental observers. The Committee meets twice per year and formulates recommendations for consideration by the WIPO General Assembly. The main topics currently under discussion are the protection of broadcasting organizations and limitations and exceptions. Copyright in the digital environment, the resale royalty right, public lending right and the rights of theater directors are also being discussed within the Committee.\nWorld Intellectual Property Day.\nWorld Intellectual Property Day is an annual global public awareness campaign to \"highlight the role and contribution of intellectual property in the economic, cultural and social development of all countries as well as to raise public awareness and understanding in this field of human endeavor.\" In 2000, WIPO's Member States formally designated 26 April \u2013 the day on which the WIPO Convention came into force in 1970 \u2013 as World Intellectual Property Day. The first World Intellectual Property Day was held in 2001.\nSectors and divisions.\nEconomics and Statistics Division.\nWIPO's Economics and Statistics Division gathers data on intellectual property activity worldwide and publishes statistics to the public. The Division also conducts economic analysis on how government IP and innovation policies affect economic performance.\nInfrastructure and Platforms Sector.\nThe Infrastructure and Platforms sector develops, implements and maintains the various databases, tools and platforms of the Organization that are targeted at and used by intellectual property offices, legal professionals, researchers, and other specialized users. The sector also covers the use of 'frontier technologies' such as artificial intelligence and coordinates WIPO's overall customer goals, strategies and tools.\nDiplomatic Engagement and Assemblies Affairs Division.\nThe Diplomatic Engagement and Assemblies Affairs Division is directly under the supervision of the Director General, it focuses on engagement with the diplomatic community in Geneva through events, meetings and overseeing the administrative, logistical and other aspects of key meetings including the Assemblies of WIPO. The Division is also responsible for supervising the full range of protocol services across the Organization. Specifically, the Division is responsible for meeting all the Director General's representation and hospitality protocol-related needs and protocol-related needs for meetings and events.\nTraditional Knowledge Division.\nThe Traditional Knowledge Division carries out WIPO's work on genetic resources, traditional cultural expressions and traditional knowledge through its seven service areas. These include supporting indigenous and local community entrepreneurship in making strategic and effective use of intellectual property tools in their businesses; providing intellectual property advice on the documentation of traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions; organizing hands-on training, mentoring and distance learning programs; and acting as a global reference of information resources on the intersection of IP and genetic resources, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions, as well as maintaining a repository of regional, national and community experiences. The Traditional Knowledge Division is also responsible for facilitating multilateral negotiations in the WIPO Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and Folklore.\nPublications and databases.\nWIPO publishes around 40 new titles a year, which are translated and published in the official languages of the United Nations: Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish. The WIPO Knowledge Repository holds the archive of WIPO publications and documentations since 1885, as well as a library of academic research literature on intellectual property. WIPO adopted an Open Access Policy in 2016. Its publications are free to reuse and modify, under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 license.\nGlobal Innovation Index.\nThe Global Innovation Index is an annual ranking of countries by their capacity for, and success in, innovation, published by the World Intellectual Property Organization. It was started in 2007 by INSEAD and \"World Business\", a British magazine. Until 2021 it was published by WIPO, in partnership with Cornell University, INSEAD, and other organisations and institutions. It is based on both subjective and objective data derived from several sources, including the International Telecommunication Union, the World Bank and the World Economic Forum.\nWorld Intellectual Property Report.\nThe World Intellectual Property Report is a biennial analytical publication by WIPO, first published in 2011. Each report examines a different theme, focusing on trends in a particular area of intellectual property and innovation. The report uses macroeconomic analysis and includes case studies to examine the role of intellectual property and other intangibles in the global economy.\nWorld Intellectual Property Indicators.\nSince 2009, WIPO has published the annual World Intellectual Property Indicators, providing a wide range of indicators covering the areas of intellectual property. It draws on data from national and regional IP offices, WIPO, the World Bank, and UNESCO.\nWIPO Lex.\nWIPO Lex is an online global database launched in 2010, which provides free public access to intellectual property laws, treaties and judicial decisions from around the world. In 2022, the WIPO Lex database contained 48,000 national, regional and international legal documents relating to intellectual property, with access in the six UN languages.\nWIPO Magazine.\nWIPO Magazine, the organization's flagship outreach publication, is available in eight languages (Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Japanese, Portuguese, Russian and Spanish). Established in 1999, and online since 2005, WIPO Magazine explores the worlds of innovation and creativity, and the role of IP in advancing human progress. The WIPO Magazine features a range of articles on how people around the world are using IP rights to advance their goals and support national economic development. It also includes expert commentary on the latest \"hot topics\" relating to IP policy and practice. The WIPO Magazine is free of charge. In January 2023, it moved to a digital-only format.\nPATENTSCOPE.\nPATENTSCOPE is a public patent database provided by WIPO that serves as an official publication source for patent applications filed under the Patent Cooperation Treaty and covers numerous national and regional patent collections. In 2021 it held over 100 million patent documents including 4.2 million published international patent applications.\nThe Green Technology Book.\nIn November 2022 at UNFCCC COP27, WIPO introduced its new Flagship publication the Green Technology Book. This digital-first publication aims to put innovation, technology and intellectual property at the forefront in the fight against climate change. The inaugural edition of this annual publication focused on available solutions for climate-change adaptation to reduce vulnerability as well as to increase resilience to the impacts of climate change. The book was created in cooperation with the Climate Technology Center and Network (CTCN) and the Egyptian Academy of Scientific Research and Technology (ASTR). It features 200 adaptation technologies, which are also available in the WIPO GREEN database of innovative technologies and needs.\nWIPO Pearl.\nThe WIPO Pearl database was created in 2014. It gives access to scientific and technical terms derived from patent documents. It aims to promote accurate and consistent use of terms across different languages, and to make it easier to search and share scientific and technical knowledge. It operates in ten languages.\nDirectors General.\nOn 1 October 2020, Daren Tang of Singapore succeeded Gurry as Director General. His candidacy was backed by the United States and 54 other countries over China's preferred candidate, Wang Binying, who received 28 votes out of the 83 voting members.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33295", "revid": "47179870", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33295", "title": "Wicca", "text": "Modern syncretic pagan religion\nWicca (), is a modern pagan, syncretic, Earth-centred religion. Considered a new religious movement by scholars of religion, the path evolved from Western esotericism, developed in England during the first half of the 20th century, and was introduced to the public in 1954 by Gerald Gardner, a retired British civil servant. Wicca draws upon ancient pagan and 20th-century Hermetic motifs for theological and ritual purposes. Doreen Valiente joined Gardner in the 1950s, further building Wicca's liturgical tradition of beliefs, principles, and practices, disseminated through published books as well as secret written and oral teachings passed along to initiates.\nMany variations of the religion have grown and evolved over time, associated with a number of diverse lineages, sects, and denominations, referred to as \"traditions\", each with its own organisational structure and level of centralisation. Given its broadly decentralised nature, disagreements arise over the boundaries that define Wicca. Some traditions, collectively referred to as British Traditional Wicca (BTW), strictly follow the initiatory lineage of Gardner and consider \"Wicca\" specific to similar traditions, excluding newer, eclectic traditions. Other traditions, as well as scholars of religion, apply \"Wicca\" as a broad term for a religion with denominations that differ on some key points but share core beliefs and practices.\nWicca is typically duotheistic, venerating both a goddess and a god, traditionally conceived as the Triple Goddess and the Horned God, respectively. These deities may be regarded in a henotheistic way, as having many different divine aspects which can be identified with various pagan deities from different historical pantheons. For this reason, they are sometimes referred to as the \"Great Goddess\" and the \"Great Horned God\", with the honorific \"great\" connoting a personification containing many other deities within their own nature. Some Wiccans refer to the goddess as \"Lady\" and the god as \"Lord\" to invoke their divinity. These two deities are sometimes viewed as facets of a universal pantheistic divinity, regarded as an impersonal force rather than a personal deity. Other traditions of Wicca embrace polytheism, pantheism, monism, and Goddess monotheism.\nWiccan celebrations encompass both the cycles of the Moon, known as Esbats and commonly associated with the Triple Goddess, alongside the cycles of the Sun, seasonally based festivals known as Sabbats and commonly associated with the Horned God. The Wiccan Rede is a popular expression of Wiccan morality, often with respect to the ritual practice of magic.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTerminology.\nDefinition.\nScholars of religious studies classify Wicca as a new religious movement, and more specifically as a form of modern paganism. Wicca has been cited as the largest, best known, most influential, and most academically studied form of modern paganism. It is an eclectic religion, as opposed to reconstructionist paganism.\nSeveral academics also categorise Wicca as a nature religion, a term embraced by many Wiccans, and as a mystery religion. But because Wicca also incorporates the practice of magic, several scholars have referred to it as a \"magico-religion\". Wicca is also a form of Western esotericism, and more specifically a part of the esoteric current known as occultism. Academics like Wouter Hanegraaff and Tanya Luhrmann have categorised Wicca as part of the New Age, although other academics, and many Wiccans themselves, dispute this.\nAlthough recognised as a religion by academics, some evangelical Christians have attempted to deny it legal recognition as such, while some Wiccans themselves eschew the term \"religion\", associating it purely with organised religion, and instead favour \"spirituality\" or \"way of life\". Wicca is distinct from other forms of contemporary paganism, but there has been \"cross-fertilization\" between these different faiths. Wicca has both influenced and been influenced by other pagan religions, making clear-cut distinctions more difficult for religious studies scholars. In Wicca, denominations are referred to as \"traditions\", while non-Wiccans are often termed \"cowans\".\nNames.\nWhen the religion first came to public attention, its followers commonly called it \"Witchcraft\". Gerald Gardner\u2014the man regarded as the \"Father of Wicca\"\u2014called it the \"Craft of the Wise\", \"Witchcraft\", and \"the Witch-cult\" during the 1950s. Gardner believed in the theory that persecuted witches had actually been followers of a surviving pagan religion, but this theory has been disproved. There is no evidence that he ever called it \"Wicca\", although he did call its community of followers \"the Wica\" (with one \"c\"). As a name for the religion, \"Wicca\" developed in Britain during the 1960s. It is not known who first used this name for the religion, although one possibility is that it was Gardner's rival Charles Cardell, who was calling it the \"Craft of the Wiccens\" by 1958. The first recorded use of the name \"Wicca\" was in 1962, and it had been popularised to the extent that several British practitioners founded a newsletter called \"The Wiccan\" in 1968.\nAlthough pronounced differently, the modern English name \"Wicca\" is borrowed from the Old English \"wicca\" and \"wicce\" , respectively the masculine and feminine terms for certain kinds of magic-workers in Anglo-Saxon England. It is the origin of the word witch. By adopting this Old English term for modern usage, Wiccans were both symbolically linking themselves to the ancient, pre-Christian past and adopting a self-designation less controversial than \"Witchcraft\". The scholar of religion and Wiccan priestess Joanne Pearson noted that while \"the words 'witch' and 'wicca' are therefore linked etymologically, [...] they are used to emphasize different things today\".\nIn early sources, \"Wicca\" referred to the whole of the religion rather than to a specific tradition. In following decades, members of certain traditions\u2014those known as British Traditional Wicca\u2014began claiming that only they should be called \"Wiccan\", and that other traditions must not use it. From the late 1980s onward, books about Wicca again used the former, broader meaning of the word. Thus, by the 1980s, there were two competing definitions of the word \"Wicca\" in use among the pagan and esoteric communities: one broad and inclusive, the other narrow and exclusionary. Among scholars of pagan studies, the older, broader, and inclusive meaning is preferred.\nAlongside \"Wicca\", some practitioners still call the religion \"Witchcraft\" or \"the Craft\". Using the word \"Witchcraft\" in this context can result in confusion with other, non-religious meanings of \"witchcraft\" as well as other religions\u2014such as Satanism and Luciferianism\u2014whose practitioners also sometimes call themselves \"Witches\". Another term sometimes used as a synonym for \"Wicca\" is \"Pagan witchcraft\", although other forms of modern paganism\u2014such as types of Heathenry\u2014also use the term \"Pagan witchcraft\". From the 1990s onward, some Wiccans began calling themselves \"Traditional Witches\", although this term was also used by practitioners of other magico-religious traditions like Luciferianism. In some popular culture, such as television programmes \"Buffy the Vampire Slayer\" and \"Charmed\", the word \"Wicca\" has been used as a synonym for witchcraft more generally, including in non-religious and non-pagan forms.\nPractitioners call themselves Wiccans, witches, or pagan witches. The terms \"wizard\" and \"warlock\" are discouraged.\nBeliefs.\nTheology.\nTheological views within Wicca are diverse. The religion encompasses theists, atheists, and agnostics, with some viewing the religion's deities as entities with a literal existence and others viewing them as Jungian archetypes or symbols. Even among theistic Wiccans, there are divergent beliefs, and Wicca includes pantheists, monotheists, duotheists, and polytheists. Common to these divergent perspectives, however, is that Wicca's deities are viewed as forms of ancient, pre-Christian divinities by its practitioners.\nDuotheism.\nMost early Wiccan groups adhered to the duotheistic worship of a Horned God and a Mother Goddess, and practitioners of Wicca typically believe that they were the ancient deities that were worshipped by the hunter-gatherers who lived during the Old Stone Age, and according to practitioners of Wicca, the veneration of these deities was secretly passed down to the present day in the form of rites. This theology derived from Egyptologist Margaret Murray's claims about the witch-cult in her book \"The Witch-Cult in Western Europe\" published by Oxford University Press in 1921; she claimed that this cult had venerated a Horned God at the time of the Early Modern witch trials, but centuries before it had also worshipped a Mother Goddess. This duotheistic Horned God/Mother Goddess structure was embraced by Gardner\u2014who claimed that it had Stone Age roots\u2014and remains the underlying theological basis of his Gardnerian tradition. Gardner claimed that the names of these deities should be kept secret within the tradition, but in 1964, they were publicly revealed to be Cernunnos and Aradia; the secret names of the Gardnerian deities were subsequently changed.\nAlthough different Wiccans attribute different traits to the Horned God, he is most frequently associated with animals and the natural world, but he is also associated with the afterlife, and he is also viewed as an ideal role model for men. The Mother Goddess has been associated with life, fertility, and the springtime, and has been described as an ideal role model for women. Wicca's duotheism has been compared to the Taoist system of yin and yang.\nOther Wiccans have adopted the original Gardnerian God/Goddess duotheistic structure but have also adopted deity forms other than those of the Horned God and the Mother Goddess. For instance, the God has been called the Oak King and the Holly King, as well as the Sun God, the Son/Lover God, and the Vegetation God. He has also been seen in the roles of the Leader of the Wild Hunt and the Lord of Death. The Goddess is often portrayed as a Triple Goddess, thereby being a triadic deity that consists of a Maiden goddess, a Mother goddess, and a Crone goddess, each of whom has different associations, namely virginity, fertility, and wisdom. Other Wiccan conceptualisations have portrayed her as a Moon Goddess and a Menstruating Goddess. According to the anthropologist Susan Greenwood, in Wicca, the Goddess is \"a symbol of self-transformation\u2014she is seen to be constantly changing and a force for change for those who open themselves up to her\".\nMonotheism and polytheism.\nGardner stated that beyond Wicca's two deities was the \"Supreme Deity\" or \"Prime Mover\", an entity that was too complex for humans to understand. This belief has been endorsed by other practitioners, who have referred to it as \"the Cosmic Logos\", \"Supreme Cosmic Power\", or \"Godhead\". Gardner envisioned this Supreme Deity as a deist entity who had created the \"Under-Gods\", among them the God and Goddess, but who was not otherwise involved in the world; alternately, other Wiccans have interpreted such an entity as a pantheistic being, of whom the God and Goddess are facets.\nAlthough Gardner criticised monotheism, citing the Problem of Evil, explicitly monotheistic forms of Wicca developed in the 1960s, when the U.S.-based Church of Wicca developed a theology rooted in the worship of what they described as \"one deity, without gender\". In the 1970s, Dianic Wiccan groups developed which were devoted to a singular, monotheistic Goddess; this approach was often criticised by members of British Traditional Wiccan groups, who lambasted such Goddess monotheism as an inverted imitation of Christian theology. As in other forms of Wicca, some Goddess monotheists have expressed the view that the Goddess is not an entity with a literal existence but a Jungian archetype.\nAs well as pantheism and duotheism, many Wiccans accept the concept of polytheism, thereby believing that there are many different deities. Some take the view espoused by the occultist Dion Fortune that \"all gods are one god, and all goddesses are one goddess\" \u2013 that is that the gods and goddesses of all cultures are, respectively, aspects of one supernal God and Goddess. With this mindset, a Wiccan may regard the Germanic \u0112ostre, Hindu Kali, and Catholic Virgin Mary each as manifestations of one supreme Goddess and likewise, the Celtic Cernunnos, the ancient Greek Dionysus and the Judeo-Christian Yahweh as aspects of a single, archetypal god. A more strictly polytheistic approach holds the various goddesses and gods as separate entities in their own right. The Wiccan writers Janet Farrar and Gavin Bone have postulated that Wicca is becoming more polytheistic as it matures, tending to embrace a more traditionally pagan worldview. Some Wiccans conceive of deities not as literal personalities but as metaphorical archetypes or thoughtforms, thereby technically allowing them to be atheists. Such a view is held by the High Priestess Vivianne Crowley, herself a psychologist, who considered the Wiccan deities to be Jungian archetypes that existed within the subconscious that could be evoked in ritual. It was for this reason she said, \"The Goddess and God manifest to us in dream and vision.\"\nWiccans often believe that the gods are not perfect and can be argued with.\nMany Wiccans also adopt a more explicitly polytheistic or animistic worldview of the universe as replete with spirit beings. In many cases, these spirits are associated with the natural world, for instance, as \"genius loci\", fairies, and elementals. In other cases, such beliefs are more idiosyncratic and atypical; Wiccan Sybil Leek, for instance, endorsed a belief in angels.\nAfterlife.\nBelief in the afterlife varies among Wiccans and does not occupy a central place. As the historian Ronald Hutton remarked, \"the instinctual position of most [Wiccans]\u00a0... seems to be that if one makes the most of the present life, in all respects, then the next life is more or less certainly going to benefit from the process, and so one may as well concentrate on the present\". It is nevertheless a common belief among Wiccans that human beings have a spirit or soul that survives bodily death. Understandings of what this soul constitutes vary among different traditions, with the Feri tradition of witchcraft, for instance, having adopted a belief from the Theosophy-inspired Huna movement, Kabbalah, and other sources, that the human being has three souls.\nAlthough not accepted by all Wiccans, a belief in reincarnation is the dominant afterlife belief within Wicca, having been espoused initially by Gardner. Understandings of how the cycle of reincarnation operates differ among practitioners; Wiccan Raymond Buckland, for instance, insisted that human souls would only incarnate into human bodies, whereas other Wiccans believe that a human soul can incarnate into any life form. There is also a common Wiccan belief that any Wiccans will come to be reincarnated as future Wiccans, an idea originally expressed by Gardner. Gardner also articulated the view that the human soul rested for a period between bodily death and its incarnation, with this resting place commonly being referred to as \"The Summerland\" among the Wiccan community. This allows many Wiccans to believe that mediums can contact the spirits of the deceased, a belief adopted from Spiritualism.\nMagic and spellcraft.\nMany Wiccans believe in magic, a manipulative force exercised through the practice of \"spellcraft\". Many Wiccans agree with the definition of magic offered by ceremonial magicians, such as Aleister Crowley, who declared that magic was \"the science and art of causing change to occur in conformity with will\", while another ceremonial magician, MacGregor Mathers stated that it was \"the science of the control of the secret forces of nature\". Many Wiccans believe magic to be a law of nature, as yet misunderstood or disregarded by contemporary science, and as such they do not view it as being supernatural, but a part of what Leo Martello calls the \"super powers that reside in the natural\". Some Wiccans believe that magic is simply making full use of the five senses to achieve surprising results, whilst other Wiccans do not claim to know how magic works, merely believing that it does because they believe they have observed it to be so.\nDuring ritual practices, which are often staged in a sacred circle, Wiccans cast spells or \"workings\" intended to bring about real changes in the physical world. Common Wiccan spells include those used for healing, protection, fertility, or to banish negative influences. Many early Wiccans, such as Alex Sanders, Sybil Leek and Alex Winfield, referred to their own magic as \"white magic\", which contrasted with \"black magic\", which they associated with evil and Satanism. Sanders also used the similar terminology of \"left-hand path\" to describe malevolent magic, and \"right-hand path\" to describe magic performed with good intentions; terminology that had originated with the occultist Helena Blavatsky in the 19th century. Some modern Wiccans, however, have stopped using the white/black magic and left/right-hand-path dichotomies, arguing, for instance, that the colour black should not necessarily have any associations with evil.\nScholars of religion Rodney Stark and William Bainbridge claimed in 1985 that Wicca had \"reacted to secularisation by a headlong plunge back into magic\" and that it was a reactionary religion which would soon die out. This view was heavily criticised in 1999 by the historian Ronald Hutton, who claimed that the evidence displayed the very opposite: that \"a large number [of Wiccans] were in jobs at the cutting edge [of scientific culture], such as computer technology\".\nWitchcraft.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIdentification as a witch can[\u2026] provide a link to those persecuted and executed in the Great Witch Hunt, which can then be remembered as a holocaust against women, a repackaging of history that implies conscious victimization and the appropriation of 'holocaust' as a badge of honour\u2014'gendercide rather than genocide'. An elective identification with the image of the witch during the time of the persecutions is commonly regarded as part of the reclamation of female power, a myth that is used by modern feminist witches as an aid in their struggle for freedom from patriarchal oppression.\n\u2014 Religious studies scholar Joanne Pearson\nHistorian Wouter Hanegraaff noted that the Wiccan view of witchcraft was \"an outgrowth of Romantic (semi)scholarship\", especially the 'witch cult' theory. It proposed that historically alleged witches were actually followers of a surviving pagan religion and that accusations of infanticide, cannibalism, Satanism, etc., were either made up by the Inquisition or were misunderstandings of pagan rites. This theory that accused witches were actually pagans has now been disproven using archive records of witch trials. Nevertheless, Gardner and other founders of Wicca believed the theory was true and saw the witch as a \"\"positive antitype\" which derives much of its symbolic force from its implicit criticism of dominant Judaeo-Christian and Enlightenment values\".\nPearson suggested that Wiccans \"identify with the witch because she is imagined as powerful - she can make people sleep for one hundred years, she can see the future, she can curse and kill as well as heal... and of course, she can turn people into frogs!\" Pearson says that Wicca \"provides a framework in which the image of oneself as a witch can be explored and brought into a modern context\".\nIdentifying as a witch also enables Wiccans to link themselves with those persecuted in the witch trials of the Early Modern period, often referred to by Wiccans as \"the Burning Times\". Various practitioners have claimed that as many as nine million people were executed as witches in the Early Modern period, thus drawing comparisons with the killing of six million Jews in the Holocaust and presenting themselves, as modern witches, as \"persecuted minorities\".\nMorality.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBide the Wiccan laws ye must, in perfect love and perfect trust\u00a0...\nMind the Threefold Law ye should \u2013 three times bad and three times good\u00a0...\nEight words the Wiccan Rede fulfill \u2013 an it harm none, do what ye will.\n Lady Gwen Thompson\nWicca has been characterised as a life-affirming religion. Practitioners typically present themselves as \"a positive force against the powers of destruction which threaten the world\".\nThere exists no dogmatic moral or ethical code followed universally by Wiccans of all traditions. However, a majority follow a code known as the Wiccan Rede, which states, \"an it harm none, do what ye will\". This is usually interpreted as a declaration of the freedom to act and the necessity of taking responsibility for what follows from one's actions and minimising harm to oneself and others.\nAnother common element of Wiccan morality is the Law of Threefold Return which holds that whatever benevolent or malevolent actions a person performs will return to that person with triple force, or with equal force on each of the three levels of body, mind, and spirit, similar to the eastern idea of karma. The Wiccan Rede was most likely introduced into Wicca by Gerald Gardner and formalised publicly by Doreen Valiente, one of his High Priestesses. The Threefold Law was an interpretation of Wiccan ideas and ritual, made by Monique Wilson and further popularized by Raymond Buckland, in his books on Wicca.\nMany Wiccans also seek to cultivate a set of eight virtues mentioned in Doreen Valiente's \"Charge of the Goddess\", these being mirth, reverence, honour, humility, strength, beauty, power, and compassion. In Valiente's poem, they are ordered in pairs of complementary opposites, reflecting a dualism that is common throughout Wiccan philosophy. Some lineaged Wiccans also observe a set of Wiccan Laws, commonly called the \"Craft Laws\" or \"Ardanes\", 30 of which exist in the Gardnerian tradition and 161 in the Alexandrian tradition. Valiente, one of Gardner's original High Priestesses, argued that Gerald Gardner likely invented the first thirty rules in mock-archaic language as the by-product of inner conflict within his Bricket Wood coven.\nIn British Traditional Wicca, \"sex complementarity is a basic and fundamental working principle\", with men and women being seen as a necessary presence to balance each other out. This may have derived from Gardner's interpretation of Murray's claim that the ancient witch-cult was a fertility religion. Thus, many practitioners of British Traditional Wicca have argued that gay men and women are not capable of correctly working magic without mixed-sex pairings.\nAlthough Gerald Gardner initially demonstrated an aversion to homosexuality, claiming that it brought down \"the curse of the goddess\", it is now generally accepted in all traditions of Wicca, with groups such as the Minoan Brotherhood openly basing their philosophy upon it. Nonetheless, a variety of viewpoints exist in Wicca around this point, with some covens adhering to a hetero-normative viewpoint. Carly B. Floyd of Illinois Wesleyan University has published an informative white paper on this subject: \"https://.\"\nThe scholar of religion Joanne Pearson noted that in her experience, most Wiccans take a \"realistic view of living in the real world\" replete with its many problems and do not claim that the gods \"have all the answers\" to these. She suggested that Wiccans do not claim to seek perfection but instead \"wholeness\" or \"completeness\", which includes an acceptance of traits like anger, weakness, and pain. She contrasted the Wiccan acceptance of an \"interplay between light and dark\" against the New Age focus on \"white light\". Similarly, the scholar of religion Geoffrey Samuel noted that Wiccans devote \"a perhaps surprising amount of attention to darkness and death\".\nMany Wiccans are involved in environmentalist campaigns.\nFive elements.\nMany traditions hold a belief in the five classical elements, although they are seen as symbolic representations of the phases of matter. These five elements are invoked during many magical rituals, notably when consecrating a magic circle. The five elements are air, fire, water, earth, and aether (or spirit), where aether unites the other four elements. Various analogies have been devised to explain the concept of the five elements; for instance, the Wiccan Ann-Marie Gallagher used that of a tree, which is composed of the earth (with the soil and plant matter), water (sap and moisture), fire (through photosynthesis) and air (the formation of oxygen from carbon dioxide), all of which are believed to be united through spirit.\nTraditionally, in the Gardnerian Craft, each element has been associated with a cardinal point of the compass: air with the east, fire with the south, water with the west, earth with the north, and the spirit with the centre. However, some Wiccans, such as Frederic Lamond, have claimed that the set cardinal points are only those applicable to the geography of southern England, where Wicca evolved, and that Wiccans should determine which directions best suit each element in their region. For instance, those living on the east coast of North America should invoke water in the east and not the west because the colossal body of water, the Atlantic Ocean, is to their east. Other Craft groups have associated the elements with different cardinal points; for instance Robert Cochrane's Clan of Tubal Cain associated earth with south, fire with east, water with west and air with north, and each of which was controlled over by a different deity who were seen as children of the primary Horned God and Goddess. The five elements are symbolised by the five points of the pentagram, the most-used symbol of Wicca.\nPractices.\nThe Wiccan high priestess and journalist Margot Adler stated that Wiccan rituals were not \"dry, formalised, repetitive experiences\", but performed with the intent of inducing a religious experience in the participants, thereby altering their consciousness. She noted that many Wiccans remain skeptical about the existence of the supernatural but remain involved in Wicca because of its ritual experiences: she quoted one as saying that \"I love myth, dream, visionary art. The Craft is a place where all of these things fit together \u2013 beauty, pageantry, music, dance, song, dream\". The Wiccan practitioner and historian Aidan Kelly wrote that the practices and experiences within Wicca were more important than the beliefs, stating: \"it's a religion of ritual rather than theology. The ritual is first; the myth is second\". Similarly, Adler stated that Wicca permits \"total skepticism about even its own methods, myths and rituals\".\nThe anthropologist Susan Greenwood characterised Wiccan rituals as \"a form of resistance to mainstream culture\". She saw these rituals as \"a healing space away from the ills of the wider culture\", one in which female practitioners can \"redefine and empower themselves\".\nWiccan rituals usually take place in private. The Reclaiming tradition has utilised its rituals for political purposes.\nPractice in Wicca (including, as an example, matters such as the varying attributions of the elements to different directions discussed in the preceding section) varies widely due to the Craft's emphasis on individual expression in one's spiritual/magical path.\nRitual practices.\nMany rituals within Wicca are used when celebrating the Sabbats, worshipping the deities, and working magic. Often these take place on a full moon, or in some cases a new moon, which is known as an Esbat. In typical rites, the coven or solitary assembles inside a ritually cast and purified magic circle. Casting the circle may involve the invocation of the \"Guardians\" of the cardinal points, alongside their respective classical elements; air, fire, water, and earth. Once the circle is cast, a seasonal ritual may be performed, prayers to the God and Goddess are said, and spells are sometimes worked; these may include various forms of 'raising energy', including raising a cone of power to send healing or other magic to persons outside of the sacred space.\nIn constructing his ritual system, Gardner drew upon older forms of ceremonial magic, in particular, those found in the writings of Aleister Crowley.\nThe classical ritual scheme in British Traditional Wicca traditions is:\nThese rites often include a special set of magical tools. These usually include a knife called an athame, a wand, a pentacle and a chalice, but other tools include a broomstick known as a besom, a cauldron, candles, incense and a curved blade known as a boline. An altar is usually present in the circle, on which ritual tools are placed and representations of the God and the Goddess may be displayed. Before entering the circle, some traditions fast for the day, and/or ritually bathe. After a ritual has finished, the God, Goddess, and Guardians are thanked, the directions are dismissed and the circle is closed.\nA central aspect of Wicca (particularly in Gardnerian and Alexandrian Wicca), often sensationalised by the media is the traditional practice of working in the nude, also known as \"skyclad\". Although no longer widely used, this practice seemingly derives from a line in \"Aradia\", Charles Leland's supposed record of Italian witchcraft. Many Wiccans believe that performing rituals skyclad allows \"power\" to flow from the body in a manner unimpeded by clothes. Some also note that it removes signs of social rank and differentiation and thus encourages unity among the practitioners. Some Wiccans seek legitimacy for the practice by stating that various ancient societies performed their rituals while nude.\nOne of Wicca's best known liturgical texts is \"The Charge of the Goddess\". The most commonly used version used by Wiccans today is the rescension of Doreen Valiente, who developed it from Gardner's version. Gardner's wording of the original \"Charge\" added extracts from Aleister Crowley's work, including \"The Book of the Law\", (especially from Ch 1, spoken by Nuit, the Star Goddess) thus linking modern Wicca irrevocably to the principles of Thelema. Valiente rewrote Gardner's version in verse, keeping the material derived from \"Aradia\", but removing the material from Crowley.\nSex magic.\nOther traditions wear robes with cords tied around the waist or even normal street clothes. In certain traditions, ritualised sex magic is performed in the form of the Great Rite, whereby a High Priest and High Priestess invoke the God and Goddess to possess them before performing sexual intercourse to raise magical energy for use in spellwork. In nearly all cases it is instead performed \"in token\", thereby merely symbolically, using the athame to symbolise the penis and the chalice to symbolise the womb.\nGerald Gardner, the man many consider the father of Wicca, believed strongly in sex magic. Much of Gardner's witch practice centred around the power of sex and its liberation, and that one of the most important aspects of the neo-pagan revival has been its ties, not just to sexual liberation, but also to feminism and women's liberation.\nFor some Wiccans, the ritual space is a \"space of resistance, in which the sexual morals of Christianity and patriarchy can be subverted\", and for this reason they have adopted techniques from the BDSM subculture into their rituals.\nPublicly, many Wiccan groups have tended to excise the role of sex magic from their image. This has served both to escape the tabloid sensationalism that has targeted the religion since the 1950s and the concerns surrounding the Satanic ritual abuse hysteria in the 1980s and 1990s.\nSome Wiccan Traditions substitute a Communion style rite in honour of the God and Goddess rather than the symbolic Great Rite in their Esbat ritual.\nWheel of the Year.\nWiccans celebrate several seasonal festivals of the year, commonly known as Sabbats. Collectively, these occasions are termed the Wheel of the Year. Most Wiccans celebrate a set of eight of these Sabbats; however, other groups such as those associated with the Clan of Tubal Cain only follow four. In the rare case of the Ros an Bucca group from Cornwall, only six are adhered to. The four Sabbats that are common to all British derived groups are the cross-quarter days, sometimes referred to as \"Greater Sabbats\". The names of these festivals are in some cases taken from the Old Irish fire festivals and the Welsh God Mabon, though in most traditional Wiccan covens the only commonality with the Celtic festival is the name. Gardner himself made use of the English names of these holidays, stating that \"the four great Sabbats are Candlemas [\"sic\"], May Eve, Lammas, and Halloween; the equinoxes and solstices are celebrated also\". In the Egyptologist Margaret Murray's \"The Witch-Cult in Western Europe\" (1921) and \"The God of the Witches\" (1933), in which she dealt with what she believed had been a historical Witch-Cult, she stated that the four main festivals had survived Christianisation and had been celebrated in the pagan Witchcraft religion. Subsequently, when Wicca was first developing in the 1930s through to the 1960s, many of the early groups, such as Robert Cochrane's Clan of Tubal Cain and Gerald Gardner's Bricket Wood coven adopted the commemoration of these four Sabbats as described by Murray.\nThe other four festivals commemorated by many Wiccans are known as \"Lesser Sabbats\". They are the solstices and the equinoxes, and they were only adopted in 1958 by members of the Bricket Wood coven, before they were subsequently adopted by other followers of the Gardnerian tradition. They were eventually adopted by followers of other traditions like Alexandrian Wicca and the Dianic tradition. The names of these holidays that are commonly used today are often taken from Germanic pagan holidays. However, the festivals are not reconstructive in nature nor do they often resemble their historical counterparts, instead, they exhibit a form of universalism. The rituals that are observed may display cultural influences from the holidays from which they take their names as well as influences from other unrelated cultures.\nRites of passage.\nVarious rites of passage can be found within Wicca. Perhaps the most significant of these is an initiation ritual, through which somebody joins the Craft and becomes a Wiccan. In British Traditional Wiccan (BTW) traditions, there is a line of initiatory descent that goes back to Gerald Gardner, and from him is said to go back to the New Forest coven; however, the existence of this coven remains unproven. Gardner himself said that there was a traditional length of \"a year and a day\" between when a person began studying the Craft and when they were initiated, although he frequently broke this rule with initiates.\nIn BTW, initiation only accepts someone into the first degree. To proceed to the second degree, an initiate has to go through another ceremony, in which they name and describe the uses of the ritual tools and implements. It is also at this ceremony that they are given their craft name. By holding the rank of second degree, a BTW is considered capable of initiating others into the Craft, or founding their own semi-autonomous covens. The third degree is the highest in BTW, and it involves the participation of the Great Rite, either actual or symbolically, and in some cases ritual flagellation, which is a rite often dispensed with due to its sado-masochistic overtones. By holding this rank, an initiate is considered capable of forming covens that are entirely autonomous of their parent coven.\nAccording to new-age religious scholar James R. Lewis, in his book \"Witchcraft Today: An Encyclopaedia of Wiccan and Neopagan Traditions\", a high priestess becomes a queen when she has successfully hived off her first new coven under a new third-degree high priestess (in the orthodox Gardnerian system). She then becomes eligible to wear the \"moon crown\". The sequence of high priestess and queens traced back to Gerald Gardner is known as a lineage, and every orthodox Gardnerian High Priestess has a set of \"lineage papers\" proving the authenticity of her status.\nThis three-tier degree system following initiation is largely unique to BTW, and traditions heavily based upon it. The Cochranian tradition, which is not BTW, but based upon the teachings of Robert Cochrane, does not have the three degrees of initiation, merely having the stages of novice and initiate.\nSome solitary Wiccans also perform self-initiation rituals, to dedicate themselves to becoming a Wiccan. The first of these to be published was in Paul Huson's \"Mastering Witchcraft\" (1970), and unusually involved recitation of the Lord's Prayer backwards as a symbol of defiance against the historical Witch Hunt. Subsequent, more overtly pagan self-initiation rituals have since been published in books designed for solitary Wiccans by authors like Doreen Valiente, Scott Cunningham and Silver RavenWolf.\nHandfasting is another celebration held by Wiccans, and is the commonly used term for their weddings. Some Wiccans observe the practice of a trial marriage for a year and a day, which some traditions hold should be contracted on the Sabbat of Lughnasadh, as this was the traditional time for trial, \"Telltown marriages\" among the Irish. A common marriage vow in Wicca is \"for as long as love lasts\" instead of the traditional Christian \"till death do us part\". The first known Wiccan wedding ceremony took part in 1960 amongst the Bricket Wood coven, between Frederic Lamond and his first wife, Gillian.\nInfants in Wiccan families may be involved in a ritual called a Wiccaning, which is analogous to a Christening. The purpose of this is to present the infant to the God and Goddess for protection. Parents are advised to \"give [their] children the gift of Wicca\" in a manner suitable to their age. In accordance with the importance put on free will in Wicca, the child is not expected or required to adhere to Wicca or other forms of paganism should they not wish to do so when they reach adulthood.\nBook of Shadows.\nIn Wicca, there is no set sacred text such as the Christian Bible, Jewish Tanakh, or Islamic Quran, although there are certain scriptures and texts that various traditions hold to be important and influence their beliefs and practices. Gerald Gardner used a book containing many different texts in his covens, known as the Book of Shadows (among other names), which he would frequently add to and adapt. In his Book of Shadows, there are texts taken from various sources, including Charles Godfrey Leland's \"Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches\" (1899) and the works of 19th\u201320th century occultist Aleister Crowley, whom Gardner knew personally. Also in the Book are examples of poetry largely composed by Gardner and his High Priestess Doreen Valiente, the most notable of which is the \"Charge of the Goddess\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Book of Shadows is not a Bible or Quran. It is a personal cookbook of spells that have worked for the owner. I am giving you mine to copy to get you started: as you gain experience discard those spells that don't work for you and substitute those that you have thought of yourselves.\nGerald Gardner to his followers\nSimilar in use to the grimoires of ceremonial magicians, the Book contained instructions for how to perform rituals and spells, as well as religious poetry and chants like \"Eko Eko Azarak\" to use in those rituals. Gardner's original intention was that every copy of the book would be different because a student would copy from their initiators, but changing things which they felt to be personally ineffective, however amongst many Gardnerian Witches today, particularly in the United States, all copies of the Book are kept identical to the version that the High Priestess Monique Wilson copied from Gardner, with nothing being altered. The Book of Shadows was originally meant to be kept a secret from non-initiates into BTW, but parts of the Book have been published by authors including Charles Cardell, Lady Sheba, Janet Farrar and Stewart Farrar.\nSymbolism.\nThe pentacle is a symbol commonly used by Wiccans. Wiccans often understand the pentacle's five points as representing each of the five elements: earth, air, fire, water, and aether/spirit. It is also regarded as a symbol of the human, with the five points representing the head, arms, and legs.\nStructure.\nThere is no overarching organisational structure to Wicca. In Wicca, all practitioners are considered to be priests and priestesses.\nWicca generally requires a ritual of initiation.\nTraditions.\nIn the 1950s through to the 1970s, when the Wiccan movement was largely confined to lineaged groups such as Gardnerian Wicca and Alexandrian Wicca, a \"tradition\" usually implied the transfer of a lineage by initiation. However, with the rise of more and more such groups, often being founded by those with no previous initiatory lineage, the term came to be a synonym for a religious denomination within Wicca. Scholars of religion tend to treat Wicca as a religion with denominations that differ on some important points but share core beliefs, much like Christianity and its many denominations. There are many such traditions and there are also many solitary practitioners who do not align themselves with any particular lineage, working alone. Some covens have formed but who do not follow any particular tradition, instead choosing their influences and practices eclectically.\nThose traditions which trace a line of initiatory descent back to Gerald Gardner include Gardnerian Wicca, Alexandrian Wicca and the Algard tradition; because of their joint history, they are often referred to as British Traditional Wicca, particularly in North America. Other traditions trace their origins to different figures, even if their beliefs and practices have been influenced to a greater or lesser extent by Gardner. These include Cochrane's Craft and the 1734 Tradition, both of which trace their origins to Robert Cochrane; Feri, which traces itself back to Victor Anderson and Gwydion Pendderwen; and Dianic Wicca, whose followers often trace their influences back to Zsuzsanna Budapest. Some of these groups prefer to refer to themselves as \"Witches\", thereby distinguishing themselves from the BTW traditions, who more typically use the term \"Wiccan\" (see Etymology). During the 1980s, Viviane Crowley, an initiate of both the Gardnerian and Alexandrian traditions, merged the two.\nPearson noted that \"Wicca has evolved and, at times, mutated quite dramatically into completely different forms\". Wicca has also been \"customized\" to the various national contexts into which it has been introduced; for instance, in Ireland, the veneration of ancient Irish deities has been incorporated into Wicca.\nCovens.\nLineaged Wicca is organised into covens of initiated priests and priestesses. Covens are autonomous and are generally headed by a High Priest and a High Priestess working in partnership, being a couple who have each been through their first, second, and third degrees of initiation. Occasionally the leaders of a coven are only second-degree initiates, in which case they come under the rule of the parent coven. Initiation and training of new priesthood is most often performed within a coven environment, but this is not a necessity, and a few initiated Wiccans are unaffiliated with any coven. Most covens would not admit members under the age of 18. They often do not advertise their existence, and when they do, do so through pagan magazines. Some organise courses and workshops through which prospective members can come along and be assessed.\nA commonly quoted Wiccan tradition holds that the ideal number of members for a coven is thirteen, though this is not held as a hard-and-fast rule. Indeed, many U.S. covens are far smaller, though the membership may be augmented by unaffiliated Wiccans at \"open\" rituals. Pearson noted that covens typically contained between five and ten initiates. They generally avoid mass recruitment due to the feasibility of finding spaces large enough to bring together greater numbers for rituals and because larger numbers inhibit the sense of intimacy and trust that covens utilise.\nSome covens are short-lived, but others have survived for many years. Covens in the Reclaiming tradition are often single-sex and non-hierarchical in structure. Coven members who leave their original group to form another, separate coven are described as having \"hived off\" in Wicca.\nInitiation into a coven is traditionally preceded by an apprenticeship period of a year and a day. A course of study may be set during this period. In some covens a \"dedication\" ceremony may be performed during this period, some time before the initiation proper, allowing the person to attend certain rituals on a probationary basis. Some solitary Wiccans also choose to study for a year and a day before their self-dedication to the religion.\nVarious high priestesses and high priests have reported being \"put on a pedestal\" by new initiates, only to have those students later \"kick away\" the pedestal as they develop their own knowledge and experience of Wicca. Within a coven, different members may be respected for having particular knowledge of specific areas, such as the Qabalah, astrology, or the Tarot.\nBased on her experience among British Traditional Wiccans in the UK, Pearson stated that the length of time between becoming a first-degree initiate and a second was \"typically two to five years\". Some practitioners nevertheless chose to remain as first-degree initiates rather than proceed to the higher degrees.\nEclectic Wicca.\nA large number of Wiccans do not exclusively follow any single tradition or even are initiated. These \"eclectic Wiccans\" each create their own syncretic spiritual paths by adopting and reinventing the beliefs and rituals of a variety of religious traditions connected to Wicca and broader paganism.\nWhile the origins of modern Wiccan practice lie in covenantal activity of a select few initiates in established lineages, eclectic Wiccans are more often than not solitary practitioners uninitiated in any tradition. A widening public appetite, especially in the United States, made traditional initiation unable to satisfy demand for involvement in Wicca. Since the 1970s, larger, more informal, often publicly advertised camps and workshops began to take place. This less formal but more accessible form of Wicca proved successful. Eclectic Wicca is the most variety of Wicca in America and eclectics now significantly outnumber lineaged Wiccans.\nEclectic Wicca is not necessarily the complete abandonment of tradition. Eclectic practitioners may follow their own individual ideas and ritual practices, while still drawing on one or more religious or philosophical paths. Eclectic approaches to Wicca often draw on Earth religion and ancient Egyptian, Greek, Saxon, Anglo-Saxon, Celtic, Asian, Jewish, and Polynesian traditions.\nIn contrast to the British Traditional Wiccans, Reclaiming Wiccans, and various eclectic Wiccans, the sociologist Douglas Ezzy argued that there existed a \"Popularized Witchcraft\" that was \"driven primarily by consumerist marketing and is represented by movies, television shows, commercial magazines, and consumer goods\". Books and magazines in this vein were targeted largely at young girls and included spells for attracting or repelling boyfriends, money spells, and home protection spells. He termed this \"New Age Witchcraft\", and compared individuals involved in this to the participants in the New Age.\nHistory.\nOrigins, 1921\u20131935.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWicca originated in the early decades of the twentieth century among those esoterically inclined Britons who wanted to resurrect the faith of their ancient forebears, and arose to public attention in the 1950s and 1960s, largely due to a small band of dedicated followers who were insistent on presenting their faith to what at times was a very hostile world. From these humble beginnings, this radical religion spread to the United States, where it found a comfortable bedfellow in the form of the 1960s counter-culture and came to be championed by those sectors of the women's and gay liberation movements which were seeking a spiritual escape from Christian hegemony.\n\u2014 Religious studies scholar Ethan Doyle White\nWicca was founded in England between 1921 and 1950, representing what the historian Ronald Hutton called \"the only full-formed religion which England can be said to have given the world\". Characterised as an \"invented tradition\" by scholars, Wicca was created from the patchwork adoption of various older elements, many taken from pre-existing religious and esoteric movements. Pearson characterised it as having arisen \"from the cultural impulses of the \"fin de si\u00e8cle\"\".\nWicca took as its basis the witch-cult hypothesis. This was the idea that those persecuted as witches in early modern Europe were actually followers of a surviving pagan religion; not Satanists as the persecutors claimed, nor innocent people who confessed under threat of torture, as had long been the historical consensus. The 'Father of Wicca', Gerald Gardner, claimed his religion was a survival of this European 'witch-cult'. The 'witch-cult' theory had been first expressed by the German Professor Karl Ernest Jarcke in 1828, before being endorsed by German Franz Josef Mone and then the French historian Jules Michelet. In the late 19th century, it was then adopted by two Americans, Matilda Joslyn Gage and Charles Leland, the latter of whom promoted a variant of it in his 1899 book, \"Aradia, or the Gospel of the Witches\". The theory's most notable advocate was the English Egyptologist Margaret Murray, who promoted it in a series of books \u2013 most notably 1921's \"The Witch-Cult in Western Europe\" and 1933's \"The God of the Witches\".\nAlmost all of Murray's peers regarded the witch-cult theory as incorrect and based on poor scholarship. However, Murray was invited to write the entry on \"witchcraft\" for the 1929 edition of the \"Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica\", which was reprinted for decades and became so influential that, according to folklorist Jacqueline Simpson, Murray's ideas became \"so entrenched in popular culture that they will probably never be uprooted\". Simpson noted that the only contemporary member of the Folklore Society who took Murray's theory seriously was Gerald Gardner, who used it as the basis for Wicca. Murray's books were the sources of many well-known motifs which have often been incorporated into Wicca. The idea that covens should have 13 members was developed by Murray, based on a single witness statement from one of the witch trials, as was her assertion that covens met on the four cross-quarter days. Murray was very interested in ascribing naturalistic or religious ceremonial explanations to some of the more fantastic descriptions found in witch trial testimony. For example, many of the confessions included the idea that Satan was personally present at coven meetings. Murray interpreted this as a witch priest wearing horns and animal skins, and a pair of forked boots to represent his authority or rank. Most mainstream folklorists, on the other hand, have argued that the entire scenario was always fictitious and does not require a naturalistic explanation, but Gardner enthusiastically adopted many of Murray's explanations into his own tradition. The witch-cult theory was \"the historical narrative around which Wicca built itself\", with the early Wiccans claiming to be the survivors of this ancient pagan religion.\nThe 'witch-cult' theory has since been disproven by further historical research, but it is still common for Wiccans to claim solidarity with witch trial victims. The notion that Wiccan traditions and rituals have survived from ancient times is contested by most recent researchers, who say that Wicca is a 20th-century creation which combines elements of freemasonry and 19th-century occultism. In his 1999 book \"The Triumph of the Moon\", English historian Ronald Hutton researched the Wiccan claim that ancient pagan customs have survived into modern times after being Christianised in mediaeval times as folk practices. Hutton found that most of the folk customs which are claimed to have pagan roots (such as the Maypole dance) actually date from the Middle Ages. He concluded that the idea that mediaeval revels were pagan in origin is a legacy of the Protestant Reformation. Hutton noted that Wicca predates the modern New Age movement and also differs markedly in its general philosophy.\nOther influences upon early Wicca included various Western esoteric traditions and practices, among them ceremonial magic, Aleister Crowley and his religion of Thelema, Freemasonry, Spiritualism, and Theosophy. To a lesser extent, Wicca also drew upon folk magic and the practices of cunning folk. It was further influenced both by scholarly works on folkloristics, particularly James Frazer's \"The Golden Bough\", as well as romanticist writings like Robert Graves' \"The White Goddess\", and pre-existing modern pagan groups such as the Order of Woodcraft Chivalry and Druidism.\nEarly development, 1936\u20131959.\nIt was during the 1930s that the first evidence appears for the practice of a neopagan 'Witchcraft' religion (what would be recognisable now as Wicca) in England. It seems that several groups around the country, in such places as Norfolk, Cheshire and the New Forest had set themselves up after being inspired by Murray's writings about the \"Witch-Cult\".\nThe history of Wicca starts with Gerald Gardner (the \"Father of Wicca\") in the mid-20th century. Gardner was a retired British civil servant and amateur anthropologist, with a broad familiarity in paganism and occultism. He claimed to have been initiated into a witches' coven in New Forest, Hampshire, in the late 1930s. Intent on perpetuating this craft, Gardner founded the Bricket Wood coven with his wife Donna in the 1940s, after buying the Naturist Fiveacres Country Club. Much of the coven's early membership was drawn from the club's members and its meetings were held within the club grounds. Many notable figures of early Wicca were direct initiates of this coven, including Dafo, Doreen Valiente, Jack Bracelin, Frederic Lamond, Dayonis, Eleanor Bone, and Lois Bourne.\nThe Witchcraft religion began to grow in 1951, with the repeal of the Witchcraft Act 1735, after which Gerald Gardner and then others such as Charles Cardell and Cecil Williamson began publicising their own versions of the Craft. Gardner and others never used the term \"Wicca\" as a religious identifier, simply referring to the \"witch cult\", \"witchcraft\", and the \"Old Religion\". However, Gardner did refer to witches as \"the Wica\". During the 1960s, the name of the religion normalised to \"Wicca\". Gardner's tradition, later termed Gardnerianism, soon became the dominant form in England and spread to other parts of the British Isles.\nAdaptation and spread, 1960\u2013present.\nFollowing Gardner's death in 1964, the Craft continued to grow unabated despite sensationalism and negative portrayals in British tabloids, with new traditions being propagated by figures like Robert Cochrane, Sybil Leek, and most importantly Alex Sanders, whose Alexandrian Wicca, which was predominantly based upon Gardnerian Wicca, albeit with an emphasis placed on ceremonial magic, spread quickly and gained much media attention. Around this time, the term \"Wicca\" began to be commonly adopted over \"Witchcraft\" and the faith was exported to countries like Australia and the United States.\nDuring the 1970s, a new generation joined Wicca who had been influenced by the counterculture of the 1960s. Many brought environmentalist ideas with them into the movement, as reflected by the formation of groups like the UK-based Pagans Against Nukes.\nIn the U.S., Victor Anderson, Cora Anderson, and Gwydion Pendderwen established the Feri Tradition.\nIt was in the United States and in Australia that new, home-grown traditions, sometimes based upon earlier, regional folk-magical traditions and often mixed with the basic structure of Gardnerian Wicca, began to develop, including Victor Anderson's Feri Tradition, Joseph Wilson's 1734 Tradition, Aidan Kelly's New Reformed Orthodox Order of the Golden Dawn, and eventually Zsuzsanna Budapest's Dianic Wicca, each of which emphasised different aspects of the faith. It was also around this time that books teaching people how to become Witches themselves without formal initiation or training began to emerge, among them Paul Huson's \"Mastering Witchcraft\" (1970) and Lady Sheba's \"Book of Shadows\" (1971). Similar books continued to be published throughout the 1980s and 1990s, fuelled by the writings of such authors as Doreen Valiente, Janet Farrar, Stewart Farrar, and Scott Cunningham, who popularised the idea of self-initiation into the Craft. Among witches in Canada, anthropologist Heather Botting (n\u00e9e Harden) of the University of Victoria was the first recognized Wiccan chaplain of a public university. She is the original high priestess of Coven Celeste.\nIn the 1990s, amid ever-rising numbers of self-initiates, the popular media began to explore \"witchcraft\" in fictional films like \"The Craft\" (1996) and television series like \"Charmed\" (1998\u20132006), introducing numbers of young people to the idea of religious witchcraft. This growing demographic was soon catered to through the Internet and by authors like Silver RavenWolf, much to the criticism of traditional Wiccan groups and individuals. In response to the way that Wicca was increasingly portrayed as trendy, eclectic, and influenced by the New Age movement, many Witches turned to the pre-Gardnerian origins of the Craft, and to the traditions of his rivals like Cardell and Cochrane, describing themselves as following \"traditional witchcraft\". Groups within this Traditional Witchcraft revival included Andrew Chumbley's Cultus Sabbati and the Cornish Ros an Bucca coven.\nDemographics.\nOriginating in Britain, Wicca then spread to North America, Australasia, continental Europe, and South Africa.\nThe actual number of Wiccans worldwide is unknown, and it has been noted that it is more difficult to establish the numbers of members of Neopagan faiths than many other religions due to their disorganised structure. However, Adherents.com, an independent website which specialises in collecting estimates of world religions, cites over thirty sources with estimates of numbers of Wiccans (principally from the US and the UK). From this, they developed a median estimate of 800,000 members. As of 2016, Doyle White suggested that there were \"hundreds of thousands of practising Wiccans around the globe\". However, the 2021 United Kingdom census notes that at that time, there were 13,000 people who noted \"Wicca\" as their religion, along with 74,000 who noted \"Paganism\" as their religion. Data for Scotland and Northern Ireland are collected separately and are not included in these figures.\nIn 1998, the Wiccan high priestess and academic psychologist Vivianne Crowley suggested that Wicca had been less successful in propagating in countries whose populations were primarily Roman Catholic. She suggested that this might be because Wicca's emphasis on a female divinity was more novel to people raised in Protestant-dominant backgrounds. On the basis of her experience, Pearson concurred that this was broadly true.\nWicca has been described as a non-proselytizing religion. In 1998, Pearson noted that there were very few individuals who had grown up as Wiccans although increasing numbers of Wiccan adults were themselves, parents. Many Wiccan parents did not refer to their children as also being Wiccan, believing it important that the latter are allowed to make their own choices about their religious identity when they are old enough. From her fieldwork among members of the Reclaiming tradition in California during 1980-90, the anthropologist Jone Salomonsen found that many described joining the movement following \"an extraordinary experience of revelation\".\nBased on their analysis of internet trends, the sociologists of religion Douglas Ezzy and Helen Berger argued that, by 2009, the \"phenomenal growth\" that Wicca has experienced in preceding years had slowed.\nEurope.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n[The average Wiccan is] a man in his forties, or a woman in her thirties, Caucasian, reasonably well educated, not earning much but probably not too concerned about material things, someone that demographers would call lower middle class.\nLeo Ruickbie (2004)\nFrom her 1996 survey of British Wiccans, Pearson found that most Wiccans were aged between 25 and 45, with the average age being around 35. She noted that as the Wiccan community aged, so the proportion of older practitioners would increase. She found roughly equal proportions of men and women, and found that 62% were from Protestant backgrounds, which was consistent with the dominance of Protestantism in Britain at large. Pearson's survey also found that half of British Wiccans featured had a university education and that they tended to work in \"healing professions\" like medicine or counselling, education, computing, and administration. She noted that there thus was \"a certain homogeneity about the background\" of British Wiccans.\nIn the United Kingdom, census figures on religion were first collected in 2001; no detailed statistics were reported outside of the six main religions. For the 2011 census a more detailed breakdown of responses was reported with 56,620 people identifying themselves as pagans, 11,766 as Wiccans and a further 1,276 describing their religion as \"Witchcraft\".\nNorth America.\nIn the United States, the American Religious Identification Survey has shown significant increases in the number of self-identified Wiccans, from 8,000 in 1990, to 134,000 in 2001, and 342,000 in 2008. Wiccans have also made up significant proportions of various groups within that country; for instance, Wicca is the largest non-Christian faith practised in the United States Air Force, with 1,434 airmen identifying themselves as such. In 2024, the Pew Research Center estimated less than 1% of the U.S. population identified as Wiccan or Pagan based on a sample size of 35,000.\nAcceptance.\nWicca emerged in predominantly Christian England, and from its inception the religion encountered opposition from certain Christian groups as well as from the popular tabloids like the \"News of the World\". Some Christians still believe that Wicca is a form of Satanism, despite important differences between these two religions. Detractors typically depict Wicca as a form of malevolent Satanism, a characterisation that Wiccans reject. Due to negative connotations associated with witchcraft, many Wiccans continue the traditional practice of secrecy, concealing their faith for fear of persecution. Revealing oneself as a Wiccan to family, friends or colleagues is often termed \"coming out of the broom-closet\". Attitudes to Christianity vary within the Wiccan movement, stretching from outright rejection to a willingness to work alongside Christians in interfaith endeavours.\nThe religious studies scholar Graham Harvey wrote that \"the popular and prevalent media image [of Wicca] is mostly inaccurate\". Pearson similarly noted that \"popular and media perceptions of Wicca have often been misleading\".\nIn the United States, a number of legal decisions have improved and validated the status of Wiccans, especially \"Dettmer v. Landon\" in 1986. However, Wiccans have encountered opposition from some politicians and Christian organisations, including former president of the United States George W. Bush, who stated that he did not believe Wicca to be a religion.\nIn 2007 the United States Department of Veterans Affairs after years of dispute added the Pentacle to the list of emblems of belief that can be included on government-issued markers, headstones, and plaques honouring deceased veterans.\nIn Canada, Heather Botting (\"Lady Aurora\") and Gary Botting (\"Pan\"), the original high priestess and high priest of Coven Celeste and founding elders of the Aquarian Tabernacle Church, successfully campaigned the British Columbian government and the federal government in 1995 to allow them to perform recognised Wiccan weddings, to become prison and hospital chaplains, and (in the case of Heather Botting) to become the first officially recognized Wiccan chaplain in a public university.\nThe oath-based system of many Wiccan traditions makes it difficult for \"outsider\" scholars to study them. For instance, after the anthropologist Tanya Luhrmann revealed information about what she learned as an initiate of a Wiccan coven in her academic study, various Wiccans were upset, believing that she had broken the oaths of secrecy taken at initiation.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWiccan literature.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33299", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33299", "title": "William Henry Harrison", "text": "President of the United States in 1841\nWilliam Henry Harrison (February 9, 1773\u00a0\u2013 April 4, 1841) was the ninth president of the United States, serving from March 4 to April 4, 1841, the shortest presidency in U.S. history. He was also the first U.S. president to die in office, causing a brief constitutional crisis, since presidential succession was not then fully defined in the U.S. Constitution. Harrison was the last president born as a British subject in the Thirteen Colonies. He was a member of the Harrison family of Virginia, and a son of Benjamin Harrison V, who was a U.S. Founding Father. His own son John Scott Harrison was the father of Benjamin Harrison, the 23rd U.S. president.\nHarrison was born in Charles City County, Virginia. In 1794, he participated in the Battle of Fallen Timbers, an American military victory that ended the Northwest Indian War. In 1811, he led a military force against Tecumseh's confederacy at the Battle of Tippecanoe, for which he earned the nickname \"Old Tippecanoe\". He was promoted to major general in the Army during the War of 1812, and led American infantry and cavalry to victory at the Battle of the Thames in Upper Canada.\nHarrison's political career began in 1798, with an appointment as secretary of the Northwest Territory. In 1799, he was elected as the territory's non-voting delegate in the U.S. House of Representatives. He became governor of the newly established Indiana Territory in 1801 and, through multiple treaties with American Indian tribes, he acquired millions of acres for the nation. After the War of 1812, he moved to Ohio where, in 1816, he was elected to represent the state's district in the House. In 1824, he was elected to the U.S. Senate, though his Senate term was cut short by his appointment as minister plenipotentiary to Gran Colombia in 1828.\nHarrison returned to private life in Ohio until he was one of four Whig Party nominees in the 1836 U.S. presidential election, which he lost to Democrat Martin Van Buren. In the 1840 presidential election, the party nominated him again, with John Tyler as his running mate, under the campaign slogan \"Tippecanoe and Tyler Too\", and Harrison defeated Van Buren. Just three weeks after his inauguration, Harrison fell ill and died days later. After resolution of an ambiguity in the constitution regarding succession, Tyler became president. Harrison is remembered for his Indian treaties, and also his inventive election campaign tactics. He is often omitted in historical presidential rankings due to the brevity of his tenure.\nEarly life and education.\nWilliam Henry Harrison was the seventh and youngest child of Benjamin Harrison V and Elizabeth (Bassett) Harrison. Born on February 9, 1773, at Berkeley Plantation, the home of the Harrison family of Virginia on the James River in Charles City County, he became the last United States president not born as an American citizen. The Harrisons were a prominent political family of English descent whose ancestors had been in Virginia since the 1630s. His father was a Virginia planter, who served as a delegate to the Continental Congress and who signed the Declaration of Independence. His father also served in the Virginia legislature and as the fifth governor of Virginia (1781\u20131784) in the years during and after the American Revolutionary War. Harrison's older brother Carter Bassett Harrison represented Virginia in the House of Representatives (1793\u20131799). William Henry often referred to himself as a \"child of the revolution\", as indeed he was, having grown up in a home just from where Washington won the war against the British in the Battle of Yorktown.\nHarrison was tutored at home until age 14 when he attended Hampden\u2013Sydney College, a Presbyterian college in Hampden Sydney, Virginia. He studied there for three years, receiving a classical education that included Latin, Greek, French, logic, and debate. His Episcopalian father removed him from the college, possibly for religious reasons, and after brief stays at an academy in Southampton County, Virginia, and with his elder brother Benjamin Harrison VI in Richmond, he went to Philadelphia in 1790.\nHis father died in the spring of 1791, and he was placed in the care of Robert Morris, a close family friend in Philadelphia. He studied medicine at the University of Pennsylvania. While at Penn, he studied with Benjamin Rush, a founding father of the United States, a Penn professor of chemistry and medicine, and a doctor, and William Shippen Sr. William Harrison's older brother inherited their father's money, so William lacked the funds for his further medical schooling, which he had also discovered he did not prefer. He withdrew from Penn, although school archives record him as a \"non-graduate alumnus of Penn's medical school class of 1793\". With the influence of his father's friend, Governor Henry Lee III, he embarked upon a military career.\nEarly military career.\nOn August 16, 1791, within 24 hours of meeting Lee, William Harrison, age 18, was commissioned as an ensign in the United States Army and assigned to the First American Regiment. He was initially assigned to Fort Washington, Cincinnati in the Northwest Territory where the army was engaged in the ongoing Northwest Indian War. Biographer William W. Freehling says that young Harrison, in his first military act, rounded up about eighty thrill-seekers and troublemakers off Philadelphia's streets, talked them into signing enlistment papers, and marched them to Fort Washington.\nHarrison was promoted to lieutenant after Major General \"Mad Anthony\" Wayne took command of the western army in 1792, after a disastrous defeat under Arthur St. Clair. In 1793, he became Wayne's aide-de-camp and acquired the skills to command an army on the frontier; he participated in Wayne's decisive victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers on August 20, 1794, which ended the Northwest Indian War. He received the following commendation from Wayne for his role in the battle: \"I must add the name of my faithful and gallant Aide-de-camp\u00a0... Lieutenant Harrison, who\u00a0... rendered the most essential service by communicating my orders in every direction\u00a0... conduct and bravery exciting the troops to press for victory.\" Harrison was a signatory of the Treaty of Greenville (1795), as witness to Wayne, the principal negotiator for the U.S. Under the terms of the treaty, a coalition of Indians ceded a portion of their lands to the federal government, opening two-thirds of Ohio to settlement.\nAt his mother's death in 1793, Harrison inherited a portion of his family's Virginia estate, including approximately of land and some slaves. He was serving in the Army at the time and sold the land to his brother. Harrison was promoted to captain in May 1797 and resigned from the Army on June 1, 1798.\nMarriage and family.\nHarrison met Anna Tuthill Symmes of North Bend, Ohio in 1795 when he was 22. She was a daughter of Anna Tuthill and Judge John Cleves Symmes, who served as a colonel in the Revolutionary War and as a representative to the Congress of the Confederation. Harrison asked the judge for permission to marry Anna but was refused, so the couple waited until Symmes left on business. They then eloped and were married on November 25, 1795, at the North Bend home of Stephen Wood, treasurer of the Northwest Territory. They honeymooned at Fort Washington, since Harrison was still on military duty. \nJudge Symmes confronted him two weeks later at a farewell dinner for General Wayne, sternly demanding to know how he intended to support a family. Harrison responded, \"by my sword, and my own right arm, sir\". The match was advantageous for Harrison, as he eventually exploited his father-in-law's connections with land speculators, which facilitated his departure from the army. Judge Symmes' doubts about him persisted, as he wrote to a friend, \"He can neither bleed, plead, nor preach, and if he could plow I should be satisfied.\" Matters eventually became cordial with the father-in-law, who later sold the Harrisons of land in North Bend, which enabled Harrison to build a home and start a farm. Anna was frequently in poor health during their marriage, primarily because of her many pregnancies, yet she outlived William by 23 years, dying on February 25, 1864, at 88. The Harrisons had ten children:\nProfessor Kenneth R. Janken, in his biography of Walter Francis White, claims that Harrison had six children by an enslaved African-American woman named Dilsia and, before running for president, gave four of them to a brother to avoid scandal. The assertion is based on the White family's oral history. In her 2012 biography of Harrison, author Gail Collins describes this as an unlikely story, although White believed it to be true.\nPolitical career.\nHarrison began his political career when he temporarily resigned from the military on June 1, 1798, and campaigned among his friends and family for a post in the Northwest Territorial government. His close friend Timothy Pickering was serving as Secretary of State, and along with Judge Symmes's influence, he was recommended to replace Winthrop Sargent, the outgoing territorial secretary. President John Adams appointed Harrison to the position in July 1798. The work of recording the activities of the territory was tedious, and he soon became bored, and sought a position in the U.S. Congress.\nU.S. Congress.\nHarrison had many friends in the Eastern aristocracy and quickly gained a reputation among them as a frontier leader. He ran a successful horse-breeding enterprise that won him acclaim throughout the Northwest Territory. Congress had legislated a territorial policy that led to high land costs, a primary concern for settlers in the Territory; Harrison became their champion to lower those prices. The Northwest Territory's population reached a sufficient number to have a congressional delegate in October 1799, and Harrison ran for election. He campaigned to encourage further migration to the territory, which eventually led to statehood.\nHarrison defeated Arthur St. Clair Jr. to become the Northwest Territory's first congressional delegate in 1798 at age 26, and served in the Sixth United States Congress from March 4, 1799, to May 14, 1800. He had no authority to vote on legislative bills, but he was permitted to serve on a committee, to submit legislation, and to engage in debate. He became chairman of the Committee on Public Lands and promoted the Land Act of 1800, which made it easier to buy Northwest Territory land in smaller tracts at a lower cost. Freeholders were permitted to buy smaller lots with a down payment of only five percent, and this became an important factor in the Territory's rapid population growth.\nHarrison was also instrumental in arranging the division of the Territory into two sections. The eastern section continued to be known as the Northwest Territory and included present-day Ohio and eastern Michigan; the western section was named the Indiana Territory and included present-day Indiana, Illinois, Wisconsin, a portion of western Michigan, and an eastern portion of Minnesota. The two new territories were formally established by law in 1800.\nOn May 13, 1800, President John Adams appointed Harrison as the governor of the Indiana Territory, based on his ties to the west and his apparent neutral political stances. He served in this capacity for twelve years. His governorship was confirmed by the Senate and he resigned from Congress to become the first Indiana territorial governor in 1801.\nIndiana territorial governor.\nHarrison began his duties on January 10, 1801, at Vincennes, the capital of the Indiana Territory. Presidents Thomas Jefferson and James Madison were members of the Democratic-Republican Party, and they reappointed him as governor in 1803, 1806, and 1809. In 1804, Harrison was assigned to administer the civilian government of the District of Louisiana. He conducted the district's affairs for five weeks until the Louisiana Territory was formally established on July 4, 1805, and Brigadier General James Wilkinson assumed the duties of governor.\nIn 1805, Harrison built a plantation-style home near Vincennes that he named Grouseland, in tribute to the birds on the property. The 26-room home was one of the first brick structures in the territory; and it served as a center of social and political life in the territory during his tenure as governor. Harrison founded a university at Vincennes in 1801, which was incorporated as Vincennes University on November 29, 1806. The territorial capital was eventually moved to Corydon in 1813, and Harrison built a second home at nearby Harrison Valley.\nHarrison's primary responsibility was to obtain title to Indian lands that would allow future settlement and increase the territory's population, a requirement for statehood. He was also eager to expand the territory for personal reasons, as his political fortunes were tied to Indiana's eventual statehood. While benefiting from land speculation on his own behalf, and acquiring two milling operations, he was credited as a good administrator, with significant improvements in roads and other infrastructure.\nWhen Harrison was reappointed as the Indiana territorial governor on February 8, 1803, he was given expanded authority to negotiate and conclude treaties with the Indians. The 1804 Treaty of St. Louis with Quashquame required the Sauk and Meskwaki tribes to cede much of western Illinois and parts of Missouri. Many of the Sauk resented the loss of lands, especially their leader Black Hawk. Harrison thought that the Treaty of Grouseland (1805) appeased some of the Indians, but tensions remained high along the frontier. The Treaty of Fort Wayne (1809) raised new tensions when Harrison purchased more than from the Potawatomi, Delaware, Miami, and Eel River tribes. Some Indians disputed the authority of the tribes joining in the treaty. Harrison was also able to conduct matters unquestioned by the government, as the administration changed hands from Jefferson to Madison.\nHe pursued the treaty process aggressively, offering large subsidies to the tribes and their leaders, so as to gain political favor with Jefferson before his departure. Biographer Freehling asserts that the Indians perceived the ownership of land was as common to all, just as the air that is breathed. In 1805, Harrison succeeded in acquiring for the nation as many as 51,000,000 acres from the Indians, after plying five of their chiefs with alcohol, for no more than a dollar per 20,000 acres &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;), and comprising two-thirds of Illinois and sizable chunks of Wisconsin and Missouri.\nIn addition to resulting tensions with the Indians, Harrison's pro-slavery position made him unpopular with the Indiana Territory's abolitionists, as he tried in vain to encourage slavery in the territory. In 1803, he had lobbied Congress to temporarily suspend for ten years Article VI of the Northwest Ordinance prohibiting slavery in the Indiana Territory. Though Harrison asserted that the suspension was necessary to promote settlement and make the territory economically viable and ready for statehood, the proposal failed. Lacking the suspension of Article VI, in 1807 the territorial legislature, with Harrison's support, enacted laws that authorized indentured servitude and gave masters authority to determine the length of service.\nPresident Jefferson, primary author of the Northwest Ordinance, made a secret compact with James Lemen to defeat the nascent pro-slavery movement supported by Harrison. He donated $100 to encourage Lemen with abolition and other good works, and later (in 1808) another $20 &amp;lpar;&amp;dollar;\u00a0in &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Tooltip/styles.css\" /&gt;) to help fund the church known as Bethel Baptist Church. In Indiana, the planting of the anti-slavery church led to citizens signing a petition and organizing politically to defeat Harrison's efforts to legalize slavery in the territory.\nThe Indiana Territory held elections to the legislature's upper and lower houses for the first time in 1809. Harrison found himself at odds with the legislature after the abolitionists came to power, and the eastern portion of the Indiana Territory grew to include a large anti-slavery population. The Territory's general assembly convened in 1810, and its anti-slavery faction immediately repealed the indenturing laws previously enacted. After 1809, the Indiana legislature assumed more authority and the territory advanced toward statehood.\nArmy general.\nTecumseh and Tippecanoe.\nIndian resistance to American expansion came to a head, with the leadership of Shawnee brothers Tecumseh and Tenskwatawa (\"The Prophet\"), in a conflict that became known as Tecumseh's War. Tenskwatawa convinced the tribes that they would be protected by the Great Spirit and that no harm could befall them if they rose up against the settlers. He encouraged resistance by telling the tribes to pay white traders only half of what they owed and to give up all the white man's ways, including their clothing, muskets, and especially whiskey. Harrison received word of the resistance through spies he had placed within the tribes, and asked Madison to fund military preparations. Madison dragged his feet, and Harrison attempted to negotiate, sending a letter to Tecumseh saying, \"Our Blue Coats (U.S. Army soldiers) are more numerous than you can count, and our hunting shirts (volunteer militiamen) are like the leaves of the forests or the grains of sand on the Wabash.\"\nIn August 1810, Tecumseh led 400 warriors down the Wabash River to meet with Harrison in Vincennes. They were dressed in war paint, and their sudden appearance at first frightened the soldiers at Vincennes. The leaders of the group were escorted to Grouseland, where they met Harrison. Tecumseh berated the condescending Harrison repeatedly, and insisted that the Fort Wayne Treaty was illegitimate, arguing that one tribe could not sell land without the approval of the other tribes. He asked Harrison to nullify it and warned that Americans should not attempt to settle the lands sold in the treaty. Tecumseh informed Harrison that he had threatened to kill the chiefs who signed the treaty if they carried out its terms and that his confederation of tribes was growing rapidly. Harrison said that the individual tribes were the owners of the land and could sell it as they wished. He rejected Tecumseh's claim that all the Indians formed one nation and said that each tribe could have separate relations with the United States if they chose to do so. Harrison argued that the Great Spirit would have made all the tribes speak one language if they were to be one nation.\nTecumseh launched an \"impassioned rebuttal\", in the words of one historian, but Harrison was unable to understand his language. Tecumseh then began shouting at Harrison and called him a liar. A Shawnee friendly to Harrison cocked his pistol from the sidelines to alert Harrison that Tecumseh's speech was leading to trouble, and some witnesses reported that Tecumseh was encouraging the warriors to kill Harrison. Many of them began to pull their weapons, representing a substantial threat to Harrison and the town, which held a population of only 1,000. Harrison drew his sword, and Tecumseh's warriors backed down when the officers presented their firearms in his defense. Chief Winamac was friendly to Harrison, and he countered Tecumseh's arguments, telling the warriors that they should return home in peace since they had come in peace. Before leaving, Tecumseh informed Harrison that he would seek an alliance with the British if the Fort Wayne Treaty was not nullified. After the meeting, Tecumseh journeyed to meet with many of the tribes in the region, hoping to create a confederation to battle the United States.\nHarrison was concerned that Tecumseh's actions would endanger the statehood of Indiana, as well as his political future, leaving it \"the haunt of a few wretched savages\". Tecumseh was traveling in 1811, leaving Tenskwatawa in charge of Indian forces. Harrison saw a window of opportunity in Tecumseh's absence, and advised Secretary of War William Eustis to present a show of force to the Indian confederation. Despite being 13 years removed from military action, Harrison convinced Madison and Eustis to allow him to assume command. He led an army north with 950 men to intimidate the Shawnee into making peace, but the tribes launched a surprise attack early on November 7 in the Battle of Tippecanoe. Harrison countered and defeated the tribal forces at Prophetstown next to the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers; the battle became famous and he was hailed as a national hero. Although his troops had suffered 62 dead and 126 wounded during the battle and the Shawnee just 150 casualties, the Shawnee prophet's vision of spiritual protection had been shattered. Tenskwatawa and his forces fled to Canada, and their campaign to unite the tribes of the region to reject assimilation failed.\nWhen reporting to Secretary Eustis, Harrison had informed him of the battle near the Tippecanoe River and that he had anticipated an attack. A first dispatch had not been clear which side had won the conflict, and the secretary interpreted it as a defeat until the follow-up dispatch clarified the situation. When no second attack came, the Shawnee defeat had become more certain. Eustis demanded to know why Harrison had not taken adequate precautions in fortifying his camp against the initial attack, and Harrison said that he had considered the position strong enough. The dispute was the catalyst of a disagreement between Harrison and the Department of War, which continued into the War of 1812. Freehling says that Harrison's rusty skills resulted in his troops setting campfires the night before the battle, exposing their position to a surprise attack and casualties.\nThe press did not cover the battle at first, until one Ohio paper misinterpreted Harrison's first dispatch to mean that he was defeated. By December, however, most major American papers carried stories on the battle victory, and public outrage grew over the Shawnee. Americans blamed the British for inciting the tribes to violence and supplying them with firearms, and Congress passed resolutions condemning the British for interfering in American domestic affairs. Congress declared war on June 18, 1812, and Harrison left Vincennes to seek a military appointment.\nWar of 1812.\nThe outbreak of war with the British in 1812 led to continued conflict with Indians in the Northwest. Harrison briefly served as a major general in the Kentucky militia until the government commissioned him on September 17 to command the Army of the Northwest. He received federal military pay for his service, and he also collected a territorial governor's salary from September until December 28, when he formally resigned as governor and continued his military service. Authors Gugin and St. Clair claim the resignation was forced upon him. Harrison was succeeded by John Gibson as acting governor of the territory.\nThe Americans suffered a defeat in the siege of Detroit. General James Winchester offered Harrison the rank of brigadier general, but Harrison wanted sole command of the army. President James Madison removed Winchester from command in September, and Harrison became commander of the fresh recruits. He received orders to retake Detroit and boost morale, but he initially held back, unwilling to press the war northward. The British and their Indian allies greatly outnumbered Harrison's troops, so Harrison constructed a defensive position during the winter along the Maumee River in northwest Ohio. He named it Fort Meigs in honor of Ohio governor Return J. Meigs Jr. He then received reinforcements in 1813, took the offensive, and led the army north to battle. He won victories in the Indiana Territory as well as Ohio and recaptured Detroit before invading Upper Canada (Ontario). His army defeated the British, and Tecumseh was killed, on October 5, 1813, at the Battle of the Thames. It was considered to be one of the great American victories in the war, second only to the Battle of New Orleans, and secured a national reputation for Harrison.\nIn 1814, Secretary of War John Armstrong Jr. divided the command of the army, assigning Harrison to an outlying post and giving control of the front to one of Harrison's subordinates. Armstrong and Harrison had disagreed over the lack of coordination and effectiveness in the invasion of Canada, and Harrison resigned from the army in May. After the war ended, Congress investigated Harrison's resignation and determined that Armstrong had mistreated him during his military campaign and that his resignation was justified. Congress awarded Harrison a gold medal for his services during the war.\nHarrison and Michigan Territory's Governor Lewis Cass were responsible for negotiating the peace treaty with the Indians. President Madison appointed Harrison in June 1815 to help in negotiating a second treaty with the Indians that became known as the Treaty of Springwells, in which the tribes ceded a large tract of land in the west, providing additional land for American purchase and settlement.\nPostwar life.\nOhio politician and diplomat.\nHarrison resigned from the army in 1814, shortly before the conclusion of the War of 1812, and returned to his family and farm in North Bend, Ohio. Freehling claims that his expenses then well exceeded his means and he fell into debt, that Harrison chose \"celebrity over duty\", as he sought the adulation found at parties in New York, Washington, and Philadelphia, and that he became an office seeker. He was elected in 1816 to complete John McLean's term in the House of Representatives, representing Ohio's 1st congressional district until 1819. He attempted to secure the post of Secretary of War under President Monroe in 1817 but lost out to John C. Calhoun. He was also passed over for a diplomatic post to Russia. He was elected to the Ohio Senate in 1819 and served until 1821, having lost the election for Ohio governor in 1820. He ran in the 1822 election for the United States House of Representatives, but lost to James W. Gazlay. He was elected to the U.S. Senate in 1824, and was an Ohio presidential elector in 1820 for James Monroe and for Henry Clay in 1824.\nHarrison was appointed in 1828 as minister plenipotentiary to Gran Colombia, so he resigned from Congress and served in his new post until March 8, 1829. He arrived in Bogot\u00e1 on December 22, 1828, and found the condition of Colombia saddening. He reported to the Secretary of State that the country was on the edge of anarchy, and that Sim\u00f3n Bol\u00edvar was about to become a military dictator. He wrote a letter of polite rebuke to Bol\u00edvar, stating that \"the strongest of all governments is that which is most free\" and calling on Bol\u00edvar to encourage the development of democracy. In response, Bol\u00edvar wrote that the United States \"seem destined by Providence to plague America with torments in the name of freedom\", a sentiment that achieved fame in Latin America.\nFreehling indicates Harrison's missteps in Colombia were \"bad and frequent\", that he failed to properly maintain a position of neutrality in Colombian affairs, by publicly opposing Bolivar, and that Colombia sought his removal. Andrew Jackson took office in March 1829, and recalled Harrison in order to make his own appointment to the position. Biographer James Hall claims that Harrison found in Colombia a military despotism and that \"his liberal opinions, his stern republican integrity, and the plain simplicity of his dress and manners, contrasted too strongly with the arbitrary opinions and ostentatious behaviour of the public officers, to allow him to be long a favourite with those who had usurped the power of that government. They feared that the people would perceive the difference between a real and a pretended patriot, and commenced a series of persecutions against our minister, which rendered his situation extremely irksome.\" A very similar sentiment of the situation is related by biographer Samuel Burr.\nHarrison, after leaving his post but while still in the country, wrote his roughly ten-page letter to Bolivar, which is reproduced in full in the Hall and Burr biographies. It left the former struck by Harrison's \"deeply imbued principles of liberty\". Burr describes the letter as \"replete with wisdom, goodness, and patriotism\u2026and the purest of principles\".\nPrivate citizen.\nHarrison returned to the United States and his North Bend farm, living in relative privacy after nearly four decades of government service. He had accumulated no substantial wealth during his lifetime, and he lived on his savings, a small pension, and the income produced by his farm. Burr references M. Chavalier, who encountered Harrison in Cincinnati at this time, and described Harrison as \"poor, with a numerous family, abandoned by the Federal government, yet vigorous with independent thinking\".\nIn May 1817, Harrison served as one of the founding vestry members of the Episcopal congregation, Christ Church in downtown Cincinnati (now Christ Church Cathedral). He went on to serve as a vestry member through 1819, and then again in 1824.\nLocal supporters had come to Harrison's relief, by appointing him Clerk of Courts for Hamilton County, where he worked from 1836 until 1840. Chevalier remarked, \"His friends back east talk of making him President, while here we make him clerk of an inferior court.\" He also cultivated corn and established a distillery to produce whiskey, but closed it after he became disturbed by the effects of alcohol on its consumers. In an address to the Hamilton County Agricultural Board in 1831, he said that he had sinned in making whiskey and hoped that others would learn from his mistake and stop the production of liquors.\nAbout this time, he met abolitionist and Underground Railroad conductor George DeBaptiste who lived in nearby Madison, and the two became friends. Harrison wrote at the time, \"we might look forward to a day when a North American sun would not look down upon a slave.\" DeBaptiste became his valet, and later White House steward.\nBurr closes his account of Harrison by describing an event, denied by some of his friends\u2014a reception given the general at Philadelphia, in 1836. According to Burr, \"Thousands and tens of thousands crowded Chesnut street wharf upon his arrival, and greeted him with continual cheering as he landed. He stepped into the barouche but the crowd pressed forward so impetuously, that the horses became frightened and reared frequently. A rush was made to unharness the animals when the General spoke to several of them and endeavored to prevent it; but the team was soon unmanageable, and it became necessary to take them off. A rope was brought, and attached to the carriage, by which the people drew it to the Marshall House. This act was the spontaneous burst of ten thousand grateful hearts. Pennsylvanians fought under the hero, and they loved him. We speak particularly on this point, because we were eyewitnesses of all that passed.\"\n1836 presidential campaign.\nHarrison was the western Whig candidate for president in 1836, one of four regional Whig party candidates. The others were Daniel Webster, Hugh Lawson White, and Willie P. Mangum. More than one Whig candidate emerged in an effort to defeat the incumbent Vice President Martin Van Buren, who was the popular Jackson-chosen Democrat. The Democrats charged that, by running multiple candidates, the Whigs sought to prevent a Van Buren victory in the electoral college, and force the election into the House. If there was such a plan, then it failed. Harrison finished in second, and carried nine of the twenty-six states in the Union.\nHarrison ran in all the non-slave states except Massachusetts, and in the slave states of Delaware, Maryland, and Kentucky. White ran in the remaining slave states except for South Carolina. Daniel Webster ran in Massachusetts, and Mangum in South Carolina. Van Buren won the election with 170 electoral votes. A swing of just over 4,000 votes in Pennsylvania would have given that state's 30 electoral votes to Harrison and the election would have been decided in the House of Representatives.\n1840 presidential campaign.\nHarrison faced incumbent Van Buren as the sole Whig candidate in the 1840 election. The Whigs saw in Harrison a born southerner and war hero, who would contrast well with the aloof, uncaring, and aristocratic Van Buren. He was chosen over more controversial members of the party, such as Clay and Webster; his campaign highlighted his military record and focused on the weak U.S. economy caused by the Panic of 1837.\nThe Whigs blamed Van Buren for the economic problems and dubbed him \"Van Ruin\". The Democrats, in turn, ridiculed the elder Harrison by calling him \"Granny Harrison, the petticoat general\", because he resigned from the army before the War of 1812 ended. They noted for the voters what Harrison's name would be when spelled backwards: \"No Sirrah\". They cast him as a provincial, out-of-touch old man who would rather \"sit in his log cabin drinking hard cider\" than attend to the administration of the country. This strategy backfired when Harrison and running mate John Tyler adopted the log cabin and hard cider as campaign symbols. Their campaign used the symbols on banners and posters and created bottles of hard cider shaped like log cabins, all to connect the candidates to the \"common man\". Freehling wrote that, \"One bitter pro-Van Buren paper lamented after his defeat, 'We have been sung down, lied down and drunk down.' In one sentence, this described the new American political process.\"\nHarrison came from a wealthy, slaveholding Virginia family, yet his campaign promoted him as a humble frontiersman in the style popularized by Andrew Jackson, while presenting Van Buren as a wealthy elitist. A memorable example was the Gold Spoon Oration that Pennsylvania's Whig representative Charles Ogle delivered in the House, ridiculing Van Buren's elegant White House lifestyle and lavish spending. The Whigs invented a chant in which people would spit tobacco juice as they chanted \"wirt-wirt\", and this also exhibited the difference between candidates from the time of the election: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Whigs boasted of Harrison's military record and his reputation as the hero of the Battle of Tippecanoe. The campaign slogan \"Tippecanoe and Tyler, Too\" became one of the most famous in American politics. While Van Buren campaigned from the White House, Harrison was on the campaign trail, entertaining with his impressions of Indian war whoops, and took people's minds off the nation's economic troubles. In June 1840, a Harrison rally at the site of the Tippecanoe battle drew 60,000 people. The Village of North Bend, Ohio, as well as the alumni of Ohio State University claim that the state's use of the nickname \"Buckeyes\" began with Harrison's campaign message. Harrison's campaign was the victim of what is described as the nation's first \"October surprise.\" Just days before voters went to the polls, Van Buren's Justice Department alleged that Whig Party officials had committed \"the most stupendous and atrocious fraud,\" when they paid Pennsylvanians to travel to New York to vote for Whig candidates two years earlier.\nVoter turnout shot to a spectacular 80%, 20 points higher than the previous election. Harrison won a landslide victory in the Electoral College, 234 electoral votes to Van Buren's 60. The popular vote margin was much closer, at fewer than 150,000 votes, though he carried nineteen of the twenty-six states.\nPresidency (1841).\nInauguration.\nWhen Harrison came to Washington, he wanted to show that he was still the steadfast hero of Tippecanoe and that he was a better educated and more thoughtful man than the backwoods caricature portrayed in the campaign. He took the oath of office on March 4, 1841, a cold and wet day. He braved the chilly weather and chose not to wear an overcoat or a hat, rode on horseback to the grand ceremony, and then delivered the longest inaugural address in American history at 8,445 words. It took him nearly two hours to read, although his friend and fellow Whig Daniel Webster had edited it for length. Freehling opines that speeches like this were actually common at the time, and that its irony was rich, as Harrison, \"a lifelong office seeker, elected by deeply partisan politics, harshly criticized both practices\".\nThe inaugural address was a detailed statement of the Whig agenda, a repudiation of Jackson's and Van Buren's policies, and the first and only formal articulation by Harrison of his approach to the presidency. The address began with Harrison's sincere regard for the trust being placed in him:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Harrison promised to re-establish the Bank of the United States and extend its capacity for credit by issuing paper currency in Henry Clay's American system. He intended to rely on the judgment of Congress in legislative matters, using his veto power only if an act were unconstitutional, and to reverse Jackson's spoils system of executive patronage. He promised to use patronage to create a qualified staff, not to enhance his own standing in government, and under no circumstance would he run for a second term. He condemned the financial excesses of the prior administration and pledged not to interfere with congressional financial policy. All in all, Harrison committed to a weak presidency, deferring to \"the First Branch\", the Congress, in keeping with Whig principles.\nHe addressed the nation's already hotly debated issue of slavery. As a slaveholder himself, he agreed with the right of states to control the matter:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs he was about to conclude his remarks, Harrison incorporated his reliance upon the country's freedom of religion while taking pains to present himself as part of the religious mainstream rather than a dissenter or member of a minority faith:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHarrison's lengthy speech offered vague clues about what his presidency would offer to the people of the United States. He declared he would only serve for one term in office and not abuse his veto power. Harrison was against devising financial schemes for the nation; rather, he left that wholly to Congress. He was against agitating the Southern United States on the slavery question. He did not discuss the tariff and distribution. He said little of the national bank, except he mentioned he was open to paper money, rather than metallic currency. Harrison's concept of the presidency was very limited. This followed closely with Harrison's Whig political ideology.\nFollowing the speech, he rode through the streets in the inaugural parade, stood in a three-hour receiving line at the White House, and attended three inaugural balls that evening, including one at Carusi's Saloon entitled the \"Tippecanoe\" ball with 1,000 guests who had paid $10 per person (equal to $371 in 2025).\nThe press of patronage.\nClay was a leader of the Whigs and a powerful legislator, as well as a frustrated presidential candidate in his own right, and he expected to have substantial influence in the Harrison administration. He ignored his own platform plank of overturning the \"spoils\" system and attempted to influence Harrison's actions before and during his brief presidency, especially in putting forth his own preferences for Cabinet offices and other presidential appointments. Harrison rebuffed his aggression, saying, \"Mr. Clay, you forget that \"I\" am the President.\" The dispute escalated when Harrison named as Secretary of State Daniel Webster, Clay's arch-rival for control of the Whig Party. Harrison also appeared to give Webster's supporters some highly coveted patronage positions. His sole concession to Clay was to name his prot\u00e9g\u00e9 John J. Crittenden to the post of Attorney General. Despite this, the contretemps continued until the president's death.\nClay was not the only one who hoped to benefit from Harrison's election. Hordes of office applicants came to the White House, which was then open to any who wanted a meeting with the president. Most of Harrison's business during his month-long presidency involved extensive social obligations and receiving visitors at the White House. He was advised to have an administration in place before the inauguration but declined, wanting to focus on the festivities. As such, job seekers awaited him at all hours and filled the Executive Mansion, with no process for organizing and vetting them.\nHarrison wrote in a letter dated March 10, \"I am so much harassed by the multitude that calls upon me that I can give no proper attention to any business of my own.\" U.S. Marshal of the District of Columbia Alexander Hunter recalled an incident in which Harrison was besieged by office seekers who were preventing him from getting to a cabinet meeting; when his pleas for their consideration were ignored, Harrison finally \"accepted their petitions, which filled his arms and pockets\". Another anecdote of the time recounted that the halls were so full one afternoon that in order to get from one room to the next, Harrison had to be helped out a window, walked the length of the White House exterior, and then helped in through another window.\nHarrison took seriously his pledge to reform executive appointments, visiting each of the six cabinet departments to observe its operations and issuing through Webster an order that electioneering by employees would be considered grounds for dismissal. He resisted pressure from other Whigs over partisan patronage. A group arrived in his office on March 16 to demand the removal of all Democrats from any appointed office, and Harrison proclaimed, \"So help me God, I will resign my office before I can be guilty of such an iniquity!\" His own cabinet attempted to countermand his appointment of John Chambers as Governor of the Iowa Territory in favor of Webster's friend James Wilson. Webster attempted to press this decision at a March 25 cabinet meeting, and Harrison asked him to read aloud a handwritten note, which said simply \"William Henry Harrison, President of the United States\". Harrison then stood and declared: \"William Henry Harrison, President of the United States, tells you, gentlemen, that, by God, John Chambers shall be governor of Iowa!\"\nHarrison's only other official decision of consequence was whether to call Congress into a special session. He and Clay had disagreed over the necessity of such a session, and Harrison's cabinet proved evenly divided, so the president initially vetoed the idea. Clay pressed him on the special session on March 13, but Harrison rebuffed him and told him not to visit the White House again, to address him only in writing. A few days later, however, Treasury Secretary Thomas Ewing reported to Harrison that federal funds were in such trouble that the government could not continue to operate until Congress's regularly scheduled session in December; Harrison thus relented, and proclaimed the special session on March 17, in the interests of \"the condition of the revenue and finance of the country\". The session would have begun on May 31 as scheduled if Harrison had lived.\nDeath and funeral.\nHarrison had been physically exhausted by the constant stream of office seekers and a demanding social schedule. He also frequently ignored the cold late-winter weather, often going out without wearing appropriate clothing, likely weakening his immune system. After delivering a two-hour inaugural address in the rain on March 4 without a hat or coat, Harrison continued to expose himself to the elements. Three weeks later on Wednesday, March 24, 1841, Harrison took his daily morning walk to local markets, again without a coat or hat. Despite being caught in a sudden rainstorm, he did not change his wet clothes upon returning to the White House. On Friday, March 26, Harrison became ill with cold-like symptoms and sent for his doctor, Thomas Miller, though he told the doctor he felt better after having taken medication for \"fatigue and mental anxiety\". The next day, Saturday, the doctor was called again, and arrived to find Harrison in bed with a \"severe chill\", after taking another early morning walk. Miller applied mustard plaster to his stomach and gave him a mild laxative, and he felt better that afternoon. At 4:00\u00a0a.m. Sunday, March 28, Harrison developed severe pain in the side and the doctor initiated bloodletting; the procedure was terminated when there was a drop in his pulse rate. Miller also applied heated cups to the president's skin to enhance blood flow. The doctor then gave him castor oil and medicines to induce vomiting, and diagnosed him with pneumonia in the right lung. A team of doctors was called in Monday, March 29, and they confirmed right lower lobe pneumonia. Harrison was then administered laudanum, opium, and camphor, along with wine and brandy.\nNo official announcements were made concerning Harrison's illness, which fueled public speculation and concern the longer he remained out of public view. Washington society had noticed his uncharacteristic absence from church on Sunday. Conflicting and unconfirmed newspaper reports were based on leaks by people with contacts in the White House. A Washington paper reported on Thursday, April 1, that Harrison's health was decidedly better. In fact, Harrison's condition had seriously weakened, and Cabinet members and family were summoned to the White House\u2014his wife Anna had remained in Ohio due to her own illness. According to papers in Washington on Friday, Harrison had rallied, despite a \"Baltimore Sun\" report that his condition was of a \"more dangerous character\". A reporter for the \"New York Commercial\" indicated that \"the country's people were deeply distressed and many of them in tears.\"\nIn the evening of Saturday, April 3, Harrison developed severe diarrhea and became delirious, and at 8:30\u00a0p.m. he uttered his last words, to his attending doctor, assumed to be for Vice President John Tyler: \"Sir, I wish you to understand the true principles of the government. I wish them carried out. I ask nothing more.\" Harrison died at 12:30\u00a0a.m. on April 4, 1841, Palm Sunday, nine days after becoming ill and exactly one month after taking the oath of office; he was the first president to die in office. Harrison's wife Anna was still in Ohio packing for the trip to Washington when she learned of her loss. Anna never moved into the White House. Harrison's daughter-in-law, Jane Irwin Harrison, widow of Harrison's son, had served as hostess of the White House in Anna's place while Harrison was president.\nThe prevailing theory at the time was that his illness had been caused by the bad weather at his inauguration three weeks earlier. Jane McHugh and Philip A. Mackowiak did an analysis in \"Clinical Infectious Diseases\" (2014), examining Miller's notes and records showing that the White House water supply was downstream of public sewage, and they concluded that he likely died of septic shock due to \"enteric fever\" (typhoid or paratyphoid fever).\nA 30-day period of mourning commenced following the president's death. The White House hosted various public ceremonies, modeled after European royal funeral practices. An invitation-only funeral service was also held on April 7 in the East Room of the White House, after which Harrison's coffin was brought to Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C., where it was placed in the Public Vault. Solomon Northup gave an account of the procession in \"Twelve Years a Slave\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The next day there was a great pageant in Washington. The roar of cannon and the tolling of bells filled the air, while many houses were shrouded with crape, and the streets were black with people. As the day advanced, the procession made its appearance, coming slowly through the Avenue, carriage after carriage, in long succession, while thousands upon thousands followed on foot\u2014all moving to the sound of melancholy music. They were bearing the dead body of Harrison to the grave\u2026. I remember distinctly how the window glass would break and rattle to the ground, after each report of the cannon they were firing in the burial ground.\nThat June, Harrison's body was transported by train and river barge to North Bend, Ohio, and he was buried on July 7 at the summit of Mt. Nebo, which is now the William Henry Harrison Tomb State Memorial.\nTyler's accession to office.\nOn April 5, Fletcher Webster, the son of Secretary of State Daniel Webster, notified Tyler that Harrison had died in office. Tyler had been visiting family in Williamsburg and returned to Washington on the morning of April 6. That same day, Tyler was sworn into office in front of Harrison's cabinet, officially beginning his presidency. On April 9, Tyler gave a brief inaugural address. In his address to the nation, Tyler did not give any personal consolation to Harrison's widow Anna or family members. Tyler did compliment Harrison by saying Harrison had been elected for a \"great work\" of purging the federal government of corruption. Tyler and his family moved into the White House one week after Harrison's funeral, before Harrison's 30-day mourning period was over. The White House state rooms were still hung with black mourning cr\u00eape.\nImpact of Harrison's death.\nHarrison's death called attention to an ambiguity in , of the Constitution regarding succession to the presidency. The Constitution specifically provided for the vice president to take over the \"Powers and Duties of the said Office\" in the event of a president's removal, death, resignation, or inability, but it was unclear whether the vice president formally became president of the United States, or simply temporarily assumed the powers and duties of that office, in a case of succession.\nHarrison's cabinet insisted that Tyler was \"Vice President acting as President\". Tyler was resolute in his claim to the title of President and in his determination to exercise the full powers of the presidency. The cabinet consulted with Chief Justice Roger Taney and decided that, if Tyler took the presidential oath of office, he would assume the office of president. Tyler obliged and was sworn into office on April 6, 1841. Congress convened, and on May 31, 1841, after a short period of debate in both houses, passed a joint resolution, which confirmed Tyler as president for the remainder of Harrison's term. This succession became the Tyler Precedent, which was followed on seven occasions when an incumbent president died prior to being written into the Constitution in 1967 through Section One of the Twenty-fifth Amendment.\nLegacy.\nHistorical reputation.\nAmong Harrison's most enduring legacies is the series of treaties that he negotiated and signed with Indian leaders during his tenure as the Indiana territorial governor. As part of the treaty negotiations, the tribes ceded large tracts of land in the west which provided additional acreage for purchase and settlement by the nation.\nHarrison's long-term impact on American politics includes his campaigning methods, which laid the foundation for modern presidential campaign tactics. Harrison died nearly penniless, and Congress voted his wife Anna a presidential widow's pension of $25,000, one year of Harrison's salary (equivalent to about $ in 2024). She also received the right to mail letters free of charge.\nFreehling refers to Harrison as \"the most dominant figure in the evolution of the Northwest territories into the Upper Midwest today\". Harrison, age 68 at the time of his inauguration, was the oldest person to assume the U.S. presidency, a distinction he held until 1981, when Ronald Reagan was inaugurated at age 69.\nHarrison's son John Scott Harrison represented Ohio in the House of Representatives between 1853 and 1857. Harrison's grandson Benjamin Harrison of Indiana served as the 23rd president from 1889 to 1893, making William and Benjamin Harrison the only grandparent-grandchild pair of presidents.\nHonors and tributes.\nVarious monuments and memorial statues have been erected in tribute to Harrison. There are public statues of him in downtown Indianapolis, Cincinnati's Piatt Park, the Tippecanoe County Courthouse, Harrison County, Indiana, and Owen County, Indiana. Numerous counties and towns also bear his name.\nThe village of North Bend, Ohio, honors Harrison every year with a parade to celebrate his birthday. The Gen. William Henry Harrison Headquarters in Franklinton, Ohio, commemorates him. The house was his military headquarters from 1813 to 1814. On February 19, 2009, the United States Mint released the ninth coin in the Presidential $1 Coin Program, bearing Harrison's likeness.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33300", "revid": "49487920", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33300", "title": "Waterloo", "text": "Waterloo most commonly refers to:\nWaterloo may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33302", "revid": "45266726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33302", "title": "Lord Kelvin", "text": "British physicist, engineer and mathematician (1824\u20131907)\nWilliam Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin (26 June 1824\u00a0\u2013 17 December 1907), was a British mathematician, mathematical physicist and engineer. Born in Belfast, he was for 53 years the professor of Natural Philosophy at the University of Glasgow, where he undertook significant research on the mathematical analysis of electricity, was instrumental in the formulation of the first and second laws of thermodynamics, and contributed significantly to unifying physics, which was then in its infancy of development as an emerging academic discipline. He received the Royal Society's Copley Medal in 1883 and served as its president from 1890 to 1895. In 1892 he became the first scientist to be elevated to the House of Lords.\nAbsolute temperatures are stated in units of kelvin in Lord Kelvin's honour. While the existence of a coldest possible temperature, absolute zero, was known before his work, Kelvin determined its correct value as approximately \u2212273.15 degrees Celsius or \u2212459.67 degrees Fahrenheit. The Joule\u2013Thomson effect is also named in his honour.\nKelvin worked closely with the mathematics professor Hugh Blackburn in his work. He also had a career as an electrical telegraph engineer and inventor which propelled him into the public eye and earned him wealth, fame and honours. For his work on the transatlantic telegraph project, he was knighted in 1866 by Queen Victoria, becoming Sir William Thomson. He had extensive maritime interests and worked on the mariner's compass, which previously had limited reliability.\nKelvin was ennobled in 1892 in recognition of his achievements in thermodynamics, and of his opposition to Irish Home Rule, becoming Baron Kelvin, of Largs in the County of Ayr. The title refers to the River Kelvin, which flows near his laboratory at the University of Glasgow's Gilmorehill home at Hillhead. Despite offers of elevated posts from several world-renowned universities, Kelvin refused to leave Glasgow, remaining until his retirement from that post in 1899. Active in industrial research and development, he was recruited around 1899 by George Eastman to serve as vice-chairman of the board of the British company Kodak Limited, affiliated with Eastman Kodak. In 1904 he became Chancellor of the University of Glasgow.\nKelvin resided in Netherhall, a mansion in Largs, which he built in the 1870s and where he died in 1907. The Hunterian Museum at the University of Glasgow has a permanent exhibition on the work of Kelvin, which includes many of his original papers, instruments, and other artefacts, including his smoking-pipe.\nEarly life and work.\nFamily.\nWilliam Thomson was born on 26 June 1824 in Belfast. His father, James Thomson, was a teacher of mathematics and engineering at the Royal Belfast Academical Institution and the son of an Ulster Scots farmer. James Thomson married Margaret Gardner in 1817 and, of their children, four boys and two girls survived infancy. Margaret Thomson died in 1830 when William was six years old.\nWilliam and his elder brother James were tutored at home by their father while the younger boys were tutored by their elder sisters. James was intended to benefit from the major share of his father's encouragement, affection and financial support and was prepared for a career in engineering.\nIn 1832 his father was appointed professor of mathematics at the University of Glasgow, and the family moved there in October 1833. The Thomson children were introduced to a broader cosmopolitan experience than their father's rural upbringing, spending mid-1839 in London, and the boys were tutored in French in Paris. Much of Thomson's life during the mid-1840s was spent in Germany and the Netherlands. Language study was given a high priority.\nHis sister, Anna Thomson, was the mother of the physicist James Thomson Bottomley.\nYouth.\nThomson attended the Royal Belfast Academical Institution, where his father was a professor of Mathematics in the university department. In 1834, aged 10, he began studying at the University of Glasgow, not out of any precociousness; the university provided many of the facilities of an elementary school for able pupils, and this was a typical starting age. In school, he showed a keen interest in the classics along with his natural interest in the sciences. At age 12 he won a prize for translating Lucian of Samosata's \"Dialogues of the Gods\" from Ancient Greek to English.\nIn the academic year 1839/1840, Thomson won the class prize in astronomy for his \"Essay on the figure of the Earth\" which showed an early facility for mathematical analysis and creativity. His physics tutor at this time was his namesake, David Thomson. Throughout his life, he would work on the problems raised in the essay as a coping strategy during times of personal stress. On the title page of this essay Thomson wrote the following lines from Alexander Pope's \"An Essay on Man\". These lines inspired Thomson to understand the natural world using the power and method of science:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThomson became intrigued with Joseph Fourier's \"Th\u00e9orie analytique de la chaleur\" (\"The Analytical Theory of Heat\"). He committed himself to study the \"continental\" mathematics resisted by a British establishment still working in the shadow of Sir Isaac Newton. Unsurprisingly, Fourier's work had been attacked by domestic mathematicians, Philip Kelland authoring a critical book. The book motivated Thomson to write his first published scientific paper under the pseudonym \"P.Q.R.\", defending Fourier, which was submitted to \"The Cambridge Mathematical Journal\" by his father. A second P.Q.R. paper followed almost immediately.\nWhile on holiday with his family in Lamlash in 1841, he wrote a third, more substantial P.Q.R. paper \"On the uniform motion of heat in homogeneous solid bodies, and its connection with the mathematical theory of electricity\". In the paper he made remarkable connections between the mathematical theories of thermal conduction and electrostatics, an analogy that James Clerk Maxwell was ultimately to describe as one of the most valuable science-forming ideas\".\"\nCambridge.\nWilliam's father was able to make a generous provision for his favourite son's education and, in 1841, installed him, with extensive letters of introduction and ample accommodation, at Peterhouse, Cambridge. While at Cambridge, Thomson was active in sports, athletics and sculling, winning the Colquhoun Sculls in 1843. He took a lively interest in the classics, music, and literature; but the real love of his intellectual life was the pursuit of science. The study of mathematics, physics, and in particular, of electricity, had captivated his imagination. In 1845 Thomson graduated as second wrangler. He also won the first Smith's Prize, which, unlike the tripos, is a test of original research. Robert Leslie Ellis, one of the examiners, is said to have declared to another examiner \"You and I are just about fit to mend his pens.\"\nIn 1845 he gave the first mathematical development of Michael Faraday's idea that electric induction takes place through an intervening medium, or \"dielectric\", and not by some incomprehensible \"action at a distance\". He also devised the mathematical technique of electrical images, which became a powerful agent in solving problems of electrostatics, the science which deals with the forces between electrically charged bodies at rest. It was partly in response to his encouragement that Faraday undertook the research in September 1845 that led to the discovery of the Faraday effect, which established that light and magnetic (and thus electric) phenomena were related.\nHe was elected a fellow of St Peter's (as Peterhouse was often called at the time) in June 1845. On gaining the fellowship, he spent some time in the laboratory of the celebrated Henri Victor Regnault, at Paris; but in 1846 he was appointed to the chair of natural philosophy at the University of Glasgow. At age 22 he found himself wearing the gown of a professor in one of the oldest universities in the country and lecturing to the class of which he was a first year student a few years before.\nThermodynamics.\nBy 1847 Thomson had already gained a reputation as a precocious and maverick scientist when he attended the British Association for the Advancement of Science annual meeting in Oxford. At that meeting, he heard James Prescott Joule making yet another of his, so far, ineffective attempts to discredit the caloric theory of heat and the theory of the heat engine built upon it by Sadi Carnot and \u00c9mile Clapeyron. Joule argued for the mutual convertibility of heat and mechanical work and for their mechanical equivalence.\nThomson was intrigued but sceptical. Though he felt that Joule's results demanded theoretical explanation, he retreated into an even deeper commitment to the Carnot\u2013Clapeyron school. He predicted that the melting point of ice must fall with pressure, otherwise its expansion on freezing could be exploited in a \"perpetuum mobile\". Experimental confirmation in his laboratory did much to bolster his beliefs.\nIn 1848, he extended the Carnot\u2013Clapeyron theory further through his dissatisfaction that the gas thermometer provided only an operational definition of temperature. He proposed an \"absolute temperature scale\" in which \"a unit of heat descending from a body A at the temperature \"T\"\u00b0 of this scale, to a body B at the temperature (\"T\"\u22121)\u00b0, would give out the same mechanical effect \"[work]\", whatever be the number \"T\".\" Such a scale would be \"quite independent of the physical properties of any specific substance.\" By employing such a \"waterfall\", Thomson postulated that a point would be reached at which no further heat (caloric) could be transferred, the point of \"absolute zero\" about which Guillaume Amontons had speculated in 1702. \"Reflections on the Motive Power of Heat\", published by Carnot in French in 1824, the year of Lord Kelvin's birth, used \u2212267 as an estimate of the absolute zero temperature. Thomson used data published by Regnault to calibrate his scale against established measurements.\nIn his publication, Thomson wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... The conversion of heat (or \"caloric\") into mechanical effect is probably impossible, certainly undiscovered\u2014But a footnote signalled his first doubts about the caloric theory, referring to Joule's \"very remarkable discoveries\". Surprisingly, Thomson did not send Joule a copy of his paper, but when Joule eventually read it he wrote to Thomson on 6 October, claiming that his studies had demonstrated conversion of heat into work but that he was planning further experiments. Thomson replied on 27 October, revealing that he was planning his own experiments and hoping for a reconciliation of their two sides.\nThomson returned to critique Carnot's original publication and read his analysis to the Royal Society of Edinburgh in January 1849, still convinced that the theory was fundamentally sound. However, though Thomson conducted no new experiments, over the next two years he became increasingly dissatisfied with Carnot's theory and convinced of Joule's. In February 1851 he sat down to articulate his new thinking. He was uncertain of how to frame his theory, and the paper went through several drafts before he settled on an attempt to reconcile Carnot and Joule. During his rewriting, he seems to have considered ideas that would subsequently give rise to the second law of thermodynamics. In Carnot's theory, lost heat was \"absolutely lost,\" but Thomson contended that it was \"\"lost to man\" irrecoverably; but not lost in the material world\". Moreover, his theological beliefs led Thomson to extrapolate the second law to the cosmos, originating the idea of universal heat death.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I believe the tendency in the material world is for motion to become diffused, and that as a whole the reverse of concentration is gradually going on \u2013 I believe that no physical action can ever restore the heat emitted from the Sun, and that this source is not inexhaustible; also that the motions of the Earth and other planets are losing \"vis viva\" which is converted into heat; and that although some \"vis viva\" may be restored for instance to the earth by heat received from the sun, or by other means, that the loss cannot be \"precisely\" compensated and I think it probable that it is under-compensated.\nCompensation would require \"a creative act or an act possessing similar power\", resulting in a \"rejuvenating universe\" (as Thomson had previously compared universal heat death to a clock running slower and slower, although he was unsure whether it would eventually reach thermodynamic equilibrium and \"stop for ever\"). Thomson also formulated the heat death paradox (Kelvin's paradox) in 1862, which uses the second law of thermodynamics to disprove the possibility of an infinitely old universe; this paradox was later extended by William Rankine.\nIn final publication, Thomson retreated from a radical departure and declared \"the whole theory of the motive power of heat is founded on ... two ... propositions, due respectively to Joule, and to Carnot and Clausius.\" Thomson went on to state a form of the second law:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is impossible, by means of inanimate material agency, to derive mechanical effect from any portion of matter by cooling it below the temperature of the coldest of the surrounding objects.\nIn the paper, Thomson supports the theory that heat was a form of motion but admits that he had been influenced only by the thought of Sir Humphry Davy and the experiments of Joule and Julius Robert von Mayer, maintaining that experimental demonstration of the conversion of heat into work was still outstanding. As soon as Joule read the paper he wrote to Thomson with his comments and questions. Thus began a fruitful, though largely epistolary, collaboration between the two men, Joule conducting experiments, Thomson analysing the results and suggesting further experiments. The collaboration lasted from 1852 to 1856, its discoveries including the Joule\u2013Thomson effect, sometimes called the Kelvin\u2013Joule effect, and the published results did much to bring about general acceptance of Joule's work and the kinetic theory.\nThomson published more than 650 scientific papers and applied for 70 patents (not all were issued). Regarding science, Thomson wrote the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In physical science a first essential step in the direction of learning any subject is to find principles of numerical reckoning and practicable methods for measuring some quality connected with it. I often say that when you can measure what you are speaking about and express it in numbers you know something about it; but when you cannot measure it, when you cannot express it in numbers, your knowledge is of a meagre and unsatisfactory kind: it may be the beginning of knowledge, but you have scarcely, in your thoughts, advanced to the stage of \"science\", whatever the matter may be.\nTransatlantic cable.\nCalculations on data rate.\nThough eminent in the academic field, Thomson was obscure to the general public. In September 1852, he married childhood sweetheart Margaret Crum, daughter of Walter Crum; but her health broke down on their honeymoon, and over the next 17 years Thomson was distracted by her suffering. On 16 October 1854 George Gabriel Stokes wrote to Thomson to try to re-interest him in work by asking his opinion on some experiments of Faraday on the proposed transatlantic telegraph cable.\nFaraday had demonstrated how the construction of a cable would limit the rate at which messages could be sent - in modern terms, the bandwidth. Thomson jumped at the problem and published his response that month. He expressed his results in terms of the data rate that could be achieved and the economic consequences in terms of the potential revenue of the transatlantic undertaking. In a further 1855 analysis, Thomson stressed the impact that the design of the cable would have on its profitability.\nThomson contended that the signalling speed through a given cable was inversely proportional to the square of the length of the cable. Thomson's results were disputed at a meeting of the British Association in 1856 by Wildman Whitehouse, the electrician of the Atlantic Telegraph Company. Whitehouse had possibly misinterpreted the results of his own experiments but was doubtless feeling financial pressure as plans for the cable were already well under way. He believed that Thomson's calculations implied that the cable must be \"abandoned as being practically and commercially impossible\".\nThomson attacked Whitehouse's contention in a letter to the popular \"Athenaeum\" magazine, pitching himself into the public eye. Thomson recommended a larger conductor with a larger cross section of insulation. He thought Whitehouse no fool and suspected that he might have the practical skill to make the existing design work. Thomson's work had attracted the attention of the project's undertakers. In December 1856, he was elected to the board of directors of the Atlantic Telegraph Company.\nScientist to engineer.\nThomson became scientific adviser to a team with Whitehouse as chief electrician and Sir Charles Tilston Bright as chief engineer, but Whitehouse had his way with the specification, supported by Faraday and Samuel Morse.\nThomson sailed on board the cable-laying ship in August 1857, with Whitehouse confined to land owing to illness, but the voyage ended after when the cable parted. Thomson contributed to the effort by publishing in the \"Engineer\" the whole theory of the stresses involved in the laying of a submarine communications cable, showing when the line is running out of the ship, at a constant speed in a uniform depth of water, it sinks in a slant or straight incline from the point where it enters the water to that where it touches the bottom.\nThomson developed a complete system for operating a submarine telegraph that was capable of sending a character every 3.5\u00a0seconds. He patented the key elements of his system, the mirror galvanometer and the siphon recorder, in 1858. Whitehouse still felt able to ignore Thomson's many suggestions and proposals. It was not until Thomson convinced the board that using purer copper for replacing the lost section of cable would improve data capacity, that he first made a difference to the execution of the project.\nThe board insisted that Thomson join the 1858 cable-laying expedition, without any financial compensation, and take an active part in the project. In return, Thomson secured a trial for his mirror galvanometer, which the board had been unenthusiastic about, alongside Whitehouse's equipment. Thomson found the access he was given unsatisfactory, and the \"Agamemnon\" had to return home following a disastrous storm in June 1858. In London, the board was about to abandon the project and mitigate their losses by selling the cable. Thomson, Cyrus W. Field and Curtis Lampson argued for another attempt and prevailed, Thomson insisting that the technical problems were tractable. Though employed in an advisory capacity, Thomson had, during the voyages, developed a real engineer's instincts and skill at practical problem-solving under pressure, often taking the lead in dealing with emergencies and being unafraid to assist in manual work. A cable was completed on 5 August.\nDisaster and triumph.\nThomson's fears were realised when Whitehouse's apparatus proved insufficiently sensitive and had to be replaced by Thomson's mirror galvanometer. Whitehouse continued to maintain that it was his equipment that was providing the service and started to engage in desperate measures to remedy some of the problems. He fatally damaged the cable by applying 2,000 volts. When the cable failed completely Whitehouse was dismissed, though Thomson objected and was reprimanded by the board for his interference. Thomson subsequently regretted that he had acquiesced too readily to many of Whitehouse's proposals and had not challenged him with sufficient vigour.\nA joint committee of inquiry was established by the Board of Trade and the Atlantic Telegraph Company. Most of the blame for the cable's failure was found to rest with Whitehouse. The committee found that, though underwater cables were notorious in their lack of reliability, most of the problems arose from known and avoidable causes. Thomson was appointed one of a five-member committee to recommend a specification for a new cable. The committee reported in October 1863.\nIn July 1865, Thomson sailed on the cable-laying expedition of the , but the voyage was dogged by technical problems. The cable was lost after had been laid, and the project was abandoned. A further attempt in 1866 laid a new cable in two weeks, and then recovered and completed the 1865 cable. The enterprise was feted as a triumph by the public, and Thomson enjoyed a large share of the adulation. Thomson, along with the other principals of the project, was knighted on 10 November 1866. To exploit his inventions for signalling on long submarine cables, Thomson entered into a partnership with C. F. Varley and Fleeming Jenkin. In conjunction with the latter, he also devised an automatic curb sender, a kind of telegraph key for sending messages on a cable.\nLater expeditions.\nThomson took part in the laying of the French Atlantic submarine communications cable of 1869, and with Jenkin was engineer of the Western and Brazilian and Platino-Brazilian cables, assisted by the vacation student Alfred Ewing. He was present at the laying of the Par\u00e1 to Pernambuco section of the Brazilian coast cables in 1873.\nThomson's wife, Margaret, died on 17 June 1870, and he resolved to make changes in his life. Already addicted to seafaring, in September he purchased a 126-ton schooner, the \"Lalla Rookh\" and used it as a base for entertaining friends and scientific colleagues. His maritime interests continued in 1871 when he was appointed to the Board of Enquiry into the sinking of .\nIn June 1873 Thomson and Jenkin were on board the \"Hooper\", bound for Lisbon with of cable when the cable developed a fault. An unscheduled 16-day stop-over in Madeira followed, and Thomson became good friends with Charles R. Blandy and his three daughters. On 2 May 1874 he set sail for Madeira on the \"Lalla Rookh\". As he approached the harbour, he signalled to the Blandy residence \"Will you marry me?\" and Fanny (Blandy's daughter Frances Anna Blandy) signalled back \"Yes\". Thomson married Fanny, 13 years his junior, on 24 June 1874.\nOther contributions.\n\"Treatise on Natural Philosophy\".\nOver the period 1855 to 1867, Thomson collaborated with Peter Guthrie Tait on a textbook that founded the study of mechanics first on the mathematics of kinematics, the description of motion without regard to force. The text developed dynamics in various areas but with constant attention to energy as a unifying principle. A second edition appeared in 1879, expanded to two separately bound parts. The textbook set a standard for early education in mathematical physics.\nAtmospheric electricity.\nThomson made significant contributions to atmospheric electricity for the relatively short time for which he worked on the subject, around 1859. He developed several instruments for measuring the atmospheric electric field, using some of the electrometers he had initially developed for telegraph work, which he tested at Glasgow and whilst on holiday on Arran. His measurements on Arran were sufficiently rigorous and well-calibrated that they could be used to deduce air pollution from the Glasgow area, through its effects on the atmospheric electric field. Thomson's water dropper electrometer was used for measuring the atmospheric electric field at Kew Observatory and Eskdalemuir Observatory for many years, and one was still in use operationally at the Kakioka Observatory in Japan until early 2021. Thomson may have unwittingly observed atmospheric electrical effects caused by the Carrington event (a significant geomagnetic storm) in early September 1859.\nVortex theory of the atom.\nBetween 1870 and 1890 the vortex atom theory, which purported that an atom was a vortex in the aether, was popular among British physicists and mathematicians. Thomson pioneered the theory, which was distinct from the 17th century vortex theory of Ren\u00e9 Descartes in that Thomson was thinking in terms of a unitary continuum theory, whereas Descartes was thinking in terms of three different types of matter, each relating respectively to emission, transmission, and reflection of light. About 60 scientific papers were written by approximately 25 scientists. Following the lead of Thomson and Tait, the branch of topology called knot theory was developed. Thomson's initiative in this complex study that continues to inspire new mathematics has led to persistence of the topic in history of science.\nMarine.\nThomson was an enthusiastic yachtsman, his interest in all things relating to the sea perhaps arising from, or fostered by, his experiences on the \"Agamemnon\" and the \"Great Eastern\". Thomson introduced a new method of deep-sea depth sounding, in which a steel piano wire replaces the ordinary hand line. The wire glides so easily to the bottom that \"flying soundings\" can be taken while the ship is at full speed. Thomson added a pressure gauge to register the depth of the sinker. About the same time he revived the Sumner method of finding a ship's position, and calculated a set of tables for its ready application.\nDuring the 1880s, Thomson worked to perfect the adjustable compass to correct errors arising from magnetic deviation owing to the increased use of iron in naval architecture. Thomson's design was a great improvement on the older instruments, being steadier and less hampered by friction. The deviation caused by the ship's magnetism was corrected by movable iron masses at the binnacle. Thomson's innovations involved much detailed work to develop principles identified by George Biddell Airy and others, but contributed little in terms of novel physical thinking. Thomson's energetic lobbying and networking proved effective in gaining acceptance of his instrument by The Admiralty.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; Scientific biographers of Thomson, if they have paid any attention at all to his compass innovations, have generally taken the matter to be a sorry saga of dim-witted naval administrators resisting marvellous innovations from a superlative scientific mind. Writers sympathetic to the Navy, on the other hand, portray Thomson as a man of undoubted talent and enthusiasm, with some genuine knowledge of the sea, who managed to parlay a handful of modest ideas in compass design into a commercial monopoly for his own manufacturing concern, using his reputation as a bludgeon in the law courts to beat down even small claims of originality from others, and persuading the Admiralty and the law to overlook both the deficiencies of his own design and the virtues of his competitors'.\nThe truth, inevitably, seems to lie somewhere between the two extremes.\nCharles Babbage had been among the first to suggest that a lighthouse might be made to signal a distinctive number by occultations of its light, but Thomson pointed out the merits of the Morse code for the purpose, and urged that the signals should consist of short and long flashes of the light to represent the dots and dashes.\nElectrical standards.\nThomson did more than any other electrician up to his time in introducing accurate methods and apparati for measuring electricity. As early as 1845 he pointed out that the experimental results of William Snow Harris were in accordance with the laws of Charles-Augustin de Coulomb. In the \"Memoirs of the Roman Academy of Sciences\" for 1857 he published a description of his divided ring electrometer, based on the electroscope of Johann Gottlieb Friedrich von Bohnenberger. He introduced a chain or series of effective instruments, including the quadrant electrometer, which cover the entire field of electrostatic measurement. He invented the current balance, also known as the \"Kelvin balance\" or \"Ampere balance\" (\"SiC\"), for the precise specification of the ampere, the standard unit of electric current. From around 1880 he was aided by the electrical engineer Magnus Maclean FRSE in his electrical experiments.\nIn 1893, Thomson headed an international commission to decide on the design of the Niagara Falls power station. Despite his belief in the superiority of direct current electric power transmission, he endorsed Westinghouse's alternating current system which had been demonstrated at the Chicago World's Fair of that year. Even after Niagara Falls, Thomson still held to his belief that direct current was the superior system.\nAcknowledging his contribution to electrical standardisation, the International Electrotechnical Commission elected Thomson as its first president at its preliminary meeting, held in London on 26\u201327 June 1906. \"On the proposal of the President [Mr Alexander Siemens, Great Britain], secounded [sic] by Mr Mailloux [US Institute of Electrical Engineers] the Right Honorable Lord Kelvin, G.C.V.O., O.M., was unanimously elected first President of the Commission\", minutes of the Preliminary Meeting Report read.\nAge of Earth.\nKelvin made an early physics-based estimation of the age of Earth. Given his youthful work on the figure of Earth and his interest in heat conduction, it is no surprise that he chose to investigate Earth's cooling and to make historical inferences of Earth's age from his calculations. Thomson was a creationist in a broad sense, but he was not a 'flood geologist' (a view that had by the 1840s.) He contended that the laws of thermodynamics operated from the birth of the universe and envisaged a dynamic process that saw the organisation and evolution of the Solar System and other structures, followed by a gradual \"heat death\". He developed the view that Earth had once been too hot to support life and contrasted this view with that of uniformitarianism, that conditions had remained constant since the indefinite past. He contended that \"This earth, certainly a moderate number of millions of years ago, was a red-hot globe ... .\"\nAfter the publication of Charles Darwin's \"On the Origin of Species\" in 1859, Thomson saw evidence of the relatively short habitable age of Earth as tending to contradict Darwin's gradualist explanation of slow natural selection bringing about biological diversity. Thomson's own views favoured a version of theistic evolution sped up by divine guidance. His calculations showed that the Sun could not have possibly existed long enough to allow the slow incremental development by evolution\u2014unless it was heated by an energy source beyond the knowledge of Victorian era science. He was soon drawn into public disagreement with geologists and with Darwin's supporters John Tyndall and Thomas Henry Huxley. In his response to Huxley's address to the Geological Society of London (1868) he presented his address \"Of Geological Dynamics\" (1869) which, among his other writings, challenged the geologists' assertion that Earth must be vastly old, perhaps billions of years in age.\nThomson's initial 1864 estimate of Earth's age was from 20 to 400 million years old. These wide limits were due to his uncertainty about the melting temperature of rock, to which he equated Earth's interior temperature, as well as the uncertainty in thermal conductivities and specific heats of rocks. Over the years he refined his arguments and reduced the upper bound by a factor of ten, and in 1897 Thomson, now Lord Kelvin, ultimately settled on an estimate that Earth was 20\u201340\u00a0million years old. In a letter published in Scientific American Supplement 1895 Kelvin criticised geologists' estimates of the age of rocks and the age of Earth, including the views published by Darwin, as \"vaguely vast age\".\nHis exploration of this estimate can be found in his 1897 address to the Victoria Institute, given at the request of the institute's president George Stokes, as recorded in that institute's journal \"Transactions\". Although his former assistant John Perry published a paper in 1895 challenging Kelvin's assumption of low thermal conductivity inside Earth, and thus showing a much greater age, this had little immediate impact. The discovery in 1903 that radioactive decay releases heat led to Kelvin's estimate being challenged, and Ernest Rutherford famously made the argument in a 1904 lecture attended by Kelvin that this provided the unknown energy source Kelvin had suggested, but the estimate was not overturned until the development in 1907 of radiometric dating of rocks.\nThe discovery of radioactivity largely invalidated Kelvin's estimate of the age of Earth. Although he eventually paid off a gentleman's bet with Strutt on the importance of radioactivity in Earth's geology, he never publicly acknowledged this because he thought he had a much stronger argument restricting the age of the Sun to no more than 20 million years. Without sunlight, there could be no explanation for the sediment record on Earth's surface. At the time, the only known source for solar energy was gravitational collapse. It was only when thermonuclear fusion was recognised in the 1930s that Kelvin's age paradox was truly resolved. However, modern cosmology recognises the Kelvin period in the early life of a star, during which it shines from gravitational energy (correctly calculated by Kelvin) before fusion and the main sequence begins.\nLater life and death.\nIn the winter of 1860\u201361, Kelvin (aged 37) slipped on the ice while curling near his home at Netherhall and fractured his leg, causing him to miss the 1861 Manchester meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science and to limp thereafter. He remained something of a celebrity on both sides of the Atlantic until his death.\nThomson remained a devout believer in Christianity throughout his life; attendance at chapel was part of his daily routine. He saw his Christian faith as supporting and informing his scientific work, as is evident from his address to the annual meeting of the Christian Evidence Society on 23 May 1889.\nIn the 1902 Coronation Honours list published on 26 June 1902 (the original day of the coronation of Edward VII and Alexandra), Kelvin was appointed a Privy Councillor and one of the first members of the new Order of Merit (OM). He received the order from the King on 8 August 1902 and was sworn a member of the council at Buckingham Palace on 11 August 1902. In his later years he often travelled to his townhouse at 15 Eaton Place, off Eaton Square in Belgravia, London.\nIn November 1907 he caught a chill and his condition deteriorated until he died at his Scottish country seat, Netherhall, in Largs on 17 December. At the request of Westminster Abbey, the undertakers Wylie &amp; Lochhead prepared an oak coffin lined with lead. In the dark of the winter evening the cortege set off from Netherhall for Largs railway station, a distance of about a mile. Large crowds witnessed the passing of the cortege, and shopkeepers closed their premises and dimmed their lights. The coffin was placed in a special Midland and Glasgow and South Western Railway van. The train set off at 8:30 pm for Kilmarnock, where the van was attached to the overnight express to St Pancras railway station in London.\nKelvin's funeral was on 23 December 1907. The Abbey was crowded, including representatives from the University of Glasgow and the University of Cambridge, along with representatives from France, Italy, Germany, Austria-Hungary, Russia, the United States, Canada, Australia, Japan and Monaco. Kelvin's grave is in the nave, near the choir screen, and close to the graves of Isaac Newton, John Herschel, and Charles Darwin. Darwin's son, Sir George Darwin, was one of the pall-bearers.\nThe University of Glasgow held a memorial service for Kelvin in the Bute Hall. Kelvin had been a member of the Scottish Episcopal Church, attached to St Columba's Episcopal Church in Largs, and when in Glasgow to St Mary's Episcopal Church (now, St Mary's Cathedral, Glasgow). At the same time as the funeral in Westminster Abbey, a service was held in St Columba's Episcopal Church, Largs, attended by a large congregation including burgh dignitaries.\nLord Kelvin is memorialised on the Thomson family grave in Glasgow Necropolis. The family grave has a second modern memorial, erected by the Royal Philosophical Society of Glasgow, a society of which he was president in the periods 1856\u201358 and 1874\u201377.\nLegacy.\nLimits of classical physics.\nIn 1884 Kelvin led a master class on \"Molecular Dynamics and the Wave Theory of Light\" at Johns Hopkins University. Kelvin referred to the acoustic wave equation describing sound as waves of pressure in air and attempted to describe also an electromagnetic wave equation, presuming a luminiferous aether susceptible to vibration. The study group included Albert A. Michelson and Edward W. Morley who subsequently performed the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment, which found no luminiferous aether. Kelvin did not provide a text, but A. S. Hathaway took notes and duplicated them with a papyrograph. As the subject matter was under active development, Kelvin amended that text and in 1904 it was typeset and published. Kelvin's attempts to provide mechanical models ultimately failed in the electromagnetic regime. Starting from his lecture in 1884, he was the first scientist to formulate the hypothetical concept of dark matter; he then attempted to define and locate some \"dark bodies\" in the Milky Way.\nHe was sceptical about Maxwell's prediction of radiation pressure, but admitted that it did exist after seeing Pyotr Lebedev's experimental proof of radiation pressure.\nOn 27 April 1900 he gave a widely reported lecture titled \"Nineteenth-Century Clouds over the Dynamical Theory of Heat and Light\" to the Royal Institution. The two \"dark clouds\" he was alluding to were confusion surrounding how matter moves through the aether (including the puzzling results of the Michelson\u2013Morley experiment) and indications that the equipartition theorem in statistical mechanics might break down. Two major physical theories were developed during the 20th century starting from these issues: for the former, the theory of relativity; for the second, quantum mechanics. In 1905 Albert Einstein published the so-called \"annus mirabilis\" papers, one of which explained the photoelectric effect based on Max Planck's discovery of energy quanta which was the foundation of quantum mechanics, another of which described special relativity, and the last of which explained Brownian motion in terms of statistical mechanics, providing a strong argument for the existence of atoms.\nPronouncements later proven to be false.\nLike many scientists, Thomson made some mistakes in predicting the future of technology.\nHis biographer, Silvanus P. Thompson, writes that, \"When R\u00f6ntgen's discovery of the X-rays was announced at the end of 1895, Lord Kelvin was entirely sceptical, and regarded the announcement as a hoax. The papers had been full of the wonders of R\u00f6ntgen's rays, about which Lord Kelvin was intensely sceptical until R\u00f6ntgen himself sent him a copy of his Memoir\". On 17 January 1896, having read the paper and seen the photographs, he wrote R\u00f6ntgen a letter saying that, \"I need not tell you that when I read the paper I was very much astonished and delighted. I can say no more now than to congratulate you warmly on the great discovery you have made.\" Kelvin had his own hand X-rayed in May 1896.\nHis forecast for practical aviation (i.e., heavier-than-air aircraft) was negative. In 1896, he refused an invitation to join the Aeronautical Society, writing, \"I have not the smallest molecule of faith in aerial navigation other than ballooning or of expectation of good results from any of the trials we hear of.\" In a 1902 newspaper interview, he predicted that \"No balloon and no aeroplane will ever be practically successful.\"\nA statement falsely attributed to Kelvin is: \"There is nothing new to be discovered in physics now. All that remains is more and more precise measurement.\" This has been widely misattributed to Kelvin since the 1980s, either without citation or stating that it was made in an address to the British Association for the Advancement of Science (1900). There is no evidence that Kelvin said this, and the quote is instead a paraphrase of Albert A. Michelson, who in 1894 stated: \"... it seems probable that most of the grand underlying principles have been firmly established ... An eminent physicist remarked that the future truths of physical science are to be looked for in the sixth place of decimals.\" Similar statements were given earlier by others, such as Philipp von Jolly. The attribution to Kelvin in 1900 is presumably a confusion with his \"Two clouds\" lecture and which on the contrary pointed out areas that would subsequently see revolutions.\nIn 1898 Kelvin predicted that only 400 years of oxygen supply remained on the planet, due to the rate of burning combustibles.\nEponyms.\nA variety of physical phenomena and concepts with which Thomson is associated are named \"Kelvin\", including:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMount Kelvin in New Zealand's Paparoa Range was named after him by botanist William Trownson.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCited sources.\nKelvin's works.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBiography, history of ideas and criticism.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33303", "revid": "25291008", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33303", "title": "Wankel engine", "text": "Combustion engine using an eccentric rotary design\nThe Wankel engine (, ) is a type of internal combustion engine using an eccentric rotary design to convert pressure into rotating motion. The concept was proven by German engineer Felix Wankel, followed by a commercially feasible engine designed by German engineer Hanns-Dieter Paschke. The Wankel engine's rotor is similar in shape to a Reuleaux triangle, with the sides having less curvature. The rotor spins inside a figure-eight-like epitrochoidal housing around a fixed gear. The midpoint of the rotor moves in a circle around the output shaft, rotating the shaft via a cam.\nIn its basic gasoline-fuelled form, the Wankel engine has lower thermal efficiency and higher exhaust emissions relative to the four-stroke reciprocating engine. This thermal inefficiency has restricted the Wankel engine to limited use since its introduction in the 1960s. However, many disadvantages have mainly been overcome over the succeeding decades following the development and production of road-going vehicles. The advantages of compact design, smoothness, lower weight, and fewer parts over reciprocating internal combustion engines make Wankel engines suited for applications such as chainsaws, auxiliary power units (APUs), loitering munitions, aircraft, personal watercraft, snowmobiles, motorcycles, racing cars, and automotive range extenders.\nConcept.\nThe Wankel engine is a type of rotary piston engine and exists in two primary forms, the Drehkolbenmotor (DKM, \"rotary piston engine\"), designed by Felix Wankel, and the Kreiskolbenmotor (KKM, \"circuitous piston engine\"), designed by Hanns-Dieter Paschke, of which only the latter has left the prototype stage. Thus, all production Wankel engines are of the KKM type.\nDevelopment.\nFelix Wankel designed a rotary compressor in the 1920s and received his first patent for a rotary type of engine in 1934. He realized that the triangular rotor of the rotary compressor could have intake and exhaust ports added, producing an internal combustion engine. Eventually, in 1951, Wankel began working at German firm NSU Motorenwerke to design a rotary compressor as a supercharger for NSU's motorcycle engines. Wankel conceived the design of a triangular rotor in the compressor. With the assistance of Professor Othmar Baier from Stuttgart University of Applied Sciences, the concept was defined mathematically. The supercharger he designed was used for one of NSU's two-stroke single-cylinder engines. The engine produced a power output of at 12,000rpm.\nIn 1954, NSU agreed to develop a rotary internal combustion engine with Wankel based upon his supercharger design. Since Wankel was known as a \"difficult colleague\", the development work for the DKM was carried out at Wankel's private Lindau design bureau. According to John B. Hege, Wankel received help from his friend Ernst H\u00f6ppner, who was a \"brilliant engineer\". The first working prototype, DKM 54, first ran on 1 February 1957 at NSU's Versuchsabteilung TX research and development facility. It produced . Soon after that, a second prototype of the DKM was built. It had a working chamber volume Vk of and also produced at 17,000rpm. It could even reach speeds of up to 25,000rpm. However, these engine speeds distorted the outer rotor's shape, thus proving impractical. According to Mazda engineers and historians, four units of the DKM engine were built; the design is described to have a displacement Vh of 250\u00a0cm3 (equivalent to a working chamber volume Vk of 125\u00a0cc). The fourth unit built is said to have received several design changes, and eventually produced at 17,000 rpm; it could reach speeds up to 22,000 rpm. One of the four engines built has been on static display at the Deutsches Museum Bonn.\nDue to its complicated design with a stationary center shaft, the DKM engine was deemed impractical. Wolf-Dieter Bensinger explicitly mentions that proper engine cooling cannot be achieved in a DKM engine, and argues that this is the reason why the DKM design had to be abandoned. NSU development chief engineer Walter Froede solved this problem by using Hanns-Dieter Paschke's design and converting the DKM into what would later be known as the KKM. The KKM proved to be a much more practical engine, as it has easily accessible spark plugs, a simpler cooling design, and a conventional power take-off shaft. Wankel disliked Froede's KKM engine because of its inner rotor's eccentric motion, which was not a pure circular motion as Wankel had intended. He remarked that his \"race horse\" was turned into a \"plough horse\". Wankel also complained that more stresses would be placed on the KKM's apex seals due to the eccentric motion of the rotor. NSU could not afford to finance developing both the DKM and the KKM, and eventually decided to drop the DKM in favour of the KKM since the latter seemed to be the more practical design.\nWankel obtained US patent 2,988,065 on the KKM engine on 13 June 1961. Throughout the design phase of the KKM, Froede's engineering team had to solve problems such as repeated bearing seizures, oil flow issues, and cooling issues. The first fully functioning KKM engine, the KKM 125, weighed in at only , displaced , and produced at 11,000rpm. Its first run was on 1 July 1958.\nIn 1963, NSU produced the first series-production Wankel engine for a car, the KKM 502. It was used in the NSU Spider sports car, of which about 2,000 were made. Despite its \"teething troubles\", the KKM\u00a0502 was a powerful engine with decent potential, smooth operation, and low noise emissions at high engine speeds. It was a single-rotor peripheral port engine with a displacement of , a rated power of at 6,000rpm and a brake mean effective pressure (BMEP) of .\nEvolution.\nFelix Wankel managed to overcome most of the problems that interfered with prior attempts to perfect the Wankel engine, by designing the apex seals with a tip radius equal to the amount of \"oversize\" of the rotor housing shape relative to the theoretical epitrochoid, to minimize radial apex seal motion, and cylindrical gas-loaded apex pins which strengthened the seals.\nIn the early days, unique, dedicated production machines had to be built for different housing dimensions. However, patented designs such as https://, G.\u00a0J. Watt, 1974, for a \"Wankel Engine Cylinder Generating Machine\", https://, \"Apparatus for machining and/or treatment of trochoidal surfaces\" and https://, \"Device for machining trochoidal inner walls\", and others, solved such production issues.\nWankel engines have a problem not present in reciprocating piston four-stroke engines in that intake, compression, combustion, and exhaust occur at fixed locations, causing a very uneven thermal load on the rotor housing. In contrast, four-stroke reciprocating engines perform these four strokes in one chamber, so that the extremes of the cold intake and hot exhaust are averaged out and shielded from working parts by a boundary layer. The University of Florida proposed the use of heat pipes in an air-cooled Wankel to overcome this uneven heating of the housing. Pre-heating of certain housing sections with exhaust gas improved performance and fuel economy, also reducing wear and emissions. Boundary layer shields and lubricant film act as thermal insulation, leading to a lower temperature of the film (approximately a maximum of on a water-cooled Wankel engine) and a more constant surface temperature. The temperature around the spark plug is about the same as in the combustion chamber of a reciprocating engine. With circumferential or axial flow cooling, the temperature difference remains tolerable.\nProblems arose during research in the 1950s and 1960s as engineers were faced with what they called \"chatter marks\" and \"devil's scratch\" in the inner epitrochoid surface, resulting in chipping of the chrome coating on the trochoidal surfaces. They discovered that the cause was the apex seals reaching a resonating vibration, and the problem was solved by reducing the thickness and weight of the apex seals as well as using more suitable materials. Scratches disappeared after introducing more compatible materials for seals and housing coatings. Kenichi Yamamoto experimentally lightened apex seals with holes, identifying weight as the main cause and leading Mazda to use aluminum-impregnated carbon apex seals in their early production engines. NSU used carbon antimony-impregnated apex seals against a chrome housing surface; upon developing an \"Elnisil\" coating to production maturity, it returned to a metal sealing strip for the Ro 80. Mazda continued to use a chrome surface, but applied to a steel jacket in the aluminum housing. This allowed Mazda to return to the 3mm and later even 2mm thick metal apex seals. Another early problem was the build-up of cracks in the stator surface near the plug hole, which was eliminated by installing the spark plugs in a separate conductive copper insert instead of screwing them directly into the block housing.\nToyota found that substituting glow plugs for leading-area spark plugs improved low-RPM partial-load specific fuel consumption by 7%, as well as emissions and idle performance. A later alternative solution to spark plug boss cooling was a variable coolant velocity scheme for water-cooled rotaries, which was patented by Curtiss-Wright and saw widespread use. These approaches did not require a copper insert, but did not preclude its use. Ford tested a Wankel engine with the plugs placed in the side plates instead of the housing working surface (&lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0, 1978).\nOperation and design.\nThe Wankel engine has a spinning eccentric power take-off shaft with an eccentric lobe around which the rotor revolves. The rotor's crown gear has one and a half times the number of teeth as the gear that is fixed to the housing (a 2:3 gear ratio). The rotor and housing constantly form three moving working chambers. The rotor does not make contact with its housing, so seals at the rotor's apices press against the housing's periphery to prevent pressure loss. The increase in pressure from combustion pushes against the rotor face, in turn transferring force to the eccentric part of the output shaft.\nAll practical Wankel engines are Otto cycle (i.e., four-stroke) engines, with each of the three rotor faces undergoing its own intake, compression, expansion, and exhaust cycles. The shape of the rotor between the fixed apices is to minimize the volume of the geometric combustion chamber and maximize the compression ratio, respectively. In theory, two-cycle engines are possible, but they are impractical because the intake gas and the exhaust gas cannot be properly separated. As the Diesel cycle with its compression ignition cannot be used in a practical Wankel engine, Wankel engines typically have a high-voltage spark ignition system.\nWankel engines have a much lower degree of irregularity relative to a reciprocating engines, leading to much smoother operation. This is because the Wankel engine has a lower moment of inertia and more uniform torque delivery. For example, a two-rotor Wankel engine runs more than twice as smoothly as a four-cylinder piston engine. The eccentric output shaft of a Wankel engine also lacks the stress-related contours of a reciprocating engine's crankshaft. The maximum engine speed of a Wankel engine is thus mainly limited by load on the synchronizing gears' teeth. Hardened steel gears are used for extended operation above 7,000 or 8,000rpm. In practice, automotive Wankel engines are not operated at much higher output shaft speeds than reciprocating piston engines of similar output. Wankel engines in auto racing are operated at speeds up to 10,000rpm, but so are four-stroke reciprocating piston engines with relatively small displacement per cylinder. In aircraft, they are used conservatively, reaching 6500 or 7500rpm.\nTorque delivery.\nWankel engines are capable of high-speed operation, meaning they do not necessarily need to produce high torque to produce high power. The positioning of the intake port and intake port closing greatly affect the engine's torque production. Early closing of the intake port increases low-end torque, but reduces high-end torque (and thus power). In contrast, late closing of the intake port reduces low-end torque while increasing torque at high engine speeds, thus resulting in more power at higher engine speeds.\nA peripheral intake port results in the highest mean effective pressure throughout the RPM range (though moreso at high RPM and particularly if rectangular); however, side intake porting produces a more steady idle, because it helps to prevent blow-back of burned gases into the intake ducts, which causes a \"misfire\" that manifests as alternating cycles of successful and unsuccessful mixture ignition. Peripheral porting is also linked to worse partial-load performance. Early work by Toyota led to the addition of a fresh air supply to the exhaust port. It also proved that a reed valve in the intake port or duct improved low-RPM partial-load performance of Wankel engines by preventing blow-back of exhaust gas into the intake at the cost of a slight loss of top-end power. Elasticity is improved with a greater rotor eccentricity, analogous to a longer stroke in a reciprocating engine.\nWankel engines operate better with a low-pressure exhaust system. Higher exhaust back pressure reduces mean effective pressure, especially in peripheral intake port engines. The Mazda RX-8's Renesis engine improved performance by doubling the exhaust port area relative to earlier designs, and there have been studies of the effect of intake and exhaust piping configuration on the performance of Wankel engines. Side intake ports, as used in the Renesis, were first proposed by Hanns-Dieter Paschke in the late 1950s. Paschke predicted that precisely calculated intake ports and intake manifolds could make a side port engine as powerful as a peripheral port engine.\nMaterials.\nAs formerly described, the Wankel engine is affected by unequal thermal expansion due to the four cycles taking place in fixed places of the engine. While this puts great demands on the materials used, the simplicity of the Wankel makes it easier to use materials such as exotic alloys and ceramics. A commonplace method is, for engine housings made of aluminum, to use a spurted molybdenum layer on the engine housing for the combustion chamber area, and a spurted steel layer elsewhere. Engine housings cast from iron can be induction-brazed to make the material suitable for withstanding combustion heat stress.\nAmong the alloys cited for Wankel housing use are A-132, Inconel 625, and 356 treated to T6 hardness. Several materials have been used for plating the housing working surface, Nikasil being one. Citro\u00ebn, Daimler-Benz, Ford, A P Grazen, and others applied for patents in this field. For the apex seals, the choice of materials has evolved along with the experience gained, from carbon alloys, to steel, ferritic stainless, ferrotitanium with carbon, and other materials. The optimal combination of plating and seal materials was determined experimentally, to obtain the best duration of both the seals and housing. For the shaft, steel alloys with little deformation on load are preferred, such as maraging steel.\nLeaded gasoline was the predominant type of gasoline available in the first years of the Wankel engine's development. Lead is a solid lubricant, and leaded gasoline is designed to reduce the wearing of seals and housings. Early Wankel engines had an oil supply that only provided lubrication where leaded gasoline was insufficient. As leaded gasoline was being phased out, Wankel engines needed an increased mix of oil in the fuel to provide lubrication to critical engine parts. An SAE paper by David Garside extensively described Norton's choices of materials and cooling fins.\nSealing.\nEarly engine designs had a high incidence of sealing loss, both between the rotor and the housing and also between the various pieces making up the housing. Also, in earlier Wankel engines, carbon particles could become trapped between the seal and the housing, jamming the engine and requiring a partial rebuild. It was common for very early Mazda engines to require rebuilding after . Further sealing problems arose from the uneven thermal distribution within the housing, causing distortion, loss of sealing, loss of compression, and uneven wear between the apex seal and the rotor housing, evident on higher mileage engines. Stressing the engine before it reached operating temperature would exacerbate these problems, which were eventually solved by Mazda. Current engines have nearly 100 seal-related parts.\nThe problem of clearance for hot rotor apices passing between the axially closer side housings in the cooler intake lobe areas was dealt with by using an axial rotor pilot radially inboard of the oil seals, plus improved inertia oil cooling of the rotor interior (C-W &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0, C. Jones, 5/8/63, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;\u00a0, M. Bentele, C. Jones. A.H. Raye. 7/2/62), and slightly \"crowned\" apex seals (with a different height in the center than the ends).\nFuel economy and emissions.\nEarly Wankel engines had poor fuel economy due to the Wankel engine's combustion chamber shape and large surface area. The Wankel engine's design is, on the other hand, much less prone to engine knocking, which allows for the use of low-octane fuels without reducing compression. NSU tested low octane gasoline at the suggestion of Felix Wankel. On a trial basis, 40-octane gasoline was produced by BV Aral, which was used in the DKM 54 test engine with a compression ratio of 8:1; it ran without complaint. This upset the petrochemical industry in Europe, which had invested considerable sums of money in new plants for the production of higher quality gasoline.\nDirect injection stratified charge engines can be operated with fuels with particularly low octane numbers, such as diesel fuel, which only has an octane number of around 25. As a result of worse efficiency, a Wankel engine with peripheral exhaust porting has a larger amount of unburnt hydrocarbons (HC) released into the exhaust. The exhaust is, however, relatively low in nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions, because combustion is slow and temperatures are lower than in other engines, and also because of the Wankel engine's good exhaust gas recirculation (EGR) behavior. Carbon monoxide (CO) emissions of Wankel and Otto engines are about the same.\nThe Wankel engine has a significantly higher (\u0394tK&gt;100\u00a0K) exhaust gas temperature than a reciprocating Otto engine, especially under low- and medium-load conditions. This is because of the higher combustion frequency and slower combustion. Exhaust gas temperatures can exceed under high load at engine speeds of 6000\u00a0rpm. To improve the exhaust gas behavior of the Wankel engine, an exhaust manifold reactor or catalytic converter may be used to reduce hydrocarbon and carbon monoxide emissions.\nMazda uses a dual ignition system with two spark plugs per chamber. This both increases power output and reduces HC emissions. At the same time, HC emissions can be lowered by reducing the pre-ignition of the T leading plug relative to the L trailing plug. This leads to internal afterburning and reduces HC emissions. On the other hand, the same ignition timing of the two plugs leads to higher energy conversion. Hydrocarbons adhering to the combustion chamber wall are expelled into the exhaust at the peripheral outlet. Mazda used 3 spark plugs per chamber in their racing R26B engine. The third spark plug ignites the mixture in the trailing side before the \"squish\" is generated, causing the mixture to burn completely and also speeding up flame propagation, which improves fuel consumption.\nAccording to Curtiss-Wright research, the factor that controls the amount of unburnt hydrocarbons in the exhaust is the rotor surface temperature, with higher temperatures resulting in fewer hydrocarbons in the exhaust. Curtiss-Wright widened the rotor, keeping the rest of the engine's architecture unchanged, thus reducing friction losses and increasing displacement and power output. The limiting factor for this widening was mechanical, particularly shaft deflection at high engine speeds. Quenching is the dominant source of hydrocarbons at high speeds and leakage at low speeds. Using side porting, which allows the exhaust port to close around top dead centre, reduces intake and exhaust overlap and thus improves fuel consumption.\nMazda's RX-8 with the Renesis engine met the in 2004. This was mainly achieved by using side porting: The exhaust port, which in earlier Mazda Wankel engines was located in the rotor housing, was moved to the side of the combustion chamber. This approach allowed Mazda to eliminate overlap between intake and exhaust port openings while simultaneously increasing the exhaust port area. This design improved combustion stability in the low-speed and light load range, and reduced HC emissions by 35\u201350% compared to a peripheral exhaust port Wankel engine. However, the RX-8 was not improved to meet Euro 5 emission regulations, and it was discontinued in 2012. The new 8C engine in the Mazda MX-30 R-EV meets the Euro 6d-ISC-FCM emissions standard.\nChamber volume.\nIn a Wankel engine, the chamber volume formula_1 is equivalent to the product of the rotor surface formula_2 and the rotor path formula_3. The rotor surface formula_2 is given by the rotor apices' path across the housing and determined by the generating radius formula_5, the rotor width formula_6, and the parallel transfers of the rotor and the inner housing formula_7. Since the rotor has a trochoid (triangular) shape, the sine of 60 degrees describes the interval at which the rotor apices get closest to the housing. Therefore,\nformula_8\nThe rotor path formula_3 may be integrated via the eccentricity formula_10 as follows:\nformula_11\nTherefore,\nformula_12\nFor convenience, formula_7 may be omitted because it is difficult to determine and small:\nformula_14\nA different approach to this is introducing formula_15 as the farthest, and formula_7 as the shortest parallel transfer of the rotor and the inner housing and assuming that formula_17 and formula_18. Then,\nformula_19\nIncluding the parallel transfers of the rotor and the inner housing provides sufficient accuracy for determining chamber volume.\nEquivalent displacement and power output.\nDifferent approaches have been used over time to evaluate the total displacement of a Wankel engine in relation to a reciprocating engine, considering only one, two, or all three chambers. Part of this dispute was because of European vehicle taxation being dependent on engine displacement, as reported by Karl Ludvigsen.\nIf formula_20 is the number of chambers considered for each rotor and formula_21 the number of rotors, then the total displacement is:\nformula_22\nIf formula_23 is the mean effective pressure, formula_24 the shaft rotational speed and formula_25 the number of shaft revolutions needed to complete a cycle (formula_26 is the frequency of the thermodynamic cycle), then the total power output is:\nformula_27\nOne chamber.\nKenichi Yamamoto and placed formula_28 and formula_29:\nformula_30\nWith these values, a single-rotor Wankel engine produces the same average power as a formula_31 single-cylinder two-stroke engine, with the same average torque and the shaft running at the same speed, operating the unitary Otto cycle at triple the frequency.\nTwo chambers.\nRichard Franz Ansdale, Wolf-Dieter Bensinger and Felix Wankel based their analogy on the number of cumulative expansion strokes per shaft revolution. In a Wankel engine, the eccentric shaft must make three full rotations (1080\u00b0) per combustion chamber to complete all four phases of a four-stroke engine. Since a Wankel engine has three combustion chambers, all four phases of a four-stroke engine are completed within one full rotation of the eccentric shaft (360\u00b0), and one power pulse is produced at each revolution of the shaft. This is different from a four-stroke piston engine, which needs to make two full rotations per combustion chamber to complete all four phases of a four-stroke engine. Thus, in a Wankel engine, according to Bensinger, displacement (formula_31) is:\nformula_33\nIf power is to be derived from BMEP, the four-stroke engine formula applies:\nformula_34\nWith this values, a single-rotor Wankel engine produces the same average power as a formula_31 two-cylinder four-stroke engine, with the same average torque and the shaft running at the same speed, operating the unitary Otto cycles at 3/2 the frequency.\nThree chambers.\nFelix Heinrich Wankel in his early patent, Eugen Wilhelm Huber, and Karl-Heinz K\u00fcttner counted all the chambers, since each one has its own thermodynamic cycle. So formula_36 and formula_37:\nformula_38\nWith these values, a single-rotor Wankel engine produces the same average power as a formula_31 three-cylinder four-stroke engine, with 3/2 of the average torque and the shaft running at 2/3 the speed, operating the unitary Otto cycles at the same frequency:\nformula_40\nApplying a 2:3 gear set to the output shaft of the three-cylinder (or a 3:2 one to the Wankel), the two are analogous from the thermodynamic and mechanical output point of view, as pointed out by Huber.\nformula_41\nformula_42\nformula_43\nformula_44\nRegulations and taxation.\nNational agencies that tax automobiles according to displacement, and regulatory bodies in auto racing, use a variety of equivalency factors to compare Wankel engines to four-stroke piston engines. Greece, for example, taxed cars based on the working chamber volume (the face of one rotor) multiplied by the number of rotors, lowering the cost of ownership.{{citation needed|date=December 2022}} Japan did the same, but applied an equivalency factor of 1.5, making Mazda's 13B engine fit just within the 2-liter tax bracket. The FIA used an equivalency factor of 1.8, but later increased it to 2.0 using the displacement formula described by Bensinger. However, Germany's DMSB applies an equivalency factor of 1.5 in motorsport.\nLaser ignition.\nLaser ignition was first proposed in 2011, but first studies of laser ignition were only conducted in 2021. It is assumed that laser ignition of lean fuel mixtures in Wankel engines could improve fuel consumption and exhaust gas behavior. In a 2021 study, a Wankel model engine was tested with laser ignition and various gaseous and liquid fuels. Laser ignition leads to a faster center of combustion development, thus improving combustion speed and leading to a reduction in NOx emissions. The laser pulse energy required for proper ignition is \"reasonable\", in the low single-digit mJ range. A significant modification of the Wankel engine is not required for laser ignition.\nCompression ignition.\nResearch, while unsuccessful, has occurred into compression ignition Wankel engines. The basic design parameters of the Wankel engine preclude obtaining a compression ratio sufficient for Diesel operation in a practical engine. The Rolls-Royce and Yanmar approach was to use a two-stage unit, with one rotor acting as a compressor while combustion takes place in the other. Both engines were not functional.\nMultifuel.\nA different approach from a compression ignition Wankel engine is a spark ignition engine that is capable of operating on a huge variety of fuels: diesel fuel, gasoline, kerosene, methanol, natural gas, and hydrogen. German engineer Dankwart Eiermann designed one such engine at Wankel SuperTec (WST) in the early 2000s. It has a chamber volume of {{Convert|500|cc|cuin|abbr=on}} and an indicated power output of {{convert|50|kW|hp|sigfig=3|abbr=on}} per rotor, and support for configurations with one to four rotors.\nThe WST engine has a common rail direct injection system operating on a stratified charge principle. Similar to a diesel engine and unlike a conventional Wankel engine, the WST engine compresses air rather than an air\u2013fuel mixture as in the four-cycle engine compression phase. Fuel is only injected into the compressed air shortly before top dead centre, which results in a stratified charge (i.e., no homogeneous mixture). A spark plug is used to initiate combustion. Pressure at the end of the compression phase and during combustion is lower than in a conventional diesel engine, and fuel consumption is equivalent to that of a small indirect injection compression ignition engine (i.e., &gt;250\u00a0g/(kW\u00b7h)).\nDiesel-fuel-powered variants of the WST Wankel engine are used as APUs in 60 Deutsche Bahn diesel locomotives. These engines can produce up to {{convert|400|kW|hp|sigfig=3|abbr=on}}.\nHydrogen fuel.\nAs a hydrogen-air mixture is quicker to ignite with a faster burning rate than gasoline, there is a greater risk of pre-ignition and backfire. In a Wankel engine, each cycle of the Otto cycle occurs in different chambers. Importantly, the intake chamber is separated from the combustion chamber, keeping the air-fuel mixture away from localized hot spots. Wankel engines also lack hot exhaust valves, which facilitates adapting them to hydrogen operation. Another problem concerns the hydrogenate attack on the lubricating film in reciprocating engines, which is circumvented in Wankel engines by using ceramic apex seals.\nIn a prototype Wankel engine fitted to a Mazda RX-8 to research hydrogen operation, Wakayama et al. found that hydrogen improved thermal efficiency by 23% over gasoline. Although the engine's lean mixture emits a small amount of NOx, the total amount of NOx emissions exceeds the Japanese SULEV standard. Supplementary stoichiometric operation combined with a catalytic converter provides additional NOx reduction.\nLicenses issued.\nNSU licensed the Wankel engine design to companies worldwide in various forms, with many companies implementing continual improvements. In his 1973 book \"Rotationskolben-Verbrennungsmotoren\", German engineer Wolf-Dieter Bensinger describes the following licensees, in chronological order, which is confirmed by John B. Hege:\nIn 1961, Soviet research organizations NATI, NAMI, and VNIImotoprom began developing a Wankel engine. In 1974, development was transferred to a special design bureau at the AvtoVAZ plant. Hege argues that no license was issued to any Soviet car manufacturer.\nAdvantages.\nThe primary advantages of a Wankel engine are:\nWankel engines are considerably lighter and simpler, containing far fewer moving parts than piston engines of equivalent power output. Valves and complex valvetrains are replaced by simple ports cut into the walls of the rotor housing. Since the rotor rides directly on a large bearing on the output shaft, there are no connecting rods and no crankshaft. The elimination of reciprocating mass gives Wankel engines a low non-uniformity coefficient, meaning that they operate much smoother than comparable reciprocating piston engines. For example, a two-rotor Wankel engine is more than twice as smooth in its operation as a four-cylinder reciprocating piston engine.\nEach cylinder in a four-stroke reciprocating engine produces a single power stroke only every other rotation of the crankshaft, with three strokes being pumping losses. The Wankel engine also has higher volumetric efficiency than a reciprocating piston engine. Because of the quasi-overlap of the power strokes, the Wankel engine is very responsive, delivering power quickly when demanded especially at higher engine speeds. This difference is more pronounced relative to four-cylinder reciprocating engines and less pronounced relative to higher cylinder counts.\nDue to the absence of hot exhaust valves, the fuel octane requirements of Wankel engines are lower than in reciprocating piston engines. As a rule of thumb, it may be assumed that a Wankel engine with a working chamber volume Vk of 500\u00a0cm3 and a compression of \u03b5=9 runs well on mediocre-quality gasoline with an octane rating of just 91\u00a0RON. If in a reciprocating engine the compression must be reduced by one unit of compression to avoid knock, then, in a comparable Wankel engine, a reduction in compression may not be required.\nBecause of the lower injector count, fuel injection systems in Wankel engines are cheaper than in reciprocating piston engines. An injection system that allows stratified charge operation may help reduce rich mixture areas in undesirable parts of the engine, improving fuel efficiency.\nDisadvantages.\nCombustion.\nWankel engines mainly suffer from poor thermodynamics caused by the Wankel engine's design, particularly its huge surface area and poor combustion chamber shape. As an effect of this, the Wankel engine has slow and incomplete combustion, which results in high fuel consumption and poor exhaust gas behaviour. Wankel engines can reach a typical maximum thermal efficiency of about 30\u00a0percent.\nIn a Wankel engine, fuel combustion is slow because the combustion chamber is long, thin, and moving. Flame travel occurs almost exclusively in the direction of rotor movement, adding to the poor quenching of the fuel and air mixture, being the main source of unburnt hydrocarbons at high engine speeds. The trailing side of the combustion chamber naturally produces a \"squeeze stream\" that prevents the flame from propagating to the combustion chamber's trailing edge at moderate and high engine speed ranges. This poor combustion is one of the reasons for the increase in carbon monoxide and unburned hydrocarbons in a Wankel's exhaust stream. A side port exhaust, as used in the Renesis, can prevent the unburned mixture from escaping by eliminating port overlap. Direct fuel injection, in which fuel is injected towards the leading edge of the combustion chamber, can minimize the amount of unburnt fuel in the exhaust.\nKawasaki addressed this problem in its US patent {{patent|US|3848574}}; Toyota obtained a 7% economy improvement by placing a glow plug at the leading edge and using reed valves in intake ducts. In two-stroke engines, metal reeds last around {{convert|15000|km|abbr=in}}, while carbon fiber reeds last around {{convert|8000|km|abbr=in}}. The Mazda R26B used three spark plugs per rotor for complete combustion of the aspirated mixture. In the 26B, the third spark plug at the trailing edge ignites before the onset of the squeeze flow.\nSealing.\nAlthough many of the Wankel engine's disadvantages are the subject of ongoing research, the current disadvantages of Wankel engines in production are the following:\nAlthough in two dimensions the seal system of a Wankel looks to be simpler than that of a corresponding multi-cylinder piston engine, in three dimensions the opposite is true. As well as the rotor apex seals evident in the conceptual diagram, the rotor must also seal against the chamber ends.\nPiston rings in reciprocating engines are not perfect seals; each has a gap to allow for expansion. The sealing at the apices of the Wankel rotor is less critical, because leakage is between adjacent chambers on adjacent strokes of the cycle rather than to the mainshaft case. Although sealing has improved over the years, the less-than-effective sealing of the Wankel, mostly due to lack of lubrication, remains a factor reducing its efficiency.\nAutomotive applications.\nThe first Wankel-engined car for sale was the 1964 NSU Spider. Wankel engines were continuously fitted in cars until 2012, when Mazda discontinued the RX-8. Mazda later introduced a Wankel-engined hybrid electric car, the MX-30 R-EV, in 2023.\nNSU.\nMazda and NSU signed a study contract to develop the Wankel engine in 1961 and competed to bring the first Wankel-powered automobile to the market. Although Mazda produced an experimental engine that year, NSU was the first with a Wankel-engined automobile for sale, the sporty NSU Spider in 1964; Mazda countered with a display of two- and four-rotor Wankel engines at that year's Tokyo Motor Show. In 1967, NSU began production of a Wankel-engined luxury car, the Ro 80. Unlike Mazda and Curtiss-Wright, NSU had not produced reliable apex seals, resulting in problems with wear, poor shaft lubrication, and poor fuel economy, culminating in frequent engine failures. These issues were not solved until 1972, which led to large warranty costs curtailing further NSU Wankel engine development. This premature release of the new Wankel engine gave a poor reputation for all makes, and even when these issues were solved in the last engines produced by NSU in the second half of the '70s, sales did not recover.\nBy early 1978, Audi engineers Richard van Basshuysen and Gottlieb Wilmers had designed a new generation of the Audi-NSU Wankel engine, the KKM 871. It was a two-rotor unit with a chamber volume Vk of 746.6\u00a0cm3, derived from an eccentricity of 17\u00a0mm, a generating radius of 118.5\u00a0mm, an equidistance of 4\u00a0mm, and a housing width of 69\u00a0mm. It had double side intake ports and a peripheral exhaust port; it was fitted with a continuously injecting Bosch K-Jetronic multipoint manifold injection system. According to the DIN 70020 standard, it produced {{convert|121|kW|hp|sigfig=3|abbr=on}} at 6500 rpm and {{convert|210|Nm|lbft|sigfig=3|abbr=on}} at 3500 rpm. Van Basshuysen and Wilmers designed the engine with either a manifold thermal reactor or a catalytic converter for emissions control. The engine had a mass of {{convert|142|kg|lb|sigfig=3|abbr=on}} a BSFC of approximately 315\u00a0g/(kW\u00b7h) at 3000 rpm, and a BMEP of 900\u00a0kPa. For testing, two KKM\u00a0871 engines were installed in Audi 100 Type 43 test cars, one with a five-speed manual gearbox, and one with a three-speed automatic gearbox.\nMazda.\nMazda claimed to have solved the apex seal problem, operating test engines at high speed for 300 hours without failure. After years of development, Mazda's first Wankel-engined car was the 1967 Cosmo 110S. The company followed with several Wankel (\"rotary\" in the company's terminology) vehicles, including a bus and a pickup truck. Customers often cited the cars' smoothness of operation. However, Mazda chose a method to comply with hydrocarbon emission standards which, while less expensive to produce, increased fuel consumption.\nMazda later abandoned the rotary in most of their automotive designs, continuing to use the engine in their sports car range only. The company normally used two-rotor designs, though a more advanced twin-turbo three-rotor engine was fitted in the 1990 Eunos Cosmo sports car. In 2003, Mazda introduced the Renesis engine fitted in the RX-8. The Renesis engine relocated the exhaust ports from the periphery of the rotary housing to the sides, allowing for larger overall ports and better airflow. The Renesis is capable of {{cvt|238|hp|sigfig=3|order=flip}} with improved fuel economy, reliability, and lower emissions than prior Mazda rotary engines, all from a nominal 2.6\u00a0L displacement, but this was not enough to meet more stringent emissions standards. Mazda ended production of their rotary engine in 2012 after the engine failed to meet Euro 5 emission standards, leaving no automotive company selling a Wankel-powered road vehicle until 2023.\nMazda launched the MX-30 R-EV hybrid fitted with a Wankel engine range extender in March 2023. The Wankel engine has no direct connection to the wheels, serving only to charge the battery. It is an {{Convert|830|cc|cuin|abbr=on}} single-rotor engine with a rated power output of {{cvt|55|kW|hp|0}}. The engine has gasoline direct injection, exhaust gas recirculation, and an exhaust gas treatment system with a three-way catalytic converter and a particulate filter. The engine is Euro 6d-ISC-FCM-compliant.\nCitro\u00ebn.\nCitro\u00ebn produced the M35 and GS Birotor cars and the {{Interlanguage link|Citro\u00ebn RE-2|fr|3=Citro\u00ebn RE-2|lt=RE-2}} helicopter using engines produced by Comotor, a joint venture by Citro\u00ebn and NSU.\nMercedes-Benz.\nMercedes-Benz fitted a Wankel engine in their C111 concept car. The C\u00a0111-II's engine was naturally aspirated, fitted with gasoline direct injection, and had four rotors. The total displacement was {{convert|4.8|L|cuin|abbr=in}}, and the compression ration was 9.3:1. It provided a maximum torque of {{convert|433|Nm|lbft|sigfig=3|abbr=on}} at 5,000{{nbsp}}rpm and a power output of {{cvt|350|PS|kW|order=flip|0}} at 6,000{{nbsp}}rpm.\nAmerican Motors.\nAmerican Motors Corporation (AMC) was so convinced \"...\u00a0that the rotary engine will play an important role as a powerplant for cars and trucks of the future\u00a0...\", that the chairman, Roy D. Chapin Jr., signed an agreement in February 1973 after a year's negotiations, to build Wankel engines for both passenger cars and military vehicles, and the right to sell any Wankel engines it produced to other companies. AMC's president, William Luneburg, did not expect dramatic development through to 1980, but Gerald C. Meyers, AMC's vice president of the engineering product group, suggested that AMC should buy the engines from Curtiss-Wright before developing its own Wankel engines, and predicted a total transition to Wankel power by 1984.\nPlans called for the engine to be used in the AMC Pacer, but development was pushed back. American Motors had designed the unique Pacer around the engine. By 1974, AMC had decided to purchase the General Motors (GM) Wankel engine instead of building one in-house. Both GM and AMC confirmed the relationship would be beneficial in marketing the new engine, with AMC claiming that the GM Wankel engine achieved good fuel economy. GM's engines had not reached production when the Pacer was launched onto the market. The 1973 oil crisis played a part in frustrating the use of the Wankel engine, and rising fuel prices and speculation about proposed US emission standards legislation also increased concerns.\nGeneral Motors.\nAt its annual meeting in May 1973, General Motors unveiled the Wankel engine it planned to use in the Chevrolet Vega. By 1974, GM R&amp;D had not succeeded in producing a Wankel engine meeting both the emission requirements and fuel economy targets, leading to the project's cancellation. Because of that decision, the R&amp;D team only partly released the results of its most recent research, which claimed to have solved the fuel-economy problem and built reliable engines with a lifespan above {{convert|530,000|mi}}. Those findings were not taken into account when the cancellation order was issued. The ending of GM's Wankel engine project required AMC, who was to purchase the engine, to reconfigure the Pacer to house its AMC straight-6 engine driving the rear wheels.\nAvtoVAZ.\nIn 1974, the Soviet Union created a special engine-design bureau, which, in 1978, designed an engine designated as VAZ-311 fitted into a VAZ-2101 car. In 1980, the company began delivering the VAZ-411 twin-rotor Wankel engine in VAZ-2106 cars, with about 200 being manufactured. Most of the production went to security services.\nFord.\nFord conducted research in Wankel engines, resulting in patents granted: {{patent|GB|1460229}}, 1974, a method for fabricating housings; {{patent|US|3833321}} 1974, side plates coating; {{patent|US|3890069}}, 1975, housing coating; {{patent|CA|1030743}}, 1978: Housings alignment; {{patent|CA|1045553}}, 1979, reed-valve assembly. In 1972, Henry Ford II stated that the Wankel would probably not replace the piston in \"my lifetime\".\nAuto racing.\nThe Sigma MC74, driven by Yojiro Terada and powered by a Mazda 12A engine, was the first Wankel-powered car (and non-Western European or American car) to finish the 1974 24 Hours of Le Mans.\nMazda was the first Japanese automaker to win Le Mans outright in 1991. Its four-rotor 787B ({{convert|5.24|L|cuin|0|abbr=on|disp=or}} displacement), rated by the FIA formula at {{convert|4.708|L|cuin|0|abbr=on|disp=or}}) is also the only non-piston-engined car to have won Le Mans. The Mazdas were classified as naturally aspirated to start with a weight of {{convert|830|kg|lb|sigfig=3|abbr=on}}, {{convert|170|kg|lb|sigfig=3|abbr=on}} less than their forced-induction competitors in the Group C2 class. The 1991 Group C1 cars were allowed to be another {{convert|80|kg|lb|sigfig=3|abbr=on}} lighter than the 787B and had no fuel quantity limits, but were only allowed 3.5-liter naturally aspirated engines.\nAs a range extender.\nDue to the compact size and the high power-to-weight ratio of a Wankel engine, it has been proposed for use as an electric vehicle range extender to provide supplementary power when battery levels are low. A Wankel engine used as a generator has packaging, noise, vibration, and harshness advantages when used in a passenger car, maximizing interior passenger and luggage space while providing a good noise and vibration emissions profile. However, it is questionable whether or not the inherent disadvantages of the Wankel engine allow for its usage as a range extender for passenger cars.\nIn 2010, Audi unveiled a prototype series-hybrid electric car, the A1 e-tron. It incorporated a Wankel engine with a chamber volume Vk of 254\u00a0cm3, capable of producing 18\u00a0kW at 5000 rpm. It was mated to an electric generator, which recharged the car's batteries as needed and provided electricity directly to the electric driving motor. The package had a mass of 70\u00a0kg and could produce 15\u00a0kW of electric power.\nIn November 2013, Mazda announced to the motoring press a series hybrid prototype car, the Mazda2 EV, using a Wankel engine as a range extender. The generator engine, located under the rear luggage floor, is a tiny, almost inaudible, single-rotor 330-cc unit, generating {{cvt|30|hp|order=flip}} at 4,500{{nbsp}}rpm and maintaining a continuous electric output of 20\u00a0kW.\nMazda introduced the MX-30 R-EV fitted with a Wankel engine range extender in March 2023. The car's Wankel engine is a naturally aspirated single-rotor unit with a chamber volume Vk of {{cvt|830|cm3|in3|1}}, a compression of 11.9:1, and a rated power output of {{cvt|55|kW|hp|0}}. It has gasoline direct injection, exhaust gas recirculation, and an exhaust gas treatment system with a three-way catalytic converter and a particulate filter. According to \"auto motor und sport\", the engine is Euro 6d-ISC-FCM-compliant.\nMotorcycle applications.\nThe first Wankel-engined motorcycle was an MZ-built MZ ES 250, fitted with a water-cooled KKM\u00a0175\u00a0W Wankel engine. An air-cooled version followed in 1965, called the KKM\u00a0175\u00a0L. The engine produced {{cvt|24|bhp|kW|0}} at 6,750{{nbsp}}rpm, but the motorcycle never went into series production.\nHercules.\nIn 1974, Hercules produced W-2000 Wankel motorcycles, but low production numbers meant the project was unprofitable, and production ceased in 1977.\nNorton.\nIn Britain, Norton developed a Wankel engine for motorcycles based on the Sachs air-cooled engine that powered the DKW/Hercules W-2000 motorcycle. This two-rotor engine was included in the Commander and F1. Norton improved on Sachs's air cooling, introducing a plenum chamber.\nIn the early 1980s, using earlier work at BSA, Norton produced the air-cooled twin-rotor Classic, followed by the liquid-cooled Commander and the Interpol2 (a police version). Subsequent Norton Wankel bikes included the Norton F1, F1 Sports, RC588, Norton RCW588, and NRS588. Norton proposed a new 588-cc twin-rotor model called the \"NRV588\" and a 700-cc version called the \"NRV700\". A former mechanic at Norton, Brian Crighton, started developing his own Wankel-engined motorcycles line named \"Roton\", which won several Australian races.\nDespite successes in racing, no motorcycles powered by Wankel engines have been produced for sale to the general public for road use since 1992.\nYamaha.\nIn 1972, Yamaha introduced the RZ201 at the Tokyo Motor Show, a prototype with a Wankel engine, weighing 220\u00a0kg and producing {{convert|60|hp|kW|abbr=on}} from a twin-rotor 660-cc engine (US patent N3964448). In 1972, Kawasaki presented its two-rotor Kawasaki X99 Wankel engine prototype (US patents N 3848574 &amp; 3991722). Both Yamaha and Kawasaki claimed to have solved the problems of poor fuel economy, high exhaust emissions, and poor engine longevity in early Wankels, but neither prototype reached production.\nSuzuki.\nFrom 1975 to 1976, Suzuki produced its RE5 single-rotor Wankel motorcycle. It was a complex design, with both liquid cooling and oil cooling, and multiple lubrication and carburetor systems. It worked well and was smooth, but it did not sell well because it was heavy and underpowered. To manage elevated exhaust temperatures, Suzuki opted for a finned exhaust manifold, twin-skinned exhausted pipes with cooling grilles, heatproof pipe wrapping, and silencers with heat shields. Suzuki had three lubrication systems, while Norton had a single total-loss oil injection system that fed both the main bearings and the intake manifolds. Mounted high in the frame was a single-rotor engine that was fairly smooth, but with rough patches at 4,000\u00a0rpm. Although it was described to handle well, the result was that the RE5 was heavy, overcomplicated, expensive to manufacture, and, at {{convert|62|bhp|kW|abbr=on}}, short on power.\nVan Veen.\nDutch motorcycle importer and manufacturer Van Veen produced small quantities of a dual-rotor Wankel-engined OCR-1000 motorcycle between 1978 and 1980 using surplus Comotor KKM 624 engines initially intended for the Citro\u00ebn GS Birotor car, whereby a Hartig electronic ignition system replaced the distributor.\nOther applications.\nAircraft.\nWankel engines are well suited for light aircraft, being light, compact, almost vibrationless, and with a high power-to-weight ratio. Further aviation benefits include:\nUnlike in cars and motorcycles, a Wankel aero engine can be sufficiently warm before full power is applied because of the time taken for pre-flight checks. Also, the journey to the runway has minimum cooling, which further permits the engine to reach the operating temperature for full power on take-off. A Wankel aero engine spends most of its operational time at high power outputs with little idling.\nSince Wankel engines operate at a relatively high rotational speed, at 6,000{{nbsp}}rpm of the output shaft, the rotor spins only at about one-third of that speed. With relatively low torque, propeller-driven aircraft must use a propeller speed reduction unit to maintain propellers within the designed speed range. Experimental aircraft with Wankel engines use propeller speed reduction units; for example, the MidWest twin-rotor engine has a 2.95:1 reduction gearbox.\nThe first Wankel-engined aircraft was the experimental Lockheed Q-Star civilian version of the United States Army's reconnaissance QT-2 in the late 1960s, essentially a powered Schweizer sailplane. The plane was powered by a {{convert|185|hp|abbr=on}} Curtiss-Wright RC2-60 Wankel engine. The same engine model was also used in a Cessna Cardinal and a helicopter, as well as other airplanes. The French company Citro\u00ebn developed a Wankel-powered {{Interlanguage link|Citro\u00ebn RE-2|fr|3=Citro\u00ebn RE-2|lt=RE-2}} helicopter in the 1970s. In Germany in the mid-1970s, a pusher ducted fan airplane powered by a modified NSU multi-rotor engine was developed in both civilian and military versions, the Fanliner and the Fantrainer.\nAt roughly the same time as the first experiments with full-scale aircraft powered with Wankel engines, model aircraft-sized versions were pioneered by a combination of the well-known Japanese O.S. Engines firm and the then-extant German Graupner model aircraft firm, under license from NSU. The O.S.-Graupner model Wankel engine has a chamber volume Vk of 4.9\u00a0cm3, and produces 460\u00a0W at 16,000\u00a0rpm\u22121; its mass is 370\u00a0g.\nWankel engines have been fitted in homebuilt experimental aircraft, such as the ARV Super2, a couple of which were powered by the British MidWest aero-engine. Most are Mazda 12A and 13B car engines converted for aviation use\u2014a very cost-effective alternative to certified aircraft engines, providing 100 to {{convert|300|hp}} at a fraction of the cost of traditional piston engines. These conversions began in the early 1970s. Peter Garrison, a contributing editor for \"Flying\" magazine, wrote \"in my opinion\u00a0\u2026 the most promising engine for aviation use is the Mazda rotary.\"\nThe sailplane manufacturer Schleicher uses an Austro Engine AE50R engine in its self-launching models ASK-21 Mi, ASH-26E, ASH-25 M/Mi, ASH-30 Mi, ASH-31 Mi, ASW-22 BLE, and ASG-32 Mi.\nIn 2013, e-Go airplanes, based in Cambridge, United Kingdom, announced that a Wankel engine from Rotron Power will power its new single-seater canard aircraft.\nThe DA36 E-Star, an aircraft designed by Siemens, Diamond Aircraft and EADS, employs a series hybrid powertrain with the propeller being turned by a Siemens {{convert|70|kW|abbr=on}} electric motor. The aim is to reduce fuel consumption and emissions by up to 25%. An onboard {{convert|40|hp|abbr=on}} Austro Engine engine and generator provide the electricity. A propeller speed reduction unit is eliminated. The electric motor uses electricity stored in batteries, with the generator engine off, to take off and climb reducing sound emissions. The series-hybrid powertrain using the Wankel engine reduces the plane's weight by 100\u00a0kg relative to its predecessor. The DA36 E-Star first flew in June 2013, making this the first-ever flight of a series-hybrid powertrain. Diamond Aircraft claims that Wankel engine technology is scalable to a 100-seat aircraft.\nTrains.\nSince 2015, a total of 60 trains in Germany have been equipped with Wankel-engined auxiliary power systems that burn diesel fuel. The locomotives use the WST KKM 351 Wankel diesel fuel engine.\nOther uses.\nThe Wankel engine is well-suited for devices in which a human operator is close to the engine, e.g., hand-held devices such as chainsaws. The excellent starting behavior and low mass make the Wankel engine also a good powerplant for portable fire pumps and portable generators.\nSmall Wankel engines are being found in applications such as go-karts, personal watercraft, and auxiliary power units for aircraft. Kawasaki patented mixture-cooled Wankel engine (US patent 3991722). Japanese diesel engine manufacturer Yanmar and Dolmar-Sachs of Germany had a Wankel-engined chainsaw (SAE paper 760642) and outboard boat engines, and the French Outils Wolf made a lawnmower (Rotondor) powered by a Wankel engine. The rotor was in a horizontal position to save on production costs, and there were no seals on the downside.\nThe simplicity of the Wankel engine makes it well-suited for miniature and microscopic engine designs. The Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) Rotary Engine Lab at the University of California, Berkeley, formerly researched developing Wankel engines down to 1\u00a0mm in diameter, with displacements less than 0.1\u00a0cc. Materials include silicon, and motive power includes compressed air. The goal of such research was to eventually develop an internal combustion engine with the ability to deliver 100 milliwatts of electrical power, with the engine serving as the rotor of the electric generator, with magnets built into the engine rotor. Development of the miniature Wankel engine stopped at UC Berkeley at the end of the DARPA contract.\nIn 1976, \"Road &amp; Track\" reported that Ingersoll-Rand would develop a Wankel engine with a chamber volume Vk of {{cvt|25|dm3|in3|-2|order=flip}} with a rated power of {{cvt|500|hp|kW|0}} per rotor. Eventually, 13 units of the proposed engine were built, albeit with a larger displacement, and covered over 90,000 operating hours combined. The engine was made with a chamber volume Vk of {{cvt|2500|in3|dm3|0}}, and a power output of {{cvt|550|hp|kW|0}} per rotor. Both single, and twin-rotor engines were made (producing {{cvt|550|hp|kW|0}} or {{cvt|1100|hp|kW|0}} respectively). The engines ran on natural gas and had a relatively low engine speed due to its application.\nDeere &amp; Company acquired the Curtiss-Wright rotary division in February 1984, making large multi-fuel prototypes, some with an 11-liter rotor for large vehicles. The developers attempted to use a stratified charge concept. The technology was transferred to RPI in 1991.\nYanmar of Japan produced small, charge-cooled Wankel engines for chainsaws and outboard engines. One of its products is the LDR (rotor recess in the leading edge of the combustion chamber) engine, which has better exhaust emissions profiles, and reed-valve controlled intake ports, which improve part-load and low rpm performance.\nIn 1971 and 1972, Arctic Cat produced snowmobiles powered by Sachs KM 914 303-cc and KC-24 294-cc Wankel engines made in Germany.\nIn the early 1970s, Outboard Marine Corporation sold snowmobiles under the Johnson and other brands, which were powered by {{convert|35|or|45|hp|abbr=on}} OMC engines.\nAixro of Germany produces and sells a go-kart engine with a 294-cc-chamber charge-cooled rotor and liquid-cooled housings. Other makers include Wankel AG, Cubewano, Rotron, and Precision Technology.\nNon-internal combustion.\nIn addition to applications as an internal combustion engine, the basic Wankel design has also been used for gas compressors, and superchargers for internal combustion engines, but in these cases, although the design still offers advantages in reliability, the primary advantages of the Wankel in size and weight over the four-stroke internal combustion engine are irrelevant. In a design using a Wankel supercharger on a Wankel engine, the supercharger is twice the size of the engine.\nThe Wankel design is used in the seat belt pre-tensioner system in some Mercedes-Benz and Volkswagen cars. When the deceleration sensors detect a potential crash, small explosive cartridges are triggered electrically, and the resulting pressurized gas feeds into tiny Wankel air motors, which tighten the seat belts and anchor the driver and passengers firmly in the seat before a collision."}
{"id": "33304", "revid": "48623286", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33304", "title": "White Dwarf (magazine)", "text": "Fantasy games magazine\nWhite Dwarf is a magazine published by British games manufacturer Games Workshop, which has long served as a promotions and advertising platform for Games Workshop and Citadel Miniatures products.\nDuring the first ten years of its publication, it covered a wide variety of fantasy and science-fiction role-playing games (RPGs) and board games, particularly the role-playing games \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" (\"AD&amp;D\"), \"Call of Cthulhu\", \"RuneQuest\" and \"Traveller\". \nThese games were all published by other games companies and distributed in the United Kingdom by Games Workshop stores. The magazine underwent a major change in style and content in the late 1980s. It is now dedicated exclusively to the miniature wargames produced by Games Workshop.\nHistory.\n1970s.\nSteve Jackson and Ian Livingstone initially produced a newsletter called \"Owl and Weasel\", which ran for twenty-five issues from February 1975 before it evolved into \"White Dwarf\".\nOriginally scheduled for May/June 1977, \"White Dwarf\" was first published one month later. According to Shannon Appelcline, \"Issue #1 ... was a 20-page magazine printed on glossy stock with a two-color cover.\" The magazine had a bimonthly schedule, with an initial (and speculative) print run of 4,000. \"White Dwarf\" continued the fantasy and science fiction role-playing and board-gaming theme developed in \"Owl and Weasel\". Due to the increase in available space, there was an opportunity to produce reviews, articles and scenarios to a greater depth than had been possible in \"Owl and Weasel\".\n1980s.\nDuring the early 1980s, the magazine focused mainly on the \"big three\" role-playing games of the time: \"Advanced Dungeons &amp; Dragons\", \"RuneQuest\" and \"Traveller\".\nIn addition to this a generation of writers passed through its offices and onto other RPG projects in the next decade, such as Phil Masters and Marcus L. Rowland. The magazine included mini-game scenarios, capable of completion in a single night's play, rather than the long games typical of the off-the-shelf campaigns. This would often be in the form of a single task for either existing or new characters to resolve. These could either be added to existing campaign plots, or be used stand-alone, just for an evening, and were easily grasped by those familiar with RPG rules.\nDuring this period the magazine included many features such as the satirical comic strip \"Thrud the Barbarian\" and Dave Langford's \"Critical Mass\" book review column, as well as a comical advertising series \"The Androx Diaries\", and always had cameos and full scenarios for a broad selection of the most popular games of the time, as well as a more rough and informal editorial style.\nIn the mid to late 1980s, however, there was a repositioning from being a general periodical covering all aspects and publishers within the hobby niche to a focus almost exclusively on Games Workshop's own products and publications. The last \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" article appeared in issue 93, with the changeover being complete by issue #102. In this respect it took over some of the aspects of the \"Citadel Journal\", an intermittent publication that supported the \"Warhammer Fantasy Battle\" game. The magazine has always been a conduit for new rules and ideas for GW games as well as a means to showcase developments. It often includes scenarios, campaigns, hobby news, photos of recently released miniatures and tips on building terrain and constructing or converting miniatures.\nGrombrindal the White Dwarf is also a special character for the \"Warhammer\" Dwarf army, whose rules are published only in certain issues of \"White Dwarf\" (being revamped for the most recent edition of the rules). It is never stated who exactly the White Dwarf is, but it is implied that he is the spirit of Snorri Whitebeard, the last king of the Dwarfs to receive respect from an Elf. The image of the White Dwarf has graced the cover of many issues of the magazine. The image was also used on the character sheet for the Dwarf character in \"HeroQuest\".\n2000s.\nIn December 2004, \"White Dwarf\" published its 300th issue in the United Kingdom, Australia, and North America. Each issue contained many special \"freebies\" as well as articles on the history of the magazine and the founding of Games Workshop.\nThe monthly battle reports are a regular feature. Battle reports detail a battle between two or more forces, usually with their own specific victory conditions. The reports follow the gamers through their army selection, tactics and deployment, through the battle to their respective conclusions. The format varies, ranging from a simplified, generalized style to a more detailed and visual style.\nThe page count of the US and UK publications was substantially different (for example, bearing in mind the US/UK numbering difference: issue US #319, 156 pages; UK #320, 132 pages) with substantial differences in actual amount of content (for example in the same issues: US, 114 pages; UK, 71 pages) and each magazine had substantial overlap with the other as well as unique articles.\n2010s.\nIn June 2010, Andrew Kenrick replaced Mark Latham as editor. Kenrick had previously been sub-editor, as well as editing other Games Workshop material such as the most recent edition of \"Codex: Space Marines\".\nAs of the October 2012 issue, \"White Dwarf\" was redesigned with a new nine-member production staff with Matthew Hutson, Kris Shield and Andrew Kenrick continuing from the previous version, and six new members, including Jes Bickham as the new editor. Bickham had previously edited the \"Battle Games in Middle-earth\" magazine.\n\"White Dwarf\" continued to be published on a monthly basis until issue #409, January 2014. On 1 February 2014, the magazine moved to a 32-page format, published weekly and renumbered from issue 1. \"Warhammer Visions\", a monthly sister title, was launched at the same time, in a format favouring the imagery over text. The weekly version of \"White Dwarf\" lasted for 131 issues. In September 2016, the magazine returned to its monthly format; it also subsumed \"Warhammer Visions\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33305", "revid": "1318082426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33305", "title": "Bhavacakra", "text": "Symbolic representation of cyclic existence\nThe bhavachakra (Sanskrit: \u092d\u0935\u091a\u0915\u094d\u0930; P\u0101li: \"bhavacakka\"; Tibetan: \u0f66\u0fb2\u0f72\u0f51\u0f0b\u0f54\u0f60\u0f72\u0f0b\u0f60\u0f41\u0f7c\u0f62\u0f0b\u0f63\u0f7c, Wylie: \"srid pa'i 'khor lo\") or wheel of life is a visual teaching aid and meditation tool symbolically representing sa\u1e43s\u0101ra (or cyclic existence). It is found on the walls of Tibetan Buddhist temples and monasteries in the Indo-Tibetan region, to help both Buddhists and non Buddhists understand the core Buddhist teachings. The image consists of four concentric circles, held by Yama, the lord of Death, with an image of the Buddha pointing to the moon metaphorically representing the possibility for liberation from the suffering of reincarnation.\nEtymology.\n\"Bhavachakra\", \"wheel of life,\" consists of the words \"bhava\" and \"chakra\".\n\"bhava\" () means \"being, worldly existence, becoming, birth, being, production, origin\".\nIn Buddhism, \"bhava\" denotes the continuity of becoming (reincarnating) in one of the realms of existence, in the samsaric context of rebirth, life and the maturation arising therefrom. It is the tenth of the Twelve Nidanas, in its \"Prat\u012btyasamutp\u0101da\" doctrine.\nThe word \"Chakra\" () derives from the Sanskrit word meaning \"wheel,\" as well as \"circle\" and \"cycle\".\nLegend has it that the historical Buddha himself created the first depiction of the bhavachakra, and the story of how he gave the illustration to King Rudr\u0101ya\u1e47a appears in the anthology of Buddhist narratives called the \"Divy\u0101vad\u0101na\". \"Sahasodgata-avad\u0101na\", in the opening paragraphs of the work, describes the Buddha's instructions for creating the bhavachakra.\nExplanation of the diagram.\nThe \"bhavachakra\" is painted on the outside walls of nearly every Tibetan Buddhist temple in Tibet and India, to instruct non-monastic audience about the Buddhist teachings.\nElements of the \"bhavachakra\".\nThe \"bhavachakra\" consists of the following elements: \nSymbolically, the three inner circles, moving from the center outward, show that the three poisons of ignorance, attachment, and aversion give rise to positive and negative actions; these actions and their results are called karma. Karma in turn gives rise to the six realms, which represent the different types of suffering within samsara.\nThe fourth and outer layer of the wheel symbolizes the twelve links of dependent origination; these links indicate \"how\" the sources of suffering that the three poisons and karma produce live within cyclic existence.\nThe fierce being holding the wheel represents impermanence; this symbolizes that the entire process of samsara or cyclic existence is impermanent, transient, constantly changing. The moon above the wheel indicates liberation. The Buddha is pointing to the moon, indicating that liberation from samsara is possible.\nHub: the three poisons.\nIn the hub of the wheel are three animals: a pig, a snake, and a bird. They represent the three poisons of ignorance, aversion, and attachment, respectively. The pig stands for ignorance; this comparison is based on the Indian concept of a pig being the most foolish of animals, since it sleeps in the dirtiest places and eats whatever comes to its mouth. The snake represents aversion or anger; this is because it will be aroused and strike at the slightest touch. The bird represents attachment (also translated as \"desire\" or \"clinging\"). The particular bird used in this diagram represents an Indian bird that is very attached to its partner. These three animals represent the three poisons, which are the core of the bhavachakra. From these three poisons, the whole cycle of existence evolves.\nIn many drawings of the wheel, the snake and bird are shown as coming out of the mouth of the pig, indicating that aversion and attachment arise from ignorance. The snake and bird are also shown grasping the tail of the pig, indicating that they in turn promote greater ignorance.\nUnder the influence of the three poisons, beings create karma, as shown in the next layer of the circle.\nSecond layer: karma.\nThe second layer of the wheel shows two-half circles:\nThese images represent karma, the law of cause and effect. The light half-circle indicates people experiencing the results of positive actions. The dark half-circle indicates people experiencing the results of negative actions.\nRingu Tulku states:\nWe create karma in three different ways, through actions that are positive, negative, or neutral. When we feel kindness and love and with this attitude do good things, which are beneficial to both ourselves and others, this is positive action. When we commit harmful deeds out of equally harmful intentions, this is negative action. Finally, when our motivation is indifferent and our deeds are neither harmful or beneficial, this is neutral action. The results we experience will accord with the quality of our actions.\nPropelled by their karma, beings take rebirth in the six realms of samsara, as shown in the next layer of the circle.\nThird layer: the six realms of samsara.\nThe third layer of the wheel is divided into six sections that represent the six realms of samsara, or cyclic existence, the process of cycling through one rebirth after another. These six realms are divided into three higher realms and three lower realms. The wheel can also be represented as having five realms, combining the God realm and the Demi-god realm into a single realm.\nThe three higher realms are shown in the top half of the circle:\nThe three lower realms are shown in the bottom half of the circle:\nAmong the six realms, the human realm is considered to offer the best opportunity to practice the dharma. In some representations of the wheel, there is a buddha or bodhisattva depicted within each realm, trying to help sentient beings find their way to nirvana.\nOuter rim: the twelve links.\nThe outer rim of the wheel is divided into twelve sections that represent the Twelve Nid\u0101nas. As previously stated, the three inner layers of the wheel show that the three poisons lead to karma, which leads to the suffering of the six realms. The twelve links of the outer rim show \"how\" this happens\u2014by presenting the process of cause and effect in detail.\nThese twelve links can be understood to operate on an outer or inner level. \nBy contemplating on the twelve links, one gains greater insight into the workings of karma; this insight enables us to begin to unravel our habitual way of thinking and reacting.\nThe twelve causal links, paired with their corresponding symbols, are: \nThe figure holding the wheel: impermanence.\nThe wheel is being held by a fearsome figure who represents impermanence.\nThis figure is often interpreted as being Mara, the demon who tried to tempt the Buddha, or as Yama, the lord of death. Regardless of the figure depicted, the inner meaning remains the same\u2013that the entire process of cyclic existence (samsara) is transient; everything within this wheel is constantly changing.\nYama has the following attributes:\nThe moon: liberation.\nAbove the wheel is an image of the moon; the moon represents liberation from the sufferings of samsara. Some drawings may show an image of a \"pure land\" to indicate liberation, rather than a moon.\nThe Buddha pointing to the white circle: the path to liberation.\nThe upper part of the drawing also shows an image of the Buddha pointing toward the moon; this represents the path to liberation. While in Theravada Buddhism this is the Noble Eightfold Path, in Mahayana Buddhism this is the Bodhisattva path, striving to liberation for all sentient beings. In Tibetan Buddhism, this is Lamrim, which details all the stages on the path, while Zen has its own complicated history of the entanglement of meditation practice and direct insight.\nInscription.\nDrawings of the Bhavachakra usually contain an inscription consisting of a few lines of text that explain the process that keeps people in samsara and how to reverse that process.\nAlternative interpretations.\nTheravada.\nThe Theravada-tradition does not have a graphical representation of the round of rebirths, but cakra-symbolism is an elementary component of Buddhism, and Buddhaghosa's \"Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga)\" contains such imagery:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is the beginningless round of rebirths that is called the 'Wheel of the round of rebirths' (\"sa\u1e43s\u0101racakka\"). Ignorance (\"avijj\u0101\") is its hub (or nave) because it is its root. Ageing-and-death (\"jar\u0101-mara\u1e47a\") is its rim (or felly) because it terminates it. The remaining ten links (of the Dependent Origination) are its spokes (i.e. karma formations [\"sa\u1e45kh\u0101ra\"] up to process of becoming [\"bhava\"]).\nWestern psychological interpretation.\nSome western interpreters take a psychological point of view, explaining that different karmic actions contribute to one's metaphorical existence in different realms, or rather, different actions reinforce personal characteristics described by the realms. According to Mark Epstein, \"each realm becomes not so much a specific place but rather a metaphor for a different psychological state, with the entire wheel becoming a representation of neurotic suffering.\"\nReferences.\nFootnotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWeb-sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33306", "revid": "940017", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33306", "title": "Water", "text": "Chemical compound of hydrogen and oxygen\nWater is an inorganic compound with the chemical formula . It is a transparent, tasteless, odorless, and nearly colorless chemical substance. It is the main constituent of Earth's hydrosphere and the fluids of all known living organisms, in which it acts as a solvent. Water, being a polar molecule, undergoes strong intermolecular hydrogen bonding which is a large contributor to its physical and chemical properties. It is vital for all known forms of life, despite not providing food energy or being an organic micronutrient. Due to its presence in all organisms, its chemical stability, its worldwide abundance, and its strong polarity relative to its small molecular size, water is often referred to as the \"universal solvent\".\nBecause Earth's environment is relatively close to water's triple point, water exists on Earth as a solid, a liquid, and a gas. It forms precipitation in the form of rain and aerosols in the form of fog. Clouds consist of suspended droplets of water and ice, its solid state. When finely divided, crystalline ice may precipitate in the form of snow. The gaseous state of water is steam or water vapor.\nWater covers about 71.0% of the Earth's surface, with seas and oceans making up most of the water volume (about 96.5%). Small portions of water occur as groundwater (1.7%), in the glaciers and the ice caps of Antarctica and Greenland (1.7%), and in the air as vapor, clouds (consisting of ice and liquid water suspended in air), and precipitation (0.001%). Water moves continually through the water cycle of evaporation, transpiration (evapotranspiration), condensation, precipitation, and runoff, usually reaching the sea.\nWater plays an important role in the world economy. Approximately 70% of the fresh water used by humans goes to agriculture. Fishing in salt and fresh water bodies has been, and continues to be, a major source of food for many parts of the world, providing 6.5% of global protein. Much of the long-distance trade of commodities (such as oil, natural gas, and manufactured products) is transported by boats through seas, rivers, lakes, and canals. Large quantities of water, ice, and steam are used for cooling and heating in industry and homes. Water is an excellent solvent for a wide variety of substances, both mineral and organic; as such, it is widely used in industrial processes and in cooking and washing. Water, ice, and snow are also central to many sports and other forms of entertainment, such as swimming, pleasure boating, boat racing, surfing, sport fishing, diving, ice skating, snowboarding, and skiing.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology.\nThe word \"water\" comes from Old English , from Proto-Germanic (source also of Old Saxon , Old Frisian , Dutch , Old High German , German , , Gothic ()), from Proto-Indo-European , suffixed form of root ('water'; 'wet'). Also cognate, through the Indo-European root, with Greek (; from Ancient Greek (), whence English 'hydro-'), Russian (), Irish , and Albanian .\nProperties.\nWater () is a polar inorganic compound. At room temperature it is a tasteless and odorless liquid, nearly colorless with a hint of blue. The simplest hydrogen chalcogenide, it is by far the most studied chemical compound and is sometimes described as the \"universal solvent\" for its ability to dissolve more substances than any other liquid, though it is poor at dissolving nonpolar substances. This allows it to be the \"solvent of life\": indeed, water as found in nature almost always includes various dissolved substances, and special steps are required to obtain chemically pure water. Water is the only common substance to exist as a solid, liquid, and gas in normal terrestrial conditions.\nStates.\nAlong with \"oxidane\", \"water\" is one of the two official names for the chemical compound H2O; it is also the liquid phase of H2O. The other two common states of matter of water are the solid phase, ice, and the gaseous phase, water vapor or steam. The addition or removal of heat can cause phase transitions: freezing (water to ice), melting (ice to water), vaporization (water to vapor), condensation (vapor to water), sublimation (ice to vapor) and deposition (vapor to ice).\nDensity.\nWater is one of only a few common naturally occurring substances which, for some temperature ranges, become less dense as they cool, and the only known naturally occurring substance which does so while liquid. In addition it is unusual as it becomes significantly less dense as it freezes, though it is not unique in that respect.\nAt 1\u00a0atm pressure, it reaches its maximum density of at .\nBelow that temperature, but above the freezing point of , it expands becoming less dense until it reaches freezing point, reaching a density in its liquid phase of .\nOnce it freezes and becomes ice, it expands by about 9%, with a density of . This expansion can exert enormous pressure, bursting pipes and cracking rocks. As a solid, it displays the usual behavior of contracting and becoming more dense as it cools. These unusual thermal properties have important consequences for life on earth.\nIn a lake or ocean, water at sinks to the bottom, and ice forms on the surface, floating on the liquid water. This ice insulates the water below, preventing it from freezing solid. Without this protection, most aquatic organisms residing in lakes would perish during the winter. In addition, this anomalous behavior is an important part of the thermohaline circulation which distributes heat around the planet's oceans.\nMagnetism.\nWater is a diamagnetic material. Though interaction is weak, with superconducting magnets it can attain a notable interaction.\nPhase transitions.\nAt a pressure of one atmosphere (atm), ice melts or water freezes (solidifies) at and water boils or vapor condenses at . However, even below the boiling point, water can change to vapor at its surface by evaporation (vaporization throughout the liquid is known as boiling). Sublimation and deposition also occur on surfaces. For example, frost is deposited on cold surfaces while snowflakes form by deposition on an aerosol particle or ice nucleus. In the process of freeze-drying, a food is frozen and then stored at low pressure so the ice on its surface sublimates.\nThe melting and boiling points depend on pressure. A good approximation for the rate of change of the melting temperature with pressure is given by the Clausius\u2013Clapeyron relation:\nformula_1\nwhere formula_2 and formula_3 are the molar volumes of the liquid and solid phases, and formula_4 is the molar latent heat of melting. In most substances, the volume increases when melting occurs, so the melting temperature increases with pressure. However, because ice is less dense than water, the melting temperature decreases. In glaciers, pressure melting can occur under sufficiently thick volumes of ice, resulting in subglacial lakes.\nThe Clausius-Clapeyron relation also applies to the boiling point, but with the liquid/gas transition the vapor phase has a much lower density than the liquid phase, so the boiling point increases with pressure. Water can remain in a liquid state at high temperatures in the deep ocean or underground. For example, temperatures exceed in Old Faithful, a geyser in Yellowstone National Park. In hydrothermal vents, the temperature can exceed .\nAt sea level, the boiling point of water is . As atmospheric pressure decreases with altitude, the boiling point decreases by 1\u00a0\u00b0C every 274\u00a0meters. High-altitude cooking takes longer than sea-level cooking. For example, at , cooking time must be increased by a fourth to achieve the desired result. Conversely, a pressure cooker can be used to decrease cooking times by raising the boiling temperature. In a vacuum, water will boil at room temperature.\nTriple and critical points.\nOn a pressure/temperature phase diagram (see figure), there are curves separating solid from vapor, vapor from liquid, and liquid from solid. These meet at a single point called the triple point, where all three phases can coexist. The triple point is at a temperature of and a pressure of ; it is the lowest pressure at which liquid water can exist. Until 2019, the triple point was used to define the Kelvin temperature scale.\nThe water/vapor phase curve terminates at and . This is known as the critical point. At higher temperatures and pressures the liquid and vapor phases form a continuous phase called a supercritical fluid. It can be gradually compressed or expanded between gas-like and liquid-like densities; its properties (which are quite different from those of ambient water) are sensitive to density. For example, for suitable pressures and temperatures it can mix freely with nonpolar compounds, including most organic compounds. This makes it useful in a variety of applications including high-temperature electrochemistry and as an ecologically benign solvent or catalyst in chemical reactions involving organic compounds. In Earth's mantle, it acts as a solvent during mineral formation, dissolution and deposition.\nPhases of ice and water.\nThe normal form of ice on the surface of Earth is ice Ih, a phase that forms crystals with hexagonal symmetry. Another with cubic crystalline symmetry, ice Ic, can occur in the upper atmosphere. As the pressure increases, ice forms other crystal structures. As of 2024, twenty have been experimentally confirmed and several more are predicted theoretically. The eighteenth form of ice, ice XVIII, a face-centred-cubic, superionic ice phase, was discovered when a droplet of water was subject to a shock wave that raised the water's pressure to millions of atmospheres and its temperature to thousands of degrees, resulting in a structure of rigid oxygen atoms in which hydrogen atoms flowed freely. When sandwiched between layers of graphene, ice forms a square lattice.\nThe details of the chemical nature of liquid water are not well understood; some theories suggest that its unusual behavior is due to the existence of two liquid states.\nTaste and odor.\nPure water is usually described as tasteless and odorless, although humans have specific sensors that can feel the presence of water in their mouths, and frogs are known to be able to smell it. However, water from ordinary sources (including mineral water) usually has many dissolved substances that may give it varying tastes and odors. Humans and other animals have developed senses that enable them to evaluate the potability of water to avoid water that is too salty or putrid.\nColor and appearance.\nPure water is visibly blue due to absorption of light in the region c. 600\u2013800\u00a0nm. The color can be easily observed in a glass of tap-water placed against a pure white background, in daylight. The principal absorption bands responsible for the color are overtones of the O\u2013H stretching vibrations. The apparent intensity of the color increases with the depth of the water column, following Beer's law. This also applies, for example, with a swimming pool when the light source is sunlight reflected from the pool's white tiles.\nIn nature, the color may also be modified from blue to green due to the presence of suspended solids or algae.\nIn industry, near-infrared spectroscopy is used with aqueous solutions as the greater intensity of the lower overtones of water means that glass cuvettes with short path-length may be employed. To observe the fundamental stretching absorption spectrum of water or of an aqueous solution in the region around 3,500\u00a0cm\u22121 (2.85\u00a0\u03bcm) a path length of about 25\u00a0\u03bcm is needed. Also, the cuvette must be both transparent around 3500\u00a0cm\u22121 and insoluble in water; calcium fluoride is one material that is in common use for the cuvette windows with aqueous solutions.\nThe Raman-active fundamental vibrations may be observed with, for example, a 1\u00a0cm sample cell.\nAquatic plants, algae, and other photosynthetic organisms can live in water up to hundreds of meters deep, because sunlight can reach them.\nPractically no sunlight reaches the parts of the oceans below of depth.\nThe refractive index of liquid water (1.333 at ) is much higher than that of air (1.0), similar to those of alkanes and ethanol, but lower than those of glycerol (1.473), benzene (1.501), carbon disulfide (1.627), and common types of glass (1.4 to 1.6). The refraction index of ice (1.31) is lower than that of liquid water.\nMolecular polarity.\nIn a water molecule, the hydrogen atoms form a 104.5\u00b0 angle with the oxygen atom. The hydrogen atoms are close to two corners of a tetrahedron centered on the oxygen. At the other two corners are \"lone pairs\" of valence electrons that do not participate in the bonding. In a perfect tetrahedron, the atoms would form a 109.5\u00b0 angle, but the repulsion between the lone pairs is greater than the repulsion between the hydrogen atoms. The O\u2013H bond length is about 0.096\u00a0nm.\nOther substances have a tetrahedral molecular structure, for example methane (CH4) and hydrogen sulfide (H2S). However, oxygen is more electronegative than most other elements, so the oxygen atom has a negative partial charge while the hydrogen atoms are partially positively charged. Along with the bent structure, this gives the molecule an electrical dipole moment and it is classified as a polar molecule.\nWater is a good polar solvent, dissolving many salts and hydrophilic organic molecules such as sugars and simple alcohols such as ethanol. Water also dissolves many gases, such as oxygen and carbon dioxide \u2013the latter giving the fizz of carbonated beverages, sparkling wines and beers. In addition, many substances in living organisms, such as proteins, DNA and polysaccharides, are dissolved in water. The interactions between water and the subunits of these biomacromolecules shape protein folding, DNA base pairing, and other phenomena crucial to life (hydrophobic effect).\nMany organic substances (such as fats and oils and alkanes) are hydrophobic, that is, insoluble in water. Many inorganic substances are insoluble too, including most metal oxides, sulfides, and silicates.\nHydrogen bonding.\nBecause of its polarity, a molecule of water in the liquid or solid state can form up to four hydrogen bonds with neighboring molecules. Hydrogen bonds are about ten times as strong as the Van der Waals force that attracts molecules to each other in most liquids. This is the reason why the melting and boiling points of water are much higher than those of other analogous compounds like hydrogen sulfide. They also explain its exceptionally high specific heat capacity (about 4.2 J/(g\u00b7K)), heat of fusion (about 333 J/g), heat of vaporization (2257 J/g), and thermal conductivity (between 0.561 and 0.679 W/(m\u00b7K)). These properties make water more effective at moderating Earth's climate, by storing heat and transporting it between the oceans and the atmosphere. The hydrogen bonds of water are around 23 kJ/mol (compared to a covalent O\u2013H bond at 492 kJ/mol). Of this, it is estimated that 90% is attributable to electrostatics, while the remaining 10% is partially covalent.\nThese bonds are the cause of water's high surface tension and capillary forces. Capillary action refers to the tendency of water to move up a narrow tube against the force of gravity. This property is relied upon by all vascular plants, such as trees.\nSelf-ionization.\nWater is a weak solution of hydronium hydroxide \u2013there is an equilibrium , in combination with solvation of the resulting hydronium and hydroxide ions.\nElectrical conductivity and electrolysis.\nPure water has a low electrical conductivity, which increases with the dissolution of a small amount of ionic material such as common salt.\nLiquid water can be split into the elements hydrogen and oxygen by passing an electric current through it\u2014a process called electrolysis. The decomposition requires more energy input than the heat released by the inverse process (285.8 kJ/mol, or 15.9 MJ/kg).\nMechanical properties.\nLiquid water can be assumed to be incompressible for most purposes: its compressibility ranges from 4.4 to in ordinary conditions. Even in oceans at 4\u00a0km depth, where the pressure is 400 atm, water suffers only a 1.8% decrease in volume.\nThe viscosity of water is about 10\u22123 Pa\u00b7s or 0.01 poise at , and the speed of sound in liquid water ranges between depending on temperature. Sound travels long distances in water with little attenuation, especially at low frequencies (roughly 0.03 dB/km for 1 kHz), a property that is exploited by cetaceans and humans for communication and environment sensing (sonar).\nReactivity.\nMetallic elements which are more electropositive than hydrogen, particularly the alkali metals and, to a lesser extent, alkaline earth metals, displace hydrogen from water, forming hydroxides and releasing hydrogen.\nAt high temperatures, coke, a form of carbon, reacts with steam to form carbon monoxide and hydrogen.\nOn Earth.\nHydrology is the study of the movement, distribution, and quality of water throughout the Earth. The study of the distribution of water is hydrography. The study of the distribution and movement of groundwater is hydrogeology, of glaciers is glaciology, of inland waters is limnology and distribution of oceans is oceanography. Ecological processes with hydrology are in the focus of ecohydrology.\nThe collective mass of water found on, under, and over the surface of a planet is called the hydrosphere. Earth's approximate water volume (the total water supply of the world) is .\nLiquid water is found in bodies of water, such as an ocean, sea, lake, river, stream, canal, pond, or puddle. The majority of water on Earth is seawater. Water is also present in the atmosphere in solid, liquid, and vapor states. It also exists as groundwater in aquifers.\nWater is important in many geological processes. Groundwater is present in most rocks, and the pressure of this groundwater affects patterns of faulting. Water in the mantle is responsible for the melt that produces volcanoes at subduction zones. On the surface of the Earth, water is important in both chemical and physical weathering processes. Water, and to a lesser but still significant extent, ice, are also responsible for a large amount of sediment transport that occurs on the surface of the earth. Deposition of transported sediment forms many types of sedimentary rocks, which make up the geologic record of Earth history.\nWater cycle.\nThe water cycle (known scientifically as the hydrologic cycle) is the continuous exchange of water within the hydrosphere, between the atmosphere, soil water, surface water, groundwater, and plants.\nWater moves perpetually through each of these regions in the \"water cycle\" consisting of the following transfer processes:\nMost water vapors found mostly in the ocean returns to it, but winds carry water vapor over land at the same rate as runoff into the sea, about 47\u00a0Tt per year while evaporation and transpiration happening in land masses also contribute another 72\u00a0Tt per year. Precipitation, at a rate of 119 Tt per year over land, has several forms: most commonly rain, snow, and hail, with some contribution from fog and dew. Dew is small drops of water that are condensed when a high density of water vapor meets a cool surface. Dew usually forms in the morning when the temperature is the lowest, just before sunrise and when the temperature of the earth's surface starts to increase. Condensed water in the air may also refract sunlight to produce rainbows.\nWater runoff often collects over watersheds flowing into rivers. Through erosion, runoff shapes the environment creating river valleys and deltas which provide rich soil and level ground for the establishment of population centers. A flood occurs when an area of land, usually low-lying, is covered with water which occurs when a river overflows its banks or a storm surge happens. On the other hand, drought is an extended period of months or years when a region notes a deficiency in its water supply. This occurs when a region receives consistently below average precipitation either due to its topography or due to its location in terms of latitude.\nWater resources.\nWater resources are natural resources of water that are potentially useful for humans, for example as a source of drinking water supply or irrigation water. Water occurs as both \"stocks\" and \"flows\". Water can be stored as lakes, water vapor, groundwater or aquifers, and ice and snow. Of the total volume of global freshwater, an estimated 69 percent is stored in glaciers and permanent snow cover; 30 percent is in groundwater; and the remaining 1 percent in lakes, rivers, the atmosphere, and biota. The length of time water remains in storage is highly variable: some aquifers consist of water stored over thousands of years, but lake volumes may fluctuate on a seasonal basis, decreasing during dry periods and increasing during wet ones. A substantial fraction of the water supply for some regions consists of water extracted from water stored in stocks, and when withdrawals exceed recharge, stocks decrease. By some estimates, as much as 30 percent of total water used for irrigation comes from unsustainable withdrawals of groundwater, causing groundwater depletion.\nSeawater and tides.\nSeawater contains about 3.5% sodium chloride on average, plus smaller amounts of other substances. The physical properties of seawater differ from fresh water in some important respects. It freezes at a lower temperature (about ) and its density increases with decreasing temperature to the freezing point, instead of reaching maximum density at a temperature above freezing. The salinity of water in major seas varies from about 0.7% in the Baltic Sea to 4.0% in the Red Sea. (The Dead Sea, known for its ultra-high salinity levels of between 30 and 40%, is really a salt lake.)\nTides are the cyclic rising and falling of local sea levels caused by the tidal forces of the Moon and the Sun acting on the oceans. Tides cause changes in the depth of the marine and estuarine water bodies and produce oscillating currents known as tidal streams. The changing tide produced at a given location is the result of the changing positions of the Moon and Sun relative to the Earth coupled with the effects of Earth rotation and the local bathymetry. The strip of seashore that is submerged at high tide and exposed at low tide, the intertidal zone, is an important ecological product of ocean tides.\nEffects on life.\nFrom a biological standpoint, water has many distinct properties that are critical for the proliferation of life. It carries out this role by allowing organic compounds to react in ways that ultimately allow replication. All known forms of life depend on water. Water is vital both as a solvent in which many of the body's solutes dissolve and as an essential part of many metabolic processes within the body. Metabolism is the sum total of anabolism and catabolism. In anabolism, water is removed from molecules (through energy requiring enzymatic chemical reactions) to grow larger molecules (e.g., starches, triglycerides, and proteins for storage of fuels and information). In catabolism, water is used to break bonds to generate smaller molecules (e.g., glucose, fatty acids, and amino acids to be used for fuels for energy use or other purposes). Without water, these particular metabolic processes could not exist.\nWater is fundamental to both photosynthesis and respiration. Photosynthetic cells use the sun's energy to split off water's hydrogen from oxygen. In the presence of sunlight, hydrogen is combined with CO2 (absorbed from air or water) to form glucose and release oxygen. All living cells use such fuels and oxidize the hydrogen and carbon to capture the sun's energy and reform water and CO2 in the process (cellular respiration).\nWater is also central to acid-base neutrality and enzyme function. An acid, a hydrogen ion (H+, that is, a proton) donor, can be neutralized by a base, a proton acceptor such as a hydroxide ion (OH\u2212) to form water. Water is considered to be neutral, with a pH (the negative log of the hydrogen ion concentration) of 7 in an ideal state. Acids have pH values less than 7 while bases have values greater than 7.\nAquatic life forms.\nEarth's surface waters are filled with life. The earliest life forms appeared in water; nearly all fish live exclusively in water, and there are many types of marine mammals, such as dolphins and whales. Some kinds of animals, such as amphibians, spend portions of their lives in water and portions on land. Plants such as kelp and algae grow in the water and are the basis for some underwater ecosystems. Plankton is generally the foundation of the ocean food chain.\nAquatic vertebrates must obtain oxygen to survive, and they do so in various ways. Fish have gills instead of lungs, although some species of fish, such as the lungfish, have both. Marine mammals, such as dolphins, whales, otters, and seals need to surface periodically to breathe air. Some amphibians are able to absorb oxygen through their skin. Invertebrates exhibit a wide range of modifications to survive in poorly oxygenated waters including breathing tubes (see insect and mollusc siphons) and gills (\"Carcinus\"). However, as invertebrate life evolved in an aquatic habitat most have little or no specialization for respiration in water.\nEffects on human civilization.\nCivilization has historically flourished around rivers and major waterways; Mesopotamia, one of the so-called cradles of civilization, was situated between the major rivers Tigris and Euphrates; the ancient society of the Egyptians depended entirely upon the Nile. The early Indus Valley civilization (c.\u20093300 BCE\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20091300 BCE) developed along the Indus River and tributaries that flowed out of the Himalayas. Rome was also founded on the banks of the Italian river Tiber. Large metropolises like Rotterdam, London, Montreal, Paris, New York City, Buenos Aires, Shanghai, Tokyo, Chicago, and Hong Kong owe their success in part to their easy accessibility via water and the resultant expansion of trade. Islands with safe water ports, like Singapore, have flourished for the same reason. In places such as North Africa and the Middle East, where water is more scarce, access to clean drinking water was and is a major factor in human development.\nHealth and pollution.\nWater fit for human consumption is called drinking water or potable water. Water that is not potable may be made potable by filtration or distillation, or by a range of other methods. More than 660 million people do not have access to safe drinking water.\nWater that is not fit for drinking but is not harmful to humans when used for swimming or bathing is called by various names other than potable or drinking water, and is sometimes called safe water, or \"safe for bathing\". Chlorine is a skin and mucous membrane irritant that is used to make water safe for bathing or drinking. Its use is highly technical and is usually monitored by government regulations (typically 1 part per million (ppm) for drinking water, and 1\u20132 ppm of chlorine not yet reacted with impurities for bathing water). Water for bathing may be maintained in satisfactory microbiological condition using chemical disinfectants such as chlorine or ozone or by the use of ultraviolet light.\nWater reclamation is the process of converting wastewater (most commonly sewage, also called municipal wastewater) into water that can be reused for other purposes. There are 2.3\u00a0billion people who reside in nations with water scarcities, which means that each individual receives less than of water annually. of municipal wastewater are produced globally each year.\nFreshwater is a renewable resource, recirculated by the natural hydrologic cycle, but pressures over access to it result from the naturally uneven distribution in space and time, growing economic demands by agriculture and industry, and rising populations. Currently, nearly a billion people around the world lack access to safe, affordable water. In 2000, the United Nations established the Millennium Development Goals for water to halve by 2015 the proportion of people worldwide without access to safe water and sanitation. Progress toward that goal was uneven, and in 2015 the UN committed to the Sustainable Development Goals of achieving universal access to safe and affordable water and sanitation by 2030. Poor water quality and bad sanitation are deadly; some five million deaths a year are caused by water-related diseases. The World Health Organization estimates that safe water could prevent 1.4\u00a0million child deaths from diarrhea each year.\nIn developing countries, 90% of all municipal wastewater still goes untreated into local rivers and streams. Some 50 countries, with roughly a third of the world's population, also suffer from medium or high water scarcity and 17 of these extract more water annually than is recharged through their natural water cycles. The strain not only affects surface freshwater bodies like rivers and lakes, but it also degrades groundwater resources.\nHuman uses.\nAgriculture.\nThe most substantial human use of water is for agriculture, including irrigated agriculture, which accounts for as much as 80 to 90 percent of total human water consumption. In the United States, 42% of freshwater withdrawn for use is for irrigation, but the vast majority of water \"consumed\" (used and not returned to the environment) goes to agriculture.\nAccess to fresh water is often taken for granted, especially in developed countries that have built sophisticated water systems for collecting, purifying, and delivering water, and removing wastewater. But growing economic, demographic, and climatic pressures are increasing concerns about water issues, leading to increasing competition for fixed water resources, giving rise to the concept of peak water. As populations and economies continue to grow, consumption of water-thirsty meat expands, and new demands rise for biofuels or new water-intensive industries, new water challenges are likely.\nAn assessment of water management in agriculture was conducted in 2007 by the International Water Management Institute in Sri Lanka to see if the world had sufficient water to provide food for its growing population. It assessed the current availability of water for agriculture on a global scale and mapped out locations suffering from water scarcity. It found that a fifth of the world's people, more than 1.2\u00a0billion, live in areas of physical water scarcity, where there is not enough water to meet all demands. A further 1.6\u00a0billion people live in areas experiencing economic water scarcity, where the lack of investment in water or insufficient human capacity make it impossible for authorities to satisfy the demand for water. The report found that it would be possible to produce the food required in the future, but that continuation of today's food production and environmental trends would lead to crises in many parts of the world. To avoid a global water crisis, farmers will have to strive to increase productivity to meet growing demands for food, while industries and cities find ways to use water more efficiently.\nWater scarcity is also caused by production of water intensive products. For example, cotton: 1\u00a0kg of cotton\u2014equivalent of a pair of jeans\u2014requires water to produce. While cotton accounts for 2.4% of world water use, the water is consumed in regions that are already at a risk of water shortage. Significant environmental damage has been caused: for example, the diversion of water by the former Soviet Union from the Amu Darya and Syr Darya rivers to produce cotton was largely responsible for the disappearance of the Aral Sea.\nAs a scientific standard.\nOn 7 April 1795, the gram was defined in France to be equal to \"the absolute weight of a volume of pure water equal to a cube of one-hundredth of a meter, and at the temperature of melting ice\". For practical purposes though, a metallic reference standard was required, one thousand times more massive, the kilogram. Work was therefore commissioned to determine precisely the mass of one liter of water. In spite of the fact that the decreed definition of the gram specified water at \u2014a highly reproducible \"temperature\"\u2014the scientists chose to redefine the standard and to perform their measurements at the temperature of highest water \"density\", which was measured at the time as .\nThe Kelvin temperature scale of the SI system was based on the triple point of water, defined as exactly , but as of May 2019 is based on the Boltzmann constant instead. The scale is an absolute temperature scale with the same increment as the Celsius temperature scale, which was originally defined according to the boiling point (set to ) and melting point (set to ) of water.\nNatural water consists mainly of the isotopes hydrogen-1 and oxygen-16, but there is also a small quantity of heavier isotopes oxygen-18, oxygen-17, and hydrogen-2 (deuterium). The percentage of the heavier isotopes is very small, but it still affects the properties of water. Water from rivers and lakes tends to contain less heavy isotopes than seawater. Therefore, standard water is defined in the Vienna Standard Mean Ocean Water specification.\nFor drinking.\nThe human body contains, on average, 50\u201360% water, depending on age, gender and body size, although individuals may have anywhere between 45% and 75%. The U.S. National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine recommends a daily intake of of water for adult men and for women. The precise amount depends on the level of activity, temperature, humidity, and other factors. Most of this is ingested through foods or beverages other than drinking straight water. Medical literature favors a lower consumption, typically 1 liter of water for an average male, excluding extra requirements due to fluid loss from exercise or warm weather.\nHealthy kidneys can excrete 0.8 to 1 liter of water per hour, but stress such as exercise can reduce this amount. People can drink far more water than necessary while exercising, putting them at risk of water intoxication (hyperhydration), which can be fatal. The popular claim that \"a person should consume eight glasses of water per day\" seems to have no real basis in science. Studies have shown that extra water intake, especially up to at mealtime, was associated with weight loss. Adequate fluid intake is helpful in preventing constipation.\nAn original recommendation for water intake in 1945 by the Food and Nutrition Board of the U.S. National Research Council read: \"An ordinary standard for diverse persons is 1 milliliter for each calorie of food. Most of this quantity is contained in prepared foods.\" The latest dietary reference intake report by the U.S. National Research Council in general recommended, based on the median total water intake from US survey data (including food sources): for men and of water total for women, noting that water contained in food provided approximately 19% of total water intake in the survey.\nSpecifically, pregnant and breastfeeding women need additional fluids to stay hydrated. The US Institute of Medicine recommends that, on average, men consume and women ; pregnant women should increase intake to and breastfeeding women should get 3 liters (12 cups), since an especially large amount of fluid is lost during nursing. Also noted is that normally, about 20% of water intake comes from food, while the rest comes from drinking water and beverages (caffeinated included). Water is excreted from the body in multiple forms; through urine and feces, through sweating, and by exhalation of water vapor in the breath. With physical exertion and heat exposure, water loss will increase and daily fluid needs may increase as well.\nHumans require water with few impurities. Common impurities include metals like copper and lead; chemical compounds such as pesticides, PFAS, or bleach; and harmful bacteria, such as \"Campylobacter\", , and \"Vibrio\". Some solutes are acceptable and even desirable for taste enhancement and to provide needed electrolytes.\nThe single largest (by volume) freshwater resource suitable for drinking is Lake Baikal in Siberia.\nChemical uses.\nWater is widely used in chemical reactions as a solvent or reactant and less commonly as a solute or catalyst. In inorganic reactions, water is a common solvent, dissolving many ionic compounds, as well as other polar compounds such as ammonia and compounds closely related to water. In organic reactions, it is not usually used as a reaction solvent, because it does not dissolve the reactants well and is amphoteric (acidic \"and\" basic) and nucleophilic. Nevertheless, these properties are sometimes desirable. Also, acceleration of Diels-Alder reactions by water has been observed. Supercritical water has recently been a topic of research. Oxygen-saturated supercritical water combusts organic pollutants efficiently.\nHeat exchange.\nWater and steam are a common fluid used for heat exchange, due to its availability and high heat capacity, both for cooling and heating. Cool water may even be naturally available from a lake or the sea. It is especially effective to transport heat through vaporization and condensation of water because of its large latent heat of vaporization. A disadvantage is that metals commonly found in industries such as steel and copper are oxidized faster by untreated water and steam. In almost all thermal power stations, water is used as the working fluid (used in a closed-loop between boiler, steam turbine, and condenser), and the coolant (used to exchange the waste heat to a water body or carry it away by evaporation in a cooling tower). In the United States, cooling power plants is the largest use of water.\nIn the nuclear power industry, water can also be used as a neutron moderator. In most nuclear reactors, water is both a coolant and a moderator. This provides something of a passive safety measure, as removing the water from the reactor also slows the nuclear reaction down. However other methods are favored for stopping a reaction and it is preferred to keep the nuclear core covered with water so as to ensure adequate cooling.\nFire considerations.\nWater has a high heat of vaporization and is relatively inert, which makes it a good fire extinguishing fluid. The evaporation of water carries heat away from the fire. It is dangerous to use water on fires involving oils and organic solvents because many organic materials float on water and the water tends to spread the burning liquid.\nUse of water in fire fighting should also take into account the hazards of a steam explosion, which may occur when water is used on very hot fires in confined spaces, and of a hydrogen explosion, when substances which react with water, such as certain metals or hot carbon such as coal, charcoal, or coke graphite, decompose the water, producing water gas.\nThe power of such explosions was seen in the Chernobyl disaster, although the water involved in this case did not come from fire-fighting but from the reactor's own water cooling system. A steam explosion occurred when the extreme overheating of the core caused water to flash into steam. A hydrogen explosion may have occurred as a result of a reaction between steam and hot zirconium.\nSome metallic oxides, most notably those of alkali metals and alkaline earth metals, produce so much heat in reaction with water that a fire hazard can develop. The alkaline earth oxide quicklime, also known as calcium oxide, is a mass-produced substance that is often transported in paper bags. If these are soaked through, they may ignite as their contents react with water.\nRecreation.\nHumans use water for many recreational purposes, as well as for exercising and for sports. Some of these include swimming, waterskiing, boating, surfing and diving. In addition, some sports, like ice hockey and ice skating, are played on ice. Lakesides, beaches and water parks are popular places for people to go to relax and enjoy recreation. Many find the sound and appearance of flowing water to be calming, and fountains and other flowing water structures are popular decorations. Some keep fish and other flora and fauna inside aquariums or ponds for show, fun, and companionship. Humans also use water for snow sports, such as skiing, sledding, snowmobiling or snowboarding, which require the water to be at a low temperature either as ice or crystallized into snow.\nWater industry.\nThe water industry provides drinking water and wastewater services (including sewage treatment) to households and industry. Water supply facilities include water wells, cisterns for rainwater harvesting, water supply networks, and water purification facilities, water tanks, water towers, water pipes including old aqueducts. Atmospheric water generators are in development.\nDrinking water is often collected at springs, extracted from artificial borings (wells) in the ground, or pumped from lakes and rivers. Building more wells in adequate places is thus a possible way to produce more water, assuming the aquifers can supply an adequate flow. Other water sources include rainwater collection. Water may require purification for human consumption. This may involve the removal of undissolved substances, dissolved substances and harmful microbes. Popular methods are filtering with sand which only removes undissolved material, while chlorination and boiling kill harmful microbes. Distillation does all three functions. More advanced techniques exist, such as reverse osmosis. Desalination of abundant seawater is a more expensive solution used in coastal arid climates.\nThe distribution of drinking water is done through municipal water systems, tanker delivery or as bottled water. Governments in many countries have programs to distribute water to the needy at no charge.\nReducing usage by using drinking (potable) water only for human consumption is another option. In some cities such as Hong Kong, seawater is extensively used for flushing toilets citywide to conserve freshwater resources.\nPolluting water may be the biggest single misuse of water; to the extent that a pollutant limits other uses of the water, it becomes a waste of the resource, regardless of benefits to the polluter. Like other types of pollution, this does not enter standard accounting of market costs, being conceived as externalities for which the market cannot account. Thus other people pay the price of water pollution, while the private firms' profits are not redistributed to the local population, victims of this pollution. Pharmaceuticals consumed by humans often end up in the waterways and can have detrimental effects on aquatic life if they bioaccumulate and if they are not biodegradable.\nMunicipal and industrial wastewater are typically treated at wastewater treatment plants. Mitigation of polluted surface runoff is addressed through a variety of prevention and treatment techniques.\nIndustrial applications.\nMany industrial processes rely on reactions using chemicals dissolved in water, suspension of solids in water slurries or using water to dissolve and extract substances, or to wash products or process equipment. Processes such as mining, chemical pulping, pulp bleaching, paper manufacturing, textile production, dyeing, printing, and cooling of power plants use large amounts of water, requiring a dedicated water source, and often cause significant water pollution.\nWater is used in power generation. Hydroelectricity is electricity obtained from hydropower. Hydroelectric power comes from water driving a water turbine connected to a generator. Hydroelectricity is a low-cost, non-polluting, renewable energy source. The energy is supplied by the motion of water. Typically a dam is constructed on a river, creating an artificial lake behind it. Water flowing out of the lake is forced through turbines that turn generators.\nPressurized water is used in water blasting and water jet cutters. High pressure water guns are used for precise cutting. It works very well, is relatively safe, and is not harmful to the environment. It is also used in the cooling of machinery to prevent overheating, or prevent saw blades from overheating.\nWater is also used in many industrial processes and machines, such as the steam turbine and heat exchanger, in addition to its use as a chemical solvent. Discharge of untreated water from industrial uses is pollution. Pollution includes discharged solutes (chemical pollution) and discharged coolant water (thermal pollution). Industry requires pure water for many applications and uses a variety of purification techniques both in water supply and discharge.\nFood processing.\nBoiling, steaming, and simmering are popular cooking methods that often require immersing food in water or its gaseous state, steam. Water is also used for dishwashing. Water also plays many critical roles within the field of food science.\nSolutes such as salts and sugars found in water affect the physical properties of water. The boiling and freezing points of water are affected by solutes, as well as air pressure, which is in turn affected by altitude. Water boils at lower temperatures with the lower air pressure that occurs at higher elevations. One mole of sucrose (sugar) per kilogram of water raises the boiling point of water by , and one mole of salt per kg raises the boiling point by ; similarly, increasing the number of dissolved particles lowers water's freezing point.\nSolutes in water also affect water activity that affects many chemical reactions and the growth of microbes in food. Water activity can be described as a ratio of the vapor pressure of water in a solution to the vapor pressure of pure water. Solutes in water lower water activity\u2014this is important to know because most bacterial growth ceases at low levels of water activity. Not only does microbial growth affect the safety of food, but also the preservation and shelf life of food.\nWater hardness is also a critical factor in food processing and may be altered or treated by using a chemical ion exchange system. It can dramatically affect the quality of a product, as well as playing a role in sanitation. Water hardness is classified based on concentration of calcium carbonate the water contains. Water is classified as soft if it contains less than 100\u00a0mg/L (UK) or less than 60\u00a0mg/L (US).\nAccording to a report published by the Water Footprint organization in 2010, a single kilogram of beef requires of water; however, the authors also make clear that this is a global average and circumstantial factors determine the amount of water used in beef production.\nMedical use.\nWater for injection is on the World Health Organization's list of essential medicines.\nDistribution in nature.\nIn the universe.\nMuch of the universe's water is produced as a byproduct of star formation. The formation of stars is accompanied by a strong outward wind of gas and dust. When this outflow of material eventually impacts the surrounding gas, the shock waves that are created compress and heat the gas. The water observed is quickly produced in this warm dense gas.\nOn 22 July 2011, a report described the discovery of a gigantic cloud of water vapor containing \"140 trillion times more water than all of Earth's oceans combined\" around a quasar located 12\u00a0billion light years from Earth. According to the researchers, the \"discovery shows that water has been prevalent in the universe for nearly its entire existence\".\nWater has been detected in interstellar clouds within the Milky Way. Water probably exists in abundance in other galaxies, too, because its components, hydrogen, and oxygen, are among the most abundant elements in the universe. Based on models of the formation and evolution of the Solar System and that of other star systems, most other planetary systems are likely to have similar ingredients.\nWater vapor.\nWater is present as vapor in:\nLiquid water.\nLiquid water is present on Earth, covering 71% of its surface. Liquid water is also occasionally present in small amounts on Mars. Scientists believe liquid water is present in the Saturnian moons of Enceladus, as a 10-kilometre thick ocean approximately 30\u201340 kilometers below Enceladus' south polar surface, and Titan, as a subsurface layer, possibly mixed with ammonia. Jupiter's moon Europa has surface characteristics which suggest a subsurface liquid water ocean. Liquid water may also exist on Jupiter's moon Ganymede as a layer sandwiched between high pressure ice and rock.\nWater ice.\nWater is present as ice on:\nAnd is also likely present on:\nExotic forms.\nWater and other volatiles probably comprise much of the internal structures of Uranus and Neptune and the water in the deeper layers may be in the form of ionic water in which the molecules break down into a soup of hydrogen and oxygen ions, and deeper still as superionic water in which the oxygen crystallizes, but the hydrogen ions float about freely within the oxygen lattice.\nWater and planetary habitability.\nThe existence of liquid water, and to a lesser extent its gaseous and solid forms, on Earth are vital to the existence of life on Earth as we know it. The Earth is located in the habitable zone of the Solar System; if it were slightly closer to or farther from the Sun (about 5%, or about 8 million kilometers), the conditions which allow the three forms to be present simultaneously would be far less likely to exist. Earth's size also plays a role: its gravity allows it to hold an atmosphere, including air moisture. Smaller planets like Mars have extremely thin or no atmospheres. Water vapor and carbon dioxide in the atmosphere provide a temperature buffer (greenhouse effect) which helps maintain a relatively steady surface temperature.\nThe surface temperature of Earth has been relatively constant through geologic time despite varying levels of incoming solar radiation (insolation), indicating that a dynamic process governs Earth's temperature via a combination of greenhouse gases and surface or atmospheric albedo. This proposal is known as the Gaia hypothesis.\nThe state of water on a planet depends on ambient pressure, which is determined by the planet's gravity. If a planet is sufficiently massive, the water on it may be solid even at high temperatures, because of the high pressure caused by gravity, as it was observed on exoplanets Gliese 436 b and GJ 1214 b.\nLaw, politics, and crisis.\nWater politics is politics affected by water and water resources. Water, particularly fresh water, is a strategic resource across the world and an important element in many political conflicts. It causes health impacts and damage to biodiversity.\nAccess to safe drinking water has improved over the last decades in almost every part of the world, but approximately one billion people still lack access to safe water and over 2.5\u00a0billion lack access to adequate sanitation. However, some observers have estimated that by 2025 more than half of the world population will be facing water-based vulnerability. A report, issued in November 2009, suggests that by 2030, in some developing regions of the world, water demand will exceed supply by 50%.\n1.6\u00a0billion people have gained access to a safe water source since 1990. The proportion of people in developing countries with access to safe water is calculated to have improved from 30% in 1970 to 71% in 1990, 79% in 2000, and 84% in 2004.\nA 2006 United Nations report stated that \"there is enough water for everyone\", but that access to it is hampered by mismanagement and corruption. In addition, global initiatives to improve the efficiency of aid delivery, such as the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, have not been taken up by water sector donors as effectively as they have in education and health, potentially leaving multiple donors working on overlapping projects and recipient governments without empowerment to act.\nThe authors of the 2007 Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture cited poor governance as one reason for some forms of water scarcity. Water governance is the set of formal and informal processes through which decisions related to water management are made. Good water governance is primarily about knowing what processes work best in a particular physical and socioeconomic context. Mistakes have sometimes been made by trying to apply 'blueprints' that work in the developed world to developing world locations and contexts. The Mekong river is one example; a review by the International Water Management Institute of policies in six countries that rely on the Mekong river for water found that thorough and transparent cost-benefit analyses and environmental impact assessments were rarely undertaken. They also discovered that Cambodia's draft water law was much more complex than it needed to be.\nIn 2004, the UK charity WaterAid reported that a child dies every 15 seconds from easily preventable water-related diseases, which are often tied to a lack of adequate sanitation.\nSince 2003, the UN World Water Development Report, produced by the UNESCO World Water Assessment Programme, has provided decision-makers with tools for developing sustainable water policies. The 2023 report states that two billion people (26% of the population) do not have access to drinking water and 3.6\u00a0billion (46%) lack access to safely managed sanitation. People in urban areas (2.4\u00a0billion) will face water scarcity by 2050. Water scarcity has been described as endemic, due to overconsumption and pollution. The report states that 10% of the world's population lives in countries with high or critical water stress. Yet over the past 40 years, water consumption has increased by around 1% per year, and is expected to grow at the same rate until 2050. Since 2000, flooding in the tropics has quadrupled, while flooding in northern mid-latitudes has increased by a factor of 2.5. The cost of these floods between 2000 and 2019 was 100,000 deaths and $650\u00a0million.\nOrganizations concerned with water protection include the International Water Association (IWA), WaterAid, Water 1st, and the American Water Resources Association. The International Water Management Institute undertakes projects with the aim of using effective water management to reduce poverty. Water related conventions are United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification (UNCCD), International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and Ramsar Convention. World Day for Water takes place on 22 March and World Oceans Day on 8 June.\nIn culture.\nReligion.\nWater is considered a purifier in most religions. Faiths that incorporate ritual washing (ablution) include Christianity, Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, the Rastafari movement, Shinto, Taoism, and Wicca. Immersion (or aspersion or affusion) of a person in water is a central Sacrament of Christianity (where it is called baptism); it is also a part of the practice of other religions, including Islam (\"Ghusl\"), Judaism (\"mikvah\") and Sikhism (\"Amrit Sanskar\"). In addition, a ritual bath in pure water is performed for the dead in many religions including Islam and Judaism. In Islam, the five daily prayers can be done in most cases after washing certain parts of the body using clean water (\"wudu\"), unless water is unavailable (see \"Tayammum\"). In Shinto, water is used in almost all rituals to cleanse a person or an area (e.g., in the ritual of \"misogi\").\nIn Christianity, holy water is water that has been sanctified by a priest for the purpose of baptism, the blessing of persons, places, and objects, or as a means of repelling evil.\nIn Zoroastrianism, water (\"\u0101b\") is respected as the source of life.\nPhilosophy.\nThe Ancient Greek philosopher Empedocles saw water as one of the four classical elements (along with fire, earth, and air), and regarded it as an ylem, or basic substance of the universe. Thales, whom Aristotle portrayed as an astronomer and an engineer, theorized that the earth, which is denser than water, emerged from the water. Thales, a monist, believed further that all things are made from water. Plato believed that the shape of water is an icosahedron \u2013 flowing easily compared to the cube-shaped earth.\nThe theory of the four bodily humors associated water with phlegm, as being cold and moist. The classical element of water was also one of the five elements in traditional Chinese philosophy (along with earth, fire, wood, and metal).\nSome traditional and popular Asian philosophical systems take water as a role-model. James Legge's 1891 translation of the \"Dao De Jing\" states, \"The highest excellence is like (that of) water. The excellence of water appears in its benefiting all things, and in its occupying, without striving (to the contrary), the low place which all men dislike. Hence (its way) is near to (that of) the Tao\" and \"There is nothing in the world more soft and weak than water, and yet for attacking things that are firm and strong there is nothing that can take precedence of it\u2014for there is nothing (so effectual) for which it can be changed.\" \"Guanzi\" in the \"Shui di\" \u6c34\u5730 chapter further elaborates on the symbolism of water, proclaiming that \"man is water\" and attributing natural qualities of the people of different Chinese regions to the character of local water resources.\nFolklore.\n\"Living water\" features in Germanic and Slavic folktales as a means of bringing the dead back to life. Note the Grimm fairy-tale (\"The Water of Life\") and the Russian dichotomy of living and dead water. The Fountain of Youth represents a related concept of magical waters allegedly preventing aging.\nArt and activism.\nIn the significant modernist novel \"Ulysses\" (1922) by Irish writer James Joyce, the chapter \"Ithaca\" takes the form of a catechism of 309 questions and answers, one of which is known as the \"water hymn\".91 According to Richard E. Madtes, the hymn is not merely a \"monotonous string of facts\", rather, its phrases, like their subject, \"ebb and flow, heave and swell, gather and break, until they subside into the calm quiescence of the concluding 'pestilential fens, faded flowerwater, stagnant pools in the waning moon.'\"79 The hymn is considered one of the most remarkable passages in Ithaca, and according to literary critic Hugh Kenner, achieves \"the improbable feat of raising to poetry all the clutter of footling information that has accumulated in schoolbooks.\"91 The literary motif of water represents the novel's theme of \"everlasting, everchanging life,\" and the hymn represents the culmination of the motif in the novel.91 The following is the hymn quoted in full.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;What in water did Bloom, waterlover, drawer of water, watercarrier returning to the range, admire?&lt;br&gt;Its universality: its democratic equality and constancy to its nature in seeking its own level: its vastness in the ocean of Mercator\u2019s projection: its unplumbed profundity in the Sundam trench of the Pacific exceeding 8,000 fathoms: the restlessness of its waves and surface particles visiting in turn all points of its seaboard: the independence of its units: the variability of states of sea: its hydrostatic quiescence in calm: its hydrokinetic turgidity in neap and spring tides: its subsidence after devastation: its sterility in the circumpolar icecaps, arctic and antarctic: its climatic and commercial significance: its preponderance of 3 to 1 over the dry land of the globe: its indisputable hegemony extending in square leagues over all the region below the subequatorial tropic of Capricorn: the multisecular stability of its primeval basin: its luteofulvous bed: its capacity to dissolve and hold in solution all soluble substances including millions of tons of the most precious metals: its slow erosions of peninsulas and downwardtending promontories: its alluvial deposits: its weight and volume and density: its imperturbability in lagoons and highland tarns: its gradation of colours in the torrid and temperate and frigid zones: its vehicular ramifications in continental lakecontained streams and confluent oceanflowing rivers with their tributaries and transoceanic currents: gulfstream, north and south equatorial courses: its violence in seaquakes, waterspouts, artesian wells, eruptions, torrents, eddies, freshets, spates, groundswells, watersheds, waterpartings, geysers, cataracts, whirlpools, maelstroms, inundations, deluges, cloudbursts: its vast circumterrestrial ahorizontal curve: its secrecy in springs, and latent humidity, revealed by rhabdomantic or hygrometric instruments and exemplified by the well by the hole in the wall at Ashtown gate, saturation of air, distillation of dew: the simplicity of its composition, two constituent parts of hydrogen with one constituent part of oxygen: its healing virtues: its buoyancy in the waters of the Dead Sea: its persevering penetrativeness in runnels, gullies, inadequate dams, leaks on shipboard: its properties for cleansing, quenching thirst and fire, nourishing vegetation: its infallibility as paradigm and paragon: its metamorphoses as vapour, mist, cloud, rain, sleet, snow, hail: its strength in rigid hydrants: its variety of forms in loughs and bays and gulfs and bights and guts and lagoons and atolls and archipelagos and sounds and fjords and minches and tidal estuaries and arms of sea: its solidity in glaciers, icebergs, icefloes: its docility in working hydraulic millwheels, turbines, dynamos, electric power stations, bleachworks, tanneries, scutchmills: its utility in canals, rivers, if navigable, floating and graving docks: its potentiality derivable from harnessed tides or watercourses falling from level to level: its submarine fauna and flora (anacoustic, photophobe) numerically, if not literally, the inhabitants of the globe: its ubiquity as constituting 90% of the human body: the noxiousness of its effluvia in lacustrine marshes, pestilential fens, faded flowerwater, stagnant pools in the waning moon.\nPainter and activist Fredericka Foster curated \"The Value of Water\", at the Cathedral of St. John the Divine in New York City, which anchored a year-long initiative by the Cathedral on our dependence on water. The largest exhibition to ever appear at the Cathedral, it featured over forty artists, including Jenny Holzer, Robert Longo, Mark Rothko, William Kentridge, April Gornik, Kiki Smith, Pat Steir, Alice Dalton Brown, Teresita Fernandez and Bill Viola. Foster created Think About Water, an ecological collective of artists who use water as their subject or medium. Members include Basia Irland, Aviva Rahmani, Betsy Damon, Diane Burko, Leila Daw, Stacy Levy, Charlotte Cot\u00e9, Meridel Rubenstein, and Anna Macleod.\nTo mark the 10th anniversary of access to water and sanitation being declared a human right by the UN, the charity WaterAid commissioned ten visual artists to show the impact of clean water on people's lives.\nDihydrogen monoxide parody.\n'Dihydrogen monoxide' is a technically correct but rarely used chemical name of water. This name has been used in a series of hoaxes and pranks that mock scientific illiteracy. This began in 1983, when an April Fools' Day article appeared in a newspaper in Durand, Michigan. The false story consisted of safety concerns about the substance.\nMusic.\nThe word \"Water\" has been used by many Florida based rappers as a sort of catchphrase or adlib. Rappers who have done this include BLP Kosher and Ski Mask the Slump God. To go even further some rappers have made whole songs dedicated to the water in Florida, such as the 2023 Danny Towers song \"Florida Water\". Others have made whole songs dedicated to water as a whole, such as XXXTentacion, and Ski Mask the Slump God with their hit song \"H2O\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33308", "revid": "50228115", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33308", "title": "Weezer", "text": "American rock band\nWeezer is an American rock band formed in Los Angeles, California, in 1992. Since 2001, the band has consisted of Rivers Cuomo (lead vocals, guitar, keyboards), Patrick Wilson (drums, backing vocals), Brian Bell (guitar, keyboards, backing vocals), and Scott Shriner (bass guitar, keyboards, backing vocals). They have sold 10 million albums in the United States and more than 35 million worldwide.\nAfter signing to Geffen Records in 1993, Weezer released their acclaimed self-titled debut album, also known as the Blue Album, in May 1994. Backed by music videos for the singles \"Undone \u2013 The Sweater Song\", \"Buddy Holly\", and \"Say It Ain't So\", the Blue Album became a multi-platinum success. Weezer's second album, \"Pinkerton\" (1996), featuring a darker, more abrasive sound, was a commercial failure and initially received mixed reviews, but achieved cult status and acclaim years later. Both the Blue Album and \"Pinkerton\" are now frequently cited among the best albums of the 1990s. Following the tour for \"Pinkerton\", the founding bassist, Matt Sharp, left and Weezer went on hiatus.\nIn 2001, Weezer returned with the Green Album with their new bassist, Mikey Welsh. With a more pop-oriented sound, and promoted by singles \"Hash Pipe\" and \"Island in the Sun\", it was a commercial success and received mostly positive reviews. After the Green Album tour, Welsh left for health reasons and was replaced by Shriner. Weezer's fourth album, \"Maladroit\" (2002), incorporated a hard rock sound and achieved mostly positive reviews, but weaker sales. \"Make Believe\" (2005) received mixed reviews, but its single \"Beverly Hills\" became Weezer's first single to top the US Modern Rock Tracks chart and their first to reach the top ten on the \"Billboard\" Hot 100.\nIn 2008, Weezer released the Red Album; its lead single, \"Pork and Beans\", became the third Weezer song to top the Modern Rock Tracks chart, backed by a Grammy-winning music video. \"Raditude\" (2009) and \"Hurley\" (2010) both featured more modern pop production, along with songs co-written with other artists, receiving further mixed reviews and moderate sales. \"Everything Will Be Alright in the End\" (2014) and the White Album (2016) returned to a rock style that was reminiscent of their 1990s sound, mixed with modern alternative production, and achieved more positive reviews. \"Pacific Daydream\" (2017) returned to more mainstream pop sound. In 2019, Weezer released an album of covers, the Teal Album, followed by the Black Album. In 2021, they released \"OK Human\", which featured an orchestral pop sound and received acclaim, followed by the hard rock-inspired \"Van Weezer\". In 2022, Weezer released \"SZNZ\", a series of EPs based on the four seasons.\nHistory.\nFormation and first years (1986\u20131994).\nLead vocalist and guitarist Rivers Cuomo moved to Los Angeles from Mansfield, Connecticut, in 1989 with his high school metal band, Avant Garde, later renamed Zoom. After the group disbanded, Cuomo met drummer Patrick Wilson, a native of Buffalo, New York, and moved in with him and Wilson's friend Matt Sharp. Cuomo moved away from metal and explored alternative rock influences such as Nirvana, the Pixies and Sonic Youth. He and Wilson formed a band, Fuzz, and enlisted Scottie Chapman on bass. Chapman quit after a few early shows; the band reformed as Sixty Wrong Sausages, with Cuomo's friend Pat Finn on bass and Jason Cropper on guitar, but soon disbanded. Cuomo moved to Santa Monica, California, and recorded dozens of demos, including the future Weezer songs \"The World Has Turned and Left Me Here\" and \"Undone \u2013 The Sweater Song\". Sharp was enthusiastic about the demos, and became the group's bassist and de facto manager.\nCuomo, Wilson, Sharp, and Cropper formed Weezer on February 14, 1992. Their first show was on March 19, 1992, closing for Keanu Reeves' band Dogstar. They took their name from a nickname Cuomo's father gave him, which was based on a character called \"Wheezer\" from the \"Our Gang\" short films. Cuomo gave Sharp one year to get the band a record deal before Cuomo accepted a scholarship at the University of California, Berkeley. In November, Weezer recorded a demo, \"The Kitchen Tape\", including a version of the future Weezer single \"Say It Ain't So\". The demo was heard by Todd Sullivan, an A&amp;R man at Geffen Records, who signed Weezer in June 1993.\nThe \"Blue Album\" and \"Pinkerton\" (1994\u20131997).\nWeezer recorded their debut album with the musician and producer Ric Ocasek at Electric Lady Studios in New York City. Cropper was fired during recording, as Cuomo and Sharp felt he was threatening the band chemistry. He was replaced by Brian Bell. Weezer's self-titled debut album\",\" also known as the \"Blue Album\", was released in May 1994. Described by \"Pitchfork\" as integrating \"geeky humor, dense cultural references, and positively gargantuan hooks\", it combined alternative rock, power pop, polished production and what \"AllMusic\" critic Stephen Thomas Erlewine called an \"'70s trash-rock predilection ... resulting in something quite distinctive\".\nWeezer's first single, \"Undone \u2013 The Sweater Song\", was backed by a music video directed by Spike Jonze; filmed in an unbroken take, it featured Weezer performing on a sound stage with little action, barring a pack of dogs swarming the set. The video became an instant hit on MTV. The song reached No. 57 on the Billboard Hot 100. Jonze also directed Weezer's second video, \"Buddy Holly\", splicing the band into footage from the 1970s television sitcom \"Happy Days\". The video achieved heavy rotation on MTV and won four MTV Video Music Awards, including Breakthrough Video and Best Alternative Music Video, and two \"Billboard\" Music Video Awards. \"Buddy Holly\" peaked at No. 18 on the Hot 100 Airplay and No. 2 on the Billboard Modern Rock chart. The song is included on Rolling Stone's 500 Best Songs Of All Time. A third single, \"Say It Ain't So\", followed. It was met with critical acclaim and later Pitchfork ranked it No. 10 on the top 200 tracks of the 90s list. The song reached No. 51 on the Hot 100 Airplay chart and No. 7 on the Billboard Modern Rock chart. Additionally, the track was included in Rolling Stone's list of \"The Top 100 Guitar Songs of All Time\".\nTheir debut album gained critical and commercial success. In 2020, Rolling Stone ranked it number 294 on The 500 Greatest Albums Of All Time. \"Weezer\" is certified quadruple platinum in the United States as well as Canada, making it Weezer's best-selling album.\nIn 1994, Weezer took a break from touring for the Christmas holidays. Cuomo traveled to his home state of Connecticut and began recording demos for Weezer's next album. His original concept was a space-themed rock opera, \"Songs from the Black Hole\", that would express his mixed feelings about success. Cuomo conceived the story as a metaphor for his conflicted feelings about touring in a successful rock band. Weezer developed the concept through intermittent recording sessions through 1995. At the end of the year, Cuomo enrolled at Harvard University, where his songwriting became \"darker, more visceral and exposed, less playful\", and he abandoned \"Songs from the Black Hole\". While attending Harvard, Cuomo experienced loneliness and frustration while also undergoing an extensive surgery for his left leg. These experiences influenced his songwriting for the next record. The other members of Weezer decided to embark on their own side projects during this time. Sharp started The Rentals, who released their debut album, \"Return of the Rentals\", in October 1995, also featuring Wilson on drums.\nWeezer's second album, \"Pinkerton\", was released on September 24, 1996. \"Pinkerton\" is named after the character BF Pinkerton from \"Madama Butterfly\", who marries and then abandons a Japanese woman named Butterfly. Calling him an \"asshole American sailor similar to a touring rock star\", Cuomo felt the character was \"the perfect symbol for the part of myself that I am trying to come to terms with on this album\". It produced three singles: \"El Scorcho\", \"The Good Life\", and \"Pink Triangle\".\nWith a darker, more abrasive sound, \"Pinkerton\" sold poorly compared to the Blue Album and received mixed reviews; it was voted \"one of the worst albums of 1996\" in a \"Rolling Stone\" reader poll. However, the album eventually gained a cult following and came to be considered among Weezer's best work; in 2002, \"Rolling Stone\" readers voted \"Pinkerton\" the 16th greatest album of all time. In 2004, \"Rolling Stone\" gave the album a new review, awarding it five out of five stars and adding it to the \"\"Rolling Stone\" Hall of Fame\". \"Pinkerton\" was certified platinum in 2016. It is credited for influencing a number of emo bands in the 2000s.\nIn July 1997, the sisters Mykel, Carli, and Trysta Allan died in a car accident while driving home from a Weezer show in Denver, Colorado. Mykel and Carli ran Weezer's fan club and helped manage publicity for several other Los Angeles bands, and had inspired the \"Sweater Song\" B-side \"Mykel and Carli\". Weezer canceled a show to attend their funeral. In August, Weezer and other bands held a benefit concert for the family in Los Angeles. A compilation album, \"Hear You Me! A Tribute to Mykel and Carli\", was dedicated to their memory. The album included \"Mykel and Carli\", as well as songs by Ozma, That Dog, and Kara's Flowers. In 2001, Jimmy Eat World released \"Hear You Me\", dedicated to Mykel and Carli.\nHiatus (1997\u20132000).\nWeezer completed the \"Pinkerton\" tour in mid-1997 and went on hiatus. Wilson returned to his home in Portland, Oregon to work on his side project, the Special Goodness, and Bell worked on his band Space Twins. In 1998, Sharp left Weezer due to differences with the band members. He said of his departure: \"I certainly have my view of it, as I'm sure everybody else has their sort of foggy things. When you have a group that doesn't communicate, you're going to have a whole lot of different stories.\" Sharp's departure left Cuomo and Wilson as the two remaining original members.\nCuomo returned to Harvard but took a break to focus on songwriting. He formed a new band composed of a changing lineup of Boston musicians, and performed new material. The songs were abandoned, but bootlegs of the Boston shows are traded on the internet. Wilson eventually flew to Boston to join Homie, another Cuomo side project. The members of the band were composed of Greg Brown (Cake and Deathray), Matt Sharp, Yuval Gabay (Soul Coughing and Sulfur), Adam Orth (Shufflepuck), and future Weezer bassist Mikey Welsh. Although a Homie album was being recorded, they ended up only releasing one song, called \"American Girls\", for the 1998 film \"Meet the Deedles\".\nIn February 1998, Cuomo, Bell and Wilson reunited in Los Angeles to start work on the next Weezer album. The group hired Welsh, who had played with Cuomo in Boston, as their new bassist. Welsh was also previously a bassist for Juliana Hatfield. Weezer continued rehearsing and recording demos until late 1998. Frustration and creative disagreements led to a decline in rehearsals, and in late 1998, Wilson left for his home in Portland pending renewed productivity from Cuomo. In November 1998, the band played two club shows with a substitute drummer in California under the name Goat Punishment, consisting entirely of covers of Nirvana and Oasis songs. In the months following, Cuomo entered a period of depression, unplugging his phone, painting the walls of his home black, and putting fiberglass insulation over his windows to prevent light from entering. Eventually during this time, Cuomo started experimenting with his music and ended up writing 121 songs by 1999. In the meantime, Wilson continued to work with the Special Goodness while Bell again worked with Space Twins. Welsh continued to tour with Juliana Hatfield.\nComeback, the \"Green Album\" and \"Maladroit\" (2000\u20132002).\nWeezer reunited in April 2000, when they accepted a lucrative offer to perform at the Fuji Rock Festival. The festival served as a catalyst for Weezer's productivity, and from April to May 2000, they rehearsed and demoed new songs in Los Angeles. They returned to live shows in June 2000, playing small unpromoted concerts once again under the name Goat Punishment. In June 2000, the band joined the American Warped Tour for nine dates.\nEventually the band went back into the studio to produce a third album, the \"Green Album\". Due to the mixed reception of \"Pinkerton,\" Cuomo wrote less personal lyrics for the Green Album. The band hired Ric Ocasek, who had also produced the band's debut album. Shortly after the release, Weezer went on another American tour. The album was supported by the singles \"Hash Pipe\", \"Island in the Sun\", and \"Photograph\". Executives suggested that \"Don't Let Go\" should be chosen as the first single. However, Cuomo continued to fight and \"Hash Pipe\" eventually became the album's first single. \"Hash Pipe\" peaked at No. 2 on the Billboard Modern Rock chart and No. 6 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart. \"Island In the Sun\" was released as the second single and became a radio hit as well as one of their biggest overseas hits. The song peaked at No. 11 on the Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart. The song has gained increasing popularity over the years as it later joined the digital song sales in 2008, only to peak at No. 18 in 2022. The label tried to postpone the release date of \"Weezer\" further until June, but they ended up sticking to the album's original release date of May 15 release date. The album debuted at number 4 on the Billboard 200 and has since been certified platinum.\nAfter suffering a breakdown from the stress of touring, undiagnosed bipolar disorder, and drug abuse, Welsh attempted suicide and left Weezer in 2001. He later joined The Kickovers for a short stint before retiring from music. He was replaced by Scott Shriner, who had also played with Vanilla Ice. During this time, Spike Jonze returned to film a music video for \"Island In the Sun\". Matt Sharp was originally intended to appear in the video, but it did not end up happening.\nWeezer took an experimental approach to the recording process of its fourth album by allowing fans to download in-progress mixes of new songs from its official website in return for feedback. After the release of the album, the band said that this process was something of a failure, as the fans did not supply the group with coherent, constructive advice. Cuomo eventually delegated song selection for the album to the band's original A&amp;R rep, Todd Sullivan, saying that Weezer fans chose the \"wackiest songs\". Only the song \"Slob\" was included on the album due to general fan advice.\nThe recording was also done without input from Weezer's record label, Interscope. Cuomo had what he then described as a \"massive falling out\" with the label. In early 2002, well before the official release of the album, the label sent out a letter to radio stations requesting the song be pulled until an official, sanctioned single was released. Interscope also briefly shut down Weezer's audio/video download webpage, removing all the MP3 demos. In April 2002, former bassist Matt Sharp sued the band, alleging, among several accusations, that he was owed money for cowriting several Weezer songs. The suit was later settled out of court.\nThe band's fourth album, \"Maladroit\", was released on May 14, 2002, only one year after its predecessor. The album served as a harder-edged version of the band's trademark catchy pop-influenced music, and was replete with busy 1980s-style guitar solos. Although met with generally positive critical reviews, its sales were not as strong as those for the Green Album. Two singles were released from the album. The music video for \"Dope Nose\" featured an obscure Japanese motorcycle gang, and was put into regular rotation. The song reached No. 8 on the Billboard Modern Rock chart. The music video for \"Keep Fishin'\" combined Weezer with the Muppets, and had heavy rotation on MTV. Both videos were directed by Marcos Siega.\nSpin reviewed it as the 6th best album of 2002. A \"Rolling Stone\" reader's poll also from that year voted it the 90th greatest album of all time. Weezer released its much-delayed first DVD on March 23, 2004. The \"\" DVD chronicles the band from its beginnings through \"Maladroit\"'s Enlightenment Tour. Compiled by the band\u2019s assistant Karl Koch, the DVD features home video footage, music videos, commercials, rehearsals, concert performances, television performances, and band commentary. The DVD was certified \"gold\" on November 8, 2004.\n\"Make Believe\" (2003\u20132006).\nBefore working on new material, Cuomo discovered vipassana meditation which became a large influence to his songwriting. He decided to take a more personal approach to his writing once again. One song during this process, \"The Other Way\", was written for Cuomo's ex-girlfriend Jennifer Chiba after her then-boyfriend, singer-songwriter Elliott Smith, presumably died by suicide. Cuomo said, \"I wanted to console her, but I was confused and skeptical about my own motives for wanting to do so, so I wrote that song about that.\" Before recording material for their fourth album, Bell and Wilson worked on their own projects. Bell's Space Twins released \"The End of Imagining\" which Rolling Stone critic, John D. Lueressen named the 7th best album of 2003. Meanwhile, Wilson's the Special Goodness released \"Land Air Sea\".\nFrom December 2003 to the fall of 2004, Weezer recorded a large amount of material intended for a new album to be released in the spring of 2005 with producer Rick Rubin. The band's early recording efforts became available to the public through the band's website. The demos were a big hit, but none of the songs recorded at this time were included on the finished album. That album, titled \"Make Believe,\" was released on May 10, 2005. The album debuted at No. 2 on the Billboard 200. Despite commercial success, \"Make Believe\" got a mixed reception from critics, receiving an average score of 52 on the review collator Metacritic. Although some reviews, such as AMG's, compared it favorably to \"Pinkerton\", others, among them \"Pitchfork\", panned the album as predictable and lyrically poor.\nThe album's first single, \"Beverly Hills\", became a hit in the U.S. and worldwide, staying on the charts for several months after its release. It became the first Weezer song to hit No. 1 on the Billboard Modern Rock chart and No. 10 on the Billboard Hot 100. \"Beverly Hills\" was nominated for Best Rock Song at the 48th Annual Grammy Awards, the first ever Grammy nomination for the band. The video was also nominated for Best Rock Video at the 2005 MTV Video Music Awards. The second single released from \"Make Believe\" was \"We Are All on Drugs\" which peaked at No. 10 on the Alternative Airplay chart. MTV refused to play the song, so Weezer re-recorded the lyrics by replacing \"on drugs\" with \"in love\" and renaming the song \"We Are All in Love\". In early 2006, it was announced that \"Make Believe\" was certified platinum, and \"Beverly Hills\" was the second most popular song download on iTunes for 2005, finishing just behind \"Hollaback Girl\" by Gwen Stefani. \"Make Believe\"'s third single, \"Perfect Situation\", reached No. 1 U.S. Billboard Modern Rock chart and No. 51 on the Billboard Hot 100. \"This Is Such a Pity\" was the band's fourth single from the album, but no music video was made for its release. The \"Make Believe\" tour also found the band using additional instruments onstage, adding piano, synthesizers, pseudophones, and guitarist Bobby Schneck.\nThe \"Red Album\" (2006\u20132008).\nAfter the success of \"Make Believe,\" the band decided to take a break. Cuomo returned to Harvard where he ended up graduating cum laude and as a Phi Beta Kappa in 2006. Cuomo also married Kyoko Ito on June 18, 2006, a woman he had known since March 1997. The wedding was attended by the current members of the band as well as Matt Sharp and Jason Cropper. During this break, Wilson and Bell appeared in the 2006 film \"Factory Girl\" playing John Cale and Lou Reed respectively, as well as contributing a cover of the Velvet Underground song \"Heroin\" for the film. Also during this time, Bell started a new project, the Relationship.\n\"Weezer\" (also known as the Red Album) was released in June 2008. Rick Rubin produced the album and Rich Costey mixed it. The record was described as \"experimental\", and according to Cuomo, who claimed it at the time to be Weezer's \"boldest and bravest and showiest album\", included longer and non-traditional songs, TR-808 drum machines, synthesizers, Southern rap, baroque counterpoint, and band members other than Cuomo writing, singing, and switching instruments. Wilson said the album cost about a million dollars to make, contrasting it with the $ budget of the Blue Album. The album was produced by Rubin and Jacknife Lee. The album debuted at No. 4 on the Billboard 200 while receiving generally positive reviews.\nIts lead single, \"Pork and Beans\", topped the \"Billboard\" Modern Rock Tracks charts for 11 weeks while also peaking at No. 64 on the Billboard Hot 100. Its music video won a Grammy for Best Short Form Music Video. The second single, \"Troublemaker\", debuted at No. 39 on the \"Billboard\" Hot Modern Rock Tracks chart and peaked at No. 2. In October 2008, the group announced that the third single would be \"The Greatest Man That Ever Lived (Variations on a Shaker Hymn)\", the song was met with critical praise.\nOn May 30, 2008, the Toledo Free Press revealed in an interview with Shriner that Weezer would be unveiling the \"Hootenanny Tour\", in which fans would be invited to bring their own instruments to play along with the band. Said Shriner: \"They can bring whatever they want... oboes, keyboards, drums, violins, and play the songs with us as opposed to us performing for them.\"\nThe band performed five dates in Japan at the beginning of September and then embarked on what was dubbed the \"Troublemaker\" tour, consisting of 21 dates around North America, including two in Canada. Angels and Airwaves and Tokyo Police Club joined the band as support at each show, and Bell's other band the Relationship also performed at a handful of dates. Shortly before the encore at each show, the band would bring on fans with various instruments and perform \"Island in the Sun\" and \"Beverly Hills\" with the band. At a show in Austin, after Tokyo Police Club had played its set, Cuomo was wheeled out in a box and mimed to a recording of rare Weezer demo, \"My Brain\", dressed in pajamas and with puppets on his hands, before being wheeled off again. This bizarre event later surfaced as the climax to a promo video for Cuomo's second demo album, \"Alone II: The Home Recordings of Rivers Cuomo\".\n\"Raditude\" and \"Hurley\" (2009\u20132013).\nWeezer toured with Blink-182 in 2009, including an August 30 stop at the Virgin Festival at Merriweather Post Pavilion in Columbia, Maryland. Drummer Josh Freese joined Weezer on a temporary basis to play drums on the tour, while Wilson switched to guitar. Wilson said in an interview for Yahoo! Music that Cuomo wanted \"to be active and more free on stage and him having guitar on was an impediment.\" Freese stated he was a Weezer fan and did not want to pass up the opportunity to play with the band.\nOn August 18, 2009, Weezer released the first single for their upcoming album, \"If You're Wondering If I Want You To\". The song peaked at No. 81 on the Billboard Hot 100. The album was titled \"Raditude\" which was a suggestion from actor Rainn Wilson. \"Raditude\"'s album artwork was revealed on September 11, featuring a National Geographic contest-winning photograph of a jumping dog named Sidney. The record's release was pushed to November 3, 2009, where it debuted as the seventh best-selling album of the week on the \"Billboard\" 200 chart. The band scheduled tour dates in December 2009 extending into early 2010 to coincide with the new album's release. On December 6, 2009, Cuomo was injured when his tour bus crashed in Glen, New York due to black ice. Cuomo suffered three broken ribs and internal bleeding, and his assistant broke two ribs. His wife, baby daughter, and their nanny were also on the bus, but they escaped injury. Weezer cancelled the remaining 2009 tour dates the following day. The band resumed touring on January 20, 2010.\nIn December 2009, it was revealed that the band was no longer with Geffen Records. The band stated that new material would still be released, but the band members were unsure of the means, whether it be self-released, released online, or getting signed by another label. Eventually, the band was signed to the independent label Epitaph. Weezer co-headlined The Bamboozle in May 2010, and performed at the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival in Manchester, Tennessee in June. In August 2010, Weezer performed at the Reading and Leeds Festival, and performed at the Voodoo Experience festival in New Orleans, LA in October 2010.\nThe band's eighth album \"Hurley\" was released in September 2010 through Epitaph Records. The title comes from the character Hugo \"Hurley\" Reyes from the television show \"Lost\". Jorge Garcia, the actor who portrayed Hurley, stated that being featured on the album cover is \"one of the biggest honors of [his] career.\" The first single, \"Memories\", was chosen as part of the soundtrack for the 2010 film \"Jackass 3D\" with the music video featuring members of the cast contributing backing vocals. Weezer used internet streaming service YouTube as a way to promote the album. Weezer loaned itself to 15 amateur online video producers, \"going along with whatever plans the creator could execute in about 30 minutes.\" The band was promoted through popular channels such as Barely Political, Ray William Johnson and Fred Figglehorn. The Gregory Brothers solicited musical and vocal contributions from the band on one of its compositions built around speeches by representative Charles Rangel and U.S. President Barack Obama. Weezer called the promotion \"The YouTube Invasion\".\nIn November 2010, Weezer released a compilation album composed of re-recorded versions of unused recordings spanning from 1993 to 2010, \"Death to False Metal\". The lead track, \"Turning Up the Radio\", was a collaborative effort with many fans on YouTube. On the same day a deluxe version of \"Pinkerton\", which includes \"25 demos, outtakes and live tracks\" was also released. A third volume of Cuomo's solo \"Alone\" series, titled \"Alone III: The Pinkerton Years\", consisting of demos and outtakes from the \"Pinkerton\" sessions, was released on December 12, 2011. The band contributed a cover of the Monkees' \"I'm a Believer\" for the 2010 film \"Shrek Forever After\" as well as a cover of the Cars' \"You Might Think\" for the 2011 Disney-Pixar film \"Cars 2\".\nWeezer began working on their ninth studio album in September 2010 with the intent of a 2011 release, but the year ended without seeing a release. On October 8, 2011, former Weezer bassist Mikey Welsh was found dead from a suspected heroin overdose in a Chicago hotel room. Weezer performed in Chicago the next day and dedicated the concert to Welsh, who was expected to have attended. Welsh had previously joined Weezer on stage for a few performances between 2010 and 2011.\nThe band headlined a four-day music cruise, the Weezer Cruise, from Miami to Cozumel that set sail on January 19, 2012. In July, Weezer headlined the inaugural Bunbury Music Festival in Cincinnati, Ohio. In early 2013 the band brought its Memories Tour to Australia\u2014the band's first Australian tour since 1996. The band played its first two albums in full at several venues. The band also headlined the Punkspring 2013 tour in Japan and later in the year toured Canada and the United States. They played multiple nights in cities around the U.S. The first night shows were dedicated to playing their hits, then the Blue album in full, front to back. The second night, they played \"Pinkerton\" in the same fashion. Koch did a \"Memories\" slide show at the Gibson amphitheater in Los Angeles. The slide show consisted of photos of gigs over the years and highlighted the loss of their fan club team members Mykel and Carli Allan in 1997.\n\"Everything Will Be Alright in the End\" and the \"White Album\" (2013\u20132016).\nIn January 2014, Weezer began recording with producer Ric Ocasek, who had produced the \"Blue Album\" and the \"Green Album\". A clip of a new song was posted on the band's official YouTube account on March 19, 2014, which confirmed previous rumors of the band being in the studio. On June 12, 2014, it was revealed that the album title would be \"Everything Will Be Alright in the End\". It was released on October 7, 2014 to generally favorable reviews, becoming the band's best-reviewed release since \"Pinkerton\". The first single, \"Back to the Shack\", reached No. 5 on the Alternative Airplay chart.\nOver 200 tracks were considered for \"Everything Will Be Alright in the End\", but they were able to narrow it down to thirteen. According to the album's official press release, the album is organized thematically around three groups of songs: \"Belladonna\", \"The Panopticon Artist\" and \"Patriarchia\". \"Belladonna\" includes the songs \"Ain't Got Nobody\", \"Lonely Girl\", \"Da Vinci\", \"Go Away\", \"Cleopatra\" and \"Return to Ithaka\", all of which deal with Cuomo's relationships with women. Tracks under \"The Panopticon Artist\" include \"Back to the Shack\", \"I've Had It Up To Here\" and \"The Waste Land\" all deal with Cuomo's relationships with fans. The final group of songs, \"Patriarchia\", are \"Eulogy for a Rock Band\", \"The British Are Coming\", \"Foolish Father\" and \"Anonymous\", which deal with relationships with father figures, \"with a new spin\".\nOn October 26, 2015, the band released a new single, \"Thank God for Girls\", through Apple Music and to radio the same day. The following week, the band released a second single, \"Do You Wanna Get High?\". Cuomo claimed in an interview with Zane Lowe, that the band was not working on a new album. Later, on January 14, 2016, Weezer released a third single, \"King of the World\", and announced the \"White Album\", which continued the critical success of the band's previous release. Cuomo joined Tinder to meet with people to get inspired for new songs. He also started to explore other songwriting techniques including a cut-up technique, stream-of-consciousness, and writing melodies with a piano instead of guitar.\n\"Weezer\" was officially released on April 1, 2016, and peaked at No. 4 on the Billboard 200. The album is considered a concept album exploring the themes of gender dynamics, modern dating experiences and references to religious iconography. It received a Grammy nomination for Best Rock Album for the 59th Annual Grammy Awards. Weezer performed on the Weezer &amp; Panic! at the Disco Summer Tour 2016 with Panic! at the Disco in 2016. They later signed to Atlantic Records as part of a joint venture between Warner Music Group and Crush Management.\n\"Pacific Daydream\" (2017\u20132018).\nSoon after the release of the White Album, Cuomo discussed plans for Weezer's next album, provisionally titled the \"Black Album\". Cuomo said the album would tackle \"more mature topics\" and be \"less summer day and more winter night\", and suggested the band could return to the recording studio as soon as October 2016. Weezer delayed recording after Cuomo felt his new material was more \"like reveries from a beach at the end of the world [... as if] the Beach Boys and the Clash fell in love by the ocean and had one hell of an amazing baby\".\nTo write the album, Cuomo used various musical and lyrical fragments he had collected over time. He kept an archive of song ideas and hired programmers to organize a spreadsheet of lyric snippets by beats per minute, syllable, and key to call from whenever stuck. \"Instead of trying to force myself to feel inspired, I can just go into the spreadsheet and search [...] I just try them out to see which ones work magically.\"\nOn March 16, 2017, Weezer released a new song, \"Feels Like Summer\", the lead single of the upcoming album. The song drew a mixed reaction from fans but became their biggest hit on Alternative radio in a decade (peaking at number 2 on the Alternative Airplay chart ). On August 16, Weezer announced \"Pacific Daydream,\" released on October 27. On August 17, the promotional single from the album, \"Mexican Fender\", was released. The following month, \"Beach Boys\" was released, and the month after, they released \"Weekend Woman\" to positive reception. \"Happy Hour\" was the second single and reached No. 9 on the Alternative Airplay chart. The album received a Grammy nomination for Best Rock Album at the 61st Annual Grammy Awards.\nThe \"Teal Album\" and the \"Black Album\" (2018\u20132019).\nFollowing a persistent Twitter campaign by a fan, Weezer released a cover of Toto's song \"Africa\" on May 29, 2018. Prior to this, the band released a cover of \"Rosanna\" to \"troll\" their fans. \"Africa\" reached number one on the \"Billboard\" Alternative Songs chart in August 2018, becoming the band's first number-one single since \"Pork and Beans\" in 2008. Two days later, on August 10, Toto responded by releasing a cover of Weezer's single \"Hash Pipe\". \"Africa\" eventually peaked at No. 51 on the Billboard Hot 100. The success of the \"Africa\" cover led Weezer to record an album of covers, the \"Teal Album\", a surprise album released on January 24, 2019. The album was a commercial success as it peaked at No. 4 on the Billboard 200. In addition, all tracks charted on the Hot Rock and Alternative Songs chart.\nOn September 20, 2018, Weezer released \"California Snow\" as a single for the 2018 film \"Spell\". It was chosen as the closing track for the \"Black Album\". On October 11, 2018, Weezer released \"Can't Knock the Hustle\", the lead single from their upcoming album. On November 21, they released the second single, \"Zombie Bastards\", and announced the \"Black Album\", produced by Dave Sitek and scheduled for March 1, 2019. An arena tour of the U.S. with the Pixies and supporting and international tour dates were also announced. On February 21, they released \"High as a Kite\" and \"Living in LA\" as the next singles. They would later play them on NPR Music to promote the album for their series of Tiny Desk Concerts.\n\"OK Human\" and \"Van Weezer\" (2019\u20132021).\nDuring a Beats 1 interview by Zane Lowe on Apple Music on January 24, 2019, Cuomo announced that Weezer had already recorded the \"basic tracks\" to the follow-up album to the \"Black Album\". The album, produced by Jake Sinclair (who also produced the \"White Album\"), would feature piano and strings-based songwriting and had already been recorded at Abbey Road Studios. For the recording process, Weezer departed from the modern \"grid music\" style (music recorded via modern software using grids to organize and manipulate the individual elements of recorded music) and did not perform to a \"click\" (i.e., metronome) for a more natural style. Furthermore, Cuomo said he was currently working on an album with the working title \"Van Weezer\" that harkened back to their heavier rock sound after noticing how crowds enjoy epic guitar solos at Weezer shows.\nOn September 10, 2019, the band announced the Hella Mega Tour with Green Day and Fall Out Boy as headliners alongside themselves, with the Interrupters as an opening act. They also released the opening single, \"The End of the Game\", off their upcoming fifteenth studio album, \"Van Weezer\". The song reached No. 2 on the Alternative Airplay chart. Cuomo said that the band would return \"back to big guitars\". He remarked that when the band would perform \"Beverly Hills\" live in concert, he would perform a guitar solo that was not present on the recorded version of the song. \"We noticed that, recently, the crowd just goes crazy when I do that. So it feels like maybe the audience is ready for some shredding again.\"\nThe band recorded a version of \"Lost in the Woods\" for the 2019 film \"Frozen II\", which was included on the soundtrack album. The music video featuring the band and the \"Frozen\" voice actress Kristen Bell. On May 6, 2020, Weezer released the single and music video \"Hero\" a tribute to essential workers during the COVID-19 pandemic. Simultaneously, they announced the delay of \"Van Weezer\" for a time to be determined. The song reached No. 1 on the Alternative Airplay chart. On May 10, Weezer guest-starred on an episode of \"The Simpsons\", \"The Hateful Eight-Year Olds\", where a snippet of their song \"Blue Dream\" from \"Van Weezer\" was played. On August 14, 2020, the band announced that the album had been delayed to May 2021 in order to coincide with the rescheduled Hella Mega Tour. That same day, the third single, \"Beginning of the End\", was released as a part of the soundtrack for the 2020 film \"Bill &amp; Ted Face the Music.\" On October 6, 2020, after Eddie Van Halen died, the album was dedicated to him. In addition to Van Halen, the album is also dedicated to Ric Ocasek, who produced the \"Blue Album\", \"Green Album\", and \"Everything Will Be Alright in the End\", as Ocasek had died in September 2019.\nOn January 18, 2021, the band officially announced their fourteenth studio album, \"OK Human\" (a play on Radiohead's \"OK Computer\").\",\" following cryptic promotional floppy discs and links sent to some members of the Weezer Fan Club a few days prior. The announcement came with a release date of January 29. The album's opening track, \"All My Favorite Songs\", was released as a single with an alternate version featuring indie pop-rock band AJR. The song reached No.1 on the Alternative Airplay chart and was later nominated for Best Rock Song in the 64th Annual Grammy Awards\".\"\nThe album was planned to be released following \"Van Weezer\", but when the album suffered a year-long delay following the COVID-19 pandemic, the band decided to shift their focus to completing \"OK Human\" first. Work on \"OK Human\" began as early as 2017, when the band decided to make an album that combined rock instrumentation with an orchestra. The band hired a 38-piece-orchestra and recorded the album entirely with analog equipment to achieve their desired baroque sound. The album was additionally inspired by the Beach Boys' \"Pet Sounds\" (1966\")\" and Harry Nilsson's \"Nilsson Sings Newman\" (1970).\nThe fourth single, \"I Need Some of That\" was released on April 21, 2021. \"Van Weezer\" was released on May 7, 2021, along with an animated music video for \"All the Good Ones\". The album has been compared to their fourth studio album \"Maladroit\", and is inspired by 1970s and 1980s hard rock and heavy metal bands such as Kiss, Black Sabbath, Metallica and Van Halen (the last of whom inspired the album's title).\n\"SZNZ\", touring and \"Blue Album\" 30th anniversary (2021\u2013present).\nAfter delays due to the pandemic, the American leg of the Hella Mega Tour began on July 24, 2021, in Arlington, Texas. The European leg saw Weezer, Green Day and Fall Out Boy performing in Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands, England, Ireland, Scotland and France.\nOn March 11, 2022, Weezer announced \"SZNZ\", a series of four EPs based on the seasons. The first, ', was released on March 20. The lead single, \"A Little Bit of Love\", was released on March 16, and reached No. 1 on the Alternative Airplay chart. On June 20, 2022, Weezer appeared on \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\", debuting \"Records\", the lead single from ', which also reached No. 1 on the Alternative Airplay chart. In August, a Broadway Theater residency planned for September 2022 was cancelled due to high expenses and poor ticket sales.\nOn September 19, 2022, Weezer performed again under the name Goat Punishment at Troubadour, Hollywood, where they played \"SZNZ: Winter\" for the first time. They also debuted the single \"What Happens After You?\" from ', which was released on September 22, 2022. \"What Happens After You?\" was later performed on \"Jimmy Kimmel Live!\". On December 9, 2022, Weezer released \"I Want a Dog\", the lead single from the last EP in the \"SZNZ\" series, '. \"SZNZ: Winter\" was released on December 21, 2022, alongside a music video for \"Dark Enough To See The Stars\". In mid-2023, Weezer performed several shows in North America as part of the Indie Rock Road Trip. In November 2023, Weezer appeared in the Netflix film \"Family Switch\".\nIn June 2024, Weezer began a tour of the UK and Ireland with Smashing Pumpkins. Reviewing their performance at the O2 Arena, London, \"The Guardian\" wrote: \"Thirty years on, Weezer still dole out taut, punchy, witty powerpop with self-effacing elan ... They are patently still in love with music.\" In September, Weezer, along with opening acts Dinosaur Jr. and The Flaming Lips, began their Voyage to the Blue Planet tour, in which they performed the Blue Album in its entirety for its 30th anniversary. On November 1, Weezer released a \"Super Deluxe Edition\" of the Blue Album. In April 2025, \"NME\" reported that Weezer is working on a mockumentary film depicting a rivalry between Weezer and Keanu Reeves's band Dogstar. On October 18 and 19, 2025, Weezer performed at the When We Were Young festival in Las Vegas.\nArtistry.\nMusical style and influences.\nThe styles present in the band's music have been variously categorized as alternative rock, power pop, pop rock, pop-punk, geek rock, emo, indie rock, emo pop, melodic metal, heavy metal, pop, and arena rock. James Hickie of \"Alternative Press Magazine\" dismissed the notion of Weezer as an emo band, assessing: \"Pinpointing exactly what Weezer are, musically, is harder than ever these days. [...] In the past five years alone, they\u2019ve made albums of pop covers, orchestral pop and arena rock. Rivers Cuomo and co. are a lot of things [...] \u2014 inquisitive, inventive, musically restless \u2014 but absolutely not emo.\" \nThe members of Weezer have listed influences such as Kiss (with direct references in the song \"In the Garage\"), Nirvana, the Pixies, the Cars (whose member Ric Ocasek produced several Weezer records), Cheap Trick, Pavement, Oasis, the Smashing Pumpkins, Green Day and Wax. Cuomo credited the Beach Boys as a major influence, specifically \"Pet Sounds\" (1966); Bell described Weezer's sound as \"Beach Boys with Marshall stacks\". Operas and musicals such as \"Madama Butterfly\" (1904) and \"Jesus Christ Superstar\" (1970) influenced \"Pinkerton\" and \"Songs from the Black Hole.\" The band members' deep appreciation for hard rock and heavy metal music was the source of inspiration behind \"Van Weezer\", including 1970s and 1980s bands like Kiss, Black Sabbath, Metallica, Slayer, Rush, and Van Halen (the last of whom inspired the album's title).\nInstrumentation and lyrics.\nWeezer's music is generally characterized by loud guitars, abundance of hooks, and perceived nerdiness. According to Stephen Thomas Erlewine of \"AllMusic\", the band's style \"merges the heavy power pop of arena rockers like Cheap Trick and the angular guitar leads of the Pixies while injecting their melodies with doses of '70s metal.\" Throughout its career, Weezer has maintained what has been described as a \"heavy, guitar-oriented sound [played] over a steady, danceable groove.\" The band's early material, such as the material on its debut album, was said to have \"embodied the self-awareness of the intelligent alternative rock slacker.\" According to Tim Sendra of \"AllMusic\", the group's debut album \"fuses the raucous energy of punk, the loser-friendly geekiness of indie rock, the guitar power of grunge, and the huge hooks of radio rock [combined with] some heavy metal guitar heroics.\" The sound present on the band's second album, \"Pinkerton\", has been described as \"darker [and] messier\" than its predecessor. \"Green\" was considered to be a return to the \"tight\" pop sound of Weezer's debut album. According to Erlewine, \"Maladroit\" features \"a tougher sound -- nowhere near as raw as \"Pinkerton\", yet similarly loud and raucous, overflowing with guitars spitting out riffs and solos with a gleeful abandon.\" 2005's \"Make Believe\" was considered to be a \"return to [the] musical, emotional bloodletting\" of \"Pinkerton\". On \"Red\", the band began to incorporate longer song forms. \nThe band's aesthetic and lyrics have been described as \"blurring the line between serious and humorous.\" The lyrical tone on \"Pinkerton\" has been described as \"confessional.\" According to Erlewine, \"None of the members of Weezer, especially leader Rivers Cuomo, were conventional rockers: they were kids who holed up in their garage to play along with their favorite records when they weren't studying or watching TV. As a result, their music is infused with a quirky sense of humor and an endearing awkwardness.\" \nLegacy and influence.\nWeezer has sustained a cult following throughout its career. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of \"AllMusic\" conferred the title of \"alt-rock icons of the '90s\" on Weezer, and also called them \"one of the most popular groups to emerge in the post-grunge alternative rock aftermath.\" James Hickie of \"Alternative Press Magazine\" stated that the band's second album \"Pinkerton\" is \"considered something of an emo cornerstone,\" and stated his belief that it influenced \"a generation of emo bands,\" despite Weezer not being an outright emo band. \nArtists such as Paramore, Fun., Olivia Rodrigo, Pete Wentz, Fall Out Boy, Panic! at the Disco, Blink-182, Steve Lacy, Taylor Swift, Charli XCX, Mac DeMarco, Real Estate, Dinosaur Pile-Up, Cymbals Eat Guitars, DNCE, Ozma, Wavves, Joyce Manor, Origami Angel, and the Fall of Troy cite Weezer as an influence.\nSolo work and side projects.\nWilson started his side-project the Special Goodness in 1996, for which he sings and plays guitar and bass. In May 2012, he released his fourth record with the Special Goodness, \"Natural\". Bell started the Space Twins in 1994. They released an album, \"The End of Imagining\", in 2003. In 2006, Bell started a new band called the Relationship, and did not contribute any songs for Weezer's \"Raditude\" to save material for the Relationship. The Relationship's self-titled debut was released in 2010, with a follow-up, \"Clara Obscura\", in 2017.\nFormer bassist Matt Sharp started the Rentals in 1994. After releasing \"Return of the Rentals\" in 1995, Sharp went on to quit Weezer in 1998 to focus more on the Rentals. Sharp has also released work under his own name. Mikey Welsh toured with Juliana Hatfield and played bass for the Kickovers. Scott Shriner played bass for Anthony Green's debut studio album \"Avalon\" (2008).\nOn December 18, 2007, Cuomo released ', a compilation of his demos recorded from 1992 to 2007, including some demos from the unfinished \"Songs from the Black Hole\" album. A second compilation, ', was released on November 25, 2008, and a third, \"\", on December 12, 2011. The album was sold exclusively with a book, \"The Pinkerton Diaries\", which collects Cuomo's writings from the \"Pinkerton\" era.\nOn March 20, 2013, Cuomo and Scott Murphy of the band Allister released \"Scott &amp; Rivers\", a Japanese-language album. They released their second album in April 2017. In November 2020, Cuomo released thousands of unreleased songs and demos from throughout Weezer's career on his website for purchase and download.\nMusical contributions.\nIn 1994, Weezer contributed the song \"Jamie\" to \"DGC Rarities Vol. 1\", which is a compilation of demos, B-sides, and covers recorded by bands on the label. It was the first appearance of the song until it was released as a B-side for the single of \"Buddy Holly\" and again on the \"Blue Album Deluxe Edition\". In 1999, Weezer contributed a cover of the song \"Velouria\" by The Pixies to the tribute album \"Where Is My Mind? A Tribute To The Pixies\". On July 22, 2003, Weezer contributed an acoustic cover of Green Day's \"Worry Rock\" to the compilation album \"A Different Shade of Green: A Tribute to Green Day\". On December 4, 2008, iOS developer Tapulous released the game \"Christmas with Weezer\", featuring gameplay similar to \"Tap Tap Revenge\" and six Christmas carols performed by the band. A digital EP featuring the songs, titled \"Christmas with Weezer\", was also released on December 16, 2008.\nOn March 9, 2010, Weezer appeared on an episode of the children's daytime television show \"Yo Gabba Gabba!\" and performed the song \"All My Friends Are Insects\". The song appeared on a compilation soundtrack album for the show, \"Yo Gabba Gabba! Music Is...Awesome! Volume 2\", as well as a bonus track for the Weezer album \"Hurley\". On June 11, 2010, the band released a new single, \"Represent\", as an \"unofficial\" anthem for the US Men's soccer team to coincide with the 2010 FIFA World Cup. Although technically unofficial, the song was embraced by the team, and on June 23, 2010, US Soccer released a music video on their official YouTube channel featuring dramatic footage of the US team spliced with footage of Weezer performing.\nIn 2010, the band recorded a cover of \"I'm a Believer\" for the movie \"Shrek Forever After\". Previously, Weezer had planned to include an early version of \"My Best Friend\" from \"Make Believe\" in \"Shrek 2\", but it was rejected due to the song sounding \"too much like it was written for Shrek\". In 2011, the band covered \"You Might Think\" by The Cars for the Pixar movie \"Cars 2\". The song appears on the movie's official soundtrack. In 2011, Weezer recorded a cover of \"Rainbow Connection\" with Hayley Williams for \"\", a cover album of Muppets songs which also included OK Go, The Fray, Alkaline Trio, and others.\nOn September 20, 2018, Weezer released \"California Snow\" for the film \"Spell\", which Cuomo also provided voicework for. The song later appeared on the Black Album. In 2019, Weezer recorded a cover of \"Lost In the Woods\" for the \"Frozen II\" soundtrack. In 2020\u20132021, Weezer released \"It's Always Summer in Bikini Bottom\" for \"\"'s film soundtrack. In June 2021, Weezer contributed the song \"Tell Me What You Want\" to the video game \"Wave Break\". The song is featured in a special level of the game called \"Weezy Mode\". In August 2021, Weezer contributed a cover of Metallica's \"Enter Sandman\" to \"The Metallica Blacklist\", a compilation of Metallica song covers by various artists, with each song getting several covers by different artists.\nIn October 2025, Weezer contributed a cover of Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers' \"Here Comes My Girl\" to the soundtrack of the Apple TV+ series \"Bad Monkey\".\nMembers.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTeen Choice Awards.\nThe Teen Choice Awards were established in 1999 to honor the year's biggest achievements in music, movies, sports and television, being voted by young people aged between 13 and 19. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Awards table/styles.css\" /&gt;\n! scope=\"col\" | Year\n! scope=\"col\" | Nominee / work\n! scope=\"col\" | Award\n! scope=\"col\" | Result\nDiscography.\nStudio albums.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33421", "revid": "810100753", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33421", "title": "Web commerce", "text": ""}
{"id": "33422", "revid": "461496", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33422", "title": "Wayne Gretzky", "text": "Canadian ice hockey player and coach (born 1961)\nWayne Douglas Gretzky ( ; born January 26, 1961) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player and former head coach. He played 20 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL) for four teams from 1979 to 1999. Nicknamed \"the Great One\", he has been called the greatest ice hockey player ever by the NHL based on surveys of hockey writers, ex-players, general managers and coaches. Gretzky is the leading career point scorer and assist producer in NHL history and has more assists than any other player has total career points. He is the only NHL player to total over 200\u00a0points in one season, a feat he accomplished four times. In addition, Gretzky scored more than 100\u00a0points in 15 professional seasons. At the time of his retirement in 1999, he held 61 NHL records: 40 regular season records, 15 playoff records, and six All-Star records.\nBorn and raised in Brantford, Ontario, Gretzky honed his skills on a backyard rink and regularly played minor ice hockey at a level far above his peers. Despite his unimpressive size and strength, Gretzky's intelligence, stamina, and reading of the game were unrivaled. He was adept at dodging checks from opposing players, consistently anticipated where the puck was going to be, and executed the right move at the right time. Gretzky became known for setting up behind his opponent's net, an area that was nicknamed \"Gretzky's office\".\nGretzky was the top scorer in the 1978 World Junior Championships, then signed with the Indianapolis Racers of the World Hockey Association (WHA), where he briefly played before being traded to the Edmonton Oilers. After the NHL-WHA merger, he set many scoring records in ten seasons with the Oilers, and led them to four Stanley Cup championships. Traded to the Los Angeles Kings where he played eight seasons, he led them to the 1993 Stanley Cup Finals, and he is credited with popularizing hockey in California. He played briefly for the St. Louis Blues before finishing his career with the New York Rangers. He won nine Hart Trophies as the most valuable player, 10 Art Ross Trophies for most points in a season, two Conn Smythe Trophies as playoff MVP and five Lester B. Pearson Awards as the most outstanding player as judged by his peers. He led the league in goal-scoring five times and assists 16 times. He also won the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy for sportsmanship and performance five times and often spoke against fighting in hockey.\nAfter his retirement in 1999, Gretzky was immediately inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame, making him the most recent player to have the waiting period waived. The NHL retired his jersey number 99 league-wide. Gretzky was one of six players voted to the International Ice Hockey Federation's (IIHF) Centennial All-Star Team. He was inducted into the IIHF Hall of Fame in 2000, and received the Order of Hockey in Canada in 2012. Gretzky became executive director for the Canadian national men's hockey team during the 2002 Winter Olympics, in which the team won a gold medal. In 2000, he became part-owner of the Phoenix Coyotes, and following the 2004\u201305 NHL lock-out, he became the team's head coach. In 2004, Gretzky was inducted into the Ontario Sports Hall of Fame. In September 2009, following the Phoenix Coyotes' bankruptcy, Gretzky resigned as head coach and relinquished his ownership share. In October 2016, he returned to the Oilers as a minority partner and vice-chairman of their parent company, Oilers Entertainment Group. He left in 2021 to become an analyst on Turner Sports' NHL coverage.\nEarly life.\nWayne Douglas Gretzky was born on January 26, 1961, in Brantford, Ontario, the son of Phyllis Leone (Hockin) and Walter Gretzky. The couple married in 1960, and lived in an apartment in Brantford, where Walter worked for Bell Telephone Canada. The family moved into a house on Varadi Avenue in Brantford seven months after Wayne was born, chosen partly because its yard was flat enough to make an ice rink. Wayne had a sister, Kim (born 1963), and brothers Keith, Glen and Brent. The family regularly visited the farm of Wayne's grandparents, Tony and Mary, and watched \"Hockey Night in Canada\" together. By age two, Wayne was trying to score goals against Mary using a souvenir stick. The farm was where Wayne skated on ice for the first time, aged two years, 10 months.\nWalter taught Wayne, Keith, Brent, Glen, and their friends hockey on a rink he made in the backyard of the family home, nicknamed the \"Wally Coliseum\". Drills included skating around bleach bottles and tin cans and flipping pucks over scattered hockey sticks to be able to pick up the puck again in full flight. Walter gave the advice to \"skate where the puck's going, not where it's been\". Wayne was a classic prodigy whose extraordinary skills made him the target of other children's jealous parents.\nThe team Gretzky played on at age six was otherwise composed of ten-year-olds. His first coach, Dick Martin, remarked that he handled the puck better than the ten-year-olds. According to Martin, \"Wayne was so good that you could have a boy of your own who was a tremendous hockey player, and he'd get overlooked because of what the Gretzky kid was doing.\" The sweaters for ten-year-olds were far too large for Gretzky, who coped by tucking the sweater into his pants on the right side. Gretzky continued doing this throughout his NHL career.\nBy age ten, Gretzky had scored an astonishing 378\u00a0goals and 139\u00a0assists in just one\u00a0season with the Brantford Nadrofsky Steelers. His play attracted media attention beyond Brantford, including a profile by John Iaboni in the \"Toronto Telegram\" in October 1971. In the 1974 Quebec International Pee-Wee Hockey Tournament, Gretzky scored 26 points playing for Brantford. By age 13, he had scored over \u00a0goals.\nHis play attracted considerable negative attention from other players' parents, including those of his teammates, and he was often booed. According to Walter, the \"capper\" was being booed on \"Brantford Day\" at Toronto's Maple Leaf Gardens in February 1975. When Gretzky was 14, his family arranged for him to move to and play hockey in Toronto, partly to further his career, and partly to remove him from the uncomfortable pressure. The Gretzkys had to legally challenge the Canadian Amateur Hockey Association to win Wayne the right to play in a different area, which was disallowed at the time. The Gretzkys won, and Wayne played Junior B hockey with the Toronto Nationals, in a league that included 20-year-olds. He earned Rookie of the Year honours in the Metro Junior B Hockey League in 1975\u201376, with 60\u00a0points in 28\u00a0games. The following year, as a 15\u201316-year-old, he had 72\u00a0points in 32\u00a0games with the same team, renamed the Seneca Nationals.\nDespite his offensive statistics\u2014scoring 132 points in 60 games in Junior B\u2014two teams bypassed him in the 1977 Ontario Major Junior Hockey League draft of 16-year-olds. The Oshawa Generals picked Tom McCarthy first, and the Niagara Falls Flyers picked Steve Peters second overall. With the third pick, the Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds selected Gretzky, even though Walter Gretzky had told the team Wayne would not move to Sault Ste. Marie, a northern Ontario city that inflicts a heavy travelling schedule on its junior team. The Gretzkys made an arrangement with a local family they knew and Wayne played for the Greyhounds, at age 16. It was with the Greyhounds that Gretzky first wore the number\u00a099 on his jersey. He originally wanted to wear number\u00a09\u2014for his hockey hero Gordie Howe\u2014but it was already being worn by teammate Brian Gualazzi. At coach Muzz MacPherson's suggestion, Gretzky settled on 99.\nWorld Hockey Association.\nBy 1978, the World Hockey Association, which had competed with the established NHL since 1972, was struggling. The league, which at one point iced fourteen teams, was down to seven surviving franchises. The WHA had long sought to arrange a merger with the NHL but were constantly rebuffed by a group of hardline owners in the older league. With the WHA's long-term survival in doubt, Birmingham Bulls owner John F. Bassett believed the only way to gain meaningful leverage over the NHL was to sign as many young and promising superstars as possible. The NHL did not allow the signing of players under age 20, but the WHA had no such rules. Bassett saw Gretzky as the most promising young prospect. Several WHA teams courted Gretzky, notably the Bulls and the Indianapolis Racers.\nUltimately, it was Racers owner Nelson Skalbania who, on June 12, 1978, signed 17-year-old Gretzky to a seven-year personal services contract worth US$1.75\u00a0million. Skalbania opted to have Gretzky sign a personal-services contract rather than a standard player contract in part because by that point it was well known that a majority of NHL owners, if not yet the \u00be required to add new NHL franchises, were willing to absorb at least some WHA teams. While Skalbania knew it was unlikely the Racers would be one of these teams (in part because the WHA insisted that all of its surviving Canadian teams be included), he still hoped to keep the Racers alive long enough to collect compensation from the surviving teams when the WHA dissolved, as well as any funds earned from selling the young star.\nGretzky scored his first professional goal against Dave Dryden of the Edmonton Oilers in his fifth game, and his second goal four seconds later. However, he played only eight games for Indianapolis. The Racers were losing $40,000 per game. Skalbania told Gretzky he would be moved, offering him a choice between the Edmonton Oilers and the Winnipeg Jets. On the advice of his agent, Gretzky picked the Oilers, but the move was not that simple. On November 2, Gretzky, goaltender Eddie Mio, and forward Peter Driscoll were put on a private plane, not knowing where they would land and what team they would be joining. While in the air, Skalbania worked on the deal. Skalbania offered to play a game of backgammon with Winnipeg owner Michael Gobuty, the stakes being if Gobuty won, he would get Gretzky and if he lost, he had to give Skalbania a share of the Jets. Gobuty turned down the proposal and the players landed in Edmonton. Mio paid the $4,000 bill for the flight. Skalbania sold Gretzky, Mio and Driscoll to Oilers owner Peter Pocklington, a former business partner. Although the announced price was $850,000, Pocklington paid $700,000. The money was not enough to keep the Racers alive; they folded that December.\nOne of the highlights of Gretzky's season was his appearance in the 1979 WHA All-Star Game. The format was a three-game series between the WHA All-Stars and Dynamo Moscow played at Edmonton's Northlands Coliseum. The WHA All-Stars were coached by Jacques Demers, who put Gretzky on a line with his boyhood idol Gordie Howe and Howe's son, Mark. In game one, the line scored seven points, and the WHA All-Stars won by a score of 4\u20132. In game two, Gretzky and Mark Howe each scored a goal and Gordie Howe picked up an assist as the WHA won 4\u20132. The line did not score in the final game, but the WHA won by a score of 4\u20133.\nOn Gretzky's 18th birthday, January 26, 1979, Pocklington signed him to a ten-year personal services contract (the longest in hockey history at the time) worth CA$, with options for ten more years. Gretzky finished third in the league in scoring at 110\u00a0points, behind Robbie Ftorek and R\u00e9al Cloutier. Gretzky captured the Lou Kaplan Trophy as rookie of the year, and helped the Oilers to first place in the league.\nBy the end of the regular season, the signings of Gretzky and other young stars in addition to other factors had compelled enough of the hardline NHL owners to change their positions, and an agreement (recognized as the 1979 expansion by the NHL) was finalized. Under the agreement, the WHA agreed to fold after the 1979 season with the Oilers and three other teams (the Hartford (New England) Whalers, the Quebec Nordiques and the Winnipeg Jets) joining the older league as expansion franchises. The Oilers, like the other three teams, were to be allowed to protect two goaltenders and two skaters from being reclaimed by the established NHL teams in the 1979 NHL Expansion Draft. The NHL also lowered its minimum age, ensuring players such as Gretzky would not need to return to the junior level, albeit with the caveat that such previously underaged players were supposed to be placed into the 1979 NHL Entry Draft pool. Nevertheless, to avoid any potential for litigation over the validity of Gretzky's personal services contract the Oilers were allowed to keep him on their roster as one of their priority selections. In exchange for agreeing to keep Gretzky off the draft board, the NHL placed Edmonton at the bottom of the draft order.\nThe WHA completed the playoffs of its final season as planned. The Oilers reached the Avco World Trophy finals (the only WHA championship series appearance for the franchise), where they lost to the Winnipeg Jets in six games.\nNHL career.\nEdmonton Oilers (1979\u20131988).\nGretzky's success in the WHA carried over into the NHL, despite some critics suggesting he would struggle in what was considered the bigger, tougher, and more talented league. In his first NHL season, 1979\u201380, Gretzky was awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy as the NHL's Most Valuable Player (the first of eight in a row) and tied for the scoring lead with Marcel Dionne with 137\u00a0points. Although Gretzky played 79\u00a0games to Dionne's 80, Dionne was awarded the Art Ross Trophy because he had scored more goals (53 to 51). The season still stands as the highest point total by a first-year player in NHL history. Gretzky became the youngest player to score 50\u00a0goals, but was not eligible for the Calder Memorial Trophy, given to the top NHL rookie, because of his previous year of WHA experience. The Calder was instead awarded to Boston Bruins defenceman Ray Bourque.\nIn his second season, Gretzky won the Art Ross (the first of seven consecutive) with a then-record 164\u00a0points, breaking both Bobby Orr's record for assists in a season (102) and Phil Esposito's record for points in a season (152). He won his second straight Hart Trophy, and was named \"Sportsman of the Year\" by \"the Sporting News\". In the first game of the 1981 Stanley Cup playoffs, against the Montreal Canadiens, Gretzky had five assists, a single game playoff record.\nDuring the 1981\u201382 season, Gretzky surpassed a record that had stood for 35\u00a0years: 50 goals in 50 games, first set by Maurice \"Rocket\" Richard during the 1944\u201345 NHL season and tied by Mike Bossy during the 1980\u201381 NHL season. Gretzky accomplished the feat in only 39\u00a0games. His 50th goal of the season came on December 30, 1981, in the final seconds of a 7\u20135 win against the Philadelphia Flyers and was his fifth of the game. Later that season, Gretzky broke Esposito's record for most goals in a season (76) on February 24, 1982, scoring three to help defeat the Buffalo Sabres 6\u20133. He ended the 1981\u201382 season with records of 92\u00a0goals, 120\u00a0assists, and 212\u00a0points in 80\u00a0games, becoming the only player in NHL history to break the two hundred-point mark. That year, Gretzky became the first hockey player and first Canadian to be named Associated Press Male Athlete of the Year. He was also named 1982 \"Sportsman of the Year\" by \"Sports Illustrated\". The Canadian Press also named Gretzky Newsmaker of the Year in 1982.\nThe following seasons saw Gretzky break his assists record three more times (125 in 1982\u201383, 135 in 1984\u201385 and 163 in 1985\u201386); he also bettered that mark (120\u00a0assists) in 1986\u201387 with 121 and 1990\u201391 with 122, and his point record one more time (215, in 1985\u201386). By the time he finished playing in Edmonton, he held or shared 49\u00a0NHL records.\nThe Edmonton Oilers finished first overall in their last WHA regular season. The same success was not immediate when they joined the NHL, but within four seasons, the Oilers were competing for the Stanley Cup. The Oilers were a young, strong team featuring, in addition to Gretzky, future Hall of Famers including forwards Mark Messier, Glenn Anderson and Jari Kurri; defenceman Paul Coffey; and goaltender Grant Fuhr. Gretzky was its captain from 1983 to 1988. In 1983, they made it to the Stanley Cup Finals, only to be swept by the three-time defending champion New York Islanders. The following season, the Oilers met the Islanders in the Finals again, this time winning the Stanley Cup, their first of five in seven years.\nFive times between 1981\u201382 and 1986\u201387, Gretzky led the NHL in goals scored. The Oilers also won the Stanley Cup with Gretzky three additional times: in 1985, 1987 and 1988.\nWhen the Oilers joined the NHL, Gretzky continued to play under his personal services contract with Oilers owner Peter Pocklington. This arrangement came under increased scrutiny by the mid-1980s, especially following reports that Pocklington had used the contract as collateral to help secure a $31\u00a0million loan with the Alberta Treasury Branches. Amid growing concern around the NHL that a financial institution might be able to lay claim to Gretzky's rights in the event the heavily leveraged Pocklington were to declare bankruptcy, as well as growing dissatisfaction on the part of Gretzky and his advisers, in 1987, Gretzky and Pocklington agreed to replace the personal services contract with a standard NHL contract.\nThe Gretzky rule.\nIn June 1985, as part of a package of five rule changes to be implemented for the 1985\u201386 season, the NHL Board of Governors decided to introduce offsetting penalties, where neither team lost a man when coincidental penalties were called. The effect of calling offsetting penalties was felt immediately in the NHL because during the early 1980s, when the Gretzky-era Oilers entered a four-on-four or three-on-three situation with an opponent, they frequently used the space on the ice to score one or more goals. A few days later, during a press conference the day after being awarded the Hart Memorial Trophy, Gretzky criticized the NHL for punishing teams and players who previously benefited. The rule change became known as \"the Gretzky rule\". The rule was reversed for the 1992\u201393 season, by which time a majority of the players from the all-time powerhouse Edmonton Oilers (the 1984\u201385 Oilers team, the one most directly impacted by the June 1985 rule change, was later voted the greatest NHL team ever, as part of the NHL's centennial celebrations) had changed teams or retired from hockey.\nStrategy and effect on NHL play.\nGretzky had a major influence on the style of play of the Edmonton Oilers and the NHL as a whole, helping to inspire a more team-based strategy. Using this approach, the Oilers, led by Gretzky, became the highest-scoring team in NHL history.\n\"He was, I think, the first Canadian forward to play a true team game\", said hockey writer and former NHL goaltender Ken Dryden. The focus of the game before Gretzky's arrival, he said, especially among the Canadian teams, was on the player with the puck\u2014getting the puck to a star player who would make the big play. Gretzky reversed that. He knew he wasn't big enough, strong enough, or even fast enough to do what he wanted to do if others focused on him. Like a magician, he had to direct attention elsewhere, to his four teammates on the ice with him, to create a momentary distraction to move unnoticed into the open ice where size and strength didn't matter.\u00a0... Gretzky made his opponents compete with five players, not one, and he made his teammates full partners in the game. He made them skate to his level and pass and finish up to his level or they would be embarrassed.\nBetween 1982 and 1985, the Edmonton Oilers averaged 423 goals a season, when no previous team had scored 400, and Gretzky on his own had averaged 207 points when no player before had scored more than 152 in one year. Dryden wrote in his book \"The Game\", \"In the past, defenders and teams had learned to devise strategies to stop opponents with the puck. To stop them without it, that was interference. But now, if players without the puck skated just as hard as those with it, but faster, and dodged and darted to open ice just as determinedly, but more effectively, how did you shut them down?\"\nIn this, Gretzky added his considerable influence as the preeminent NHL star of his day to that of the Soviets, who had also developed a more team style of play and had successfully used it against the best NHL teams, beginning in the 1972 Summit Series. \"The Soviets and Gretzky changed the NHL game\", says Dryden. \"Gretzky, the kid from Brantford with the Belarusian name, was the acceptable face of Soviet hockey. No Canadian kid wanted to play like Makarov or Larionov. They all wanted to play like Gretzky.\"\nAt the same time, Gretzky recognized the contributions of their coach in the success of the Oilers: \"Under the guidance of Glen Sather, our Oiler teams became adept at generating speed, developing finesse, and learning a transition game with strong European influences.\"\nGretzky explains his style of play further:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;People think that to be a good player you have to pick the puck up, deke around ninety-three guys, and take this ungodly slap shot. No. Let the puck do all the moving and you get yourself in the right place. I don't care if you're Carl Lewis, you can't out skate that little black thing. Just move the puck: give it up, get it back, give it up. It's like Larry Bird. The hardest work he does is getting open. The jump shot is cake.\nThat's all hockey is open ice. That's my whole strategy: Find Open Ice. Chicago coach Mike Keenan said it best: \"There's a spot on the ice that's no-man's land, and all the good goal scorers find it.\" It's a piece of frozen real estate that's just in between the defense and the forward.\n\"The Trade\".\nTwo hours after the Oilers won the Stanley Cup in 1988, Gretzky learned from his father that the Oilers were planning to deal him to another team. Walter Gretzky had known for months after having been tipped off by Skalbania, but kept the news from Wayne so as not to upset him. According to Walter, Wayne was being \"shopped\" to Los Angeles, Detroit, and Vancouver, and Pocklington needed money as his other business ventures were not doing well. At first, Gretzky did not want to leave Edmonton, but he received a call while on his honeymoon from Los Angeles Kings owner Bruce McNall, who asked permission to meet and discuss the deal. Gretzky informed McNall that his prerequisites for a deal to take place were that Marty McSorley and Mike Krushelnyski join him as teammates in Los Angeles. Both McNall and Pocklington quickly agreed. After the details of the trade were finalized by the two owners, one final condition had to be met: Gretzky had to call Pocklington and request a trade. When Pocklington told Oilers general manager and head coach Sather about his plans to trade Gretzky to Los Angeles, Sather tried to stop the deal, but when he found out that Gretzky had been involved in the negotiations, he changed his attitude and requested Luc Robitaille in exchange. The Kings refused, instead offering Jimmy Carson.\nOn August 9, 1988, in a move that heralded significant change in the NHL, the Oilers traded Gretzky (along with McSorley and Krushelnyski) to the rival Kings for Carson, Martin G\u00e9linas, $15 million in cash, and the Kings' first-round draft picks in 1989 (later traded to the New Jersey Devils, who used it to select Jason Miller), 1991, (used to select Martin Ru\u010dinsk\u00fd), and 1993, (used to select Nick Stajduhar). \"The Trade\", as it came to be known, upset Canadians to the extent that New Democratic Party House Leader Nelson Riis demanded the government block it, and Pocklington was burned in effigy outside Northlands Coliseum.\nIn Gretzky's first appearance in Edmonton after the trade, a game nationally televised in Canada, he received a four-minute standing ovation. The arena was sold out, and the attendance of 17,503 was the Oilers' biggest crowd ever to that date. Large cheers erupted for his first shift, his first touch of the puck, his two assists, and Mark Messier's body check of Gretzky into the boards. After the game, Gretzky took the opportunity to confirm his patriotism: \"I'm still proud to be a Canadian. I didn't desert my country. I moved because I was traded and that's where my job is. But I'm Canadian to the core. I hope Canadians understand that.\" After the 1988\u201389 season, a life-sized bronze statue of Gretzky was erected outside Northlands Coliseum, holding the Stanley Cup over his head.\nLos Angeles Kings (1988\u20131996).\nThe Kings named Gretzky their alternate captain. He made an immediate impact on the ice, scoring on his first shot on goal in the first regular season game. The Kings got off to their best start ever, winning four straight en route to qualifying for the playoffs. For only the second time in his NHL career, Gretzky finished second in scoring, but narrowly edged the Pittsburgh Penguins' Mario Lemieux (who scored 199\u00a0points) for the Hart Trophy as MVP.\nDespite being underdogs against the defending Stanley Cup champion Edmonton Oilers in the Smythe Division semifinals, Gretzky led the Kings to a shocking upset of his old squad, spearheading the Kings' return from a 3\u20131 series deficit to win the series 4\u20133. He was nervous Edmonton would greet him with boos, but they were eagerly waiting for him. The Kings were then swept by the Calgary Flames, who went on to win their first Stanley Cup.\nIn 1990, the Associated Press named Gretzky Male Athlete of the Decade. For the second year in a row, the Kings eliminated the defending champions in the first round when they defeated the Flames in six games, but also for the second year in a row their season ended in a second round sweep, this time at the hands of Gretzky's former team. The Oilers went on to win their fifth Cup (and first without Gretzky). In his post-championship interview, Messier (who had replaced Gretzky as Edmonton's captain following the trade) dedicated the Oilers' Cup win to him.\nGretzky's first season in Los Angeles saw a marked increase in attendance and fan interest in a city not previously known for following hockey. The Kings now boasted of numerous sellouts. Many credit Gretzky's arrival with putting non-traditional American hockey markets on \"the NHL map\"; not only did California receive two more NHL franchises (the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and San Jose Sharks) during Gretzky's tenure in Los Angeles, but his popularity in Southern California proved to be an impetus in the league establishing teams in other parts of the US Sun Belt.\nGretzky was sidelined for much of the 1992\u201393 regular season with a back injury (he returned on January 6, 1993, which was also his 1,000th NHL game), and his 65-point output ended a record 13-year streak in which he recorded at least 100 points each season. However, he performed well in the playoffs, notably when he scored a hat trick in game\u00a0seven of the Campbell Conference Finals against the Toronto Maple Leafs. This victory propelled the Kings into the Stanley Cup Finals for the first time in franchise history, where they faced the Montreal Canadiens. After winning the first game of the series by a score of 4\u20131, the team lost the next three games in overtime, and then fell 4\u20131 in the deciding fifth game, where Gretzky failed to get a shot on net.\nThe next season, Gretzky broke Howe's career goal-scoring record of 801, and won the scoring title, but the team began a long slide, and despite numerous player and coaching moves, they failed to qualify for the playoffs again until 1998. After the financially troubled McNall was forced to sell the Kings in 1994, Gretzky's relationship with the Kings' new owners grew strained. Under both McNall and the new ownership group, the team was fiscally unstable, to the point that paychecks to players bounced. Finally, in early 1996, Gretzky requested a trade. During the 1994\u201395 NHL lock-out, Gretzky and some friends (including Mark Messier, Marty McSorley, Brett Hull and Steve Yzerman) formed the Ninety Nine All Stars Tour and played eight exhibition games in various countries.\nSt. Louis Blues (1996).\nOn February 27, 1996, Gretzky joined the St. Louis Blues in a trade for Patrice Tardif, Roman Vopat, Craig Johnson and two draft picks (Peter Hogan and Matt Zultek). He partially orchestrated the trade after reports surfaced that he was unhappy in Los Angeles. At the time of the trade, the Blues and New York Rangers emerged as front-runners, but the Blues met his salary demands. Gretzky was immediately named the team's captain. He scored 37\u00a0points in 31\u00a0games for the team in the regular season and the playoffs, and the Blues came within one game of the Conference Finals.\nHowever, the chemistry everyone expected with winger Brett Hull never developed. Gretzky was also forced to endure public criticism from his head coach for the first time in his career. Long before either he or Gretzky joined the Blues, Mike Keenan had refused to moderate his coaching style even while coaching Gretzky with Team Canada during international tournaments. Gretzky's professional relationship with Keenan was thus never particularly warm, and the coach's public rebukes effectively ended any realistic prospect of Gretzky remaining in St. Louis once he became a free agent. Gretzky rejected a three-year deal worth $15\u00a0million with the Blues, and on July 21, signed with the New York Rangers as a free agent, rejoining longtime Oilers teammate Mark Messier (and former Kings teammate Luc Robitaille) for a two-year, $8\u00a0million (plus incentives) contract.\nNew York Rangers (1996\u20131999).\nGretzky was originally going to sign with the Vancouver Canucks after his tenure with the Blues ended during the summer of the 1996 offseason. Canucks president and general manager Pat Quinn and Gretzky had verbally agreed to a contract during the night that they were going to formally sign the next morning, but Stan McCammon, the CEO of Orca Bay Sports &amp; Entertainment (the ownership group of the Canucks) ordered Quinn to call and demand that Gretzky sign that same night; when Quinn called Gretzky and demanded that he sign right now, the deal was called off due to Gretzky not liking the Canucks' new pushiness.\nGretzky ended his professional playing career by signing with the New York Rangers, where he played his final three seasons and helped the team reach the Eastern Conference Finals in 1997. The Rangers were defeated in the Conference Finals in five games by the Philadelphia Flyers, despite Gretzky leading the Rangers in the playoffs with 10\u00a0goals and 10\u00a0assists. For the first time in his NHL career, Gretzky was not named captain, except for a brief period as acting captain in 1998 when captain Brian Leetch was injured and out of the line-up. After the 1996\u201397 season, Mark Messier signed a free agent contract with the Vancouver Canucks, ending the brief reunion of Messier and Gretzky after just one season. The 1997 playoff run was Gretzky's last as a player, and the Rangers did not return to the playoffs until 2006, well after Gretzky retired. Along with Jaromir Jagr, he topped the NHL in the 1997\u201398 season with 67\u00a0assists. It was the 16th time in 19 seasons that Gretzky earned at least a share of the league lead in the statistic.\nIn 1997, before his retirement, \"The Hockey News\" named a committee of 50\u00a0hockey experts (former NHL players, past and present writers, broadcasters, coaches, and hockey executives) to select and rank the 50\u00a0greatest players in NHL history. The experts voted Gretzky number one. Gretzky said he would have voted Bobby Orr or Gordie Howe as the best of all time.\nThe 1998\u201399 season was his last as a professional player. He reached one milestone in this last season, breaking the professional total (regular season and playoffs) goal-scoring record of 1,071, which Gordie Howe had held. Gretzky was having difficulty scoring this season and finished with only nine goals, contributing to this being the only season in which he failed to average at least a point per game, but his last goal brought his scoring total for his combined NHL/WHA career to 1,072, one more than Howe. As the season wound down, there was media speculation that Gretzky would retire, but he refused to announce his retirement. His last NHL game in Canada was on April 15, 1999, a 2\u20132\u00a0tie with the Ottawa Senators and the Rangers' second-to-last game of the season. Following the contest, in a departure from the usual three stars announcement, Gretzky was awarded all three stars. Upon returning to New York, Gretzky announced he would retire after the Rangers' last game of the season.\nThe final game of Gretzky's career was a 2\u20131\u00a0overtime loss to the Pittsburgh Penguins on April 18, 1999, in Madison Square Garden. Although the game involved two American teams, both national anthems were played, with the lyrics slightly adjusted to accommodate Gretzky's departure. In place of the lyrics \"O Canada, we stand on guard for thee\", Bryan Adams ad-libbed, \"We're going to miss you, Wayne Gretzky\". \"The Star-Spangled Banner\", as sung by John Amirante, was altered to include the words \"in the land of Wayne Gretzky\". Gretzky ended his career with a final point, assisting on the lone New York goal scored by Brian Leetch. At the time of his retirement, Gretzky was the second-to-last WHA player still active in professional hockey. Mark Messier, who attended the game along with other representatives of the Edmonton Oilers dynasty, was the last.\nInternational play.\nGretzky made his first international appearance as a member of the Canadian national junior team at the 1978 World Junior Championships in Montreal, Quebec. The Canadian coach, Punch McLean, was originally sceptical of Gretzky's ability as he was the youngest player to compete in the tournament at the age of 16. He went on to lead the tournament in scoring with 17 points to earn All-Star Team and Best Forward honours. His 17 points remain the most scored by a 16-year-old in the World Junior Championships. Canada finished with the bronze medal.\nGretzky debuted with the Canadian national team at the 1981 Canada Cup. He led the tournament in scoring with 12 points en route to a second-place finish to the Soviet Union, losing 8\u20131 in the final. Seven months later, Gretzky joined Team Canada for the 1982 World Championships in Finland. He notched 14 points in 10 games, including a two-goal, two-assist effort in Canada's final game against Sweden to earn the bronze. Gretzky did not win his first international competition until the 1984 Canada Cup, when Canada defeated Sweden in a best-of-three finals. He led the tournament in scoring for the second consecutive time and was named to the All-Star Team.\nGretzky's international career highlight arguably came three years later at the 1987 Canada Cup. Gretzky has called the tournament the best hockey he has played in his life. Playing on a line with Pittsburgh Penguins' superstar Mario Lemieux, he recorded a tournament-best 21 points in nine games. After losing the first game of a best-of-three final series against the Soviets, Gretzky propelled Canada with a five-assist performance in the second game, including the game-winning pass to Lemieux in overtime, to extend the tournament. In the deciding game three, Gretzky and Lemieux once again combined for the game-winner. With the score tied 5\u20135 and 1:26 minutes to go in regulation, Lemieux one-timed a pass from Gretzky on a 3-on-1 with defenceman Larry Murphy. Lemieux scored to win the tournament for Canada; the play is widely regarded as one of the most memorable plays in Canadian international competition.\nThe 1991 Canada Cup marked the last time the tournament was played under the \"Canada Cup\" moniker. Gretzky led the tournament for the fourth and final time with 12 points in seven games. He did not, however, compete in the final against the United States due to a back injury. Canada nevertheless won in two games by scores of 4\u20131 and 4\u20132. Five years later, the tournament was revived and renamed the World Cup in 1996. It marked the first time Gretzky did not finish as the tournament's leading scorer; his seven points in eight games placed him fourth overall.\nLeading up to the 1998 Winter Olympics in Nagano, Japan, it was announced that NHL players would be eligible to play for the first time. Gretzky was named to the club on November 29, 1997. However, Gretzky was passed over for the captaincy, along with several other Canadian veterans including Steve Yzerman and Ray Bourque in favour of the younger Eric Lindros. Expectations were high for the Canadian team, but the team lost to the Czech Republic in the semi-finals. The game went to a shootout with a 1\u20131 tie after overtime, but Gretzky was controversially not selected by coach Marc Crawford as one of the five shooters, all of whom failed to score. Team Canada then lost the bronze medal game 3\u20132 to Finland to finish without a medal. The Olympics marked Gretzky's eighth and final international appearance, finishing with four assists in six games. He retired from international play holding the records for most goals (20), most assists (28), and most overall points (48) in best-on-best hockey.\nSkills and influences.\nStyle of play.\nGretzky's size and strength were unimpressive\u2014in fact, far below average for the NHL\u2014but he is widely considered the smartest player in the history of the game. His reading of the game and his ability to improvise on the fly were unrivaled, and he could consistently anticipate where the puck was going to be and execute the right move at the right time. His coach at the Edmonton Oilers, Glen Sather, said, \"He was so much more intelligent. While they were using all this energy trying to rattle his teeth, he was just skating away, circling, analyzing things.\"\nHe was also considered one of the most creative players in hockey. \"You never knew what he was going to do\", said hockey Hall of Famer Igor Larionov. \"He was improvising all the time. Every time he took the ice, there was some spontaneous decision he would make. That's what made him such a phenomenal player.\" Gretzky's ability to improvise came into the spotlight at the 1998 Olympics in Japan. Then an older player in the sunset of his career, he had been passed over for the captaincy of the team. But as the series continued, his unique skills made him a team leader.\nThe Canadians had trouble with the big ice. They had trouble with the European patterns and the lateral play and the endless, inventive cycling.\u00a0... Slowly, as game after game went by and the concern continued to rise, Wayne Gretzky began climbing through the line-up. He, almost alone among the Canadians, seemed to take to the larger ice surface as if it offered more opportunity instead of obligation\u00a0... His playing time soared, as he was being sent on not just for power plays but double shifts and even penalty kills. By the final round\u00a0... it was Wayne Gretzky who assumed the leadership both on and off the ice.\nHe passed and shot with prodigious skill. Hall of Fame defenceman Bobby Orr said of Gretzky, \"He passes better than anybody I've ever seen.\" In his first two seasons in the NHL, his deft passing skills helped earn him a reputation as an ace playmaker, and so opposing defencemen focused their efforts on foiling his attempts to pass the puck to other scorers. In response, Gretzky started shooting on goal himself\u2014and with exceptional effectiveness. He had a fast and accurate shot. \"Wayne Gretzky was one of the most accurate scorers in NHL history\", said one biography. Statistics support the contention: whereas Phil Esposito, who had set the previous goal-scoring record, needed 550 shots to score 76 goals, Gretzky netted his 76th after only 287 shots\u2014about half as many. He scored his all-time single-season record of 92 goals with just 369 shots. Because he was so light compared to other players, goalies were often surprised by how hard Gretzky's shot was. Goalies called his shots \"sneaky fast\". He also had a way of never shooting the puck with the same rhythm twice, making his shots harder to time and block.\nVeteran Canadian journalist Peter Gzowski wrote that Gretzky seemed to be able to slow down time. \"There is an unhurried grace to everything Gretzky does on the ice. Winding up for the slapshot, he will stop for an almost imperceptible moment at the top of his arc, like a golfer with a rhythmic swing.\" \"Gretzky uses this room to insert an extra beat into his actions. In front of the net, eyeball to eyeball with the goaltender\u00a0... he will\u00a0... hold the puck one\u00a0... extra instant, upsetting the anticipated rhythm of the game, extending the moment.\u00a0... He distorts time, and not only by slowing it down. Sometimes he will release the puck before he appears to be ready, threading the pass through a maze of players precisely to the blade of a teammate's stick, or finding a chink in a goaltender's armour and slipping the puck into it\u00a0... before the goaltender is ready to react.\"\nCommentators have noted Gretzky's uncanny ability to judge the position of the other players on the ice\u2014so much so that many suspected he enjoyed some kind of extrasensory perception, that he played like he had \"eyes in the back of his head\". Gretzky said he sensed other players more than he saw them. \"I get a feeling about where a teammate is going to be\", he said. \"A lot of times, I can turn and pass without even looking.\" Gretzky explained that what appeared to be instinct was, in large part, the effect of his relentless study and practice of the game, in co-operation with his coaches. As a result, he developed a deep understanding of its shifting patterns and dynamics. Gzowski said that Gretzky understood the game so well, that he could instantly recognize and capitalize upon emerging patterns of play: \"What we take to be creative genius is in fact a reaction to a situation that he has stored in his brain as deeply and firmly as his own phone number.\" Gretzky agreed with this assessment, saying, \"That's a hundred percent right. It's all practice. I got it from my Dad. . . . Nobody would ever say a doctor had learned his profession by instinct; yet in my own way I've put in almost as much time studying hockey as a medical student puts in studying medicine.\"\nPhysical attributes.\nWhen he entered the league in 1979, critics opined that Gretzky was \"too small, too wiry, and too slow to be a force in the [NHL]\". He weighed , compared to the NHL average of at that time. But that year, Gretzky tied for first place in scoring, and won the Hart Trophy for the league's most valuable player. In his second year in the league, weighing just 165 pounds, he broke the previous single-season scoring record, racking up 164 points. The next year (1981\u201382), at 170 pounds\u2014still \"a wisp compared to the average NHL player\"\u2014he set the all-time goal-scoring record, putting 92 pucks in the net. He weighed \"about 170 pounds\" for the better part of his career. He consistently scored last in strength tests among the Edmonton Oilers, bench pressing only 140 pounds (64\u00a0kg).\nDespite his lack of strength, Gretzky had remarkable physical stamina. Like his hero, Gordie Howe, Gretzky possessed \"an exceptional capacity to renew his energy resources quickly\". In 1980, when an exercise physiologist tested the recuperative abilities of all of the Edmonton Oilers, Gretzky scored so high that the tester said he \"thought the machine had broken\". His stamina is also indicated by the fact that Gretzky often scored late in the game. In the year he scored his record 92 goals, 22 of them went in the net during the first period, 30 in the second\u2014and 40 in the third.\nHe also had strong general athletic skills. Growing up, he was a competitive runner and also batted .492 for the Junior Intercounty Baseball League's Brantford CKCP Braves in the summer of 1980. As a result, he was offered a contract by the Toronto Blue Jays. Gretzky also excelled at box lacrosse, which he played during the summer. At age ten, after scoring 196 goals in his hockey league, he scored 158 goals in lacrosse.\nAccording to Gretzky, lacrosse was where he learned how to avoid getting hit and to protect himself from hard checks in the event he did get hit: \"In those days you could be hit from behind in lacrosse, as well as cross-checked, so you had to learn how to roll body checks for self-protection.\" Gretzky applied this technique as a professional player, avoiding checks with such skill that a rumour circulated that there was an unwritten rule not to hit him. This was how Gretzky avoided serious injuries despite being undersized and entering the NHL during its \"rough and tumble time\"; Gretzky noted that his contemporary Mike Bossy \"took a beating to score goals, which consequently led him to retire because his back took a beating\". Defencemen found Gretzky a most elusive target. The 205-pound (93\u00a0kg) Denis Potvin, a fellow Hall of Famer, compared attempting to hit Gretzky to \"wrapping your arms around fog. You saw him but when you reached out to grab him your hands felt nothing, maybe just a chill.\"\nGretzky received a good deal of cover from burly Oiler enforcers Dave Semenko and Marty McSorley. The latter was traded with Gretzky in 1988 to the Los Angeles Kings, where he played the same policeman role for several more years. But Gretzky discouraged unfair hits in another way. \"If a guy ran him, Wayne would embarrass that guy\", said former Oiler Lee Fogolin. \"He'd score six or seven points on him. I saw him do it night after night.\"\nPost-retirement.\nGretzky was named honorary chairman of the Open Ice Summit, held in August 1999 to discuss ways to improve Canadian ice hockey. He stressed the need to play and practice hockey for the love of the game, and felt that skill was more important to develop than talent and that Canada had the potential to be world leaders in skill development.\nGretzky was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 22, 1999, becoming the tenth player to bypass the three-year waiting period. The Hall of Fame then announced that he would be the last player to do so. He was inducted into the IIHF Hall of Fame in 2000. In addition, Gretzky's jersey number 99 was retired league-wide at the 2000 NHL All-Star Game, a decision inspired by Major League Baseball's retirement of the number 42 worn by Jackie Robinson. In October 1999, Edmonton honoured Gretzky by renaming one of Edmonton's busiest freeways, Capilano Drive\u2014which passes by Northlands Coliseum\u2014to Wayne Gretzky Drive. Also in Edmonton, the local transit authority assigned a rush-hour bus route numbered No. 99 which also runs on Wayne Gretzky Drive for its commute.\nIn 2002, the Kings held a jersey retirement ceremony and erected a life-sized statue of Gretzky outside the Staples Center; the ceremony was delayed until then so that Bruce McNall, who had recently finished a prison sentence, could attend. Also in 2002, Gretzky received a star on Canada's Walk of Fame in Toronto. His hometown of Brantford, Ontario, renamed Park Road North to \"Wayne Gretzky Parkway\" as well as renaming the North Park Recreation Centre to The Wayne Gretzky Sports Centre. Brantford further inducted Gretzky into its \"Walk of Fame\" in 2004. On May 10, 2010, he was awarded The Ambassador Award of Excellence by the LA Sports &amp; Entertainment Commission. Gretzky was named one of the 100 Greatest NHL Players in 2017.\nPhoenix Coyotes.\nAlmost immediately after retirement, several NHL teams approached Gretzky about an ownership role. In May 2000, he agreed to buy a 10% stake in the Phoenix Coyotes in a partnership with majority owner Steve Ellman, taking on the roles of alternate governor, managing partner and head of hockey operations. The Coyotes were in the process of being sold and Ellman convinced Gretzky to come on board, averting a potential move to Portland, Oregon. The sale was not completed until the following year, on February 15, 2001, after two missed deadlines while securing financing and partners before Ellman and Gretzky could take over. Trucking magnate and Arizona Diamondbacks part-owner Jerry Moyes was added to the partnership. Gretzky convinced his long-time agent Michael Barnett to join the team as its General Manager.\nIn 2005, rumours began circulating that Gretzky was about to name himself head coach of the Coyotes, but were denied by Gretzky and the team. Ultimately, Gretzky agreed to become head coach on August 8, 2005. Gretzky made his coaching debut on October 5, and won his first game, on October 8 against the Minnesota Wild. He took an indefinite leave of absence on December 17 to be with his ill mother. Phyllis Gretzky died of lung cancer on December 19. Gretzky resumed his head-coaching duties on December 28. The Coyotes' record at the end of the 2005\u201306 season was 38\u201339\u20135, a 16-win improvement over 2003\u201304; they were 36\u201336\u20135 in games Gretzky coached.\nIn 2006, Moyes became majority owner of the team. There was uncertainty about Gretzky's role until it was announced on May 31, 2006, that he had agreed to a five-year contract to remain head coach. The Coyotes' performance declined in 2006\u201307, as the team ended the season 15th in their conference. During Gretzky's coaching tenure, the Coyotes did not reach the postseason, and their best finish in the Western Conference standings was 12th.\nOn May 5, 2009, the Coyotes' holding company, Dewey Ranch Hockey LLC, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy. An ownership dispute involving Research in Motion's Jim Balsillie (to relocate the team to Hamilton, Ontario) and the NHL itself arose, which eventually ended up in court. Gretzky did not attend the Coyotes' training camp, leaving associate head coach Ulf Samuelsson in charge, due to an uncertain contractual status with the club, whose bankruptcy hearings were continuing. Bidders for the club had indicated that Gretzky would no longer be associated with the team after it emerged from bankruptcy, and on September 24, 2009, Gretzky stepped down as head coach and head of hockey operations of the Coyotes. Gretzky's final head coaching record was 143\u2013161\u201324.\nWinter Olympics.\nGretzky was executive director of the Canadian men's hockey team at the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, Utah. On February 18, he lashed out at the media at a press conference, frustrated with media and fan comments regarding his team's uninspiring 1\u20131\u20131 start. His temper boiled over after Canada's 3\u20133\u00a0draw versus the Czech Republic, as he launched a tirade against the perceived negative reputation of Team Canada among other national squads, and called rumours of dissent in the dressing room the result of \"American propaganda\". \"They're loving us not doing well\", he said, referring to American hockey fans. American fans online began calling Gretzky a \"crybaby\"; defenders said he was merely borrowing a page from former coach Glen Sather to take the pressure off his players. Gretzky addressed those comments by saying he spoke out to protect the Canadian players, and the tirade was not \"staged\". The Canadian team won the gold medal, its first in 50\u00a0years.\nGretzky again acted as executive director of Canada's men's hockey team at the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin, Italy, though not with the success of 2002; the team was eliminated in the quarterfinals and failed to win a medal. He was asked to manage Canada's team at the 2005 Ice Hockey World Championships, but declined due to his mother's poor health.\nGretzky served as an ambassador to Vancouver's successful bid for the 2010 Winter Olympics, and was named Special Advisor to Canada's men's hockey team at the Games. During the Games' opening ceremony, Gretzky, basketball player Steve Nash, skier Nancy Greene, and speed skater Catriona Le May Doan jointly lit the Olympic cauldron inside the ceremony venue of BC Place. Due to BC Place being an indoor stadium, and Olympic protocols stating that the lighting of the cauldron should be visible to the public, Gretzky was then escorted out of the stadium to light a second, outdoor cauldron outside the Vancouver Convention Centre, making him the \"de facto\" final torchbearer.\nAlumni games.\nAlthough Gretzky had previously stated he would not participate in any \"old-timers exhibition games\", on November 22, 2003, he took to the ice to help celebrate the Edmonton Oilers' 25th anniversary as an NHL team. The Heritage Classic, held at Commonwealth Stadium in Edmonton, was the first regular season NHL game to be played outdoors. It was preceded by the Mega Stars game, which featured Gretzky and many of his Oiler Dynasty teammates against a group of retired Montreal Canadiens players (whose likes included Claude Lemieux, Guy Lafleur and others). Despite frigid temperatures, the crowd numbered 57,167, with an additional several million watching the game on television. The Edmonton alumni won the Megastars game 2\u20130, while Montreal went on to win the regular season game held later that day, 4\u20133.\nThirteen years later, on December 31, 2016, Gretzky participated in the Winter Classic Alumni Game, which was held between teams of former Chicago Blackhawks and St. Louis Blues players two days before the 2017 Winter Classic. Gretzky represented the Blues in the game, which his team won 8\u20137.\nEdmonton Oilers.\nIn October 2016, Gretzky returned to the Oilers as a partner and vice-chairman of the team's parent company, Oilers Entertainment Group, to work closely with owner Daryl Katz and Oilers Entertainment Group CEO Bob Nicholson on the business side of the Oilers' operation.\nOn May 25, 2021, Gretzky announced that he would step down from his role with the Oilers, stating that \"The Oilers, their fans, and the city of Edmonton have meant the world to me and my family for over four decades\u2014and that will never end. Given the pandemic and other life changes, I realize I will not be able to dedicate the time nor effort needed to support this world-class organization.\" It was subsequently reported by various outlets that Gretzky had signed with new US NHL rightsholder Turner Sports to become an analyst. He serves as a studio analyst for NHL broadcasts on TNT and TBS.\nPersonal life.\nGretzky has made several TV appearances, including as a \"Dance Fever\" celebrity judge, and acted in a dramatic role alongside Victor Newman in \"The Young and the Restless\" in 1981. In 1984, he travelled to the Soviet Union to film a television program on Russian goaltender Vladislav Tretiak. Gretzky was a guest host of the American late night variety show \"Saturday Night Live\" in 1989. A fictional crime-fighting version of him served as one of the main characters in the cartoon \"ProStars\" in 1991. In December 2016, Gretzky made a cameo on a Christmas episode of \"The Simpsons\" as a winter character.\nGretzky is a dual citizen of Canada and the United States, having become a naturalized citizen of the latter. However, in 2025 he denied ever having US citizenship: \"I never became an American citizen; I\u2019m Canadian,\" he said.\nFamily.\nWhile serving as a judge on \"Dance Fever\", Gretzky met actress Janet Jones. According to Gretzky, Jones does not recall his being on the show. They met regularly after that, but did not become a couple until 1987 when they ran into each other at a Los Angeles Lakers game. Gretzky proposed in January 1988, and they were married on July 16, 1988, in a lavish ceremony the Canadian press dubbed \"The Royal Wedding\". Broadcast live throughout Canada from Edmonton's St. Joseph's Basilica, members of the Fire Department acted as ceremonial guards. The event reportedly cost Gretzky over US$1\u00a0million.\nThe couple have five children: Paulina, Ty, Trevor, Tristan, and Emma. Paulina and golfer Dustin Johnson announced their engagement on August 18, 2013, and married on April 23, 2022, in Tennessee. Ty played hockey at Shattuck-Saint Mary's, but quit the sport, and attended Arizona State University. Trevor is a former minor league baseball player.\nHis father Walter died in 2021 at the age of 82.\nBusiness ventures.\nGretzky owned or partnered in the ownership of two sports teams before becoming a partner in the Phoenix Coyotes. In 1985, Gretzky bought the Hull Olympiques of the Quebec Major Junior Hockey League for CA$. During his ownership, the team's colours were changed to silver and black, presaging the change in team jersey colours when he played for the Los Angeles Kings. For the first season that Gretzky played in Los Angeles, the Kings had their training camp at the Olympiques' arena. Gretzky sold the team in 1992 for CA$.\nIn 1991, McNall purchased the Toronto Argonauts of the Canadian Football League (CFL) with Gretzky and John Candy as minority owners. The club won the Grey Cup championship in the first year of the partnership but struggled in the two following seasons, and the partnership sold the team before the 1994 season. Only McNall's name was engraved on the Grey Cup as team owner, but in November 2007, the CFL corrected the oversight, adding Gretzky's and Candy's names. In 1992, Gretzky and McNall partnered in an investment to buy a rare T206 cigarette card of Honus Wagner for US$451,000, later selling the card. It most recently sold for US$2.8 million. The pair also owned Thoroughbred race horses; one of them, Saumarez, won France's Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe in 1990. Gretzky was a board member and executive officer of the Hespeler Hockey Company.\nGretzky's appeal as a product endorser far surpassed that of other hockey players of his era. By 1995, he was among the five highest-paid athlete endorsers in North America, with deals from The Coca-Cola Company, Domino's Pizza, Sharp Corporation, and Upper Deck Company among others. \"Forbes\" estimates that Gretzky made US$93.8\u00a0million from 1990 to 1998. He has endorsed and launched a wide variety of products, from pillowcases to insurance. Gretzky is a partner in First Team Sports, a maker of sports equipment and Worldwide Roller Hockey, Inc., an operator of roller hockey rinks. The video game brand EA Sports included Gretzky in its 2010 title \"NHL Slapshot\", and he had previously been an endorser for Page 44 Studios and Sony Computer Entertainment's video games \"Gretzky NHL 2005\" and \"Gretzky NHL 06\".\nIn 2017, as part-owner with Andrew Peller Ltd., Gretzky opened a winery and distillery named \"Wayne Gretzky Estates\" in Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, with products labelled by the trademark \"No. 99\". From 1993 to 2020, Gretzky and a business partner operated the \"Wayne Gretzky's\" restaurant near the Rogers Centre in downtown Toronto. Gretzky has other restaurants opened in 2016 at the Edmonton International Airport and named \"No. 99 Gretzky's Wine &amp; Whisky\", and in 2018 called \"Studio 99\" at Rogers Place in Edmonton, Alberta.\nBooks.\nGretzky has written several books, including \"Gretzky: An Autobiography\" (1990), with Rick Reilly, and \"99: My Life in Pictures\" (1999), with John Davidson and Dan Diamond. His most recent work, \"99: Stories of the Game\" (2016), with Kirstie McLellan Day, was an in-depth look at the history of hockey. It was the best-selling Canadian book of 2016.\nPolitical activity.\nGretzky has aligned himself with the Conservative Party in Canada and Republican politicians in the United States.\nIn 2003, while not criticizing Canada for declining to participate in the invasion of Iraq, Gretzky praised US President George W. Bush and handling the conflict, saying: \"the President of the United States is a great leader, I happen to think he's a wonderful man and if he believes what he's doing is right, I back him 100 per cent\".\nDuring the 2015 Canadian federal election, Gretzky endorsed Prime Minister Stephen Harper, and appeared at a Conservative Party campaign rally praising Harper as \"wonderful to the country\". As a non-resident, Gretzky came under some criticism for this endorsement. In 2014, Gretzky called Harper \"one of the greatest prime ministers ever\". In 2015, Gretzky endorsed Patrick Brown who won the leadership of the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario. \nFollowing the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Gretzky supported calls to ban Russian teams from international events. The following month, he shared a ceremonial puck-drop with a Ukrainian hockey player.\nIn 2024, Gretzky attended the victory party for Donald Trump during the 2024 United States presidential election. Trump subsequently suggested Gretzky should be prime minister of Canada. According to Trump, when he suggested Gretzky run for prime minister, Gretzky said \"Am I going to run for prime minister or governor, you tell me.\" Trump replied, \"I don't know, let's make it governor. I like it better.\" Gretzky's position also resulted in adverse reactions from fans when the NHL awarded Gretzky the honorary team captain for Canada at the 4 Nations Face-Off February 2025 finals. Gretzky did not wear a Team Canada jersey in his representation, unlike the American honorary captain, who wore a Team USA jersey. Gretzky also gave a \"thumbs up\" to the American team as he came on the ice, but did not give any similar gesture to the Canadian team. Following the 4-Nations Face-Off, a petition circulated on Reddit calling for the renaming of Wayne Gretzky Drive in Edmonton due to some fans feeling Gretzky betrayed Canada.\nLegacy.\nHockey.\nGretzky's career achievements include a record nine Hart Trophies as the most valuable player in the NHL. Between 1981 and 1994, he won the Art Ross Trophy, presented to the NHL's season points leader, 10 times. Gretzky was named the MVP of the Stanley Cup playoffs in 1985 and 1988, receiving the Conn Smythe Trophy. In addition, he earned the Lester B. Pearson Award (now Ted Lindsay Award) on five occasions; the award is given to the NHL's \"most outstanding player\", as determined by National Hockey League Players' Association members. The Lady Byng Trophy, awarded for sportsmanship and performance, was presented to Gretzky five times between 1980 and 1999. Gretzky was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame in 1999, and into the IIHF Hall of Fame in 2000. He was an inaugural recipient of the Order of Hockey in Canada in 2012.\nThe Wayne Gretzky International Award is presented by the United States Hockey Hall of Fame to honour international individuals who have made major contributions to the growth and advancement of hockey in the United States. The Wayne Gretzky 99 Award is awarded annually to the Most Valuable Player in the Ontario Hockey League playoffs. The Wayne Gretzky Trophy is awarded annually to the playoff champion of the OHL's Western Conference. The Edmonton Minor Hockey Association also has an award named for Gretzky.\nIn May 2021, one of his 1979 O-Pee-Chee hockey cards sold for US$.\nOrder of Canada.\nIn 1984, Gretzky was appointed an Officer of the Order of Canada, the mid-level grade of the order. The citation describes him as: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt; \nThe citation also mentions his philanthropy, particularly in support of CNIB Foundation. \nGretzky did not come to Ottawa for the investiture in the Order for fourteen years. When he came, his investiture was conducted in private.\nGretzky was promoted to the highest rank, a Companion of the Order of Canada, in 2009. The citation for the promotion describes him as &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAs of 2025[ [update]], he has not attended in Ottawa for the investiture as a Companion. His agent stated in 2015 that Gretzky has had trouble fitting one into his schedule. Investitures are held four times a year. Gretzky has been in Canada at various times in the past fifteen years, including for political events.\nOne of the leading experts on Canada's honours system, Christopher McCreery, has criticized Gretzky for not attending an investiture: \"I've probably met 1,000 recipients of the Order of Canada. It's a highlight of their lives\u2014their country saying thank you.\" McCreery added that not attending the investiture is \"insulting to the others who get them. All are supposed to be in the same category, yet they think they are on a plane above everybody else\".\nA spokesperson for the Governor General's office confirmed in 2015 that the office had made attempts to arrange for an investiture. She also stated that between 1967 and 2015, there had been 467 individuals appointed as Companions. She added: \"Of this number, there are five Companions, including Mr. Gretzky, who have not been invested. Two were appointed within the last six months. Two others are deceased.\"\nCareer statistics.\nRegular season and playoffs.\nFigures in boldface italics are NHL records.\nHead coaching record.\nSource:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33425", "revid": "45710782", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33425", "title": "Word processing", "text": ""}
{"id": "33426", "revid": "49121927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33426", "title": "Wave\u2013particle duality", "text": "Concept in quantum mechanics\nWave\u2013particle duality is the concept in quantum mechanics that fundamental entities of the universe, like photons and electrons, exhibit particle or wave properties according to the experimental circumstances. It expresses the inability of the classical concepts such as particle or wave to fully describe the behavior of quantum objects. During the 19th and early 20th centuries, light was found to behave as a wave, then later was discovered to have a particle-like behavior, whereas electrons behaved like particles in early experiments, then later were discovered to have wave-like behavior. The concept of duality arose to name these seeming contradictions.\nHistory.\nWave\u2013particle duality of light.\nIn the late 17th century, Sir Isaac Newton had advocated that light was corpuscular (particulate), but Christiaan Huygens took an opposing wave description. While Newton had favored a particle approach, he was the first to attempt to reconcile both wave and particle theories of light, and the only one in his time to consider both, thereby anticipating modern wave\u2013particle duality. Thomas Young's interference experiments in 1801, and Fran\u00e7ois Arago's detection of the Poisson spot in 1819, validated Huygens' wave models. However, the wave model was challenged in 1901 by Planck's law for black-body radiation. Max Planck heuristically derived a formula for the observed spectrum by assuming that a hypothetical electrically charged oscillator in a cavity that contained black-body radiation could only change its energy in a minimal increment, \"E\", that was proportional to the frequency of its associated electromagnetic wave. In 1905 Albert Einstein interpreted the photoelectric effect also with discrete energies for photons. These both indicate particle behavior. Despite confirmation by various experimental observations, the photon theory (as it came to be called) remained controversial until Arthur Compton performed a series of experiments from 1922 to 1924 demonstrating the momentum of light. The experimental evidence of particle-like momentum and energy seemingly contradicted the earlier work demonstrating wave-like interference of light.\nWave\u2013particle duality of matter.\nThe contradictory evidence from electrons arrived in the opposite order. Many experiments by J. J. Thomson, Robert Millikan, and Charles Wilson among others had shown that free electrons had particle properties, for instance, the measurement of their mass by Thomson in 1897. In 1924, Louis de Broglie introduced his theory of electron waves in his PhD thesis \"Recherches sur la th\u00e9orie des quanta\". He suggested that an electron around a nucleus could be thought of as being a standing wave and that electrons and all matter could be considered as waves. He merged the idea of thinking about them as particles, and of thinking of them as waves. He proposed that particles are bundles of waves (wave packets) that move with a group velocity and have an effective mass. Both of these depend upon the energy, which in turn connects to the wavevector and the relativistic formulation of Albert Einstein a few years before.\nFollowing de Broglie's proposal of wave\u2013particle duality of electrons, in 1925 to 1926, Erwin Schr\u00f6dinger developed the wave equation of motion for electrons. This rapidly became part of what was called by Schr\u00f6dinger \"undulatory mechanics\", now called the Schr\u00f6dinger equation and also \"wave mechanics\".\nIn 1926, Max Born gave a talk in an Oxford meeting about using the electron diffraction experiments to confirm the wave\u2013particle duality of electrons. In his talk, Born cited experimental data from Clinton Davisson in 1923. It happened that Davisson also attended that talk. Davisson returned to his lab in the US to switch his experimental focus to test the wave property of electrons.\nIn 1927, the wave nature of electrons was empirically confirmed by two experiments. The Davisson\u2013Germer experiment at Bell Labs measured electrons scattered from Ni metal surfaces. George Paget Thomson and Alexander Reid at Cambridge University scattered electrons through thin nickel films and observed concentric diffraction rings. Alexander Reid, who was Thomson's graduate student, performed the first experiments, but he died soon after in a motorcycle accident and is rarely mentioned. These experiments were rapidly followed by the first non-relativistic diffraction model for electrons by Hans Bethe based upon the Schr\u00f6dinger equation, which is very close to how electron diffraction is now described. Significantly, Davisson and Germer noticed that their results could not be interpreted using a Bragg's law approach as the positions were systematically different; the approach of Bethe, which includes the refraction due to the average potential, yielded more accurate results. Davisson and Thomson were awarded the Nobel Prize in 1937 for experimental verification of wave property of electrons by diffraction experiments. Similar crystal diffraction experiments were carried out by Otto Stern in the 1930s using beams of helium atoms and hydrogen molecules. These experiments further verified that wave behavior is not limited to electrons and is a general property of matter on a microscopic scale.\nClassical waves and particles.\nBefore proceeding further, it is critical to introduce some definitions of waves and particles both in a classical sense and in quantum mechanics. Waves and particles are two very different models for physical systems, each with an exceptionally large range of application. Classical waves obey the wave equation; they have continuous values at many points in space that vary with time; their spatial extent can vary with time due to diffraction, and they display wave interference. Physical systems exhibiting wave behavior and described by the mathematics of wave equations include water waves, seismic waves, sound waves, radio waves, and more.\nClassical particles obey classical mechanics; they have some center of mass and extent; they follow trajectories characterized by positions and velocities that vary over time; in the absence of forces their trajectories are straight lines. Stars, planets, spacecraft, tennis balls, bullets, sand grains: particle models work across a huge scale. Unlike waves, particles do not exhibit interference.\nSome experiments on quantum systems show wave-like interference and diffraction; some experiments show particle-like collisions.\nQuantum systems obey wave equations that predict particle probability distributions. These particles are associated with discrete values called quanta for properties such as spin, electric charge and magnetic moment. These particles arrive one at time, randomly, but build up a pattern. The probability that experiments will measure particles at a point in space is the square of a complex-number valued wave. Experiments can be designed to exhibit diffraction and interference of the probability amplitude. Thus statistically large numbers of the random particle appearances can display wave-like properties. Similar equations govern collective excitations called quasiparticles.\nElectrons behaving as waves and particles.\nThe electron double slit experiment is a textbook demonstration of wave\u2013particle duality. A modern version of the experiment is shown schematically in the figure below.\nElectrons from the source hit a wall with two thin slits. A mask behind the slits can expose either one or open to expose both slits. The results for high electron intensity are shown on the right, first for each slit individually, then with both slits open. With either slit open there is a smooth intensity variation due to diffraction. When both slits are open the intensity oscillates, characteristic of wave interference.\nHaving observed wave behavior, now change the experiment, lowering the intensity of the electron source until only one or two are detected per second, appearing as individual particles, dots in the video. As shown in the movie clip below, the dots on the detector seem at first to be random. After some time a pattern emerges, eventually forming an alternating sequence of light and dark bands.\nThe experiment shows wave interference revealed a single particle at a time\u2014quantum mechanical electrons display both wave and particle behavior. Similar results have been shown for atoms and even large molecules.\nObserving photons as particles.\nWhile electrons were thought to be particles until their wave properties were discovered, for photons it was the opposite. In 1887, Heinrich Hertz observed that when light with sufficient frequency hits a metallic surface, the surface emits cathode rays, what are now called electrons. In 1902, Philipp Lenard discovered that the maximum possible energy of an ejected electron is unrelated to its intensity. This observation is at odds with classical electromagnetism, which predicts that the electron's energy should be proportional to the intensity of the incident radiation. In 1905, Albert Einstein suggested that the energy of the light must occur a finite number of energy quanta. He postulated that electrons can receive energy from an electromagnetic field only in discrete units (quanta or photons): an amount of energy \"E\" that was related to the frequency \"f\" of the light by\n formula_1\nwhere \"h\" is the Planck constant (6.626\u00d710\u221234 J\u22c5s). Only photons of a high enough frequency (above a certain \"threshold\" value which, when multiplied by the Planck constant, is the work function) could knock an electron free. For example, photons of blue light had sufficient energy to free an electron from the metal he used, but photons of red light did not. One photon of light above the threshold frequency could release only one electron; the higher the frequency of a photon, the higher the kinetic energy of the emitted electron, but no amount of light below the threshold frequency could release an electron. Despite confirmation by various experimental observations, the photon theory (as it came to be called later) remained controversial until Arthur Compton performed a series of experiments from 1922 to 1924 demonstrating the momentum of light.\nBoth discrete (quantized) energies and also momentum are, classically, particle attributes. There are many other examples where photons display particle-type properties, for instance in solar sails, where sunlight could propel a space vehicle and laser cooling where the momentum is used to slow down (cool) atoms. These are a different aspect of wave\u2013particle duality.\nWhich slit experiments.\nIn a \"which way\" experiment, particle detectors are placed at the slits to determine which slit the electron traveled through. When these detectors are inserted, quantum mechanics predicts that the interference pattern disappears because the detected part of the electron wave has changed (loss of coherence). Many similar proposals have been made and many have been converted into experiments and tried out. Every single one shows the same result: as soon as electron trajectories are detected, interference disappears.\nA simple example of these \"which way\" experiments uses a Mach\u2013Zehnder interferometer, a device based on lasers and mirrors sketched below.\nA laser beam along the input port splits at a half-silvered mirror. Part of the beam continues straight, passes through a glass phase shifter, then reflects downward. The other part of the beam reflects from the first mirror then turns at another mirror. The two beams meet at a second half-silvered beam splitter.\nEach output port has a camera to record the results. The two beams show interference characteristic of wave propagation. If the laser intensity is turned sufficiently low, individual dots appear on the cameras, building up the pattern as in the electron example.\nThe first beam-splitter mirror acts like double slits, but in the interferometer case we can remove the second beam splitter. Then the beam heading down ends up in output port 1: any photon particles on this path gets counted in that port. The beam going across the top ends up on output port 2. In either case the counts will track the photon trajectories. However, as soon as the second beam splitter is removed the interference pattern disappears.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33430", "revid": "48736052", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33430", "title": "Wolfenstein 3D", "text": "1992 video game\nWolfenstein 3D is a 1992 first-person shooter game developed by id Software and published by Apogee Software and FormGen for DOS. It was inspired by the 1981 Muse Software video game \"Castle Wolfenstein\", and is the third installment in the \"Wolfenstein\" series. In \"Wolfenstein 3D\", the player assumes the role of Allied spy William \"B.J.\" Blazkowicz during World War\u00a0II as he escapes from the Nazi German prison Castle Wolfenstein and carries out a series of crucial missions against the Nazis. The player traverses each of the game's levels to find an elevator to the next level or kill a final boss, fighting Nazi soldiers, dogs, and other enemies with a knife and a variety of guns.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" was the second major independent release by id Software, after the \"Commander Keen\" series of episodes. In mid-1991, programmer John Carmack experimented with making a fast 3D game engine by restricting the gameplay and viewpoint to a single plane, producing \"Hovertank 3D\" and \"Catacomb 3-D\" as prototypes. After a design session prompted the company to shift from the family-friendly \"Keen\" to a more violent theme, programmer John Romero suggested remaking the 1981 stealth shooter \"Castle Wolfenstein\" as a fast-paced action game. He and designer Tom Hall designed the game, built on Carmack's engine, to be fast and violent, unlike other computer games on the market at the time. \"Wolfenstein 3D\" features artwork by Adrian Carmack and sound effects and music by Bobby Prince. The game was released through Apogee in two sets of three episodes under the shareware model, in which the first episode is released for free to drive interest in paying for the rest. An additional episode, \"Spear of Destiny\", was released as a stand-alone retail title through FormGen.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" was a critical and commercial success and is considered one of the greatest video games ever made. It garnered numerous awards and sold over 250,000 copies by the end of 1995. It has been termed the \"grandfather of 3D shooters\", and is widely regarded as having helped popularize the first-person shooter genre and establishing the standard of fast-paced action and technical prowess for many subsequent games in the genre, as well as showcasing the viability of the shareware publishing model at the time. FormGen developed an additional two episodes for the game, while Apogee released a pack of over 800 fan-created levels. Id Software never returned to the series, but did license the engine to numerous other titles before releasing the source code for free in 1995, and multiple other games in the \"Wolfenstein\" series have been developed by other companies since 2001.\nGameplay.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" is a first-person shooter presented with rudimentary 3D graphics. The game is broken up into levels, each of which is a flat plane divided into areas and rooms by a grid-based pattern of walls and doors, all of equal height. Each level is themed after Nazi bunkers and buildings. To finish a level, the player must traverse through the area to reach an elevator. Levels\u2014ten in the original episodes\u2014are grouped together into named episodes, with the final level focusing on a boss fight with a particularly difficult enemy. While traversing the levels, the player must fight Nazi guards and soldiers, dogs, and other enemies while managing supplies of ammunition and health. The player can find weapons and ammunition placed in the levels or can collect them from dead enemies; weapons include a knife, a pistol, a submachine gun, and a rapid-fire chain gun. The player can also find keys that allow them to pass through locked doors. While the levels are presented in a 3D perspective, the enemies and objects are instead 2D sprites presented from several set viewing angles, a technique sometimes referred to as 2.5D graphics.\nThe player's health is represented by a percentage starting at 100, which is diminished when they are shot or attacked by enemies. If the player's health falls to zero, they lose one life and start the level over with a knife, a pistol, and eight bullets. The player begins each episode with four lives and can gain more by finding extra-life tokens or by earning enough points. Points are scored by killing enemies or collecting treasures scattered throughout the levels. Points can also be scored by killing all enemies in a level, collecting all treasure, finding all secret areas, or completing a level under a par time; the player's completion ratio and speed is displayed when a level is completed. Secret areas containing treasure, health refills, or ammunition can be found in hidden rooms revealed by activating certain wall tiles that slide back when triggered. The original version of the game allows the player to save their progress at any point, though in many of its ports the player can only save between levels.\nPlot.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" is divided into two sets of three episodes: \"Escape from Castle Wolfenstein\", \"Operation: Eisenfaust\", and \"Die, F\u00fchrer, Die!\" serve as the primary trilogy, with a second trilogy titled \"The Nocturnal Missions\" including \"A Dark Secret\", \"Trail of the Madman\", and \"Confrontation\". The protagonist is William \"B.J.\" Blazkowicz, an American spy of Polish descent, and the game follows his efforts to destroy the Nazi regime. In \"Escape\", Blazkowicz has been captured while trying to find the plans for Operation Eisenfaust (Iron Fist) and imprisoned in Castle Wolfenstein, from which he must escape. \"Operation: Eisenfaust\" follows his discovery and thwarting of the Nazi plan to create an army of undead mutants in Castle Hollehammer, while in \"Die, F\u00fchrer, Die!\" he infiltrates a bunker under the Reichstag, culminating in a battle with Adolf Hitler in a robotic suit equipped with four chain guns.\n\"The Nocturnal Missions\" form a prequel storyline dealing with German plans for chemical warfare. \"A Dark Secret\" deals with the initial pursuit through a weapons research facility of the scientist responsible for developing the weaponry. \"Trail of the Madman\" takes place in Castle Erlangen, where Blazkowicz's goal is to find the maps and plans for the chemical war. The story ends in \"Confrontation\", which is set in Castle Offenbach as he confronts the Nazi general behind the chemical warfare initiative.\nSpear of Destiny.\nAn additional episode, titled \"Spear of Destiny\", was released as a retail game by FormGen. It follows Blazkowicz on a different prequel mission, trying to recapture the Spear of Destiny from the Nazis after it was stolen from Versailles. FormGen later developed two sequel episodes known as \"mission packs\", \"Return to Danger\" and \"Ultimate Challenge\", each of which feature Blazkowicz as he fights through another Nazi base to recover the Spear of Destiny after it has been stolen again as part of a plot to build a nuclear weapon or summon demons.\nDevelopment.\nIn October\u2013December 1990, a team of employees from programming studio Softdisk calling themselves Ideas from the Deep developed the three-part video game \"Commander Keen in Invasion of the Vorticons\", the first game in the \"Commander Keen\" series. The group, who worked at Softdisk in Shreveport, Louisiana, developing games for the \"Gamer's Edge\" video game subscription service and disk magazine, was composed of programmers John Romero and John Carmack, designer Tom Hall, artist Adrian Carmack, and manager Jay Wilbur. After the release of the game in December through shareware publisher Apogee Software, the team planned to quit Softdisk and start their own company. When their boss, Softdisk owner Al Vekovius, confronted them on both their plans and their use of company resources to develop the game\u2014the team had created it on their work computers, both in the office after hours and by taking the computers to John Carmack's house on the weekends\u2014the team made no secret of their intentions. After a few weeks of negotiation, the team agreed to produce a series of games for \"Gamer's Edge\", one every two months.\nIdeas from the Deep, now formally established as id Software, used some of these to prototype ideas for their own games. Adrian Carmack used them to push his preferred, dark art style, while John Carmack began to experiment with 3D computer graphics, which until then was largely the purview of flight simulators such as \"Wing Commander\" (1990) and slower adventure games such as \"Mercenary\" (1985). Carmack found that this was largely due to the limitations of personal computers of the time, which had difficulty displaying a fast action game in 3D due to the number of surfaces it needed to calculate, but felt that the increasing computational power of PCs meant that it may be possible. During 1991, he experimented with limiting the possible surfaces the computer needed to display, creating game levels with walls designed only on a flat grid rather than with arbitrary shapes or angles. He also took the unusual approach of creating the displayed graphics through ray casting, in which only the surfaces visible to the player were calculated rather than the entire area surrounding the player. After six weeks of development, Carmack had created a rudimentary 3D game engine that used animated 2D sprites for enemies. Id Software then used the engine for the April 1991 Softdisk game \"Hovertank 3D\", in which the player drives a tank through a plane of colored walls and shoots nuclear monsters. In the fall of 1991, after the team\u2014sans Wilbur\u2014had relocated to Madison, Wisconsin, and he had largely finished the engine work for \"Commander Keen in Goodbye, Galaxy\", Carmack decided to implement a feature from \"\", a role-playing game in development by Blue Sky Productions. \"Ultima Underworld\" was planned to display texture-mapped 3D graphics without \"Hovertank\"'s restrictions of flat walls and simple lighting. Deciding that he could add texture mapping without sacrificing the engine's speed or greatly increasing the system requirements as \"Underworld\" was doing, Carmack enhanced the engine over six weeks from \"Hovertank 3D\" for another Softdisk game, the November 1991 \"Catacomb 3-D\". Upon seeing it, Scott Miller of Apogee began to push the team to make a 3D shareware action game.\nIn November 1991, with the second \"Commander Keen\" trilogy of episodes nearing completion and their contractual obligations to Softdisk almost finished, id Software sat down to plan out their next major game. Designer Tom Hall, who initially wanted to do a third \"Keen\" trilogy, recognized that Carmack's programming focus had shifted from the 2D side-scrolling platform game series to 3D action games. After an initial proposal by Hall of a sci-fi project, \"It's Green and Pissed\", Romero suggested a 3D remake of the 1981 \"Castle Wolfenstein\". The team was interested in the idea, as Romero, Hall, and John Carmack all had fond memories of the original title and felt the maze-like shooter gameplay fit well with Carmack's 3D game engine, while Adrian Carmack was interested in moving away from the child-friendly art style of \"Keen\" into something more violent. Encouraged by the reception to his idea, Romero expounded on it by proposing a \"loud\" and \"cool\" fast action game where the player could shoot soldiers before dragging and looting their bodies. The core of the gameplay would be fast and simple, for Romero believed that due to the novelty of a 3D game and control scheme, players would not be receptive to more complicated, slow gameplay. He felt the game would occupy a unique place in the industry, which was then dominated by slower simulation and strategy games. Adrian and John Carmack were excited by the prospect, while Hall felt that it was enjoyable enough, and that since he was the company's designer that they could return to his ideas at a later date.\nInitially the team believed that they would be unable to use the \"Wolfenstein\" name due to trademark issues, and came up with multiple possible titles. They contacted \"Castle Wolfenstein\" developer Silas Warner, but learned that Muse Software had shut down in 1986, with all rights to \"Wolfenstein\" sold. The rights last belonged to someone in Michigan, and the team was able to purchase the trademark around mid-April 1992 for US$5,000. Thus they were free to use the name \"Wolfenstein 3D\". The game concept met with immediate approval from Scott Miller of Apogee, who considered id Software his star developer, and he guaranteed id a US$100,000 payment on the project. Mark Rein, who had been brought on a few months prior as id's probationary president, also sold the idea of doing a retail \"Wolfenstein\" project to FormGen, which had published id's December 1991 \"Commander Keen in Aliens Ate My Babysitter\", overcoming the publisher's concerns over \"Wolfenstein\"'s proposed content. This put id in the unique position of selling simultaneously to the shareware and retail markets.\nThe project officially began on December 15, 1991. Romero and Hall designed the gameplay and aesthetics. Romero wanted the goal to be \"to mow down Nazis\", with the suspense of storming a Nazi bunker full of SS soldiers and Hitler himself, as well as dogs, blood \"like you never see in games\", and straightforward, lethal weapons. He also composed the general storyline for the game. Hall designed the levels while also adding collectible objects in the form of treasure and food for health items. He also did sketches for the bosses and the title screen. Carmack programmed \"the core\" of the game's engine in a month; he added a few features to the \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine from \"Catacomb 3-D\", including support for doors and decorative non-wall objects, but primarily focused on making the game run smoother and faster with higher-resolution graphics. The game was programmed chiefly in ANSI C, with its scaling and ray casting routines written in assembly. The graphics for the game were planned to be in 16 color EGA, but were changed to 256 color VGA four months before release, which also enabled the game to have higher resolutions. Romero in turn worked on building a game with the engine, removing elements of the initial design, like looting enemy bodies, that he felt interrupted the flow of fast gameplay. The sprites for the enemies and objects were hand drawn at eight different angles by Adrian Carmack using Electronic Arts's \"Deluxe Paint II\". Initially the team had an external artist who assisted him and created animated wall textures, but the team felt that the quality was poor and did not use it in the game. The level design, by Romero and Hall, due to the grid-based level design, took some inspiration from \"Pac-Man\", and paid homage with a hidden \"Pac-Man\" level. Romero later said in 2017 that making the levels was uninteresting compared to those from \"Commander Keen\" and had to prompt Hall to finish the maps with the promise of being able to buy himself a brand new car. The team was going to include some anti-fascist references and Nazi atrocities, but left them out to avoid controversies. They ensured that the presentation of the game created the atmosphere that they wanted, adding violent animations by Adrian Carmack for enemies being shot and music and sound effects by \"Keen\" composer Bobby Prince to make the guns sound exciting. Prince took some inspiration from his days as a platoon soldier in the US Army. With the aid of a 16-bit sampler keyboard and cassette recorder, he composed realistic sounds from a shooting range in addition to Foley sounds. The development team along with Scott Miller did the voicing for the enemies. Some of the enemy shouts were based on the original \"Castle Wolfenstein\" game.\nAs development continued, id Software hired their former Softdisk liaison Kevin Cloud as an assistant artist, and moved the company out to Mesquite, Texas, near where Apogee was located. Scott Miller of Apogee was pleased to have his star developers nearby, and agreed to not only increase their royalty rate to 50 percent, but have Apogee create their next game for Softdisk, \"ScubaVenture\", so that id could focus on \"Wolfenstein\". The game was intended to be released using Apogee's shareware model of splitting it into three episodes and releasing the first for free, with ten levels per episode. The level maps were designed in 2D using a custom-made program called Tile Editor (TEd), which had been used for the entire \"Keen\" series as well as several other games. Upon finding out that the team was able to create a level in a single day using the program, Miller convinced them to instead develop six episodes, which could be sold in different-sized packs. Around the same time, the team changed members and structure: id fired probationary president Mark Rein and brought back Jay Wilbur, who had stayed in Shreveport, to be both their CEO and business team; Bobby Prince moved into the office temporarily to record sound effects, while Adrian Carmack moved out of the office to get away from the noise.\nAs the game neared completion, FormGen contacted id with concerns over its violence and shock content. In response, id increased these aspects; Adrian Carmack added skeletons, corpses, and bloody wall details, and Hall and Romero added screams and cries in German, along with a Death Cam that would show a replay of the death of the final boss of an episode. The team also added \"Horst-Wessel-Lied\", the anthem of the Nazi Party, to the opening screen. John Carmack, meanwhile, added in walls that moved when triggered to hide secret areas, a feature that Hall had been pushing for months but which Carmack had objected to for technical reasons. Hall also added in cheat codes, and wrote a back story for the game. The team did a month of playtesting in the final stage of the game's development. In the early morning of May 5, 1992, the first episode of the shareware game was completed and uploaded by Apogee and id to bulletin board systems. The other episodes were completed a few weeks later. The total development time had been around half a year, with a cost of around US$25,000 to cover the team's rent and US$750 per month salaries, plus around US$6,500 for the computer John Carmack used to develop the engine and the US$5,000 to get the \"Wolfenstein\" trademark.\nThe following summer, most of the id Software team developed \"Spear of Destiny\". The single-episode game was a prequel to \"Wolfenstein 3D\" and used the same engine, but added new audio, graphics, and enemies. It was created in two months, and was published commercially by FormGen in September 1992. The publisher was concerned that the material would be controversial due to holy relics associated with World WarII, but Romero felt it was similar to the \"Indiana Jones\" films. Instead of working on the game, John Carmack experimented with a new graphics engine that was licensed for \"ShadowCaster\" and became the basis of the engine for id's next game, \"Doom\" (1993).\nRelease.\nThe first episode was released as shareware for free distribution by Apogee and the whole original trilogy of episodes made available for purchase on May 5 as \"Wolfenstein 3D\", though the purchased episodes were not actually shipped to customers until a few weeks later. The second trilogy that Miller had convinced id to create was released soon after as an add-on pack titled \"The Nocturnal Missions\". Players were able to buy each trilogy separately or as a single game. In 1993 Apogee also published the \"Wolfenstein 3D Super Upgrades\" pack, which included 815 fan-made levels called \"WolfMaster\", along with a map editor titled \"MapEdit\" and a random level generator named \"Wolf Creator\". A retail \"Wolfenstein\" episode double the length of the Apogee episodes, \"Spear of Destiny\", was released through FormGen on September 18, 1992. FormGen later published two mission packs titled \"Return to Danger\" and \"Ultimate Challenge\", each the same length as \"Spear of Destiny\", in May 1994, and later that year published \"Spear of Destiny\" and the two mission packs together as the \"Spear of Destiny Super CD Package\". Id released the original six Apogee episodes as a retail title through GT Software in 1993 and produced a collection of both the Apogee and FormGen episodes released through Activision in 1998.\nThere were two intended promotions associated with the original Apogee release, both of which were cancelled. A pushable wall maze led to a sign reading \"Call Apogee and say Aardwolf\" (\"Snapity\" in beta versions); it was intended that the first person to find the sign and carry out its instructions would win a prize (consisting of US$1,000 or a line of Apogee games for life), but the quick creation of level editors and cheat programs for the game soon after release led id and Apogee to give up on the idea. Additionally, after completing an episode the player is given a three-letter code in addition to their total score and time. This code was intended to be a verification code as part of a high-score contest, but the sudden prevalence of editor programs resulted in the cancellation of the contest without ever being formally announced.\nImagineer bought the rights for the game, and commissioned id to port the game to the Super Nintendo Entertainment System (SNES) for a US$100,000 advance. The team was busy with the development of \"Doom\", plus their work on \"Spear of Destiny\", and ignored the project for seven or eight months, finally hiring Rebecca Heineman to do the work. She made no progress on the port, however, and the id team members instead spent three weeks frantically learning how to make SNES games and creating the port by March 1993. This version was written in C and compiled in the 65816 assembly language, making use of binary space partitioning rather than raycasting in order to give it speed. Carmack had to resize existing images to fit the SNES resolution. Nintendo insisted on censoring the game in accordance with their policies; this included first making all blood green and then finally removing it, removing Nazi imagery and German voice clips, and replacing enemy dogs with giant rats. The port was released in Japan on February 10, 1994, under the name \"Wolfenstein 3D: The Claw of Eisenfaust\" before being released in North America and Europe later that year. Using the source code of the SNES port, on a whim John Carmack later converted the game to run on the Atari Jaguar. Atari Corporation approved the conversion for publication and Carmack spent three weeks, assisted by Dave Taylor, improving the port's graphics and quality to what he later claimed was four times more detail than the DOS version. He also removed the changes that Nintendo had insisted on. The game itself, however, had to be slowed down to work properly on the console.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" has also been ported to numerous other platforms. In 1993, Alternate Worlds Technology licensed \"Wolfenstein 3D\" and converted it into a virtual reality arcade game. The 1994 Acorn Archimedes port was done in UK by programmer Eddie Edwards and published by Powerslave Software. By 1994, a port for the Sega Mega Drive was under development by Imagineer, who intended to release it by September, but it was cancelled due to technical problems. The 1994 Classic Mac OS version of the game had three releases: \"The First Encounter\", a shareware release; \"The Second Encounter\", with 30 exclusive levels; and \"The Third Encounter\", with all 60 levels from the DOS version. An Atari Lynx version of the game was offered earlier by Atari for id, but work on the port was never started, save for a few images. A 3DO version was released in October 1995. The Apple IIGS port was started in Fall 1994 by Vitesse with Heineman as the initial developer, with later graphics assistance by Ninjaforce Entertainment, but due to licensing problems with id it was not released until February 1998. An open source iOS port programmed by John Carmack himself was released in 2009. An unofficial port for the Game Boy Color was made in 2016. An Android port titled \"Wolfenstein 3D Touch\" (later renamed \"ECWolf\") was released and published by Beloko Games. Other releases include the Game Boy Advance (2002), Xbox Live Arcade, and PlayStation Network. These ports' sound, graphics, and levels sometimes differ from the original. Many of the ports include only the Apogee episodes, but the iOS port includes \"Spear of Destiny\", and a 2007 Steam release for PC, macOS, and Linux includes all of the FormGen episodes. Bethesda Softworks, whose parent company bought id Software in 2009, celebrated the 20th anniversary of \"Wolfenstein 3D\"'s release by producing a free-to-play browser-based version of the game in 2012, though the website was removed a few years later.\nReception.\nThe developers had no clear expectations for \"Wolfenstein\"'s commercial reception, but hoped that it would make around US$60,000 in its first month; the first royalty check from Apogee was instead for US$100,000. The game was selling at a rate of 4,000 copies a month by mail order. \"PC Zone\" quoted a shareware distributor as saying \"Wolfenstein 3D\" was the top shareware seller of 1992. By the end of 1993, sales of the Apogee episodes of \"Wolfenstein 3D\" as well as \"Spear of Destiny\" had reached over 100,000 units each, with the Apogee game still selling strongly by the end of the year as its reach spread without newer retail titles to compete with it for shelf space. By mid-1994 150,000 shareware copies were registered and id Software had sold another 150,000 retail copies of \"Spear of Destiny\"; the company estimated that one million shareware copies were distributed worldwide. Over 20 percent of its sales were from outside of the US, despite the lack of any marketing or non-English description and despite the game being banned from sale in Germany due to its inclusion of Nazi symbols by the Federal Department for Media Harmful to Young Persons in 1994, and again in 1997 for \"Spear of Destiny\". Japanese gaming magazine \"Famitsu\" reviewed the game five months after release, describing it as: \"View from the character's point of view: It's a real shooter. The game is easy to play, and it runs well ... This is the only game of its type.\" The Apogee episodes' sales vastly exceeded the shareware game sales record set by the developer's earlier \"Commander Keen\" series and provided id with a much higher profit margin than the sales of its retail counterpart; where \"Commander Keen\" games were bringing Apogee around $10,000 a month, \"Wolfenstein 3D\" averaged $200,000 per month for the first year and a half. The game sold 250,000 copies by 1995 and grossed $2.5 million in revenue.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" won the 1992 Best Arcade game award from \"Compute!\", the 1992 Most Innovative Game and Best Action Game awards from \"VideoGames &amp; Computer Entertainment\", the 1992 Reader's Choice\u00a0\u2014 Action/Arcade Game award from \"Game Bytes\", the 1993 Best Action/Arcade Game, Best Entertainment Software, and People's Choice awards at the Shareware Industry Awards, the 1993 Best Action Game award from \"Computer Gaming World\", and a Codie award from the Software Publishers Association for Best Action/Arcade Game. It was the first shareware title to win a Codie, and id (with six employees) became the smallest company to ever receive the award. \"Wolfenstein 3D\" was noted as one of the top games of the year at the 1993 Game Developers Conference.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" was well received by reviewers upon its release. Chris Lombardi of \"Computer Gaming World\" praised the \"sparse [but] gorgeous\", \"frighteningly realistic\", and \"extremely violent\" graphics, as well as the immersive sound and music. Noting the violence, he warned \"those sensitive to such things to stay home\". Lombardi concluded that \"Wolfenstein 3D\", alongside \"Ultima Underworld\" released two months prior, was \"the first game technologically capable of creating a sufficient element of disbelief\u2013suspension to emotionally immerse the player in a threatening environment\", stating that they knew of no other game that could \"evoke such intense psychological responses from its players\". \"Wolfenstein\" twice received 5 out of 5 stars in \"Dragon\" in 1993; Hartley, Patricia, and Kirk Lesser termed it \"definitely one of the best arcade games ever created for PC\", highly praised the graphics and sound, and said that the \"fast-paced action\" could keep players enthralled for weeks if they were not concerned about the violence. Sandy Petersen, in the first \"Eye of the Monitor\" column, claimed that \"there is nothing else quite like \"Wolfenstein\"\" and that it had \"evolved almost beyond recognition\" from the original 1981 game. He enthusiastically praised the speed and gameplay, calling it \"a fun game with lots of action\" and \"a fun, fairly mindless romp\", though he did note that at higher difficulty settings or later levels it became extremely hard. The \"Spear of Destiny\" retail episode was also rated highly by \"Computer Gaming World\"'s Bryan A. Walker, who praised the added enemy types, though he noted that it was essentially the same game as the shareware episodes. Formgen's \"Spear of Destiny\" mission packs \"Return to Danger\" and \"Ultimate Challenge\" were reviewed by Paul Hyman of \"Computer Gaming World\", who praised the updated graphical details and sound, as well as the smooth gameplay, but noted its overall dated graphics and lack of gameplay changes from the original game.\nThe early ports of the game also received high reviews, though their sales have been described as \"dismal\". The four reviewers of \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" called the Super NES version a good conversion that retained the good music, huge levels, and overall fun of the original game and dismissed the censoring in the version as inconsequential. In 1995, \"Total!\" ranked the game 84th on their \"Top 100 SNES Games\" list. \"Electronic Gaming Monthly\" rated the Jaguar version similarly to the Super NES version, commenting that the graphics and audio were superior to other versions of the game, but criticizing the faster movement of the player character as making it less fun to play. A \"GamePro\" review of the Jaguar port was highly complimentary, saying \"Wolfenstein 3D\" \"set a new standard for PC gaming\" and that the Jaguar version was the best to date, and better than the original due to its increased graphics and sound capabilities. A \"Next Generation\" review of the Jaguar version was less enthusiastic, terming it good but not up to the standards of newer games. Its review of the Macintosh version of the game was also mild, stating that \"there isn't a staggering amount of freshness here, but the action is fast, deadly, and (surprise) addictive\".\nMajor Mike of \"GamePro\" commended the 3DO version's complete absence of pixelation, fast scaling, \"rousing\" music, and high quality sound effects, but criticized the controls as overly sensitive. He concluded that the game, then over three years old, \"still packs a punch as a first-person shooter\". \"Wolfenstein 3D\" won \"GamePro\"'s Best 3DO Game of 1995 award, beating the acclaimed \"The Need for Speed\" and \"D\". \"Maximum\", on the other hand, while stating that the 3DO port was better than the original and as good as the Jaguar version, felt that it was so aged compared to recent releases like \"\" and the PlayStation version of \"Doom\" that a new port was pointless, with the game now \"somewhat tiresome and very, very repetitive\". A reviewer for \"Next Generation\" asserted that \"Wolfenstein 3D\" was \"still as addictive as it ever was\" but essentially agreed with \"Maximum\", contending that anyone interested in first-person shooters would have either already played it on another platform or \"moved on\" to more advanced games in the genre. More modern reviews include one for the Xbox 360 port in 2009 by Ryan McCaffrey of \"Official Xbox Magazine\", who heavily criticized it for non-existent enemy AI and bad level design and found it notably inferior to \"Doom\", and one that same year by Daemon Hatfield of \"IGN\", who gave the PlayStation Network release of the game a warm reception, saying that while it was \"dated and flawed\", it was \"required playing for any first-person shooter fan\".\nLegacy.\n\"Wolfenstein 3D\" has been called the \"grandfather of 3D shooters\", specifically first-person shooters, because it established the fast-paced action and technical prowess commonly expected in the genre and greatly increased the genre's popularity. It has also been called \"the \"Citizen Kane\" of shooters\". Although some prior computer shooting-based games existed, they were generally scrolling shooters, while \"Wolfenstein 3D\" helped move the market towards first-person shooters. It has also been credited with confirming shareware distribution as a serious and profitable business strategy at the time; \"VideoGames &amp; Computer Entertainment\" claimed in September 1992 that the game \"justified the existence of shareware\", and in July 1993 \"Computer Gaming World\" claimed that it \"almost single-handedly\" demonstrated the viability of shareware as a method of publishing, leading to a wave of other shareware first-person shooters. The game's high revenue compared to prior, smaller 2D titles led Apogee as well as others in the shareware games industry to move towards larger, 3D titles built by larger development teams.\nDuring development, id approached Sierra Entertainment, then one of the biggest companies in the industry and employer of several of their idols, with the goal of seeing if they could make a deal with the company. After viewing \"Commander Keen\" and an early version of \"Wolfenstein 3D\", CEO Ken Williams offered to buy id Software for US$2.5 million and turn it into an in-house development studio. The team was excited by the deal, but had felt there was a large culture clash between the two companies during their visit to Sierra and were hesitant to accept; Romero proposed asking for US$100,000 in cash up front as part of the deal rather than solely accepting payment in Sierra stock as a measure of Williams's seriousness. Williams refused, which id interpreted to mean that Williams did not truly recognize the potential of \"Wolfenstein 3D\" and the company, and the deal fell through, causing id to decide to remain an independent company for the foreseeable future. By the end of 1993 just before the release of their next game, \"Doom\", the success of \"Wolfenstein 3D\" led id to receive multiple calls every month from investment companies looking to make id a publicly traded company, which were all turned down. In 1996, \"Computer Gaming World\" declared \"Wolfenstein 3D\" the 97th-best computer game ever released.\nThe game is also recognized as the principal cause for Germany banning video games that contain certain types of symbols and imagery from extremist groups like Nazis under its \"Strafgesetzbuch\" section 86a up through 2018. Section 86a had \"social adequacy\" allowances for works of art, but in 1998, a High District Frankfurt Court case evaluating the Nazi imagery within \"Wolfenstein 3D\" determined that video games did not fall under this allowance. The court ruled that because video games drew younger audiences, \"this could lead to them growing up with these symbols and insignias and thereby becoming used to them, which again could make them more vulnerable for ideological manipulation by national socialist ideas\". Up through 2018, the Germany software ratings board, the Unterhaltungssoftware Selbstkontrolle (USK) refused to rate any game that included inappropriate symbols and imagery, effectively banning the game for sale within the country. By May 2018, a new court ruling was made in response to a parody web browser game, in which the Public Prosecutor's Office confirmed there were no breaches of the law in the game's content. Following this, the ban was reversed by the German government in August, having determined that the \"Wolfenstein 3D\" decision was outdated since the USK now included age ratings alongside other content warnings, and that video games should be considered as art under the social adequacy allowance. In November 2019, \"Wolfenstein 3D\" was formally struck from the \"Index\", the list of games banned from sale in Germany.\nAfter the game's release, id Software licensed the engine to other developers, like the \"Commander Keen\" engine before it, as part of a series of engine licensing deals that id has made throughout its history; games using the \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine or derivatives of it include \"Blake Stone\", the Capstone Software games ' and \"Operation Body Count\", as well as \"Super 3D Noah's Ark\". Apogee intended to produce an expansion pack in 1993 titled \"Rise of the Triad: Wolfenstein 3D Part II\", designed by Tom Hall using the \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine, but during development the game was changed into a stand-alone title with an enhanced engine, \"Rise of the Triad\". Additionally, Softdisk produced \"Catacomb Abyss\" using the prototype \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine from \"Catacomb 3-D\" as part of the \"Catacomb Adventure Series\" trilogy of sequels. Although \"Wolfenstein 3D\" was not designed to be editable or modified, players developed character and level editors to create original alterations to the game's content. John Carmack and Romero, who had played numerous mods of other games, were delighted, and overrode any concerns about copyright issues by the others. The modding efforts of \"Wolfenstein\" players led id Software to explicitly design later titles like \"Doom\" and \"Quake\" to be easily modifiable by players, even including the map editing tools id Software used with the games. The source code for the original \"Wolfenstein 3D\" engine was released by id in 1995; when making the 2009 iOS port, Carmack used some of the enhancements to the engine made by fans after its release. The game's technical achievements also led to numerous imitators such as \"Ken's Labyrinth\", \"Nitemare 3D\", ', \"Terminal Terror\" and \"The Fortress of Dr. Radiaki\", among others.\nAlthough id Software did not develop another \"Wolfenstein\" game, as their development focus shifted to \"Doom\" shortly after release, and has never returned to the series, multiple \"Wolfenstein\" titles have been produced by other companies, sometimes using game engines developed by id. The first of these newer \"Wolfenstein\" games was \"Return to Castle Wolfenstein\" in 2001, a reboot of the series, and the most recent titles are the 2019 games ' and '.\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33431", "revid": "5811002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33431", "title": "Whidbey Island", "text": "Island in Puget Sound in Washington, United States\nWhidbey Island (historical spellings Whidby, Whitbey, or Whitby) is the largest of the islands composing Island County, Washington, in the United States, and the largest island in Washington state. Whidbey is about north of Seattle, and is separated from the Olympic Peninsula in the southwest by Admiralty Inlet. The island forms the northern boundary of Puget Sound. It is home to Naval Air Station Whidbey Island. The state parks and natural forests are home to numerous old growth trees.\nAs of the 2020 U.S. census, Whidbey Island has 69,501 total residents. The majority live in the center of the island, which includes its most populous city, Oak Harbor.\nWhidbey Island is approximately from north to south, and wide, with a total land area of , making it the 40th largest island in the United States. It is ranked as the fourth longest and fourth largest island in the contiguous United States, behind Long Island, New York; Padre Island, Texas (the world's longest barrier island); and Isle Royale, Michigan. In the state of Washington, it is the largest island, followed by Orcas Island.\nHistory.\nPrehistory.\nWhidbey Island was originally the site of villages belonging to the Lower Skagit and Snohomish peoples. One name that was recorded for the island was \"Tscha-kole-chy\".\nEuropean contact.\nThe first known European sighting of Whidbey Island was during the 1790 Spanish expedition of Manuel Quimper and Gonzalo L\u00f3pez de Haro on the \"Princesa Real\".\nCaptain George Vancouver fully explored the island in 1792. In May of that year, Royal Navy officers and members of Vancouver's expedition, Joseph Whidbey (master of HMS \"Discovery\") and Peter Puget (a lieutenant on the ship), began to map and explore the areas of what would later be named Puget Sound. After Whidbey circumnavigated the island in June 1792, Vancouver named the island in his honor. By that time, Vancouver had claimed the area for Britain. On 4 June 1792, the King's Birthday, near Possession Point at the southern end of Whidbey Island, Vancouver took formal possession of all the coast and hinterland contiguous to the Strait of Juan de Fuca, including Puget Sound, under the name of New Georgia.\nThe first known overnight stay by a non-Native American was made on May 26, 1840, by a Catholic missionary, Father Fran\u00e7ois Norbert Blanchet, during travel across Puget Sound. He had been invited by Chief Tslalakum. Blanchet remained on the island for nearly a year and guided the inhabitants in building a new log church.\nLieutenant Charles Wilkes, commander of the United States Exploring Expedition of 1838\u20131842, sailed the USS \"Vincennes\" into Penn Cove in 1841. By that time, the log church was already being built by the Native Americans beside a huge wooden cross (24 feet long) that they had erected. Wilkes ordered his men to use no force except in self-defense when dealing with the \"savage and treacherous inhabitants\". In fact, he encountered few problems with the indigenous people who had already been poorly treated by visitors and suffered from diseases they had introduced.\nWilkes named the lower cove Holmes Harbor, after his assistant surgeon, Silas Holmes. During this time he charted Puget Sound. Other sites in the area that were given names by Wilkes included Maury Island (Vashon), Hammersley Inlet, Totten and Budd Inlets, Agate Passage between the Kitsap Peninsula and Bainbridge Island, Hale Passage and Dana Passage.\nThe Oregon Treaty of 1846 established the boundary between Britain and the U.S.A. making Puget Sound and islands claimed by the United States. \nThomas W. Glasgow filed the first land claim on Whidbey Island in 1848, attempting to become the first settler. He built a small cabin near Penn Cove, planted some crops and married a local lady, Julia Pat-Ke-Nim. Glasgow left in August of that year however, having been forced out by the local inhabitants.\nColonel Isaac N. Ebey arrived from Columbus, Ohio, in 1850 and became the first permanent white settler, claiming a square mile (2.6\u00a0km2) of prairie with a southern shoreline on Admiralty Inlet. He took advantage of the 640 acres offered free of charge to each married couple, the first to do so, on October 15, 1850. In the fall of 1851, his children, his wife, three of her brothers and the Samuel Crockett family arrived to join Ebey.\nIn addition to farming potatoes and wheat, Ebey was also the postmaster for Port Townsend, Washington and rowed a boat daily across the inlet in order to work at the post office there. Colonel Ebey also served as a representative in the Oregon Territory Legislative Assembly, as Island County's first Justice of the Peace, as a probate judge and as Collector of Customs for the Puget Sound District.\nOn August 11, 1857, at age 39, Colonel Ebey was murdered and beheaded by Native Americans, said to be Haida who had traveled to this area from Haida Gwaii. Some sources however, refer to his killers as \"Russian Indians called Kakes or Kikans, [from] Kufrinoff Island, near the head of Prince Frederick's Sound.\" Ebey was slain in proxy-retaliation for the killing of a Haida chief or Tyee and 27 other indigenous people at Port Gamble. Fort Ebey, named for the Colonel, was established in 1942 on the west side of the central part of the island, just northwest of Coupeville.\nAdmiralty Head Lighthouse is located in this area, on the grounds of Fort Casey State Park. The area around Coupeville is the federally protected Ebey's Landing National Historical Reserve, named in honor of Isaac Ebey.\nOn September 25, 1959, a U.S. Navy P5M antisubmarine aircraft with an unarmed (it carried no nuclear material at the time) nuclear depth charge on board crash-landed into Puget Sound near Whidbey Island. The Mark 90 nuclear bomb casing was never recovered.\nOn August 8, 1970, the infamous Penn Cove capture of several orcas along with the deaths of several orcas occurred in Penn Cove off the island's east coast.\nIn December 1984, the island was the site of a violent encounter between law enforcement and white nationalist and organized crime leader Robert Jay Mathews of the group The Order. A large shootout occurred between Mathews and FBI agents in which Mathews was killed during a house fire. Mathews' followers have since gathered on the island at the location where he was killed by FBI agents on the anniversary of his death to commemorate it.\nOn June 10, 2022, the island dedicated one of its trash cans to late night talk show host Conan O'Brien in an elaborate ceremony in which O'Brien signed the top of the trash can with a black marker. O'Brien was visiting the island to attend the premiere of a play written by Liza O'Brien (his wife).\nGovernment.\nWhidbey Island, along with Camano Island, Ben Ure Island and six uninhabited islands, comprises Island County, Washington. The county seat is located in the town of Coupeville on Whidbey Island.\nPopulation centers of Whidbey Island include the City of Oak Harbor, the Town of Coupeville, the City of Langley, the Village of Freeland, the Community of Greenbank, the Village of Clinton and the Community of Bayview. Only Oak Harbor, Coupeville and Langley are incorporated, the others (with the exception of Greenbank and Bayview) are all census-designated places, and all but Bayview have their own post offices and ZIP codes.\nEconomy.\nWhidbey Island is divided economically into two different regions: the northern end of the island (encompassing Oak Harbor and Whidbey Island Naval Air Station), and the remainder of the island (encompassing Coupeville, Greenbank, Freeland, Langley, Clinton and the smaller communities in-between).\nThe economy of the northern end of Whidbey Island is strongly influenced by the presence of Whidbey Island Naval Air Station near Oak Harbor (N.A.S. Whidbey). N.A.S. Whidbey is Oak Harbor's largest employer; thus, Oak Harbor has a predominantly service-based economy and several national chain stores have been attracted to the Oak Harbor area.\nThe economy of Whidbey Island south of Oak Harbor relies heavily on tourism, small-scale agriculture, and the arts.\nTourism is especially important for both Whidbey and Camano Islands. On Whidbey, tourists find a wide range of amenities in the towns of Oak Harbor, Coupeville, Freeland and Langley. Coupeville's Penn Cove Mussel Farm exports large quantities of its highly renowned Penn Cove Mussels. This aquaculture facility, along with a number of small farms, reflects the rural agricultural nature of most of central Whidbey Island. Many of these small farms host farm stands onsite, where customers may buy produce, flowers, meat, eggs and other locally raised products directly from the farmers.\nWhidbey is home to numerous working artists, writers, and performers. These include many well-known painters, sculptors, glass artists, wood workers, metal workers, mixed media artists, photographers, authors, poets, actors, and musicians.\nIn addition to being a haven for artists, the southern end of Whidbey Island also serves as a minor bedroom community for the nearby cities of Everett, where the Boeing Everett Factory is located, and Seattle. Commuters to and from those areas use the Washington State Ferries system's run between Clinton and Mukilteo.\nGeography.\nWhidbey Island is often claimed to be the longest island in the continental United States (or another similar claim), but according to the Seattle Times it cannot be correctly considered so. The island has several bays, including on its east side Oak Harbor with the town of Oak Harbor at its base, and Penn Cove with the towns of Coupeville and San de Fuca on its south and north shores respectively.\nWhidbey Island has four lakes that are part of its interior hydrology: Cranberry Lake (inside Deception Pass State Park), Deer Lake, Goss Lake and Lone Lake (both near the town of Langley).\nDemographics.\n2020 census.\nAs of the 2020 census, there were 69,501 people and 28,461 households living within the three census county divisions (CCDs) that encompass Whidbey Island. Of them, the North Whidbey CCD is the most populous with 40,814 residents, followed by the South Whidbey CCD at 15,082 residents and the Central Whidbey CCD at 13,605 residents. The island's population density was . There were 32,926 total housing units, of which 84.2% were occupied and 15.8% were vacant or for occasional use. The racial makeup of Whidbey Island was 75.9% White, 3.3% Black or African American, 0.8% Native American and Alaska Native, 5.3% Asian, 0.6% Native Hawaiian and Pacific Islander, and 3.1% from other races. Residents who identified as more than one race were 11.0% of the population. Hispanic or Latino residents of any race were 9.2% of the population.\nParks and reserve areas.\nWhidbey Island contains several state and federal parks and recreation areas. The largest site is Ebey's Landing National Historical Reserve, created in 1978 as the first national historic reserve in the United States and maintained by the National Park Service to preserve the rural history and culture of the island and to protect the area's rare and sensitive plants.\nWashington State Parks located on the island include Deception Pass State Park (the most visited state park in Washington), Joseph Whidbey State Park, Fort Ebey State Park, Fort Casey State Park, Possession Point State Park, and South Whidbey State Park. There is also a series of county operated parks throughout the Island including:\nEarth Sanctuary is a nature reserve, sculpture garden and retreat center on Whidbey Island. The ponds and bog fen complex have been designated as a \"habitat of local importance\" by the Whidbey Audubon Society and Island County Critical Areas program.\nThe Price Sculpture Forest opened in October 2020 in Coupeville.\nFestivals.\nWhidbey Island hosts many festivals and celebrations throughout the year.\nClimate.\nWhidbey Island lies partially in the rain shadow of the Olympic Mountain Range to the west, and has a variety of climate zones. This can be observed by rainfall amounts \u2013 wettest in the south with average rainfall of , driest in the central district of Coupeville with average rainfall of , and turning moister again farther north with average rainfall of . Microclimates abound, determined by proximity to water, elevation and prevailing winds.\nEcology.\nAncient extinct fauna.\nDuring the Last Glacial Period, the Salish Sea region was populated by American mastodon, Columbian mammoth, \"Bison antiquus\", giant ground sloth, saber-toothed salmon, \"Camelops\" (camels), and other animals. There is evidence in the shorelines of the island of mammoth hunts by Indigenous peoples extending beyond the formation of the major coastlines. The Island County Historical Museum currently possesses mammoth tusks which were unearthed by soil erosion.\nFlora.\nVegetation varies greatly from one end of the island to the other. Vegetation in the south is more similar to that of mainland Washington. The principal trees are Douglas fir, red alder, bigleaf maple, western red cedar, western hemlock, and Pacific madrone. Compared to the rest of western Washington state, vine maple is notably absent, except where they have been planted. Other under-story plants include the evergreen huckleberry, lower longleaf Oregon grape, elderberry, salal, oceanspray, and varieties of nettle. Non-native introduced plants such as foxglove, ivy and holly are also evident.\nFarther up the island, however, the shorter Oregon-Grape and the blue Evergreen Huckleberry is seen less, while tall Oregon-grape and Red Huckleberry predominate. The native Pacific rhododendron is much more visible. Amongst the deciduous varieties, Garry oak (from which Oak Harbor takes its name) are seen more frequently in the northern portion of the island. In the conifer classification, grand fir is found more in the northern part of Whidbey Island along with Sitka spruce and shore pine. There are three open prairie areas on Whidbey Island \u2013 Smith Prairie, Crockett Prairie and Ebey Prairie. Some patches of prickly pear cactus are found along the slopes near Partridge Point.\nFauna.\nGray whales migrate between Whidbey and Camano Islands during March and April and can be seen from both ship and shore. Orca also make use of the waters surrounding Whidbey Island, including the southern residents. Penn Cove was used as an orca-hunting area in the 1960s and 1970s by aquarium owner Ted Griffin, who captured several young southern resident orcas for sale to marine parks and killed others in the process. The southern residents did not return to Penn Cove until a sighting in 2024.\nClams and oysters are abundant locally and may be harvested from some public beaches. The Washington State Department of Health provides an online guide to assist in identifying shellfish varieties as well as providing guidance about where to find specific varieties.\nAccording to the Whidbey Audubon Society, Approximately 230 bird species are reported to take advantage of the diverse habitats on the island.\nEducation.\nPublic school districts.\nWhidbey Island is served by three public school districts.\nOak Harbor School District operates in Oak Harbor. Within the district, there is one high school, one alternative high school, two middle schools, and five elementary schools. Within the Washington Interscholastic Activities Association, Oak Harbor High is listed as a 3-A school.\nCoupeville School District operates in Coupeville, Washington, and Greenbank, Washington. Within the district, there is one high school, one middle school, and one elementary school. Within the Washington Interscholastic Activities Association, Coupeville High is listed as a 1-A school.\nSouth Whidbey School District serves the southern end of the island, including Freeland, Langley, and Clinton. Within the district, there is one high school (grades 9\u201312), one alternative school (grades K\u201312), one middle school (grades 5\u20138) split between two campuses, and one elementary school (grades K\u20134). Within the Washington Interscholastic Activities Association, South Whidbey High is listed as a 1-A school.\nColleges.\nSkagit Valley College has one campus located in Oak Harbor.\nSeattle Pacific University owns Camp Casey, a retreat center near Coupeville, which was once the barracks for the adjacent Fort Casey.\nInfrastructure.\nTransportation.\n The only bridge that reaches Whidbey Island is the Deception Pass Bridge, State Route 20, which connects the north end of Whidbey to the mainland via Fidalgo Island. Prior to the completion of the bridge in 1935, Whidbey Island was linked to Fidalgo Island by the Deception Pass ferry, which ran from 1924 to 1935. Modern ferry service is available via State Route 20 on the Coupeville to Port Townsend ferry, and via State Route 525 on the Clinton to Mukilteo ferry service on the southern east coast.\nTravel on the island involves use of an extensive county road system, or city infrastructure depending on location, all of which act as feeders to the two state highways State Route 525 and State Route 20.\nWhidbey Island's State Routes 525/20 is the only nationally designated Scenic Byway on an island. It is named the \"Whidbey Island Scenic Isle Way\". It is also a part of the Cascade Loop.\nPublic transportation is provided by Island Transit, zero-fare bus service paid for by a 6/10th of 1% sales tax within the county. There are currently 11 bus routes serving Whidbey Island. The service operated 7 days a week, except for major holidays.\nTwo public airports provide service to Whidbey Island. Whidbey Air Park is located southwest of Langley with a long runway. A.J. Eisenberg Airport is located southwest of Oak Harbor with a long runway. Kenmore Air Express ran a scheduled airline service to Whidbey Island serving the Oak Harbor airport from 2006 to 2009.\nThe United States Navy operates two airports on Whidbey Island. The largest is a two-runway airport located at Whidbey Island Naval Air Station north of Oak Harbor. In addition, the Navy also operates a flight training facility named Naval Outlying Landing Field Coupeville (Coupeville OLF) located just southeast of Coupeville. The Navy named USS \"Whidbey Island\" (LSD-41) in honor of the island.\nHealth systems.\nWhidbey Health is the regional, county-run healthcare system with a general hospital in Coupeville. It also operates walk-in clinics in Clinton and Oak Harbor, along with four primary care facilities.\nNAS Whidbey has a limited service hospital at the main base at Ault Field. The Veterans Health Administration also operates a clinic in Oak Harbor to supplement its larger facilities on the mainland.\nCommunities.\nNorth to south:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33432", "revid": "20957809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33432", "title": "Writers and Illustrators of the Future", "text": "Science fiction and fantasy story contest\nWriters and Illustrators of the Future is a science fiction and fantasy story and art contest that was established by L. Ron Hubbard in 1983 as Writers of the Future. A sister contest, Illustrators of the Future, was launched in 1988 and presents awards for science fiction art. Hubbard characterized the contest as a way of \"giving back\" to the field that had defined his professional writing life. The contest has no entry fee. \nNotable past winners include Robert Reed, Dave Wolverton, Nancy Farmer, James Gardner, Scott Nicholson, Ian McHugh and Randy Henderson.\nContest.\nWriters of the Future.\nIn 1983, L. Ron Hubbard initiated the \"Writers of the Future Writing Contest\" with the first awards ceremony held in 1985. Since Hubbard's death in 1986 contests have been organized by the Scientologist organization Author Services Inc. under the trade name Galaxy Press. \nThe \"Writers of the Future\" contest is run quarterly and is open to authors who have no, or few, professional publications. The contest rules state that entrants cannot have had published \"a novel or short novel, or more than one novelette, or more than three short stories, in any medium. Professional publication is deemed to be payment and at least 5,000 copies or 5,000 hits. Works that are less than 3,000 words and for which payment was less 6c/word do not count as \"professional\" publications. Stories of up to 17,000 words in length can be submitted to the contest. Poems, screenplays, non-fiction, etc., are not eligible.\nManuscripts are judged with the authors' names deleted and are separated out in quarterfinal and semifinal award rounds by the Coordinating Judge (previously K. D. Wentworth, Dave Wolverton in 2015, and originally Algis Budrys). Eight finalists are sent to a panel of professional science fiction writers, who determine the top three awards. Prizes are $1000 (first place), $750 (second) and $500 (third). The process is repeated quarterly. At the end of the contest year, the four quarterly first place stories compete for a separate annual grand prize, the \"Gold Award,\" which includes an additional $5000. The first, second and third-place winners and often a selection of the other finalist stories are published annually, for which the writers receive additional compensation for publication rights. Thus, a grand prize-winning author can make over $6000 for a single story. \nSome finalist stories not considered among the top three (in effect, the fourth or fifth placers) may be included in the annual anthology. These are called \"published finalists.\" The writers were compensated for publication rights but are not considered winners and receive no prize money. They are eligible to re-enter the contest. \nIllustrators of the Future.\nAn artists' contest, the Illustrators of the Future, was added in 1988. Like the writers' contest, the illustrators contest is only open to amateurs/beginners. The rules state: \"The Contest is open to those who have not previously published more than three black-and-white story illustrations, or more than one process-color painting, in media distributed nationally to the general public, such as magazines or books sold at newsstands, or books sold in stores merchandising to the general public. The submitted entry shall not have been previously published in professional media as exampled above.\"\nEntrants submit a portfolio of three pieces of artwork, which are circulated among the judges. Up to three winners are selected every quarter, each given a prize of $500. Unlike the writers, the illustrators are not ranked. After the completion of the contest year, each of the twelve illustration winners is assigned one of the stories from among the twelve writer winners and given a month to return the finished illustration. A single grand prize, also called the Gold Award, is accompanied by a prize of $5000 - judging is based only on the final illustration, not the initial portfolio. While the art is judged according to standard artistic considerations (composition, draftsmanship, consistency of lighting, sense of wonder, facial expressions, etc.), a key consideration during the final judging is whether or not the art would make the viewer want to read the accompanying story. The art is also included in the annual anthology, and illustrators are additionally compensated.\nAwards and workshop.\nNo official tallies are given for the number of entrants in either contest, but it is believed that thousands enter the Writers contest every quarter, while only hundreds enter the illustration contest. Thus, the Illustration judges are sometimes often unable to find three deserving winners, and only pick one or two. Should the illustration winners number less than twelve in a year, each illustrator is - as usual - assigned a single story to illustrate for purposes of determining who wins the Gold Award. All winners and published finalists were invited to attend the annual week-long writers' and artists' workshops and awards gala at the invitation and expense of the contest administration. Various Hollywood actors are generally in attendance, in addition to prominent science fiction authors and artists. These include the present judges in addition to a famous and generally elderly writer given a Lifetime Achievement Award. While it is not required to attend the week-long festivities and seminars, it's thought by some that those in the running for the Gold Award may advance their cause by displaying professionalism and hard work at that time, judges for the contest, however, refute this.\nJudges.\nMany noted writers and artists have judged the awards or have won them themselves.\nNotable writing judges have included: Kevin J. Anderson, Gregory Benford, Algis Budrys, Orson Scott Card, Brian Herbert, Nina Kiriki Hoffman, Anne McCaffrey, Larry Niven, Andre Norton, Frederik Pohl, Jerry Pournelle, Tim Powers, Brandon Sanderson, Robert J. Sawyer, K. D. Wentworth, and Jack Williamson. \nProminent art judges have included: Ciruelo Cabral, Edd Cartier, Echo Chernik, Leo and Diane Dillon, Bob Eggleton, Will Eisner, Frank Frazetta, Frank Kelly Freas, Stephen Hickman, and Stephen Youll.\nWinners.\nThe following is a list of Grand Prize winners in each contest year. Stories by the grand prize winner, the quarterly top-three, and selected others (\"published finalists\"), are collected into an anthology each year. Winners and published finalists in the contest have included the writers Robert Reed, Dave Wolverton, Nancy Farmer, James Gardner, Scott Nicholson, Ian McHugh and Randy Henderson, and the artist Frank Wu.\nConnections to Scientology.\nThe original sponsor of the contest was Bridge Publications, Inc., the publishing arm of the Church of Scientology. Prior to the 2004 contest, the sponsorship moved to Author Services Inc. under the trade name Galaxy Press, which was spun off from Bridge to publish Hubbard's fiction and the contest anthologies.\nThe contest has also been characterized as a promotional vehicle for Hubbard himself, who returned to science fiction writing with \"Battlefield Earth\" at about the same time as he began the contest. On the covers of the annual WOTF anthologies, Hubbard's name appears prominently. The prominence of Hubbard's name and the lavish funding of the contest awards, publicity and ceremonies have led some to speculate that the contest is part of a campaign by the Church of Scientology to promote Hubbard's status in the science fiction and literary communities.\nEntering or winning the contest does not appear to require or imply endorsement or membership in the Church of Scientology, and the contest itself has been endorsed by a wide range of well-known speculative fiction writers (see Judges and Winners above) who have no relationship to Scientology.\nAccording to Director of the Writers and Illustrators Contests Joni Labaqui, the funds to underwrite the contest\u2014including the cash prizes, the gala awards ceremony and the weeklong pre-awards festivities\u2014come from the Hubbard estate. The Hubbard estate is separate from the Church of Scientology and earns royalties from sales of Hubbard's books, including his fiction. Labaqui also reports that staff of Author Services Inc. is entirely made up of Scientologists.\nRecords with the United States Patent and Trademark Office show that the rights to the Writers of the Future name were transferred from the L. Ron Hubbard estate (\"Family Trust-B\") to the Church of Spiritual Technology in 1989, and under the 1993 IRS closing agreement with the Church of Scientology, the L. Ron Hubbard estate became part of the Church of Spiritual Technology, a \"Scientology-related entity\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33433", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33433", "title": "Wilfrid Laurier", "text": "Prime Minister of Canada from 1896 to 1911\nSir Henri Charles Wilfrid Laurier (November 20, 1841\u00a0\u2013 February 17, 1919) was the seventh prime minister of Canada from 1896 to 1911. The first French Canadian prime minister, his 15-year tenure remains the longest uninterrupted term of office among Canadian prime ministers and his nearly 45 years of service in the House of Commons is a record for the House. Laurier is best known for his compromises between English and French Canada.\nLaurier studied law at McGill University and practised as a lawyer before being elected to the Legislative Assembly of Quebec in 1871. He was then elected as a member of Parliament (MP) in the 1874 federal election. As an MP, Laurier gained a large personal following among French Canadians and the Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois. He also came to be known as a great orator. After serving as minister of inland revenue under Prime Minister Alexander Mackenzie from 1877 to 1878, Laurier became leader of the Liberal Party in 1887, thus becoming leader of the Official Opposition. He lost the 1891 federal election to Prime Minister John A. Macdonald's Conservatives. However, controversy surrounding the Conservative government's handling of the Manitoba Schools Question, which was triggered by the Manitoba government's elimination of funding for Catholic schools, gave Laurier a victory in the 1896 federal election. He led the Liberal Party to three more consecutive majority governments in the 1900, 1904, and 1908 federal elections.\nAs prime minister, Laurier resolved the Manitoba Schools Question by persuading the Manitoba government to permit Catholic students to receive a Catholic education on a school-by-school basis. While this compromise drew criticism from some French Canadians who viewed it as inadequate, it earned him the nickname \"the Great Conciliator\" for balancing the interests of French and English Canada. When Britain requested Canadian troops to fight in the Second Boer War and financial contributions to the Royal Navy, Laurier again pursued middle ground; English Canadians supported both requests, while French Canadians opposed them. Laurier's solution was to dispatch a volunteer force to fight in the Boer War. His government later enacted the \"Naval Service Act\" in 1910 to create Canada's own navy. Laurier also presided over a period of demographic and territorial expansion. Immigration levels rose significantly, the provinces of Alberta and Saskatchewan entered Confederation in 1905, and the construction of two major transcontinental railway projects\u2014the Grand Trunk Pacific and the National Transcontinental\u2014were initiated. Laurier's government also pursued policies aimed at promoting Canada's autonomy within the British Empire, including by establishing the Department of External Affairs.\nLaurier's proposed reciprocity agreement with the United States to lower tariffs became a main issue in the 1911 federal election. In that election, the Liberals were defeated by the Conservatives led by Robert Borden, who took the position that the treaty would lead to the U.S. influencing Canadian identity. Despite his defeat, Laurier stayed on as Liberal leader and once again became leader of the Opposition. During World War I and the Conscription Crisis of 1917, Laurier faced divisions within the Liberal Party as pro-conscription Liberals joined Borden's Unionist government. The anti-conscription faction of the Liberal Party, led by Laurier, became the Laurier Liberals, though the group was heavily defeated by Borden's Unionists in the 1917 federal election. Laurier remained Opposition leader until his death in 1919. Laurier is ranked among the top three of Canadian prime ministers. At 31 years and 8 months, Laurier is the longest-serving leader of a major Canadian political party. He is the fourth-longest serving prime minister of Canada, behind Pierre Trudeau, John A. Macdonald, and William Lyon Mackenzie King.\nEarly life (1841\u20131871).\nChildhood.\nThe second child of Carolus Laurier and Marcelle Martineau, Henri Charles Wilfrid Laurier was born in Saint-Lin, Canada East (modern-day Saint-Lin-Laurentides, Quebec), on November 20, 1841. He was a sixth-generation French Canadian, with partial Acadian ancestry through his mother. His ancestor Fran\u00e7ois Cottineau, \"dit\" Champlaurier, came to Canada from Saint-Claud, France. Laurier grew up in a family where politics was a staple of talk and debate. His father, an educated man having liberal ideas, enjoyed a certain degree of prestige about town. In addition to being a farmer and surveyor, he also occupied such sought-after positions as mayor, justice of the peace, militia lieutenant and school board member. At the age of 11, Wilfrid left home to study in New Glasgow, a neighbouring village largely inhabited by immigrants from Scotland. Over the next two years, he familiarized himself with the mentality, language and culture of English Canada, in addition to learning English. In 1854, Laurier attended the Coll\u00e8ge de L'Assomption, an institution that staunchly followed Roman Catholicism. There, he started to develop an interest in politics, and began to endorse the ideology of liberalism, despite the school being heavily conservative.\nPolitical beginnings.\nIn September 1861, Laurier began studying law at McGill University. There, he met Zo\u00e9 Lafontaine, who later became his wife. Laurier also discovered that he had chronic bronchitis, an illness that stuck with him for the rest of his life. At McGill, Laurier joined the , or Red Party, which was a centre-left political party that contested elections in Canada East. In 1864, Laurier graduated from McGill. Laurier continued being active within the , and from May 1864 to fall 1866, was vice president of the , a literary society with ties to the Rouge. In August 1864, Laurier joined the Liberals of Lower Canada, an anti-Confederation group composed of both moderates and radicals. The group argued that Confederation would give too much power to the central, or federal government, and the group believed that Confederation would lead to discrimination towards French Canadians.\nLaurier then practised law in Montreal, though he initially struggled as a lawyer. He opened his first practice on October 27, 1864, but closed it within a month. He established his second office, but that closed within three months, due to a lack of clients. In March 1865, nearly bankrupt, Laurier established his third law firm, partnering with M\u00e9d\u00e9ric Lanctot, a lawyer and journalist who staunchly opposed Confederation. The two experienced some success, but in late 1866, Laurier was invited by fellow Rouge Antoine-Aim\u00e9 Dorion to replace his recently deceased brother to became editor and run a newspaper, .\nLaurier moved to Victoriaville and began writing and controlling the newspaper from January 1, 1867. Laurier saw this as an opportunity to express his strong anti-Confederation views; in one instance he wrote, \"Confederation is the second stage on the road to \u2018anglification\u2019 mapped out by Lord Durham...We are being handed over to the English majority...[We must] use whatever influence we have left to demand and obtain a free and separate government.\" On March 21, was forced to shut down, as a result of financial issues and opposition from the local clergy. On July 1, Confederation was officially proclaimed and recognized, a defeat for Laurier.\nLaurier decided to remain in Victoriaville. He slowly became well known across the town with a population of 730, and was even elected mayor not so long after he settled. In addition, he established a law practice which spanned for three decades and had four different partners. He made some money, but not enough to consider himself wealthy. During his period in Victoriaville, Laurier opted to accept Confederation and identify himself as a moderate liberal, as opposed to a radical liberal. \nIn 1869, while living in Victoriaville, Laurier was appointed an ensign in the Arthabaskaville Infantry Company. He was promoted to lieutenant in 1870, and from May to June was on active service at Saint-Hyacinthe during the second Fenian Raid. He continued to serve in the company until 1878, and in 1899 he was awarded the Canada General Service Medal for his service in 1870.\nEarly political career (1871\u20131887).\nMember of the Legislative Assembly of Quebec (1871\u20131874).\nA member of the Quebec Liberal Party, Laurier was elected to the Legislative Assembly of Quebec for the riding of Drummond-Arthabaska in the 1871 Quebec general election, though the Liberal Party altogether suffered a landslide defeat. To win the provincial riding, Laurier campaigned on increasing funding for education, agriculture, and colonization. His career as a provincial politician was not noteworthy, and very few times did he make speeches in the legislature.\nMember of Parliament (1874\u20131887).\nLaurier resigned from the provincial legislature to enter federal politics as a Liberal. He was elected to the House of Commons in the January 22, 1874 election, representing the riding of Drummond\u2014Arthabaska. In this election, the Liberals led by Alexander Mackenzie heavily triumphed, as a result of the Pacific Scandal that was initiated by the Conservative Party and the Conservative prime minister, John A. Macdonald. Laurier ran a simple campaign, denouncing Conservative corruption.\nAs a member of Parliament (MP), Laurier's first mission was to build prominence by giving speeches in the House of Commons. He gained considerable attention when he delivered a speech on political liberalism on June 26, 1877, in front of about 2,000 people. He stated, \"Liberal Catholicism is not political liberalism\" and that the Liberal Party is not \"a party composed of men holding perverse doctrines, with a dangerous tendency, and knowingly and deliberately progressing towards revolution.\" He also stated, \"The policy of the Liberal party is to protect [our] institutions, to defend them and spread them, and, under the sway of those institutions, to develop the country\u2019s latent resources. That is the policy of the Liberal party and it has no other.\" The speech helped Laurier become a leader of the Quebec wing of the Liberal Party.\nFrom October 1877 to October 1878, Laurier served briefly in the Cabinet of Prime Minister Mackenzie as minister of inland revenue. However, his appointment triggered an October 27, 1877 ministerial by-election. In the by-election, he lost his seat in Drummond\u2014Arthabaska. On November 11, he ran for the seat of Quebec East, which he narrowly won. From November 11, 1877, to his death on February 17, 1919, Laurier's seat was Quebec East. Laurier won reelection for Quebec East in the 1878 federal election, though the Liberals suffered a landslide defeat as a result of their mishandling of the Panic of 1873. Macdonald returned as prime minister.\nLaurier called on Mackenzie to resign as leader, not least because of his handling of the economy. Mackenzie resigned as Liberal leader in 1880 and was succeeded by Edward Blake. Laurier, along with others, founded the Quebec newspaper, \"L\u2019\u00c9lecteur\", to promote the Liberal Party. The Liberals were in opposition once again, and Laurier made use of that status, expressing his support for laissez-faire economics and provincial rights. The Liberals suffered a second consecutive defeat in 1882, with Macdonald winning his fourth term. Laurier continued to make speeches opposing the Conservative government's policies, though nothing notable came until 1885, when he spoke out against the execution of M\u00e9tis leader Louis Riel, to whom the Macdonald government refused to grant clemency after he led the North-West Rebellion.\nLeader of the Official Opposition (1887\u20131896).\nEdward Blake resigned as Liberal leader after leading them to back-to-back defeats in 1882 and 1887. Blake urged Laurier to run for leadership of the party. At first, Laurier refused as he was not keen to take such a powerful position, but later on accepted. After 13 and a half years, Laurier had already established his reputation. He was now a prominent politician who was known for leading the Quebec branch of the Liberal Party, known for defending French Canadian rights, and known for being a great orator who was a fierce parliamentary speaker. Over the next nine years, Laurier gradually built up his party's strength through his personal following both in Quebec and elsewhere in Canada.\nIn the 1891 federal election, Laurier faced Conservative Prime Minister John A. Macdonald. Laurier campaigned in favour of reciprocity, or free trade, with the United States, contrary to Macdonald's position on the matter, who claimed that reciprocity would lead to American annexation of Canada. On election day, March 5, the Liberals gained 10 seats. The Liberals also won a majority of seats in Quebec for the first time since the 1874 election. Prime Minister Macdonald won his fourth consecutive federal election victory. The day after, Blake denounced the Liberal trade policy.\nLaurier remained disillusioned for some time after his defeat. Multiple times he suggested he resign as leader, though he was persuaded not to by other Liberals. Only in 1893 did Laurier become encouraged again. On June 20 and 21, 1893, Laurier convened a Liberal convention in Ottawa. The convention established that unrestricted reciprocity was intended to develop Canada's natural resources and that keeping a customs tariff was intended to generate revenue. Laurier subsequently undertook a series of speaking tours to campaign on the convention's results. Laurier visited Western Canada in September and October 1894, promising to relax the Conservatives' National Policy, open the American market, and increase immigration.\nMacdonald died only three months after he defeated Laurier in the 1891 election. After Macdonald's death, the Conservatives went through a period of disorganization with four short-serving leaders. The fourth prime minister after Macdonald, Charles Tupper, became prime minister in May 1896 after Mackenzie Bowell resigned as a result of a leadership crisis that was triggered by his attempts to offer a compromise for the Manitoba Schools Question, a dispute which emerged after the provincial government ended funding for Catholic schools in 1890. Tupper faced Laurier in the 1896 federal election, in which the schools dispute was a key issue. While Tupper supported overriding the provincial legislation to reinstate funding for the Catholic schools, Laurier was vague when giving his position on the matter, proposing an investigation of the issue first and then conciliation, a method he famously called, \"sunny ways\". On June 23, Laurier led the Liberals to their first victory in 22 years, despite losing the popular vote. Laurier's win was made possible by his sweep in Quebec.\nPrime Minister (1896\u20131911).\nDomestic policy.\nManitoba Schools Question.\nOne of Laurier's first acts as prime minister was to implement a solution to the Manitoba Schools Question, which had helped to bring down the Conservative government of Charles Tupper earlier in 1896. The Manitoba legislature had passed a law eliminating public funding for Catholic schooling. Supporters of Catholic schools argued that the new statute was contrary to the provisions of the Manitoba Act, 1870, which had a provision relating to school funding, but the courts rejected that argument and held that the new statute was constitutional. The Catholic minority in Manitoba then asked the federal government for support, and eventually, the Conservatives proposed remedial legislation to override Manitoba's legislation. Laurier opposed the remedial legislation on the basis of provincial rights and succeeded in blocking its passage by Parliament. Once elected, Laurier reached a compromise with the provincial premier, Thomas Greenway. Known as the Laurier-Greenway Compromise, the agreement did not allow separate Catholic schools to be re-established. However, religious instruction (Catholic education) would take place for 30 minutes at the end of each day, if requested by the parents of 10 children in rural areas or 25 in urban areas. Catholic teachers were allowed to be hired in the schools as long as there were at least 40 Catholic students in urban areas or 25 Catholic students in rural areas, and teachers could speak in French (or any other minority language) as long as there were enough Francophone students. This was seen by many as the best possible solution in the circumstances, however, some French Canadians criticized this move as it was done on an individual basis, and did not protect Catholic or French rights in all schools. Laurier called his effort to lessen the tinder in this issue \"sunny ways\" ().\nRailway construction.\nLaurier's government introduced and initiated the idea of constructing a second transcontinental railway, the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway. The first transcontinental railway, the Canadian Pacific Railway, had limitations and was not able to meet everyone's needs. In the West, the railway was not able to transport everything produced by farmers and in the East, the railway did not reach into Northern Ontario and Northern Quebec. Laurier was in favour of a transcontinental line built entirely on Canadian land by private enterprise.\nLaurier's government also constructed a third railway: the National Transcontinental Railway. It was made to provide Western Canada with direct rail connection to the Atlantic ports and to open up and develop Northern Ontario and Northern Quebec. Laurier believed that competition between the three railways would force one of the three, the Canadian Pacific Railway, to lower freight rates and thus please Western shippers who would contribute to the competition between the railways. Laurier initially reached out to Grand Trunk Railway and Canadian Northern Railway to build the National Transcontinental railway, but after disagreements emerged between the two companies, Laurier's government opted to build part of the railway itself. However, Laurier's government soon struck a deal with the Grand Trunk Pacific Railway Company (subsidiary of the Grand Trunk Railway Company) to build the western section (from Winnipeg to the Pacific Ocean) while the government would build the eastern section (from Winnipeg to Moncton). Once completed, Laurier's government would hand over the railway to the company for operation. Laurier's government gained criticism from the public due to the heavy cost to construct the railway.\nProvincial and territorial boundaries.\nOn September 1, 1905, through the \"Alberta Act\" and the \"Saskatchewan Act\", Laurier oversaw Alberta and Saskatchewan's entry into Confederation, the last two provinces to be created out of the Northwest Territories. Laurier decided to create two provinces, arguing that one large province would be too difficult to govern. This followed the enactment of the \"Yukon Territory Act\" by the Laurier Government in 1898, separating the Yukon from the Northwest Territories. Also in 1898, Quebec was enlarged through the \"Quebec Boundary Extension Act\".\nImmigration.\nLaurier's government dramatically increased immigration to grow the economy. Between 1897 and 1914, at least a million immigrants arrived in Canada, and Canada's population increased by 40 percent. Laurier's immigration policy targeted the Prairies as he argued that it would increase farming production and benefit the agriculture industry.\nThe British Columbia electorate was alarmed at the arrival of people they considered \"uncivilized\" by Canadian standards, and adopted a whites-only policy. Although railways and large companies wanted to hire Asians, labour unions and the public at large stood opposed. Both major parties went along with public opinion, with Laurier taking the lead. Scholars have argued that Laurier acted in terms of his racist views in restricting immigration from China and India, as shown by his support for the Chinese head tax. In 1900, Laurier raised the Chinese head tax to $100. In 1903, this was further raised to $500, but when a few Chinese did pay the $500, he proposed raising the sum to $1,000. This was not the first time Laurier showed racially charged action, and over the course of his time as a politician, he had a history of racist views and actions. In 1886, Laurier told the House of Commons that it was moral for Canada to take lands from \u201csavage nations\u201d so long as the government paid adequate compensation. Laurier also negotiated a limit to Japanese immigration into Canada.\nIn August 1911, Laurier approved the Order-in-Council P.C. 1911-1324 recommended by the minister of the interior, Frank Oliver. The order was approved by the cabinet on August 12, 1911. The order was intended to keep out Black Americans escaping segregation in the American south, stating that \"the Negro race...is deemed unsuitable to the climate and requirements of Canada.\" The order was never called upon, as efforts by immigration officials had already reduced the number of Blacks migrating to Canada. The order was cancelled on October 5, 1911, the day before Laurier left office, by cabinet claiming that the minister of the interior was not present at the time of approval.\nSocial policy.\nIn March 1906, Laurier's government introduced the \"Lord's Day Act\" after being persuaded by the Lord's Day Alliance. The act became effective on March 1, 1907. It prohibited business transactions from taking place on Sundays; it also restricted Sunday trade, labour, recreation, and newspapers. The act was supported by organized labour and the French Canadian Catholic hierarchy but was opposed by those who worked in the manufacturing and transportation sectors. It was also opposed by French Canadians due to them believing the federal government was interfering in a provincial matter; the Quebec government passed its own \"Lord\u2019s Day Act\" that came into effect one day before the federal act did.\nIn 1907, Laurier's government passed the \"Industrial Disputes Investigation Act\", which mandated conciliation for employers and workers before any strike in public utilities or mines, but did not make it necessary for the groups to accept the conciliators\u2019 report.\nIn 1908, a system was introduced where by annuities may be purchased from the government, the aim of which was to encourage voluntary provision for old age.\nForeign policy.\nUnited Kingdom.\nOn June 22, 1897, Laurier attended the Diamond Jubilee of Queen Victoria, which was the 60th anniversary of her accession. There, he was knighted, and was given several honours, honorary degrees, and medals. Laurier again visited the United Kingdom in 1902, taking part in the 1902 Colonial Conference and the coronation of King Edward VII on August 9, 1902. Laurier also took part in the 1907 and 1911 Imperial Conferences.\nIn 1899, the British government requested Canadian troops to serve in the Second Boer War. Laurier was caught between demands for support for military action from English Canada and a strong opposition from French Canada. Laurier eventually decided to send a volunteer force, rather than the Canadian Militia as expected by Britain. Roughly 7,000 Canadian soldiers served in the force. Outspoken French Canadian nationalist and Liberal MP Henri Bourassa was an especially vocal opponent of any form of Canadian participation in the Boer War and thus resigned from the Liberal caucus in October 1899.\nOn June 1, 1909, Laurier's government established the Department of External Affairs for Canada to take greater control of its foreign policy.\nThe Anglo-German naval arms race escalated in the early years of the 20th century. The British government requested financial and material resources to assist in expanding the Royal Navy, precipitating a heated political division in Canada. Many English Canadians wished to send as much as possible; many French Canadians and those against wished to send nothing. Aiming for compromise, Laurier advanced the \"Naval Service Act\" of 1910 which created the Royal Canadian Navy. The navy would initially consist of five cruisers and six destroyers; in times of crisis, it could be made subordinate to the British navy. However, the idea faced opposition in both English and French Canada, especially in Quebec where Bourassa organized an anti-Laurier force.\nAlaska boundary dispute.\nIn 1897 and 1898, the Alaska-Canada border emerged as a pressing issue. The Klondike Gold Rush prompted Laurier to demand an all-Canadian route from the gold fields to a seaport. The region being a desirable place with lots of gold furthered Laurier's ambition of fixing an exact boundary. Laurier also wanted to establish who owned the Lynn Canal and who controlled maritime access to the Yukon. Laurier and US President William McKinley agreed to set up a joint Anglo-American commission that would study the differences and resolve the dispute. However, this commission was unsuccessful and came to an abrupt end on February 20, 1899.\nThe dispute was then referred to an international judicial commission in 1903, which included three American politicians (Elihu Root, Henry Cabot Lodge, and George Turner), two Canadians (Allen Bristol Aylesworth and Louis-Amable Jett\u00e9) and one Briton (Lord Alverstone, Lord Chief Justice of England). On October 20, 1903, the commission by a majority (Root, Lodge, Turner, and Alverstone) ruled to support the American government's claims. Canada only acquired two islands below the Portland Canal. The decision provoked a wave of anti-American and anti-British sentiment in Canada, which Laurier temporarily encouraged.\nTariffs and trade.\nThough supportive of free trade with the United States, Laurier did not pursue the idea because the American government refused to discuss the issue. Instead, he implemented a Liberal version of the Conservatives' nationalist and protectionist National Policy by maintaining high tariffs on goods from other countries that restricted Canadian goods. However, he lowered tariffs to the same level as countries that admitted Canadian goods.\nIn 1897, Laurier's government impelemented a preferential reduction of a tariff rate of 12.5 percent for countries that imported Canadian goods at a rate equivalent to the minimum Canadian charge; rates for countries that imposed a protective duty against Canada remained the same. For the most part, the policy was supported by those for free trade (due to the preferential reduction) and those against free trade (due to elements of the National Policy remaining in place).\nLaurier's government again reformed tariffs in 1907. His government introduced a \"three-column tariff\", which added a new intermediate rate (a bargaining rate) alongside the existing British preferential rate and the general rate (which applied to all countries that Canada had no most-favoured-nation agreement with). The preferential and general rates remained unchanged, while the intermediate rates were slightly lower than the general rates.\nAlso in 1907, Laurier's minister of finance, William Stevens Fielding, and minister of marine and fisheries, Louis-Philippe Brodeur, negotiated a trade agreement with France which lowered import duties on some goods. In 1909, Fielding negotiated an agreement to promote trade with the British West Indies.\nElection victories.\nLaurier led the Liberal party to three re-elections in 1900, 1904, and 1908. In the 1900 and 1904 elections, the Liberals' popular vote and seat share increased whereas in the 1908 election, the party's popular vote and seat share went down slightly.\nQuebec stronghold.\nBy the late 1800s, Laurier built up Quebec as a base for the Liberal Party. Quebec had been a Conservative stronghold for decades due to the province's social conservatism and to the influence of the Roman Catholic Church, which distrusted the Liberals' anti-clericalism. The growing alienation of French Canadians from the Conservative Party due to its links with anti-French, anti-Catholic Orangemen in English Canada aided the Liberal Party. After the collapse of the Conservative Party of Quebec, Laurier built a stronghold in French Canada and among Catholics across Canada. \nHowever, Catholic priests in Quebec repeatedly warned their parishioners not to vote for Liberals. Their slogan was \"\" (\"heaven is blue, hell is red\", referring to the Conservative and Liberal parties' traditional colours).\nReciprocity and defeat.\nIn 1911, controversy arose regarding Laurier's support of trade reciprocity with the United States. His long-serving minister of finance, William Stevens Fielding, reached an agreement allowing for the free trade of natural products. The agreement would also lower tariffs. This had the strong support of agricultural interests, particularly in Western Canada, but it alienated many businessmen who formed a significant part of the Liberal base, many whom shifted their support to the Conservatives. Official Opposition leader Robert Laird Borden and the Conservatives denounced the deal and played on long-standing fears that reciprocity could eventually lead to weakened ties with Britain and a Canadian economy dominated by the United States. They also campaigned on fears that this would lead to the Canadian identity being taken away by the US and the American annexation of Canada.\nLaurier's government was unable to pass the reciprocity agreement due to an unruly caucus within the House of Commons, led by vocal disapproval from Liberal MP Clifford Sifton. Laurier called an election to settle the issue of reciprocity. The Conservatives were victorious and the Liberals lost over a third of their seats. The Conservatives' leader, Borden, succeeded Laurier as prime minister. Over 15 consecutive years of Liberal rule ended.\nOpposition and war (1911\u20131919).\nLaurier stayed on as Liberal leader. In December 1912, he started leading the filibuster and fight against the Conservatives' Naval Aid Bill, which would have allocated $35 million to be sent to assist the Royal Navy. The Conservative plan was at least three times more costly than the Liberal plan to construct a Canadian-operated fleet, and would reap no benefits to Canadian industries whatsoever. Laurier argued that the bill threatened Canada's autonomy, and after six months of battling it, the bill was blocked by the Liberal-controlled Senate.\nLaurier led the opposition during World War I. He supported sending a volunteer force to fight in the war, arguing that an intense campaign for volunteers would produce enough troops. Borden initially had a volunteer military system in place, but when applications started to decline, he imposed conscription in the summer of 1917, which led to the Conscription Crisis of 1917. Laurier was an influential opponent of conscription, and his position on the matter was applauded by French Canadians, who were generally anti-conscription. Pro-conscription Liberals, particularly from English Canada, joined Borden as Liberal-Unionists to form the Union government. Laurier refused to join the Unionist Party, and instead created the \"Laurier Liberals\", a party composed of Liberals opposed to conscription. Laurier also rejected Prime Minister Borden's proposal to form a coalition government composed of both Conservatives and Liberals, arguing that there would be no \"real\" opposition to the government. He also argued that if the Liberals joined, Quebec would feel alienated and would lead to the province being heavily influenced by outspoken French-Canadian nationalist Henri Bourassa, and what Laurier called Bourassa's \"dangerous nationalism\" which might lead to Quebec seceding from Canada.\nIn the 1917 election, the Laurier Liberals were reduced to a mostly French Canadian rump. Laurier swept Quebec, winning 62 out of 65 of the province's seats, not least due to the French Canadians' overwhelming respect and support for Laurier as a result of his opposition to conscription.\nThe Conscription Crisis once again revealed the divisions between French Canadians and English Canadians. Most English Canadians favoured conscription as they believed this would strengthen ties with Britain, whereas most French Canadians opposed conscription as they wanted nothing to do with the war. Laurier was now seen as a \"traitor\" to English Canadians and English Canadian Liberals, whereas he was seen as a \"hero\" for French Canadians. Laurier's prot\u00e9g\u00e9 and successor as party leader, William Lyon Mackenzie King, unified the English and French factions of the Liberal Party, leading it to victory over the Conservatives in the 1921 federal election.\nAfter the election, Laurier still stayed on as Liberal and Opposition leader. When World War I came to an end on November 11, 1918, he focused on his efforts to rebuild and reunify the Liberal Party.\nDeath.\nLaurier died of a stroke on February 17, 1919, while still in office as leader of the Opposition. Though he had lost a bitter election two years earlier, he was loved nationwide for his \"warm smile, his sense of style, and his \"sunny ways\".\" 50,000 to 100,000 people jammed the streets of Ottawa as his funeral procession marched to his final resting place at Notre-Dame Cemetery. His remains were eventually placed in a stone sarcophagus, adorned by sculptures of nine mourning female figures, representing each of the provinces in the union. His wife, Zo\u00e9 Laurier, died on November 1, 1921, and was placed in the same tomb.\nLaurier was permanently succeeded as Liberal leader by his former minister of labour, William Lyon Mackenzie King. King narrowly defeated Laurier's former minister of finance, William Stevens Fielding. According to Zo\u00e9, Fielding was Laurier's choice for next leader; Laurier believed Fielding had the best chance to restore unity in the party.\nPersonal life.\nWilfrid Laurier married Zo\u00e9 Lafontaine in Montreal on May 13, 1868. She was the daughter of G.N.R. Lafontaine and his first wife, Zo\u00e9 Tessier known as Zo\u00e9 Lavigne. Laurier's wife Zo\u00e9 was born in Montreal and educated there at the School of the Bon Pasteur, and at the Convent of the Sisters of the Sacred Heart, St. Vincent de Paul. The couple lived at Arthabaskaville until they moved to Ottawa in 1896. She was one of the vice presidents on the formation of the National Council of Women and was honorary vice president of the Victorian Order of Nurses. The couple had no children.\nBeginning in 1878 and for some twenty years while married to Zo\u00e9, Laurier had an \"ambiguous relationship\" with a married woman, \u00c9milie Barthe. Zo\u00e9 was not an intellectual; \u00c9milie was, and relished literature and politics like Wilfrid, whose heart she won. Rumour had it he fathered a son, Armand Lavergne, with her, yet Zo\u00e9 remained with him until his death.\nLegacy.\nOverall, Laurier's efforts to remain neutral between English Canadians and French Canadians, and his efforts to seek a middle ground between the two ethnic groups have paved the way for him to be ranked among the top three of Canadian prime ministers. Despite being a French Canadian, he did not fully accept the French Canadian demands of repealing Manitoba's ban on public funding for Catholic schools nor did he fully accept their demands of refusing to send any Canadian troop to fight in the Boer War. Nonetheless, in all seven elections he fought, the majority of Quebec's ridings were handed over to his Liberal Party. Despite one notable exception in 1958, the Liberal Party continued to dominate federal politics in Quebec until 1984.\nHistorian Jacques Monet wrote, \"To his faithful followers, especially in Quebec, where his surname is used as a first name by many other Canadians, Laurier is a charismatic hero whose term of office was a happy time in Canadian history. He worked all his life for cooperation between French- and English-speaking Canadians while he strove to keep Canada as independent as possible from Britain. His personal charm and dignity, his great skill as an orator, and his great gifts of intellect won the admiration of all Canadians and non-Canadians alike.\"\nAccording to historians Norman Hillmer and Stephen Azzi, a 2011 poll of 117 historians and experts voted Laurier as the \"best\" Canadian prime minister, ahead of John A. Macdonald and Mackenzie King. Laurier was ranked Number 3 of the Prime Ministers of Canada (out of the 20 through Jean Chr\u00e9tien) in the survey by Canadian historians included in \"Prime Ministers: Ranking Canada's Leaders\" by J.L. Granatstein and Norman Hillmer. \"Passionate, charismatic, and an intellectual force in both languages,\" the Canadian War Museum's Tim Cook stated, \"Sir Wilfrid was the full package.\"\nMore recently, Laurier has been criticised for his policies towards Indigenous Canadians, Chinese, and Indian immigrants. Laurier's government had promoted immigration for economic growth, but also took measures to prevent Chinese and Indian immigrants from arriving. Additionally, Laurier also encouraged settlements, which affected local populations.\nRecognition.\nNational historic sites.\nLaurier is commemorated by three National Historic Sites.\nThe Sir Wilfrid Laurier National Historic Site is in his birthplace, Saint-Lin-Laurentides, a town north of Montreal, Quebec. Its establishment reflected an early desire to not only mark his birthplace (a plaque in 1925 and a monument in 1927), but to create a shrine to Laurier in the 1930s. Despite early doubts and later confirmation that the house designated as the birthplace was neither Laurier's nor on its original site, its development, and the building of a museum, satisfied the goal of honoring the man and reflecting his early life.\nLaurier's brick residence in Ottawa is known as Laurier House National Historic Site, at the corner of what is now Laurier Avenue and Chapel Street. In their will, the Lauriers left the house to Prime Minister Mackenzie King, who in turn donated it to Canada upon his death. Both sites are administered by Parks Canada as part of the national park system.\nThe 1876 Italianate residence of the Lauriers during his years as a lawyer and Member of Parliament, in Victoriaville, Quebec, is designated Wilfrid Laurier House National Historic Site, owned privately and operated as the Laurier Museum.\nIn November 2011, Wilfrid Laurier University in Waterloo, Ontario, unveiled a statue depicting a young Wilfrid Laurier sitting on a bench, thinking.\nOther honours.\nLaurier had titular honours including:\nThe $1,000 note in the 1935 Series and 1937 Series\nThe $5 note in the Scenes of Canada series, 1972 and 1979, Birds of Canada series, 1986, Journey series, 2002 and Frontier series, 2013\nMany sites and landmarks were named to honor Laurier. They include:\nSupreme Court appointments.\nWilfrid Laurier advised the Governor General to appoint the following individuals to the Supreme Court of Canada:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33434", "revid": "16360910", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33434", "title": "W3C", "text": ""}
{"id": "33436", "revid": "525927", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33436", "title": "William Lyon Mackenzie King", "text": "Prime Minister of Canada (1921\u20131926, 1926\u20131930, 1935\u20131948)\nWilliam Lyon Mackenzie King (December 17, 1874 \u2013 July 22, 1950) was the prime minister of Canada for three non-consecutive terms from 1921 to 1926, 1926 to 1930, and 1935 to 1948. A Liberal, he was the dominant politician in Canada from the early 1920s to the late 1940s. With a total of 21 years and 154 days in office, he remains the longest-serving prime minister in Canadian history.\nKing studied law and political economy in the 1890s and later obtained a PhD, the first Canadian prime minister to have done so. In 1900, he became deputy minister of the Canadian government's new Department of Labour. He entered the House of Commons in 1908 before becoming the first federal minister of labour in 1909 under Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier. After losing his seat in the 1911 federal election, King worked for the Rockefeller Foundation before briefly working as an industrial consultant. Following the death of Laurier in 1919, King won to the leadership of the Liberal Party. Taking the helm of a party torn apart by the Conscription Crisis of 1917, he unified both the pro-conscription and anti-conscription factions of the party, leading it to victory in the 1921 federal election.\nKing established a post-war agenda which lowered wartime taxes and tariffs. He sought to strengthen Canadian autonomy by refusing to support Britain in the Chanak Crisis without Parliament's consent and negotiating the Halibut Treaty with the United States without British interference. His government also passed the \"Chinese Immigration Act, 1923\", which banned most forms of Chinese immigration to Canada. In the 1925 federal election, the Conservatives won a plurality of seats, but the Liberals negotiated support from the Progressive Party and stayed in office as a minority government. In 1926, facing a Commons vote that could force his government to resign, King asked Governor General Lord Byng to dissolve parliament and call an election. Byng refused and instead invited the Conservatives to form government, who briefly held office but lost a motion of no confidence. This sequence of events triggered a major constitutional crisis, the King\u2013Byng affair. King and the Liberals won the resulting election. Afterwards, King pursued a more independent foreign policy including by expanding the Department of External Affairs and Canada's diplomatic missions. His government also introduced old-age pensions based on need. King's slow reaction to the Great Depression led to a defeat at the polls in 1930.\nIn the 1935 federal election, King's Liberal Party returned to power in a landslide victory, defeating R.B. Bennett's Conservative government whose response to the depression was unpopular. King negotiated the 1935 Canada-United States Reciprocal Trade Agreement, nationalized the Bank of Canada, and passed the 1938 \"National Housing Act\" to improve housing affordability. His government also established the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, Trans-Canada Air Lines, and the National Film Board. Days after World War II broke out, King's government deployed Canadian troops, and the Liberals' second landslide victory in the 1940 federal election allowed King to continue leading Canada through the war. After the election, his government introduced unemployment insurance and signed the Ogdensburg Agreement with the United States, which established the Permanent Joint Board on Defense. King oversaw the displacement and internment of Japanese Canadians on the domestic front and, to satisfy French Canadians, he delayed introducing overseas conscription until late 1944. King's government also introduced family allowances (Canada's first universal welfare program). Following the Allies' victory in 1945, King called a post-war election, in which the Liberals lost their majority government. In his final years in office, King and his government oversaw Canada's entry into the United Nations, partnered Canada with other Western nations to take part in the deepening Cold War, introduced Canadian citizenship, and successfully negotiated Newfoundland's entry into Confederation.\nKing retired from politics in late 1948 and died of pneumonia in July 1950. King's personality was complex. He is best known for his leadership of Canada throughout the Great Depression and World War II, and he played a major role in laying the foundations of the Canadian welfare state and establishing Canada's international position as a middle power. Meanwhile, King kept secret his beliefs in spiritualism and the use of mediums to stay in contact with departed associates, particularly with his mother, and allowed his intense spirituality to distort his understanding of Adolf Hitler throughout the late 1930s. Historian Jack Granatstein notes, \"the scholars expressed little admiration for King the man but offered unbounded admiration for his political skills and attention to Canadian unity.\" In multiple surveys, scholars have ranked King among the top three Canadian prime ministers.\nEarly life (1874\u20131891).\nKing was born in a frame house rented by his parents at 43 Benton Street in Berlin (now Kitchener), Ontario to John King and Isabel Grace Mackenzie. His maternal grandfather was William Lyon Mackenzie, first mayor of Toronto and leader of the Upper Canada Rebellion in 1837. His father was a lawyer and later a lecturer at Osgoode Hall Law School. King had three siblings: older sister Isabel \"Bella\" Christina Grace (1873\u20131915), younger sister Janet \"Jennie\" Lindsey (1876\u20131962) and younger brother Dougall Macdougall \"Max\" (1878\u20131922). Within his family, he was known as Willie; during his university years, he adopted W. L. Mackenzie King as his signature and began using Mackenzie as his preferred name with those outside the family.\nKing's father was a lawyer with a struggling practice in a small city, and never enjoyed financial security. His parents lived a life of shabby gentility, employing servants and tutors they could scarcely afford, although their financial situation improved somewhat following a move to Toronto around 1890, where King lived with them for several years in a duplex on Beverley Street while studying at the University of Toronto.\nKing became a lifelong practising Presbyterian with a dedication to social reform based on his Christian duty. He never favoured socialism.\nUniversity (1891\u20131900).\nKing enrolled at the University of Toronto in 1891. He obtained a BA degree in 1895, an LLB degree in 1896, and an MA in 1897, all from the university. While studying in Toronto he met a wide circle of friends, many of whom became prominent. He was an early member and officer of the Kappa Alpha Society, which included a number of these individuals (two future Ontario Supreme Court Justices and the future chairman of the university itself). It encouraged debate on political ideas. He also was simultaneously a part of the Literary Society with Arthur Meighen, a future political rival.\nKing was especially concerned with issues of social welfare and was influenced by the settlement house movement pioneered by Toynbee Hall in London, England. He played a central role in fomenting a students' strike at the university in 1895. He was in close touch, behind the scenes, with Vice-Chancellor William Mulock, for whom the strike provided a chance to embarrass his rivals Chancellor Edward Blake and President James Loudon. King failed to gain his immediate objective, a teaching position at the university but earned political credit with Mulock, the man who would invite him to Ottawa and make him a deputy minister only five years later. While studying at the University of Toronto, King also contributed to the campus newspaper, \"The Varsity,\" and served as president of the yearbook committee in 1896. King subsequently wrote for \"The Globe\", \"The Mail and Empire\", and the \"Toronto News\". Fellow journalist W. A. Hewitt recalled that, the city editor of the \"Toronto News\" left him in charge one afternoon with instructions to fire King if he showed up. When Hewitt sat at the editor's desk, King showed up a few minutes later and resigned before Hewitt could tell him he was fired.\nAfter studying at the University of Chicago and working with Jane Addams at her settlement house, Hull House, King proceeded to Harvard University. While at the University of Chicago, he participated on their track team as a half-mile runner. He earned an MA in political economy from Harvard in 1898. In 1909, Harvard granted him a PhD degree for a dissertation titled \"Oriental Immigration to Canada.\" King was the first Canadian prime minister to have earned a PhD.\nEarly career, civil servant (1900\u20131908).\nIn 1900, King became editor of the federal government-owned \"Labour Gazette\", a publication that explored complex labour issues. Later that year, he was appointed as deputy minister of the Canadian government's new Department of Labour, and became active in policy domains from Japanese immigration to railways, notably the \"Industrial Disputes Investigations Act\" (1907) which sought to avert labour strikes by prior conciliation.\nIn 1901, King's roommate and best friend, Henry Albert Harper, died heroically during a skating party when a young woman fell through the ice of the partly frozen Ottawa River. Harper dove into the water to try to save her, and perished in the attempt. King led the effort to raise a memorial to Harper, which resulted in the erection of the Sir Galahad statue on Parliament Hill in 1905. In 1906, King published a memoir of Harper, entitled \"The Secret of Heroism\".\nWhile deputy minister of labour, King was appointed to investigate the causes of and claims for compensation resulting from the 1907 anti-Oriental riots in Vancouver's Chinatown and Japantown. One of the claims for damages came from Chinese opium dealers, which led King to investigate narcotics use in Vancouver, British Columbia. Following the investigation King reported that white women were also opium users, not just Chinese men, and the federal government used the report to justify the first legislation outlawing narcotics in Canada.\nEarly political career, minister of labour (1908\u20131911).\nKing was first elected to Parliament as a Liberal in the 1908 federal election, representing Waterloo North. In 1909, King was appointed as the first-ever minister of labour by Prime Minister Wilfrid Laurier.\nKing's term as minister of labour was marked by two significant achievements. He led the passage of the \"Industrial Disputes Investigation Act\" and the \"Combines Investigation Act\", which he had shaped during his civil and parliamentary service. The legislation significantly improved the financial situation for millions of Canadian workers. In 1910 Mackenzie King introduced a bill aimed at establishing an 8-hour day on public works but it was killed in the Senate. He lost his seat in the 1911 general election, which saw the Conservatives defeat the Liberals and form government.\nOut of politics (1911\u20131919).\nIndustrial consultant.\nAfter his defeat, King went on the lecture circuit on behalf of the Liberal Party. In June 1914 John D. Rockefeller Jr. hired him at the Rockefeller Foundation in New York City, to head its new Department of Industrial Research. It paid $12,000 per year, compared to the meagre $2,500 per year the Liberal Party was paying. He worked for the Foundation until 1918, forming a close working association and friendship with Rockefeller, advising him through the turbulent period of the 1913\u20131914 Strike and Ludlow Massacre\u2013in what is known as the Colorado Coalfield War\u2013at a family-owned coal company in Colorado, which subsequently set the stage for a new era in labour management in America. King became one of the earliest expert practitioners in the emerging field of industrial relations.\nKing was not a pacifist, but he showed little enthusiasm for the Great War; he faced criticism for not serving in Canada's military and instead working for the Rockefellers. However, he was nearly 40 years old when the war began, and was not in good physical condition. He never gave up his Ottawa home, and travelled to the United States on an as-needed basis, performing service to the war effort by helping to keep war-related industries running smoothly.\nIn 1918, King, assisted by his friend F. A. McGregor, published \"Industry and Humanity: A Study in the Principles Underlying Industrial Reconstruction\", a dense, abstract book he wrote in response to the Ludlow massacre. It went over the heads of most readers, but revealed the practical idealism behind King's political thinking. He argued that capital and labour were natural allies, not foes, and that the community at large (represented by the government) should be the third and decisive party in industrial disputes. He expressed derision for syndicates and trades unions, chastising them for aiming at the \"destruction by force of existing organization, and the transfer of industrial capital from the present possessors\" to themselves.\nQuitting the Rockefeller Foundation in February 1918, King became an independent consultant on labour issues for the next two years, earning $1,000 per week from leading American corporations. Even so, he kept his official residence in Ottawa, hoping for a call to duty.\nWartime politics.\nIn 1917, Canada was in crisis; King supported Liberal leader Wilfrid Laurier in his opposition to conscription, which was violently opposed in the province of Quebec. The Liberal party became deeply split, with several Anglophones joining the pro-conscription Union government, a coalition controlled by the Conservatives under Prime Minister Robert Borden. King returned to Canada to run in the 1917 election, which focused almost entirely on the conscription issue. Unable to overcome a landslide against Laurier, King lost in the constituency of York North, which his grandfather had once represented.\nOpposition leader (1919\u20131921).\n1919 leadership election.\nThe Liberal Party was deeply divided by Quebec's opposition to conscription and the agrarian revolt in Ontario and the Prairies. Levin argues that when King returned to politics in 1919, he was a rusty outsider with a weak base facing a nation bitterly split by language, regionalism and class. He outmaneuvered more senior competitors by embracing Laurier's legacy, championing labour interests, calling for welfare reform, and offering solid opposition to the Conservative rivals. When Laurier died in 1919, King was elected leader in the first Liberal leadership convention, defeating his three rivals on the fourth ballot. He won thanks to the support of the Quebec bloc, organized by Ernest Lapointe (1876\u20131941), later King's long-time lieutenant in Quebec. King could not speak French, but in election after election for the next 20 years (save for 1930), Lapointe produced the critical seats to give the Liberals control of the Commons. When campaigning in Quebec, King portrayed Lapointe as co-prime minister.\nIdealizes the Prairies.\nOnce King became the Liberal leader in 1919 he paid closer attention to the Prairies, a fast-developing region. Viewing a sunrise in Alberta in 1920, he wrote in his diary, \"I thought of the New Day, the New Social Order. It seems like Heaven's prophecy of the dawn of a new era, revealed to me.\" Pragmatism played a role as well, since his party depended for its survival on the votes of Progressive Party Members of Parliament, many of whom who represented farmers in Ontario and the Prairies. He convinced many Progressives to return to the Liberal fold.\n1921 federal election.\nIn the 1921 election, King's Liberals defeated the Conservatives led by Prime Minister Arthur Meighen, winning a narrow majority of 118 out of 235 seats. The Conservatives won 50, the newly formed Progressive Party won 58 (but declined to form the official Opposition), and the remaining ten seats went to Labour MPs and Independents; most of these ten supported the Progressives. King became prime minister.\nPrime Minister (1921\u20131926, 1926\u20131930).\nAs prime minister of Canada, King was appointed to the Privy Council of the United Kingdom on 20 June 1922 and was sworn at Buckingham Palace on October 11, 1923, during the 1923 Imperial Conference.\nBalancing act.\nDuring his first term of office, from 1921 to 1926, King sought to lower wartime taxes and, especially, wartime ethnic and labour tensions. \"The War is over\", he argued, \"and for a long time to come it is going to take all that the energies of man can do to bridge the chasm and heal the wounds which the War has made in our social life.\"\nDespite prolonged negotiations, King was unable to attract the Progressives into his government, but once Parliament opened, he relied on their support to defeat non-confidence motions from the Conservatives. King was opposed in some policies by the Progressives, who opposed the high tariffs of the National Policy. King faced a delicate balancing act of reducing tariffs enough to please the Prairie-based Progressives, but not so much as to alienate his vital supporters in industrial Ontario and Quebec, who perceived tariffs were necessary to compete with American imports.\nOver time, the Progressives gradually weakened. Their effective and passionate leader, Thomas Crerar, resigned to return to his grain business, and was replaced by the more placid Robert Forke, who joined King's cabinet in 1926 as Minister of Immigration and Colonization after becoming a Liberal-Progressive. Socialist reformer J.\u00a0S. Woodsworth gradually gained influence and power, and King was able to reach an accommodation with him on policy matters. In any event, the Progressive caucus lacked the party discipline that was traditionally enforced by the Liberals and Conservatives. The Progressives had campaigned on a promise that their MP's would represent their constituents first. King used this to his advantage, as he could always count on at least a handful of Progressive MPs to shore up his near-majority position for any crucial vote.\nImmigration.\nIn 1923, King's government passed the \"Chinese Immigration Act, 1923\" banning most forms of Chinese immigration to Canada. Immigration from most countries was controlled or restricted in some way, but only the Chinese were completely prohibited from immigrating. This was after various members of the federal and some provincial governments (especially British Columbia) put pressure on the federal government to discourage Chinese immigration.\nAlso in 1923, the government modified the \"Immigration Act\" to allow former subjects of Austria-Hungary to once again enter Canada. Ukrainian immigration resumed after restrictions were put in place during World War I.\nCity planning.\nKing had a long-standing concern with city planning and the development of the national capital, since he had been trained in the settlement house movement and envisioned town planning and garden cities as a component of his broader program of social reform. He drew on four broad traditions in early North American planning: social planning, the Parks Movement, the City Scientific, and the City Beautiful. King's greatest impact was as the political champion for the planning and development of Ottawa, Canada's national capital. His plans, much of which were completed in the two decades after his death, were part of a century of federal planning that repositioned Ottawa as a national space in the City Beautiful style. Confederation Square, for example, was initially planned to be a civic plaza to balance the nearby federal presence of Parliament Hill and was turned into a war memorial. The Great War monument was not installed until the 1939 royal visit, and King intended that the replanning of the capital would be the World War I memorial. However, the symbolic meaning of the World War I monument gradually expanded to become the place of remembrance for all Canadian war sacrifices and includes a war memorial.\nCorruption scandals.\nKing called an election in 1925, in which the Conservatives won the most seats, but not a majority in the House of Commons. King held onto power with the support of the Progressives. A corruption scandal discovered late in his first term involved misdeeds around the expansion of the Beauharnois Canal in Quebec; this led to extensive inquiries and eventually a Royal Commission, which exposed the Beauharnois Scandal. The resulting press coverage damaged King's party in the election. Early in his second term, another corruption scandal, this time in the Department of Customs, was revealed, which led to more support for the Conservatives and Progressives, and the possibility that King would be forced to resign, if he lost sufficient support in the Commons. King had no personal connection to this scandal, although one of his own appointees was at the heart of it. Opposition leader Meighen unleashed his fierce invective towards King, stating he was hanging onto power \"like a lobster with lockjaw\".`\nKing\u2013Byng Affair.\nIn June 1926, King, facing a House of Commons vote connected to the customs scandal that could force his government to resign, advised the Governor General, Lord Byng, to dissolve Parliament and call another election. Byng, however, declined the Prime Minister's request \u2013 the first time in Canadian history that a request for dissolution was refused; and, to date, the only time the governor general of Canada has done so. Byng instead asked Leader of the Opposition, Arthur Meighen, to form government. Although the Conservatives held more seats in the House than any other party, they did not control a majority. They were soon themselves defeated on a motion of non-confidence on July 2. Meighen himself then requested a dissolution of Parliament, which Byng now granted.\nKing ran the 1926 Liberal election campaign largely on the issue of the right of Canadians to govern themselves and against the interference of the Crown. The Liberal Party was returned to power with a minority government, which bolstered King's position on the issue and the position of the prime minister generally. King later pushed for greater Canadian autonomy at the 1926 Imperial Conference which elicited the Balfour Declaration stating that upon the granting of dominion status, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Newfoundland, South Africa, and the Irish Free State, while still autonomous communities within the British Empire, ceased to be subordinate to the United Kingdom. Thus, the governor general ceased to represent the British government and was solely the personal representative of the sovereign while becoming a representative of The Crown. This ultimately was formalized in the Statute of Westminster 1931. On September 14, King and his party won the election with a plurality of seats in the Commons: 116 seats to the Conservatives' 91 in a 245-member House.\nExtending Canadian autonomy.\nDuring the Chanak Crisis of 1922, King refused to support the British without first consulting Parliament, while the Conservative leader, Arthur Meighen, supported Britain. King sought a Canadian voice independent of London in foreign affairs. In September 1922 the British prime minister, David Lloyd George, appealed repeatedly to King for Canadian support in the crisis. King coldly replied that the Canadian Parliament would decide what policy to follow, making clear it would not be bound by London's suggestions. King wrote in his diary of the British appeal: \"I confess it annoyed me. It is drafted designedly to play the imperial game, to test out centralization versus autonomy as regards European wars...No [Canadian] contingent will go without parliament being summoned in the first instance\". The British were disappointed with King's response but the crisis was soon resolved, as King had anticipated. After Chanak, King was concerned about the possibility that Canada might go to war because of its connections with Britain, writing to Violet Markham:\nAnything like centralization in London, to say nothing of a direct or indirect attempt on the part of those in office in Downing Street to tell the people of the Dominions what they should or should not do, and to dictate their duty in matters of foreign policy, is certain to prove just as injurious to the so-called 'imperial solidarity' as any attempt at interference in questions of purely domestic concern. If membership within the British Commonwealth means participation by the Dominions in any and every war in which Great Britain becomes involved, without consultation, conference, or agreement of any kind in advance, I can see no hope for an enduring relationship.\nFor years, halibut stocks were depleting in Canadian and American fishing areas in the North Pacific Ocean. In 1923, King's government negotiated the Halibut Treaty with the United States. The treaty annually prohibited commercial fishing from November 16 to February 15; violation would result in seizure. The agreement was notable in that Canada negotiated it without a British delegate at the table and without ratification from the British Parliament; though not official, convention stated that the United Kingdom would have a seat at the table or be a signatory to any agreement Canada was part of. King argued the situation only concerned Canada and the United States. After, the British accepted King's intentions to send a separate Canadian diplomat to Washington D.C. (to represent Canada's interests) rather than a British one. At the 1923 Imperial Conference, Britain accepted the Halibut Treaty, arguing it set a new precedent for the role of British Dominions.\nKing expanded the Department of External Affairs, founded in 1909, to further promote Canadian autonomy from Britain. The new department took some time to develop, but over time it significantly increased the reach and projection of Canadian diplomacy. Prior to this, Canada had relied on British diplomats who owed their first loyalty to London. After the King\u2013Byng episode, King recruited many high-calibre people for the new venture, including future prime minister Lester Pearson and influential career administrators Norman Robertson and Hume Wrong. This project was a key element of his overall strategy, setting Canada on a course independent of Britain, of former colonizer France, as well as of the neighbouring powerful United States.\nThroughout his tenure, King led Canada from a dominion with responsible government to an autonomous nation within the British Commonwealth. King asserted Canadian autonomy against the British government's attempts to turn the Commonwealth into an alliance. His biographer asserts that \"in this struggle Mackenzie King was the constant aggressor\". The Canadian High Commissioner to Britain, Vincent Massey, claimed that an \"anti-British bias\" was \"one of the most powerful factors in his make-up\".\nOther reforms.\nIn domestic affairs, King strengthened the Liberal policy of increasing the powers of the provincial governments by transferring to the governments of Manitoba, Alberta, and Saskatchewan the ownership of the crown lands within those provinces, as well as the subsoil rights; these in particular would become increasingly important, as petroleum and other natural resources proved very abundant. In collaboration with the provincial governments, he inaugurated a system of old-age pensions based on need. In February 1930, he appointed Cairine Wilson as the first female senator in Canadian history.\nReductions in taxation were carried out such as exemptions under the sales tax on commodities and enlarged exemptions of income tax, while in 1929 taxes on cables, telegrams, and railway and steamship tickets were removed. In 1924, a Civil Service Superannuation Act was passed with the aim of providing public servants with a suitable income upon retirement from the public service. Under c.39 of 1922, civil servants who were unfit for further duty \u201cmay be retired even if they are under 65 years of age.\u201d Under c.42 of 1922, various social provisions were introduced for returned soldiers and dependents. An Act of 1923 improved pension eligibility for returned soldiers. Entitlement to military pensions was also extended. In 1929, a previous Insurance Act was amended to enable fraternal societies to issue endowment policies for a period of twenty years or longer, and to increase their maximum policies to $10,000 under certain conditions. \nMeasures were also carried out to support farmers. In 1922, for instance, a measure was introduced and passed \"restoring the Crow's Nest Pass railways rates on grain and flour moving eastwards from the prairie provinces.\" A Farm Loan Board was set up to provide rural credit; advancing funds to farmers \"at rates of interest and under terms not obtainable from the usual sources,\" while other measures were carried out such as preventative measures against foot and mouth disease and the establishment of grading standards \"to assist in the marketing of agricultural products\" both at home and overseas. In addition, the \"Combines Investigation Act of 1923\" was aimed at safeguarding consumers and producers from exploitation. \nSeveral measures affecting labour were also carried out. In July 1922, an Order in Council was adopted to secure a more effective observance of a fair wages policy. From 1924 onwards, the employment of young persons at sea was regulated in accordance with various international labour conventions. In 1927, the Government Employees' Compensation Act was amended by the Dominion Parliament to provide (as noted by one study) \u201cthat all employees of the Dominion government in Prince Edward Island should be eligible for compensation in the same manner and at the same rate as similar workers in New Brunswick.\u201d An order of March 1930 entitled employees of the Dominion Government who worked more than 8 hours daily to an 8-hour workday with a half-holiday on Saturdays. That same year, a Fair Wages and Eight Hours Day Act was introduced.\nKing's strategy to address the issue of provincial-federal relations included the use of the Supreme Court of Canada as a tool to avoid contentious and politically damaging debates. In 1922, the \"Supreme Court Act\" was amended to expand the jurisdiction of the Court to hear appeals to provincial reference questions. King used the reference authority 14 times, dealing with significant issues such as aviation, discriminatory fishing licensing schemes, and water-power on navigable waterways.\nDefeat in 1930.\nKing's government was in power at the beginning of the Great Depression, but was slow to respond to the mounting crisis. He felt that the crisis was a temporary swing of the business cycle and that the economy would soon recover without government intervention. Critics said he was out of touch. Just prior to the election, King carelessly remarked that he \"would not give a five-cent piece\" to Tory provincial governments for unemployment relief. The opposition made this remark a catch-phrase; the main issue was the deterioration in the economy and whether the prime minister was out of touch with the hardships of ordinary people. The Liberals lost the election of 1930 to the Conservative Party, led by Richard Bedford Bennett. The popular vote was very close between the two parties, with the Liberals actually earning more votes than in 1926, but the Conservatives had a geographical advantage that turned into enough seats to give a majority.\nOpposition leader (1930\u20131935).\nAfter his 1930 election loss, King stayed on as Liberal leader, becoming the leader of the Opposition for the second time. He began his years as Opposition leader convinced that his government did not deserve defeat and that its financial caution had helped the economy prosper. He blamed the financial crisis on the speculative excesses of businessmen and on the weather cycle. King argued that the worst mistake Canada could make in reacting to the Depression was to raise tariffs and restrict international trade. He believed that over time, voters would learn that Bennett had deceived them and they would come to appreciate the King government's policy of frugality and free trade.\nKing's policy was to refrain from offering advice or alternative policies to the Conservative government. Indeed, his policy preferences were not much different from Bennett's, and he let the government have its way. Though he gave the impression of sympathy with progressive and liberal causes, he had no enthusiasm for the New Deal of U.S. president Franklin D. Roosevelt (which Bennett eventually tried to emulate, after floundering without solutions for several years), and he never advocated massive government action to alleviate the Depression in Canada.\nAs Opposition leader, King denounced the Bennett government's budget deficits as irresponsible, though he did not suggest his own idea of how budgets could be balanced. King also denounced the \"blank cheques\" that Parliament was asked to approve for relief and delayed the passage of these bills despite the objections of some Liberals, who feared the public might conclude that the party had no sympathy for those struggling. Each year, after the throne speech and the budget, King introduced amendments that blamed the Depression on Bennett's policy of high tariffs.\nBy the time the 1935 election arrived, the Bennett government was heavily unpopular due to its handling of the Depression. Using the slogan \"King or Chaos\", the Liberals won a landslide victory, winning 173 out of the Commons' 245 seats and reducing the Conservatives to a rump of 40; this was the largest majority government at the time.\nPrime Minister (1935\u20131948).\nFor the first time in his political career, King led an undisputed Liberal majority government. Upon his return to office in October 1935, he demonstrated a commitment (like his American counterpart Roosevelt) to the underprivileged, speaking of a new era where \"poverty and adversity, want and misery are the enemies which liberalism will seek to banish from the land\". Once again, King appointed himself as secretary of state for external affairs; he held this post until 1946.\nEconomic reforms.\nFree trade.\nPromising a much-desired trade treaty with the U.S., the King government passed the 1935 Reciprocal Trade Agreement. It marked a turning point in Canadian-American economic relations, reversing the disastrous trade war of 1930\u201331, lowering tariffs, and yielding a dramatic increase in trade. More subtly, it revealed to the prime minister and President Roosevelt that they could work well together.\nSocial programs.\nKing's government introduced the National Employment Commission in 1936. As for the unemployed, King was hostile to federal relief. However, the first compulsory national unemployment insurance program was instituted in August 1940 under the King government after a constitutional amendment was agreed to by all of the Canadian provinces, to concede to the federal government legislative power over unemployment insurance. New Brunswick, Alberta and Quebec had held out against the federal government's desire to amend the constitution but ultimately acceded to its request, Alberta being the last to do so. The \"British North America Act\" Section 91 was amended by adding in a heading designated Number 2A simply in the words \"Unemployment Insurance\". As far back as February 1933, the Liberals had committed themselves to introducing unemployment insurance; with a declaration by Mackenzie King that was endorsed by all members of the parliamentary party and the National Liberal Federation in which he called for such a system to be put in place.\nOver the next thirteen years, a wide range of reforms were realized during King's last period in office as prime minister. In 1937, the age for blind persons to qualify for old-age pensions was reduced to 40 in 1937, and later to 21 in 1947. In 1939, compulsory contributions for pensions for low-income widows and orphans were introduced (although these only covered the regularly employed) while depressed farmers were subsidized from that same year onwards. In 1944, family allowances were introduced. King had various arguments in favour of family allowances, one of which, as noted by one study, was that family allowances \"would mean better food, clothing and medical and dental care for children in low-income families.\" These were approved after divisions in cabinet. From 1948 the federal government subsidized medical services in the provinces; a policy which led to developments in services such as dental care. \nSpending management.\nThe provincial governments faced declining revenues and higher welfare costs. They needed federal grants and loans to reduce their deficits. In a December 1935 conference with the premiers, King announced that the federal grants would be increased until the spring of 1936. At this stage, King's main goal was to have a federal system in which each level of government would pay for its programs out of its own tax sources.\nKing only reluctantly accepted a Keynesian solution that involved federal deficit spending, tax cuts, and subsidies to the housing market. King and his finance minister, Charles Avery Dunning, had planned to balance the budget for 1938. However, some colleagues, to King's surprise, opposed that idea and instead favoured job creation to stimulate the economy, citing British economist John Maynard Keynes's theory that governments could increase employment by spending during times of low private investment. In a politically motivated move, King accepted their arguments and hence ran deficits in both 1938 and 1939.\nWorkers.\nVarious reforms affecting working people were also introduced. The various provinces were assisted by the \"Federal Unemployment and Agricultural Assistance Act of 1938\" and the \"Youth Training Act of 1939\" to create training programs for young persons, while an amendment to the \"Criminal Code\" in May 1939 provided against refusal to hire, or dismissal, \"solely because of a person's membership in a lawful trade-union or association\".\nThe \"Vocational Training Co-ordination Act\" of 1942 provided an impetus to the provinces to set up facilities for postsecondary vocational training. Further, in 1948, the \"Industrial Relations and Disputes Investigation Act\" was passed; this act safeguarded the rights of workers to join unions while requiring employers to recognize unions chosen by their employees. A Fisheries Price Support Act was also introduced with the aim of providing fishermen with similar safeguards to industrial workers covered by minimum wage legislation.\nHousing.\nThe Federal Home Improvement Plan of 1937 provided subsidized rates of interest on rehabilitation loans to 66,900 homes, while the \"National Housing Act\" of 1938 made provision for the building of low-rent housing. Another Housing Act was later passed in 1944 with the intention of providing federally guaranteed loans or mortgages to individuals who wished to repair or construct dwellings through their own initiative.\nAgriculture.\nWhile King opposed Bennett's Canadian Wheat Board in 1935, he accepted its operation. However, by 1938, the board had sold its holdings and King proposed returning to the open market. This angered Western Canadian farmers, who favoured a board that would give them a guaranteed minimum price, with the federal government covering any losses. Facing a public campaign to keep the board, King and his minister of agriculture, James Garfield Gardiner, reluctantly extended the board's life and offered a minimum price that would protect the farmers from further declines. Also, from 1935 onwards, measures were carried out to promote prairie farm rehabilitation. Also, in 1945 a Farm Improvement Loans Act was introduced that provided for bank loans for purposes such as land improvement and the repair and construction of farm buildings.\nCrown corporations.\nIn 1937, King's government established the Trans-Canada Air Lines (the precursor to Air Canada), as a subsidiary of the crown corporation, Canadian National Railways. It was created to provide air service to all regions of Canada.\nIn 1938, King's government nationalized the Bank of Canada into a crown corporation.\nMedia reforms.\nIn 1936, the Canadian Radio Broadcasting Commission (CRBC) became the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC), a crown corporation. The CBC had a better organizational structure, more secure funding through the use of a licence fee on receiving sets (initially set at $2.50), and less vulnerability to political pressure. When Bennett's Conservatives were governing and the Liberals were in Opposition, the Liberals accused the network of being biased towards the Conservatives. During the 1935 election campaign, the CRBC broadcast a series of 15 minutes soap operas called \"Mr. Sage\" which were critical of King and the Liberal Party. Decried as political propaganda, the incident was one factor in King's decision to replace the CRBC.\nIn 1938, King's government invited British documentary maker John Grierson to study the situation of the government's film production (which at that time was the responsibility of the Canadian Government Motion Picture Bureau). King believed that Canadian cinema deserved an increased presence in Canadian theatres. This report prompted the \"National Film Act\", which created the National Film Board of Canada in 1939. It was created to produce and distribute films serving the national interest and was intended specifically to make Canada better known both domestically and internationally. Gierson was appointed the first film commissioner in October 1939.\nRelationship with provinces.\nAfter 1936, the prime minister lost patience when Western Canadians preferred radical alternatives such as the CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) and Social Credit to his middle-of-the-road liberalism. Indeed, he came close to writing off the region with his comment that the prairie dust bowl was \"part of the U.S. desert area. I doubt if it will be of any real use again.\" Instead he paid more attention to the industrial regions and the needs of Ontario and Quebec, particularly with respect to the proposed St. Lawrence Seaway project with the United States.\nIn 1937, Maurice Duplessis, the conservative Union Nationale premier of Quebec, passed the Padlock Law (the \"Act to Protect the Province Against Communistic Propaganda\"), which intimidated labour leaders by threatening to lock up their offices for any alleged communist activities. King's government, which had already repealed the section of the \"Criminal Code\" banning unlawful associations, considered disallowing this bill. However, King's cabinet minister, Ernest Lapointe, believed this would harm the Liberal Party's electoral chances in Quebec. King and his English-Canadian ministers accepted Lapointe's view; as King wrote in his diary in July 1938, \"we were prepared to accept what really should not, in the name of liberalism, be tolerated for one moment.\"\nGermany and Hitler.\nIn March 1936, in response to the German remilitarization of the Rhineland, King had the High Commission of Canada in the United Kingdom inform the British government that if Britain went to war with Germany over the Rhineland issue, Canada would remain neutral. In June 1937, during an Imperial Conference in London of the prime ministers of every dominion, King informed Britain's prime minister Neville Chamberlain that Canada would only go to war if Britain were directly attacked, and that if the British were to become involved in a continental war then Chamberlain was not to expect Canadian support.\nIn 1937, King visited Nazi Germany and met with Adolf Hitler. Possessing a religious yearning for direct insight into the hidden mysteries of life and the universe, and strongly influenced by the operas of Richard Wagner (who was also Hitler's favourite composer), King decided Hitler was akin to mythical Wagnerian heroes within whom good and evil were struggling. He thought that good would eventually triumph and Hitler would redeem his people and lead them to a harmonious, uplifting future. These spiritual attitudes not only guided Canada's relations with Hitler but gave the prime minister the comforting sense of a higher mission, that of helping to lead Hitler to peace. King commented in his journal that \"he is really one who truly loves his fellow-men, and his country, and would make any sacrifice for their good\". King forecast that: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The world will yet come to see a very great man\u2013mystic in Hitler\u00a0... I cannot abide in Nazism\u00a0\u2013 the regimentation\u00a0\u2013 cruelty\u00a0\u2013 oppression of Jews\u00a0\u2013 attitude towards religion, etc., but Hitler\u00a0... will rank some day with Joan of Arc among the deliverers of his people.\nIn late 1938, during the great crisis in Europe over Czechoslovakia that culminated in the Munich Agreement, Canadians were divided. Francophones insisted on neutrality, as did some top advisers like Oscar D. Skelton. Anglophones stood behind Britain and were willing to fight Germany. King, who served as his own secretary of state for external affairs (foreign minister), said privately that if he had to choose he would not be neutral, but he made no public statement. All of Canada was relieved that the Munich Agreement, while sacrificing the sovereignty of Czechoslovakia, seemed to bring peace.\nUnder King's administration, the Canadian government, responding to strong public opinion, especially in Quebec, refused to expand immigration opportunities for Jewish refugees from Europe. In June 1939 Canada, along with Cuba and the United States, refused to allow entry for the 900 Jewish refugees aboard the passenger ship . King's government was widely criticized for its antisemitic policies and refusal to admit Jewish refugees. Most famously, when Frederick Blair, an immigration official in King's party, was asked how many Jewish refugees Canada would admit after World War II, he replied \"None is too many\". This policy was wholly supported by King and his political allies.\nSecond World War.\n King accompanied the Royal Couple\u2014King George VI and Queen Elizabeth\u2014throughout their 1939 cross-Canada tour, as well as on their American visit, a few months before the start of World War II.\nDeclaration of war.\nAccording to historian Norman Hillmer, as British prime minister Neville Chamberlain \"negotiated in Munich with Adolf Hitler in September 1938, Mackenzie King, Canada's Prime Minister, grew agitated.\" King realized the likelihood of World War II and began mobilizing on August 25, 1939, with full mobilization on September 1, 1939, the day Germany invaded Poland. In 1914, at the beginning of World War I, Canada had been at war by virtue of King George V's declaration, issued solely on the advice of the British government. In 1939, King asserted Canada's autonomy and convened the House of Commons on September 7, nearly a month ahead of schedule, to discuss the government's intention to enter the war. King affirmed Canadian autonomy by saying that the Canadian Parliament would make the final decision on the issue of going to war. He reassured the pro-British Canadians that Parliament would surely decide that Canada would be at Britain's side if Great Britain was drawn into a major war. At the same time, he reassured those who were suspicious of British influence in Canada by promising that Canada would not participate in British colonial wars. His Quebec lieutenant, Ernest Lapointe, promised French Canadians that the government would not introduce conscription for overseas service; individual participation would be voluntary. These promises made it possible for Parliament to agree almost unanimously to declare war on September 9. On September 10, King, through his high commissioner in London, issued a request to King George VI, asking him, in his capacity as King of Canada, to declare Canada at war against Germany.\nForeign policy.\nTo re-arm Canada, King built the Royal Canadian Air Force as a viable military power, while at the same time keeping it separate from Britain's Royal Air Force. He was instrumental in obtaining the British Commonwealth Air Training Plan Agreement, which was signed in Ottawa in December 1939, binding Canada, Britain, New Zealand and Australia to a program that eventually trained half the airmen from those four nations in the Second World War.\nKing linked Canada more and more closely to the United States, signing an agreement with Roosevelt at Ogdensburg, New York, in August 1940 that provided for the close cooperation of Canadian and American forces, despite the fact that the U.S. remained officially neutral until the bombing of Pearl Harbor on December 7, 1941. During the war the Americans took virtual control of the Yukon in building the Alaska Highway, and major airbases in Newfoundland, at that time under British governance.\nKing\u2014and Canada\u2014were largely ignored by British prime minister Winston Churchill, despite Canada's major role in supplying food, raw materials, munitions, and money to the hard-pressed British economy, training airmen for the Commonwealth, guarding the western half of the North Atlantic Ocean against German U-boats, and providing combat troops for the invasions of Italy, France and Germany in 1943\u201345. King proved highly successful in mobilizing the economy for war, with impressive results in industrial and agricultural output. The depression ended, prosperity returned, and Canada's economy expanded significantly.\nDuring the war, Canada rapidly expanded its diplomatic missions abroad. While Canada hosted two major Allied conferences in Quebec in 1943 and 1944, neither King nor his senior generals and admirals were invited to take part in any of the discussions.\nPolitical affairs.\nKing's government made an unprecedented intervention in the 1939 Quebec general election to defeat anti-war Premier Maurice Duplessis's Union Nationale and ensure victory for the pro-war Quebec Liberals under Ad\u00e9lard Godbout. Three of King's Cabinet ministers from Quebec (Ernest Lapointe, Arthur Cardin, and Charles Gavan Power) threatened to resign if Duplessis won re-election, claiming that no one would be left to stand up for Quebec in the Cabinet if conscription become an issue again. In his diary, King called Duplessis \"diabolic\" and a \"little Hitler\", believing Duplessis's aim was to provoke such a crisis between French Canada and English Canada that Quebec would leave Confederation. King used the powers of censorship under the \"War Measures Act\" to keep Duplessis from speaking on the radio. The Quebec Liberals won a landslide victory.\nKing rejected any notion of a government of national unity like the Unionist Government during World War\u00a0I. When the Legislative Assembly of Ontario passed a resolution criticizing King's government for not fighting the war \"in the vigorous manner the people of Canada desire to see\", King dissolved the federal parliament, triggering a federal election for March 26, 1940. He held it despite the ongoing war, unlike Britain, which formed a government of national unity and did not hold a wartime election. King won a second consecutive landslide victory, winning 179 seats\u00a0\u2013 6 more than in 1935. This was the Liberals' most successful result as of 2023[ [update]] (in terms of proportion of seats). The Official Opposition party, the Conservatives, won the same number of seats as R.\u00a0B. Bennett did in the 1935 election. King's relationship with Liberal Ontario Premier Mitchell Hepburn was damaged due to Hepburn spearheading the resolution criticizing the war effort.\nKing promoted engineer and businessman C.\u00a0D. Howe to senior cabinet positions during the war. King also suffered two cabinet setbacks; his defence minister, Norman McLeod Rogers, died in 1940 and his Quebec lieutenant and minister of justice and attorney general, Ernest Lapointe, died in 1941. King successfully sought out the reluctant Louis St. Laurent, a leading Quebec lawyer, to enter the House of Commons and to take over Lapointe's role. St. Laurent became King's right-hand man.\nWartime expenditure.\nOn June 24, 1940, King's government presented the first $1 billion budget in Canadian history. It included $700 million in war expenses compared to $126 million in the 1939\u20131940 fiscal year; however, due to the war, the overall economy was the strongest in Canadian history.\nInternment of Japanese-Canadians.\nFollowing the attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941, Japanese Canadians were categorized by Canada as enemy aliens under the \"War Measures Act\", which began to remove their personal rights. Starting on December 8, 1941, 1,200 Japanese-Canadian-owned fishing vessels were impounded as a \"defence measure.\" On January 14, 1942, the federal government passed an order calling for the removal of male Japanese nationals between 18 and 45 years of age from a designated protected area of 100 miles inland from the British Columbia coast, enacted a ban against Japanese-Canadian fishing during the war, banned shortwave radios and controlled the sale of gasoline and dynamite to Japanese Canadians. Japanese nationals removed from the coast after the January 14 order were sent to road camps around Jasper, Alberta.\nThree weeks later, on February 19, 1942, US president Franklin D. Roosevelt signed Executive Order 9066, which called for the removal of 110,000 people of Japanese ancestry from the American coastline. A historian of internment, Ann Sunahara, argues that \"the American action sealed the fate of Japanese Canadians.\"\nOn February 24, the federal government passed order-in-council PC 1468 which allowed for the removal of \"all persons of Japanese origin\" This order-in-council allowed the Minister of Justice the broad powers of removing people from any protected area in Canada, but was meant for Japanese Canadians on the Pacific coast in particular. On February 25, the federal government announced that Japanese Canadians were being moved for reasons of national security. In all, some 27,000 people were detained without charge or trial, and their property confiscated. Others were deported to Japan.\nKing and his Cabinet received conflicting intelligence reports about the potential threat from the Japanese. Major General Ken Stuart told Ottawa, \"I cannot see that the Japanese Canadians constitute the slightest menace to national security.\" In contrast, BC's attorney general, Gordon Sylvester Wismer reported that, while he had \"the greatest respect for\" and \"hesitated to disagree with\" the RCMP, \"every law enforcement agency in this province, including ... the military officials charged with local internal security, are unanimous that a grave menace exists.\"\nExpansion of scientific research.\nKing's government greatly expanded the role of the National Research Council of Canada during the war, moving into full-scale research in nuclear physics and commercial use of nuclear power in the following years. King, with C. D. Howe acting as point man, moved the nuclear group from Montreal to Chalk River, Ontario in 1944, with the establishment of Chalk River Nuclear Laboratories and the residential town of Deep River, Ontario. Canada became a world leader in this field, with the NRX reactor becoming operational in 1947; at the time, NRX was the only operational nuclear reactor outside the United States.\nConscription.\nKing's promise not to impose conscription contributed to the defeat of Maurice Duplessis's Union Nationale Quebec provincial government in 1939 and the Liberals' re-election in the 1940 election. But after the fall of France in 1940, Canada introduced conscription for home service (conscription meant for the defence of Canada only). Only volunteers were to be sent overseas. King wanted to avoid a repeat of the Conscription Crisis of 1917. By 1942, the military was pressing King hard to send conscripts to Europe. In 1942, King held a national plebiscite on the issue, asking the nation to relieve him of the commitment he had made during the election campaign. In the House of Commons on June 10, 1942, he said that his policy was \"not necessarily conscription but conscription if necessary\".\nFrench Canadians voted against conscription, with over 70 percent opposed, but an overwhelming majority \u2013 over 80 percent \u2013 of English Canadians supported it. French and English conscripts were sent to fight in the Aleutian Islands in 1943 \u2013 technically North American soil and therefore not \"overseas\" \u2013 but the mix of Canadian volunteers and draftees found that the Japanese troops had fled before their arrival. Otherwise, King continued with a campaign to recruit volunteers, hoping to address the problem with the shortage of troops caused by heavy losses in the Dieppe Raid in 1942, in Italy in 1943, and after the Battle of Normandy in 1944. In November 1944, the government decided it was necessary to send conscripts for the war. This led to a brief political crisis (see Conscription Crisis of 1944) and a mutiny by conscripts posted in British Columbia, but the war ended a few months later. In all, 12,908 conscripts were sent to fight abroad, though only 2,463 saw combat.\nPost-war Canada.\n1945 election.\nWith the war winding down, King called a federal election for June 11, 1945. The Liberals' election campaign was centered on a broad program of social security. Although King was hesitant for his government to expand its role in the economy and run deficits, he accepted it as these measures aligned with his concern for people struggling financially. There were political motives too; the Liberals needed to compete with the rising socialist Co-operative Commonwealth Federation (CCF) for votes. In addition, King promised to commit one division of volunteers to Operation Downfall, the planned invasion of Japan scheduled for late 1945-early 1946, whereas Progressive Conservative leader John Bracken promised conscription. Bracken's promise was unpopular and it thus benefited the Liberals.\nThe Liberals were knocked down from a massive majority government to a minority government. However, they were able to govern with a working majority with the support of eight \"Independent Liberal\" MPs (most of whom did not run as official Liberals because of their opposition to conscription). The Liberals' decline in support was partly attributed to the introduction of conscription, which was unpopular in many parts of Canada. As King was defeated in his own riding of Prince Albert, fellow Liberal William MacDiarmid, who was re-elected in the safe seat of Glengarry, resigned so that an August 6 by-election could be held, which was subsequently won by King.\nForeign affairs, Cold War.\nKing helped found the United Nations (UN) in 1945 and attended the opening meetings in San Francisco. Though he conceded that major powers such as the United States and the United Kingdom would dominate the organization, King argued that middle powers such as Canada should be given an influence on the UN based on their contributions to the settlement of disputes.\nKing moved Canada into the deepening Cold War in alliance with the U.S. and Britain. He dealt with the espionage revelations of Soviet cipher clerk Igor Gouzenko, who defected in Ottawa in September 1945, by quickly appointing a Royal Commission to investigate Gouzenko's allegations of a Canadian Communist spy-ring transmitting top-secret documents to Moscow. Justice Minister Louis St. Laurent dealt decisively with this crisis, the first of its type in Canada's history. St. Laurent succeeded King as external affairs minister in September 1946.\nDomestic achievements.\nAfter the war, King quickly dismantled wartime controls. Unlike World War I, press censorship ended with the hostilities.\nKing's government introduced the \"Canadian Citizenship Act\" in 1946, which officially created the notion of \"Canadian citizens\". Prior to this, Canadians were considered British subjects living in Canada. On January 3, 1947, King received Canadian citizenship certificate number 0001.\nKing also laid the groundwork for the Dominion of Newfoundland's later entry into Canadian Confederation, stating, \"Newfoundlanders are no strangers to Canada, nor are Canadians strangers to Newfoundland.\" Pro-Confederation Newfoundlanders Frederick Gordon Bradley and Joey Smallwood argued that joining Canada would raise the standard of living for Newfoundlanders; Britain also favoured Confederation. A runoff vote was held on July 22, 1948, and 52.3 percent of voters decided that Newfoundland should enter Canada. After, Smallwood negotiated the terms of entry with King. Newfoundland entered Confederation on March 31, 1949, becoming Canada's tenth province.\nRetirement.\n With his health declining, King declared in May 1948 that he would not be Liberal leader going in the next election. The August 1948 convention (held exactly 29 years after King became Liberal leader) picked St. Laurent, King's personal choice, as the new leader of the Liberal Party. Three months later, on November 15, King retired after &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;21+1\u20442 years as prime minister. King was the longest-serving prime minister in Canadian history; he also served in the most parliaments (six, in three non-consecutive periods) as prime minister.\nRetirement and death (1948\u20131950).\nKing had plans to write his memoirs. However, he did not enjoy a lengthy retirement and died on July 22, 1950, at his country estate in Kingsmere from pneumonia. He is buried in Mount Pleasant Cemetery, Toronto.\nPersonal style and character.\nKing lacked a commanding presence or oratorical skills; he did not shine on the radio or in newsreels. There was scant charisma. Cold and tactless in human relations, he had allies but very few close personal friends. His allies were annoyed by his constant intrigues.\nScholars attribute King's long tenure as party leader to his wide range of skills that were appropriate to Canada's needs.\nKing kept a very candid diary from 1893, when he was still an undergraduate, until a few days before his death in 1950; the volumes, stacked in a row, span a length of over seven metres and comprise over 50,000 manuscript pages of typed transcribed text. One biographer called these diaries \"the most important single political document in twentieth-century Canadian history,\" for they explain motivations of the Canadian war efforts and describe other events in detail.\nKing's occult interests were kept secret during his years in office, and only became publicized after his death when his diaries were opened. Readers were amazed and for some, King was saddled with the moniker \"Weird Willie.\" King communed with spirits, using seances with paid mediums. Thereby, he claimed to have communicated with Leonardo da Vinci, Wilfrid Laurier, his dead mother, his grandfather, and several of his dead dogs, as well as the spirit of the late US president Franklin D. Roosevelt. Some historians argue that he sought personal reassurance from the spirit world, more than political advice. After his death, one of his mediums said that she had not realized that he was a politician. King did inquire whether his party would win the 1935 election, one of the few times politics came up during his seances. However, Allan Levine argues that sometimes he did pay attention to the political implications of his seances: \"All of his spiritualist experiences, his other superstitions and his multi-paranoid reactions imprinted on his consciousness, shaping his thoughts and feelings in a thousand different ways.\"\nHistorians have seen in his spiritualism and occult activities a penchant for forging unities from antitheses, thus having latent political import. Historian C.P. Stacey, in his 1976 book \"A Very Double Life\" examined King's secret life in detail, argued that King did not allow his beliefs to influence his decisions on political matters. Stacey wrote that King entirely gave up his interests in the occult and spiritualism during World War II. In his two-volume biography \"The Spiritualist Prime Minister: Mackenzie King and the New Revelation\" and \"The Spiritualist Prime Minister: Mackenzie King and His Mediums\", Anton Wagner documents that King maintained his spiritualist beliefs and occult practices until his death in 1950. Wagner maintains that King\u2019s spiritualism contributed to his political achievements as Canada\u2019s longest-serving prime minister.\nKing never married, but had several close female friends, including Joan Patteson, a married woman with whom he spent some of his leisure time; sometimes she served as hostess at his dinner parties. He did not have a wife who could be the hostess all the time and handle the many social obligations that he tried to downplay. Editor Charles Bowman reports that, \"He felt the lack of a wife, particularly when social duties called for a hostess.\"\nSome historians have interpreted passages in his diaries as suggesting that King regularly had sexual relations with prostitutes. Others, also basing their claims on passages of his diaries, have suggested that King was in love with Lord Tweedsmuir, whom he had chosen for appointment as Governor General in 1935.\nDiary.\nKing kept a detailed personal diary from July 23, 1893, until December 13, 1950, just days before his death. Spanning 51,084 pages in 172 volumes, it is one of the most extensive personal records kept by any political leader. \nKing began the diary at age 19 while studying at the University of Toronto, initially as a tool for moral reflection and self-improvement. It evolved into a daily record of both his inner life and his political career, encompassing Cabinet discussions, international meetings, and his personal emotions. From 1935 onward, he dictated entries to secretaries, greatly expanding their scope and detail.\nRecurring themes include King\u2019s devotion to his mother, his religious beliefs, and his fascination with spiritualism, particularly after 1917. He recorded numerous s\u00e9ances and claimed to communicate with the spirits of deceased relatives, Wilfrid Laurier, and his dog Pat. Early entries also describe his encounters with prostitutes in Toronto and Ottawa, written as moral reform efforts yet revealing deep self-reproach.\nIn his 1950 will, King instructed his executors to destroy the diaries except for marked sections he deemed suitable for publication, but he never identified any portions. His executors\u2014Fred A. McGregor, J.W. Pickersgill, Norman Robertson, and W. Kaye Lamb\u2014chose instead to preserve them, citing their historical significance. Most spiritualism notebooks were destroyed in 1977, but the main diaries were transferred to the Library and Archives Canada in 1975 and made public by 1981.\nLegacy.\nHistorian George Stanley argues that King's wartime policies, \"may not have been exciting or satisfying, but they were effective and successful. That is why, practically alone among wartime governments, he continued to enjoy public support after as well as during the Second World War.\" Historian Jack Granatstein evaluates the King government's economic performance. He reports, \"Canada's economic management was generally judged the most successful of all the countries engaged in the war.\"\nHistorian Christopher Moore says, \"King had made 'Parliament will decide' his maxim, and he trotted it out whenever he wished to avoid a decision.\" King was keenly sensitive to the nuances of public policy; he was a workaholic with a shrewd and penetrating intelligence and a profound understanding of the complexities of Canadian society. His strength was apparent when he synthesized, built support for, and passed measures that had reached a level of broad national support. Advances in the welfare state were an example. His successors, especially Diefenbaker, Pearson, and Trudeau built the welfare state which he had advanced during the Second World War into the modern cradle-to-grave system.\nHistorian H. Blair Neatby wrote, \"Mackenzie King has continued to intrigue Canadians. Critics argue that his political longevity was achieved by evasions and indecision, and that he failed to provide creative leadership. His defenders argue that he gradually changed Canada, a difficult country to govern, while keeping the nation united.\"\nKing was ranked as the greatest Canadian prime minister by a survey of Canadian historians. King was named a Person of National Historic Significance in 1968.\nMemorials.\nKing's likeness has been used on the Canadian fifty-dollar note since 1975.\nKing left no published political memoirs, although his private diaries were extensively detailed. His main published work remains his 1918 book \"Industry and Humanity\".\nFollowing the publication of King's diaries in the 1970s, several fictional works about him were published by Canadian writers. These included Elizabeth Gourlay's novel \"Isabel\", Allan Stratton's play \"Rexy\" and Heather Robertson's trilogy \"Willie: A Romance\" (1983), \"Lily: A Rhapsody in Red\" (1986), and \"Igor: A Novel of Intrigue\" (1989).\nIn 1998, there was controversy over King's exclusion from a memorial to the Quebec Conference, which was attended by King, Roosevelt, and Churchill. The monument was commissioned by the sovereigntist Parti Qu\u00e9b\u00e9cois government of Quebec, which justified the decision on their interpretation that King was acting merely as a host for the meeting between Roosevelt and Churchill. Canadian federalists, however, accused the government of Quebec of trying to advance their own political agenda.\nOC Transpo has a Transitway station named Mackenzie King due to its location on the Mackenzie King Bridge. It is adjacent to the Rideau Centre in downtown Ottawa, Ontario.\nThe bridge across the Rideau Canal in downtown Ottawa, built following World War II, is named in his honour to recognize his contributions to the land planning of the city of Ottawa.\nKing bequeathed his private country retreat in Kingsmere, Quebec, near Ottawa, to the Government of Canada and most of the estate was incorporated into the federally managed Gatineau Park. King's summer home at Kingsmere, called \"The Farm\", now serves as the official residence of the Speaker of the House of Commons of Canada. The Farm and its grounds are located within Gatineau Park but are not open to the public.\nThe Woodside National Historic Site in Kitchener, Ontario was King's boyhood home. The estate has over 4.65 hectares of garden and parkland for exploring and relaxing, and the house has been restored to reflect life during King's era. There is a MacKenzie King Public School in the Heritage Park neighbourhood in Kitchener. Kitchener was known as Berlin until 1916.\nKing was mentioned in the book \"Alligator Pie\" by Dennis Lee, appearing as the subject of a nonsensical children's poem, which reads \"William Lyon Mackenzie King / He sat in the middle and played with string / He loved his mother like anything / William Lyon Mackenzie King.\"\nKing is a prominent character in Donald Jack's novel \"Me Too\", set in Ottawa in the 1920s.\nA character who appeared twice in the popular 1990s Canadian television series \"Due South\" was named \"Mackenzie King\" in obvious reference.\nKing was portrayed by Sean McCann in Donald Brittain's 1988 television miniseries \"The King Chronicle\", and by Dan Beirne in Matthew Rankin's 2019 film \"The Twentieth Century\".\nSupreme Court appointments.\nKing chose the following jurists to be appointed as justices of the Supreme Court of Canada:\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "33437", "revid": "139104", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33437", "title": "Wind generator", "text": ""}
{"id": "33440", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33440", "title": "WW II", "text": ""}
{"id": "33441", "revid": "45943478", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33441", "title": "WWII", "text": ""}
{"id": "33442", "revid": "1267115722", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33442", "title": "WW2", "text": ""}
{"id": "33443", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33443", "title": "WW 2", "text": ""}
{"id": "33446", "revid": "26338846", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33446", "title": "Waterloo (1970 film)", "text": "1970 film\nWaterloo (\"\") is a 1970 English-language epic historical drama film about the Battle of Waterloo, the decisive battle of the Napoleonic Wars. A co-production between Italy and the Soviet Union, it was directed by Sergei Bondarchuk and produced by Dino De Laurentiis. It stars Rod Steiger as Napoleon Bonaparte and Christopher Plummer as the Duke of Wellington. Other stars include Jack Hawkins as General Sir Thomas Picton, Virginia McKenna as the Duchess of Richmond, Dan O'Herlihy as Marshal Ney, and Orson Welles as Louis XVIII of France. The film is centered not just on the Battle of Waterloo, but also on the days that led to the campaign known as the Hundred Days\".\"\nSteiger and Plummer often narrate sections in voice-over, presenting thoughts of Napoleon and Wellington. The film takes a largely neutral stance and portrays many individual leaders and soldiers on each side, rather than simply focusing on Wellington and Napoleon. It creates a generally accurate chronology of the events of the battle, the extreme heroism on each side, and the loss of life suffered by all the participating armies.\nThe film is most famous for its lavish battle scenes, shot on-location in Uzhhorod, Ukraine. Its 15,000 authentically dressed extras, recreating battle scenes with true numbers and without special effects, remain the largest body of costumed extras in any film. Despite mixed critical reviews, it won several awards, including BAFTAs for Best Costume Design and Best Art Direction, and the 1971 David di Donatello for Best Film.\nPlot.\nIn the aftermath of the 1814 campaign, French Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte is forced to abdicate at the demand of his marshals. Exiled to Elba with 1,000 men, Napoleon escapes after a year and once more rallies the French to his side. King Louis XVIII flees, and the European powers declare war once again. In Brussels during the Duchess of Richmond's ball, the Duke of Wellington is warned of Napoleon's march into Belgium, tactically driving a wedge between the British and Prussian armies. Wellington, in consulting with his staff, elects to halt Napoleon at Waterloo.\nAt Quatre-Bras, Marshal Ney fights the British to a draw, whereas Napoleon defeats the Prussians at Ligny. Ney rides to Napoleon to deliver his report, but in doing so has allowed Wellington to withdraw his still intact forces. Napoleon commands Grouchy to lead 30,000 men against the Prussians to prevent their rejoining the British, whilst Napoleon will command his remaining troops against Wellington.\nOn 18 June 1815, the Battle of Waterloo commences with initial cannon fire from the French. Napoleon launches teasing attacks against Wellington's flanks at Hougoumont and La Haye Sainte, though Wellington refuses to divert his main force. General Picton is sent to plug a gap when a Dutch brigade is routed, and though successful he is killed in doing so. Ponsonby also leads a cavalry charge against the French cannon but becomes isolated from the main allied force and is cut down by French lancers.\nTroops spotted emerging from the east are worryingly assumed to be Grouchy by Wellington, and Bl\u00fccher to Napoleon. Suffering from stomach pain, Napoleon momentarily withdraws and leaves Ney in command. Simultaneously, the order is given to allied troops to retire 100 paces, which Ney incorrectly interprets as a withdrawal.\nNey leads a cavalry charge against the British but is repelled with casualties by infantry squares. Despite this, the battle still wages much in Napoleon's favour; La Haye Sainte falls to the French, and Napoleon ultimately decides to send the Imperial Guard to deliver the decisive blow.\nDuring their advance, Maitland's 1st Foot Guards, who were lying in tall grass, deliver a devastating point-blank volley against the Imperial Guard, repulsing them with heavy casualties. At the same time, Bl\u00fccher arrives in the field. For the first time in its history the Imperial Guard breaks, and the battle is won by the Allied forces.\nThat evening after the battle, Wellington is seen observing the thousands of casualties on the field. Napoleon, having survived the battle, is urged to flee at the pleas of his marshals.\nMusic.\nA large part of the music was composed by Nino Rota. However, he also incorporated a lot of music from that time. For example, he included \"La Victoire est \u00e0 Nous\" into \"Onto Brussels\" which is played during the old guard advance.\nAnother example is \"The Girl I Left Behind Me\" used in \"The Old Guard is Broken!\".\nCast.\nThe French and allies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe British and allies.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nProduction.\nItalian producer De Laurentiis first announced the film in October 1965, saying it would be made the following year. John Huston was set to direct. With John Huston on board, De Laurentiis attempted to secure international co-production deals in Eastern Europe, but negotiations did not succeed.\nIt was not until De Laurentiis began talks with the Soviets in the late 1960s, that he found the financing he was looking for. He reached an agreement with Mosfilm, in which final costs were more than \u00a312 million (GBP) (equivalent to about U.S. $38.3 million in 1970), making it one of the most expensive movies made, for its time. The movie was one of several co-productions between Italy and Russia around this time. Others include \"The Red Tent\", \"Sunflower\" and \"Dubrovsky\" (the latter was never made). Additional financing also came from Paramount and Columbia.\nHad the movie been filmed in the West, it might have cost up to three times as much. Mosfilm contributed more than \u00a34 million of the costs, and nearly 17,000 soldiers of the Soviet Army, including a full brigade of Soviet cavalry, and a host of engineers and labourers to prepare the battlefield in the rolling farmland outside Uzhhorod, Ukrainian SSR. The Italians reportedly provided eight million pounds.\nDirector and cast.\nJohn Huston having left the project by this point, this relationship also brought the celebrated Russian director on board, Bondarchuk, fresh off his internationally celebrated production of a four-hour version of \"War and Peace\", which won Best Foreign Film at the 1970 Oscars.\nIn December 1968, Steiger had been cast as Napoleon, and Bondarchuk visited London to talk to actors about playing the Duke of Wellington. \"I see Wellington as a typical Englishman,\" said the director, adding \"I see Napoleon as Tolstoy treated him.\"\nThe cast consisted of Russian, Italian, Irish, American, Canadian and British actors, who were all required to speak their lines in English.\nSeveral historical characters listed in the credits do not actually appear in the film, they are said to have been in scenes cut before release.\nLocation.\nFilming took place in Rome and the Ukrainian SSR throughout 1969. \nTo recreate the battlefield \"authentically\", the Soviets bulldozed away two hills, laid five miles of roads, transplanted 5,000 trees, sowed fields of rye, barley and wildflowers and reconstructed four historic buildings. To create the mud, more than six miles of underground irrigation piping was specially laid. Most of the battle scenes were filmed using five Panavision cameras simultaneously \u2013 from ground level, from 100-foot towers, from a helicopter, and from an overhead railway built right across the location. The battle reportedly cost $5 million of the $25 million budget. It was the largest battlefield ever used for a film.\nHowever, the authentic nature of the topography is questionable and has more to do with dramatic panoramic film shots rather than topographical accuracy: in reality, the Waterloo site is laid out as a series of low hillocks with few opportunities for long views. In particular, La Haye Sainte is almost invisible from the north and west, sitting in a small south-facing hollow.\nActual filming was accomplished over 28 weeks, which included 16 days of delay (principally due to bad weather). Many of the battle scenes were filmed in the summer of 1969 in often sweltering heat. In addition to the battlefield in Ukraine, filming also took place on location in the Royal Palace of Caserta, Italy, while interior scenes were filmed on the large De Laurentiis Studios lot in Rome. The battle sequences of the film included about 15,000 Soviet foot soldiers and 2,000 cavalrymen as extras and 50 circus stunt riders were used to perform the dangerous horse falls. It has been joked that Sergei Bondarchuk was in command of the seventh-largest army in the world.\nMonths before the cameras started filming, the 17,000 soldiers began training to learn drill and battle formations, as well as the use of sabres, bayonets and handling cannons. A selected 2,000 additional men were also taught to load and fire muskets. This army lived in a large encampment next to the battlefield. Each day after breakfast, they marched to a large wardrobe building, donned their French, British or Prussian uniforms and fifteen minutes later were in position.\nThe soldiers were commanded by officers who took orders from director Sergei Bondarchuk via walkie-talkie. To assist in the direction of this huge, multi-national undertaking, the Soviet director had four interpreters permanently at his side: one each for English, Italian, French and Serbo-Croatian.\nReception.\nBox office.\nIt was the fifth most popular \"reserve ticket\" movie at the British box office in 1971. Associate producer Tom Carlie said \"the film has been well received in Europe especially England. The French are less enthusiastic, but after all they lost at Waterloo.\"\nHowever, it failed to recoup its cost. The meagre box office results of \"Waterloo\" led to the cancellation of Stanley Kubrick's planned film biography of Napoleon.\nAfter its release, the film gained popularity and received numerous positive reviews for its battle depiction. New Zealand film director Peter Jackson said that the film inspired his adaptations of \"The Lord of the Rings\" and \"The Hobbit\".\nCritical response.\nOn the review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes, 30% of 10 critics' reviews are positive. Roger Ebert, writing for the \"Chicago Sun-Times\" said \"Bondarchuk is so overwhelmed by the thousands of Russian cavalry troops he's been given to play with, and by his $25 million budget, and by his obsession for aerial photography, that his leading characters turn out scarcely more human than his extras.\" Tony Mastroianni of the \"Cleveland Press\" wrote, \"Waterloo is solid, sometimes to the point of lumbering... But Waterloo succeeds in what it set out to do - to re-create a major historical event and place it in some kind of perspective.\"\nWriting in \"The New York Times\", Roger Greenspun called \"Waterloo\" \"a very bad movie,\" citing Bondarchuk's \"obsessive\" directing and Steiger's overacting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Steiger plays a peace-loving Napoleon, crafty, tired, much weighted with the destiny he seems never to get off his mind. Like a Willy Loman not wholly aware that he has lost his territory, he alternately schemes and complains -\u2014 as if, in addition to all his other achievements, he had discovered at Waterloo the sources of theatrical naturalism. It is an awful performance, and every mannered point of it is emphasized by the elephantine selectivity of Bondarchuk's camera -\u2014 narrowing upon the eyes, a weary fold of flesh, the carefully hunched back, the hat, the pudgy man's walk. During the first parts of \"Waterloo,\" when Napoleon is much in view, I thought that no director, not even Bondarchuk, merited Steiger's performance. Later, in the heat of the battle, I felt that not even Steiger need have suffered through Bondarchuk's direction. But now critical calm has put all things in perspective, and I realize that they richly deserved each other.\nAwards.\nThe film won two BAFTA awards in 1971 (best art direction and best costume design) and was nominated for a third (best cinematography).\nThe film was also novelised by Frederick E. Smith, with the content based on the screenplay.\nHome media.\n\"Waterloo\" was first released on VHS in 1996 in the United Kingdom by Columbia TriStar Home Video and it was released again on DVD in 1999. It was also released again on Blu-ray in 2021. The United States, however, it was only released on VHS by Paramount Home Video in 1991. Neither the DVD or Blu-Ray versions were released in the United States for a period of time.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33447", "revid": "1281304097", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33447", "title": "Wrestling weight classes", "text": "In most styles of wrestling, opponents are matched based on weight class.\nOlympic and international weight classes.\nIn international competition, men's freestyle wrestling, men's Greco-Roman wrestling, and female wrestling utilize the following weight classes as of 2018:\nInternational youth weight classes.\nFor men's freestyle and Greco-Roman wrestling.\nAs of 2019, international freestyle wrestling and Greco-Roman wrestling for male youths are divided into three age categories: U15, cadets, and juniors.\nU15 (male youths aged 14\u201315, as well as male youths at age 13 with a medical certificate and parental authorization) compete in freestyle and/or Greco-Roman wrestling in the following 10 weight classes:\nCadets (male youths aged 16\u201317, as well as male youths at age 15 with a medical certificate and parental authorization) compete in freestyle wrestling and/or Greco-Roman wrestling in the following 10 weight classes:\nJuniors (men aged 18 to 20, as well as male youths at age 17 with a medical certificate and parental authorization) compete in freestyle wrestling and/or Greco-Roman wrestling in the following weight classes:\nJuniors over the age of 18 are allowed to participate in senior competitions with a medical certificate.\nFor women's freestyle wrestling.\nAs of 2019, female youth compete in freestyle wrestling on an international level in one of four age categories: U15, cadets, and juniors.\nU15 (female youths aged 14\u201315, and female youths at age 13 with a medical certificate and parental authorization) compete in freestyle wrestling in the following 10 weight classes:\nCadets (female youths aged 16\u201317, and female youths at age 15 with a medical certificate and parental authorization) compete in freestyle wrestling in the following 10 weight classes:\nJunior (female youths aged 18 to 20, and female youths at age 17 with a medical certificate and parental authorization) compete in freestyle wrestling in the following eight weight classes:\nScholastic weight classes in the United States.\nElementary school.\nElementary school students competing in wrestling have multiple ways weight classes are determined.\nMiddle school.\nWrestling weight classes for middle (junior high) school in the United States vary from state to state and are not regulated by the National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS). The weight classes regulated by the Ohio High School Athletic Association (OHSAA) are the following:\nHigh school.\nBeginning 2023-2024 season.\nAs of the 2023-2024 season, each state must select one of three sets of weight classes (12, 13, or 14 weight classes) provided by the National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS) for high school competition in the United States, one for boys competition (which includes girls wrestling boys) and another for girls competition. \nBoys competition weight classes.\nIf a state chooses to use twelve weight classes for boys competition, the weight classes are as follows:\nIf a state chooses to use thirteen weight classes for boys competition, the weight classes are as follows:\nIf a state chooses to use fourteen weight classes for boys competition, the weight classes are as follows:\nGirls competition weight classes.\nIf a state chooses to use twelve weight classes for girls competition, the weight classes are as follows:\nIf a state chooses to use thirteen weight classes for girls competition, the weight classes are as follows:\nIf a state chooses to use fourteen weight classes for girls competition, the weight classes are as follows:\nExceptions.\nIn boys' wrestling, New York uses a modified 13 weight class set, that uses the same weight classes of the 12 weight class set with the addition of a 101 pound weight class.\nBefore 2023-2024 season.\nPrior to the 2023-2024 wrestling season high school students in the United States competing in scholastic wrestling did so in the following 14 weight classes set by the National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS):\nOther states had additional or modified weight classes, such as:\nCollegiate weight classes in the United States.\nCollege and university students in the United States competing in collegiate wrestling do so in the following 10 weight classes set by the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA):\nAlso:\nThe NCWA has also approved the following eight weight classes for its women's division, which uses collegiate rules instead of the freestyle ruleset used in NCAA-recognized women's wrestling:\nWomen's college wrestling is also governed by the Women's Collegiate Wrestling Association (WCWA), an arm of the National Wrestling Coaches Association (NWCA). The WCWA uses freestyle rules instead of collegiate rules. Freestyle wrestling became an NCAA-recognized sport as part of the Emerging Sports for Women program in 2020\u201321. The WCWA currently has 10 weight classes:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33449", "revid": "1152308", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33449", "title": "William Empson", "text": "English literary critic and poet\nSir William Empson (27 September 1906 \u2013 15 April 1984) was an English literary critic and poet, widely influential for his practice of closely reading literary works, a practice fundamental to New Criticism. His best-known work is his first, \"Seven Types of Ambiguity\", published in 1930.\nJonathan Bate has written that the three greatest English literary critics of the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries are Johnson, Hazlitt and Empson, \"not least because they are the funniest\".\nBackground and education.\nEmpson was the son of Arthur Reginald Empson of Yokefleet Hall, East Yorkshire. His mother was Laura, daughter of Richard Mickelthwait, JP, of Ardsley House, Yorkshire. He was a first cousin of the twins David and Richard Atcherley. Empson first discovered his great skill and interest in mathematics at his preparatory school. He won an entrance scholarship to Winchester College, where he excelled as a student and received what he later described as \"a ripping education\" in spite of the rather rough and abusive milieu of the school: a longstanding tradition of physical force, especially among the students, figured prominently in life at such schools.\nIn 1925 Empson won a scholarship to Magdalene College, Cambridge, where he read mathematics, gaining a first for his Part I but a disappointing upper-second for his Part II. He then went on to pursue a second degree in English, and at the end of the first year he was offered a Bye Fellowship. His supervisor in mathematics, Arthur Stanley Ramsey, expressed regret at Empson's decision to pursue English rather than mathematics, since it was a discipline for which Empson showed great talent.\nI. A. Richards, the director of studies in English, recalled the genesis of Empson's first major work, \"Seven Types of Ambiguity\", composed when Empson was not yet 22 and published when he was 24:\nAt about his third visit he brought up the games of interpretation which Laura Riding and Robert Graves had been playing [in \"A Survey of Modernist Poetry\", 1927] with the unpunctuated form of 'The expense of spirit in a waste of shame.' Taking the sonnet as a conjuror takes his hat, he produced an endless swarm of lively rabbits from it and ended by 'You could do that with any poetry, couldn't you?' This was a Godsend to a Director of Studies, so I said, 'You'd better go off and do it, hadn't you?'\nBut disaster struck when a servant found condoms among Empson's possessions and claimed to have caught him \"in flagrante delicto\" with a woman. As a result, not only did he have his scholarship revoked, but his name was struck from the college records, he lost his prospects of a fellowship and he was banished from the university.\nCareer.\nAfter his banishment from Cambridge university, Empson supported himself for a brief period as a freelance critic and journalist, living in Bloomsbury until 1930, when he signed a three-year contract to teach in Japan after his tutor had failed to find him a post teaching in China. He returned to England in the mid-1930s only to depart again after receiving a three-year contract to teach at Peking University. Upon his arrival he discovered that, because of the Japanese invasion of China, he no longer had a post. He joined the exodus of the university's staff, with little more than a typewriter and a suitcase, and ended up in Kunming in China, with Lianda (Southwest Associated University), the school created there by students and professors who were refugees from the war in the North. He arrived back in England in January 1939. In 1941 he met and married the South African sculptor, broadcaster and journalist Hetta Crouse; they were to have two sons.\nEmpson worked for a year on the daily digest of foreign broadcasts and in 1941 met George Orwell, at that time the Indian editor of the BBC Eastern Service, on a six-week course at what was called the Liars' School of the BBC. They remained friends, but Empson recalled one clash: \"At that time the Government had put into action a scheme for keeping up the birth-rate during the war by making it in various ways convenient to have babies, for mothers going out to work; government nurseries were available after the first month, I think, and there were extra eggs and other goodies on the rations. My wife and I took advantage of this plan to have two children. I was saying to George one evening after dinner what a pleasure it was to cooperate with so enlightened a plan when, to my horror, I saw the familiar look of settled loathing come over his face. Rich swine boasting over our privileges, that was what we had become ...\".\nJust after the war Empson returned to China. He taught at Peking University, befriending a young David Hawkes, who later became a noted sinologist and chair of Chinese at Oxford University. Then, in the late 1940s and early 1950s, he taught a summer course for the intensive study of literature at the Kenyon School of English at Kenyon College in Ohio. According to \"Newsweek\", \"The roster of instructors was enough to pop the eyes of any major in English.\" In addition to Empson the fellows included John Crowe Ransom, Robert Lowell, Delmore Schwartz, Eric Bentley, Cleanth Brooks, Arthur Mizener, Allen Tate and Yvor Winters.\nIn 1953 Empson was professor of rhetoric at Gresham College, London, for a year. He then became head of the English Department at the University of Sheffield until his retirement in 1972. In 1974 Empson accepted an offer of distinguished professorship at York University in Toronto. He was knighted in 1979, the same year his old college, Magdalene, awarded him an honorary fellowship some 50 years after his expulsion.\nIn 1964 Empson joined the \"Who Killed Kennedy Committee?\" set up by Bertrand Russell.\nProfessor Sir William Empson died in 1984.\nCritical focus.\nEmpson's critical work is largely concerned with early and pre-modern works in the English literary canon. He was a significant scholar of Milton (see below), Shakespeare (\"Essays on Shakespeare\") and Elizabethan drama (\"Essays on Renaissance Literature\", Volume 2: \"The Drama\"). He published a monograph, \"Faustus and the Censor\", on the subject of censorship and the authoritative version of Marlowe's \"Doctor Faustus\". He was also an important scholar of the metaphysical poets John Donne (\"Essays on Renaissance Literature\", Volume 1: \"Donne and the New Philosophy\") and Andrew Marvell.\nOccasionally Empson brought his critical genius to bear on modern writers; \"Using Biography\", for instance, contains papers on Henry Fielding's \"Tom Jones\" as well as the poems of W. B. Yeats and T. S. Eliot, and Joyce's \"Ulysses\".\nLiterary criticism.\nEmpson was styled a \"critic of genius\" by Frank Kermode, who qualified his praise by identifying wilfully perverse readings of certain authors. Harold Bloom has stated that Empson is among a handful of critics who matter most to him because of their force and eccentricity. Empson's bluntness led to controversy both during his life and after his death, and a reputation in part also as a \"licensed buffoon\" (Empson's own phrase).\nStyle, method and influence.\nEmpson is today best known for his literary criticism, and in particular his analysis of the use of language in poetical works: his own poems are arguably undervalued, although they were admired by and influenced English poets in the 1950s. The philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein was an acquaintance at Cambridge, but Empson consistently denied any previous or direct influence on his work. Empson's best-known work is the book \"Seven Types of Ambiguity\", which, together with \"Some Versions of Pastoral\" and \"The Structure of Complex Words\", mines the astonishing riches of linguistic ambiguity in English poetic literature. Empson's studies unearth layer upon layer of irony, suggestion and argumentation in various literary works, applying a technique of textual criticism so influential that often Empson's contributions to certain domains of literary scholarship remain significant, though they may no longer be recognised as his. The universal recognition of the difficulty and complexity (indeed, ambiguity) of Shakespeare's Sonnet 94 (\"They that have power ...\"), for instance, is traceable to Empson's analysis in \"Some Versions of Pastoral\". Empson's study of \"Sonnet 94\" goes some way towards explaining the high esteem in which the sonnet is now held (often being reckoned as among the finest sonnets), as well as the technique of criticism and interpretation that has thus reckoned it.\nEmpson's technique of teasing a rich variety of interpretations from poetic literature does not, however, exhaustively characterise his critical practice. He was also very interested in the human or experiential reality to be discovered in great works of literature, as is manifest, for instance, in his discussion of the fortunes of the notion of proletarian literature in \"Some Versions of Pastoral\". His commitment to unravelling or articulating the experiential truth or reality in literature permitted him unusual avenues to explore sociopolitical ideas in literature in a vein very different from contemporary Marxist critics or scholars of New Historicism. Thus, for instance, Empson remarks in the first few pages of \"Some Versions of Pastoral\" that:\nGray's \"Elegy\" is an odd case of poetry with latent political ideas:\nFull many a gem of purest ray serene\nThe dark, unfathomed caves of ocean bear;\nFull many a flower is born to blush unseen\nAnd waste its sweetness on the desert air.\nWhat this means, as the context makes clear, is that eighteenth century England had no scholarship system or \"carri\u00e8re ouverte aux talents\". This is stated as pathetic, but the reader is put into a mood in which one would not try to alter it. ... By comparing the social arrangement to Nature he makes it seem inevitable, which it was not, and gives it a dignity which was undeserved. ... The tone of melancholy claims that the poet understands the considerations opposed to aristocracy, though he judges against them; the truism of the reflections in the churchyard, the universality and impersonality this gives to the style, claim as if by comparison that we ought to accept the injustice of society as we do the inevitability of death.\nEmpson goes on to deliver his political verdict with a psychological suggestion:\nMany people, without being communists, have been irritated by the complacence in the massive calm of the poem, and this seems partly because they feel there is a cheat in the implied politics; the \"bourgeois\" themselves do not like literature to have too much \"bourgeois ideology\".\nEmpson also made remarks reminiscent of Dr Samuel Johnson in their pained insistence:\nAnd yet what is said is one of the permanent truths; it is only in degree that any improvement of society could prevent wastage of human powers; the waste even in a fortunate life, the isolation even of a life rich in intimacy, cannot but be felt deeply, and is the central feeling of tragedy. And anything of value must accept this because it must not prostitute itself; its strength is to be prepared to waste itself, if it does not get its opportunity. A statement of this is certainly non-political because it is true in any society, and yet nearly all the great poetic statements of it are in a way \"bourgeois\", like this one; they suggest to readers, though they do not say, that for the poor man things cannot be improved even in degree.\nDespite the complexity of Empson's critical methods and attitude, his work, in particular \"Seven Types of Ambiguity\", had a significant impact on the New Criticism, a school of criticism that directed particular attention to close reading of texts, among whose adherents may be numbered F. R. Leavis (whose critical approach was, however, already well developed before Empson appeared on the scene \u2013 he had been teaching at Cambridge since 1925), although Empson could scarcely be described as an adherent or exponent of such a school or, indeed, of any critical school at all. Indeed, Empson consistently ridiculed, both outrightly in words and implicitly in practice, the doctrine of the intentional fallacy formulated by William K. Wimsatt, an influential New Critic. Indeed, Empson's distaste for New Criticism could manifest itself in a distinctively dismissive and brusque wit, as when he described New Criticism (which he ironically labelled \"the new rigour\") as a \"campaign to make poetry as dull as possible\" (\"Essays on Renaissance Literature\", Volume 1: \"Donne and the New Philosophy\", p.\u00a0122). Similarly, both the title and the content of one of Empson's volumes of critical papers, \"Using Biography\", show a patent and polemical disregard for the teachings of New Critics as much as for those of Roland Barthes and postmodern literary theories predicated upon, if not merely influenced by, the notion of the Death of the Author, despite the fact that some scholars regard Empson as a progenitor of certain of these currents of criticism, which vexed Empson. As Frank Kermode stated:\nNow and again somebody like Christopher Norris may, in a pious moment, attempt to \"recuperate\" a particularly brilliant old-style reputation by claiming its owner as a New New Critic \"avant la lettre\" \u2013 Empson in this case, now to be thought of as having, in his \"great theoretical summa,\" \"The Structure of Complex Words\", anticipated deconstruction. The grumpy old man repudiated this notion with his habitual scorn, calling the work of Derrida (or, as he preferred to call him, \"Nerrida\") \"very disgusting\" (Kermode, \"Pleasure, Change, and the Canon\")\n\"Milton's God\".\nEmpson's \"Milton's God\" is often described as a sustained attack on Christianity and a defence of Milton's attempt to \"justify the ways of God to man\" in \"Paradise Lost\". Empson argues that precisely the inconsistencies and complexities adduced by critics as evidence of the poem's badness in fact function in quite the opposite manner. What the poem brings out is the difficulty faced by anyone in encountering and submitting to the will of God and, indeed, the great clash between the authority of such a deity and the determinate desires and needs of human beings:\nthe poem is not good in spite of but especially because of its moral confusions, which ought to be clear in your mind when you are feeling its power. I think it horrible and wonderful; I regard it as like Aztec or Benin sculpture, or to come nearer home the novels of Kafka, and am rather suspicious of any critic who claims not to feel anything so obvious.\nEmpson writes that it is precisely Milton's great sensitivity and faithfulness to the Scriptures, in spite of their apparent madness, that generates such a controversial picture of God. Empson reckons that it requires a mind of astonishing integrity to, in the words of Blake, be of the Devil's party without knowing it:\n[Milton] is struggling to make his God appear less wicked, as he tells us he will at the start (l. 25), and does succeed in making him noticeably less wicked than the traditional Christian one; though, after all, owing to his loyalty to the sacred text and the penetration with which he make its story real to us, his modern critics still feel, in a puzzled way, that there is something badly wrong about it all. That this searching goes on in \"Paradise Lost\", I submit, is the chief source of its fascination and poignancy...\nEmpson portrays \"Paradise Lost\" as the product of a poet of astonishingly powerful and imaginative sensibilities and great intellect who had invested much of himself in the poem.\nDespite its lack of influence, certain critics view \"Milton's God\" as by far the best sustained work of criticism on the poem by a 20th-century critic. Harold Bloom includes it as one of the few critical works worthy of canonical status in his \"The Western Canon\" (where it is also the only critical work concerned solely with a single piece of literature).\nVerse.\nEmpson's poems are clever, learned, dry, aethereal and technically virtuosic, not wholly dissimilar to his critical work. His high regard for the metaphysical poet John Donne is to be seen in many places within his work, tempered with his appreciation of Buddhist thinking, an occasional tendency to satire and a larger awareness of intellectual trends. He wrote very few poems and stopped publishing poems almost entirely after 1940. His \"Complete Poems\" [edited by John Haffenden, his biographer] is 512 pages long, with over 300 pages of notes. In reviewing this work Frank Kermode commended Empson as a \"most noteworthy poet\" and chose it as International Book of the Year for \"The Times Literary Supplement\".\nThe Face of the Buddha.\nEmpson's manuscript of a major work outside literary criticism, \"The Face of the Buddha\", begun in 1931 on the basis of often gruelling research across many parts of the Buddhist world, was long thought to be lost, but a copy miraculously turned up among the papers of a former editor at Poetry London, Richard March, who had left them to the British Library in 2003. According to the publisher, Empson 'found himself captivated by the Buddhist sculptures of ancient Japan, and spent the years that followed in search of similar examples all over Korea, China, Cambodia, Burma, India, and Sri Lanka, as well as in the great museums of the West. Compiling the results of these wide-ranging travels into what he considered to be one of his most important works, Empson was heartbroken when he mislaid the sole copy of the manuscript in the wake of the Second World War. \"The Face of the Buddha\" remained one of the great lost books until its surprise rediscovery sixty years later [...] The book provides an engaging record of Empson's reactions to the cultures and artworks he encountered during his travels, and presents experimental theories about Buddhist art that many authorities of today have found to be remarkably prescient. It also casts important new light on Empson's other works, highlighting in particular the affinities of his thinking with that of the religious and philosophical traditions of Asia.'\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33450", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33450", "title": "World Science Fiction Society", "text": ""}
{"id": "33454", "revid": "43520964", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33454", "title": "Web", "text": "Web most often refers to:\nWeb, WEB, or the Web may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33455", "revid": "160367", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33455", "title": "Web server", "text": "Computer software that distributes web pages\nA web server is computer software and underlying hardware that accepts requests via HTTP (the network protocol created to distribute web content) or its secure variant HTTPS. A user agent, commonly a web browser or web crawler, initiates communication by making a request for a web page or other resource using HTTP, and the server responds with the content of that resource or an error message. A web server can also accept and store resources sent from the user agent if configured to do so.\nThe hardware used to run a web server can vary according to the volume of requests that it needs to handle. At the low end of the range are embedded systems, such as a router that runs a small web server as its configuration interface. A high-traffic Internet website might handle requests with hundreds of servers that run on racks of high-speed computers.\nA resource sent from a web server can be a pre-existing file (static content) available to the web server, or it can be generated at the time of the request (dynamic content) by another program that communicates with the server software. The former usually can be served faster and can be more easily cached for repeated requests, while the latter supports a broader range of applications.\nTechnologies such as REST and SOAP, which use HTTP as a basis for general computer-to-computer communication, as well as support for WebDAV extensions, have extended the application of web servers well beyond their original purpose of serving human-readable pages.\nHistory.\nThis is a very brief history of \"web server programs\", so some information necessarily overlaps with the histories of the \"web browsers\", the \"World Wide Web\" and the \"Internet\"; therefore, for the sake of clarity and understandability, some key historical information below reported may be similar to that found also in one or more of the above-mentioned history articles.\nInitial WWW project (1989\u20131991).\nIn March 1989, Sir Tim Berners-Lee proposed a new project to his employer CERN, with the goal of easing the exchange of information between scientists by using a hypertext system. The proposal titled \"HyperText and CERN\", asked for comments and it was read by several people. In October 1990 the proposal was reformulated and enriched (having as co-author Robert Cailliau), and finally, it was approved.\nBetween late 1990 and early 1991 the project resulted in Berners-Lee and his developers writing and testing several software libraries along with three programs, which initially ran on NeXTSTEP OS installed on NeXT workstations:\nThose early browsers retrieved web pages written in a simple early form of HTML from web servers using a new basic communication protocol that was named HTTP 0.9.\nIn August 1991 Tim Berners-Lee announced the \"birth of WWW technology\" and encouraged scientists to adopt and develop it. Soon after, those programs, along with their source code, were made available to people interested in their usage. Although the source code was not formally licensed or placed in the public domain, CERN informally allowed users and developers to experiment and further develop on top of them. Berners-Lee started promoting the adoption and the usage of those programs along with their porting to other operating systems.\nFast and wild development (1991\u20131995).\nIn December 1991, the first web server outside Europe was installed at SLAC (U.S.A.). This was a very important event because it started trans-continental web communications between web browsers and web servers.\nIn 1991\u20131993, CERN web server program continued to be actively developed by the www group, meanwhile, thanks to the availability of its source code and the public specifications of the HTTP protocol, many other implementations of web servers started to be developed.\nIn April 1993, CERN issued a public official statement stating that the three components of Web software (the basic line-mode client, the web server and the library of common code), along with their source code, were put in the public domain. This statement freed web server developers from any possible legal issue about the development of \"derivative work\" based on that source code (a threat that in practice never existed).\nAt the beginning of 1994, the most notable among new web servers was NCSA httpd which ran on a variety of Unix-based OSs and could serve \"dynamically generated content\" by implementing the codice_1 HTTP method and the CGI to communicate with external programs. These capabilities, along with the multimedia features of NCSA's Mosaic browser (also able to manage HTML FORMs in order to send data to a web server) highlighted the potential of web technology for publishing and distributed computing applications.\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n Number of active web sites (1991\u20131996)In the second half of 1994, the development of NCSA httpd stalled to the point that a group of external software developers, webmasters and other professional figures interested in that server, started to write and collect patches thanks to the NCSA httpd source code being available to the public domain. At the beginning of 1995 those patches were all applied to the last release of NCSA source code and, after several tests, the Apache HTTP server project was started.\nAt the end of 1994, a new commercial web server, named Netsite, was released with specific features. It was the first one of many other similar products that were developed first by Netscape, then also by Sun Microsystems, and finally by Oracle Corporation.\nIn mid-1995, the first version of IIS was released, for Windows NT OS, by Microsoft. This marked the entry, in the field of World Wide Web technologies, of a very important commercial developer and vendor that has played and still is playing a key role on both sides (client and server) of the web.\nIn the second half of 1995, CERN and NCSA web servers started to decline (in global percentage usage) because of the widespread adoption of new web servers which had a much faster development cycle along with more features, more fixes applied, and more performances than the previous ones.\nExplosive growth and competition (1996\u20132014).\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chart/styles.css\"/&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\n Number of active web sites (1996-2002)\nAt the end of 1996, there were already over fifty known, different web-server-software programs that were available to everybody who wanted to own an Internet domain name or to host websites. Many of them lived only shortly and were replaced by other web servers.\nThe publication of RFCs about protocol versions HTTP/1.0 (1996) and HTTP/1.1 (1997, 1999), forced most web servers to comply (not always completely) with those standards. The use of TCP/IP persistent connections (HTTP/1.1) required web servers both to increase the maximum number of concurrent connections allowed and to improve their level of scalability.\nBetween 1996 and 1999, Netscape Enterprise Server and Microsoft's IIS emerged among the leading commercial options whereas among the freely available and open-source programs Apache HTTP Server held the lead as the preferred server (because of its reliability and its many features).\nIn those years there was also another commercial, highly innovative and thus notable web server called Zeus (\"now discontinued\") that was known as one of the fastest and most scalable web servers available on market, at least till the first decade of 2000s, despite its low percentage of usage.\nApache resulted in the most used web server from mid-1996 to the end of 2015 when, after a few years of decline, it was surpassed initially by IIS and then by Nginx. Afterward IIS dropped to much lower percentages of usage than Apache (see also market share).\nFrom 2005\u20132006, Apache started to improve its speed and its scalability level by introducing new performance features (e.g., event MPM and new content cache). As those new performance improvements initially were marked as experimental, they were not enabled by its users for a long time and so Apache suffered, even more, the competition of commercial servers and, above all, of other open-source servers which meanwhile had already achieved far superior performances (mostly when serving static content) since the beginning of their development and at the time of the Apache decline were able to offer also a long enough list of well tested advanced features.\nA few years after 2000 started, not only other commercial and highly competitive web servers (e.g., LiteSpeed) but also many other open-source programs such as Hiawatha, Cherokee HTTP server, Lighttpd, Nginx and other derived and related products also available with commercial support emerged.\nAround 2007\u20132008, most popular web browsers increased their previous default limit of 2 persistent connections per host-domain (a limit recommended by RFC-2616) to 4, 6 or 8 persistent connections per host-domain, in order to speed up the retrieval of heavy web pages with lots of images, and to mitigate the problem of the shortage of persistent connections dedicated to dynamic objects used for bi-directional notifications of events in web pages. Within a year, these changes, on average, nearly tripled the maximum number of persistent connections that web servers had to manage. This trend (of increasing the number of persistent connections) definitely gave a strong impetus to the adoption of reverse proxies in front of slower web servers and it gave also one more chance to the emerging new web servers that could show all their speed and their capability to handle very high numbers of concurrent connections without requiring too many hardware resources (expensive computers with lots of CPUs, RAM and fast disks).\nNew challenges (2015 and later years).\nIn 2015, RFCs published new protocol version [HTTP/2], and as the implementation of new specifications was not trivial at all, a dilemma arose among developers of less popular web servers (e.g., with a percentage of usage lower than 1% .. 2%), about adding or not adding support for that new protocol version.\nIn fact supporting HTTP/2 often required radical changes to their internal implementation due to many factors (practically always required encrypted connections, capability to distinguish between HTTP/1.x and HTTP/2 connections on the same TCP port, binary representation of HTTP messages, message priority, compression of HTTP headers, use of streams also known as TCP/IP sub-connections and related flow-control, etc.) and so a few developers of those web servers opted for not supporting new HTTP/2 version (at least in the near future) also because of these main reasons:\nInstead, developers of most popular web servers, rushed to offer the availability of new protocol, not only because they had the work force and the time to do so, but also because usually their previous implementation of SPDY protocol could be reused as a starting point and because most used web browsers implemented it very quickly for the same reason. Another reason that prompted those developers to act quickly was that webmasters felt the pressure of the ever increasing web traffic and they really wanted to install and to try \u2013 as soon as possible \u2013 something that could drastically lower the number of TCP/IP connections and speedup accesses to hosted websites.\nIn 2020\u20132021 the HTTP/2 dynamics about its implementation (by top web servers and popular web browsers) were partly replicated after the publication of advanced drafts of future RFC about HTTP/3 protocol.\nTechnical overview.\nThe following technical overview should be considered only as an attempt to give a few very \"limited examples\" about \"some\" features that may be implemented in a web server and \"some\" of the tasks that it may perform in order to have a sufficiently wide scenario about the topic.\nA web server program plays the role of a server in a client\u2013server model by implementing one or more versions of HTTP protocol, often including the HTTPS secure variant and other features and extensions that are considered useful for its planned usage.\nThe complexity and the efficiency of a web server program may vary a lot depending on:\nCommon features.\nAlthough web server programs differ in how they are implemented, most of them offer the following common features.\nThese are basic features that most web servers usually have.\nA few other more advanced and popular features (\"only a very short selection\") are the following ones.\nCommon tasks.\nA web server program, when it is running, usually performs several general tasks:\nRead request message.\nWeb server programs are able:\nOnce an HTTP request message has been decoded and verified, its values can be used to determine whether that request can be satisfied or not. This requires many other steps, including security checks.\nURL normalization.\nWeb server programs usually perform some type of URL normalization (URL found in most HTTP request messages) in order to:\nThe term \"URL normalization\" refers to the process of modifying and standardizing a URL in a consistent manner. There are several types of normalization that may be performed, including the conversion of the scheme and host to lowercase. Among the most important normalizations are the removal of \".\" and \"..\" path segments and adding trailing slashes to a non-empty path component.\nURL mapping.\n\"URL mapping is the process by which a URL is analyzed to figure out what resource it is referring to, so that that resource can be returned to the requesting client. This process is performed with every request that is made to a web server, with some of the requests being served with a file, such as an HTML document, or a gif image, others with the results of running a CGI program, and others by some other process, such as a built-in module handler, a PHP document, or a Java servlet.\"In practice, web server programs that implement advanced features, beyond the simple \"static content serving\" (e.g., URL rewrite engine, dynamic content serving), usually have to figure out how that URL has to be handled as a:\nOne or more configuration files of web server may specify the mapping of parts of URL path (e.g., initial parts of file path, filename extension and other path components) to a specific URL handler (file, directory, external program or internal module).\nWhen a web server implements one or more of the above-mentioned advanced features then the path part of a valid URL may not always match an existing file system path under website directory tree (a file or a directory in file system) because it can refer to a virtual name of an internal or external module processor for dynamic requests.\nURL path translation to file system.\nWeb server programs are able to translate an URL path (all or part of it), that refers to a physical file system path, to an absolute path under the target website's root directory.\nWebsite's root directory may be specified by a configuration file or by some internal rule of the web server by using the name of the website which is the host part of the URL found in HTTP client request.\nPath translation to file system is done for the following types of web resources:\nThe web server appends the path found in requested URL (HTTP request message) and appends it to the path of the (Host) website root directory. On an Apache server, this is commonly codice_2 (on Unix machines, usually it is: codice_3). See the following examples of how it may result.\nURL path translation for a static file request\nExample of a \"static request\" of an existing file specified by the following URL:\n http://www.example.com/path/file.html\nThe client's user agent connects to codice_4 and then sends the following HTTP/1.1 request:\n GET /path/file.html HTTP/1.1\n Host: www.example.com\n Connection: keep-alive\nThe result is the local file system resource:\n /home/www/www.example.com/path/file.html\nThe web server then reads the file, if it exists, and sends a response to the client's web browser. The response will describe the content of the file and contain the file itself or an error message will return saying that the file does not exist or its access is forbidden.\nURL path translation for a directory request (without a static index file)\nExample of an implicit \"dynamic request\" of an existing directory specified by the following URL:\n http://www.example.com/directory1/directory2/\nThe client's user agent connects to codice_4 and then sends the following HTTP/1.1 request:\n GET /directory1/directory2 HTTP/1.1\n Host: www.example.com\n Connection: keep-alive\nThe result is the local directory path:\n /home/www/www.example.com/directory1/directory2/\nThe web server then verifies the existence of the directory and if it exists and it can be accessed then tries to find out an index file (which in this case does not exist) and so it passes the request to an internal module or a program dedicated to directory listings and finally reads data output and sends a response to the client's web browser. The response will describe the content of the directory (list of contained subdirectories and files) or an error message will return saying that the directory does not exist or its access is forbidden.\nURL path translation for a dynamic program request\nFor a \"dynamic request\" the URL path specified by the client should refer to an existing external program (usually an executable file with a CGI) used by the web server to generate dynamic content.\nExample of a \"dynamic request\" using a program file to generate output:\n http://www.example.com/cgi-bin/forum.php?action=view&amp;orderby=thread&amp;date=2021-10-15\nThe client's user agent connects to codice_4 and then sends the following HTTP/1.1 request:\n GET /cgi-bin/forum.php?action=view&amp;ordeby=thread&amp;date=2021-10-15 HTTP/1.1\n Host: www.example.com\n Connection: keep-alive\nThe result is the local file path of the program (in this example, a PHP program):\n /home/www/www.example.com/cgi-bin/forum.php\nThe web server executes that program, passing in the path-info and the query string codice_7 so that the program has the info it needs to run. (In this case, it will return an HTML document containing a view of forum entries ordered by thread from October 15, 2021). In addition to this, the web server reads data sent from the external program and resends that data to the client that made the request.\nManage request message.\nOnce a request has been read, interpreted, and verified, it has to be managed depending on its method, its URL, and its parameters, which may include values of HTTP headers.\nIn practice, the web server has to handle the request by using one of these response paths:\nServe static content.\nIf a web server program is capable of serving static content and it has been configured to do so, then it is able to send file content whenever a request message has a valid URL path matching (after URL mapping, URL translation and URL redirection) that of an existing file under the root directory of a website and file has attributes which match those required by internal rules of web server program.\nThat kind of content is called \"static\" because usually it is not changed by the web server when it is sent to clients and because it remains the same until it is modified (file modification) by some program.\nNOTE: when serving static content only, a web server program usually does not change file contents of served websites (as they are only read and never written) and so it suffices to support only these HTTP methods:\nResponse of static file content can be sped up by a file cache.\nDirectory index files.\nIf a web server program receives a client request message with an URL whose path matches one of an existing \"directory\" and that directory is accessible and serving directory index files is enabled then a web server program may try to serve the first of known (or configured) static index file names (a regular file) found in that directory; if no index file is found or other conditions are not met then an error message is returned.\nMost used names for static index files are: codice_12, codice_13 and codice_14.\nRegular files.\nIf a web server program receives a client request message with an URL whose path matches the file name of an existing \"file\" and that file is accessible by web server program and its attributes match internal rules of web server program, then web server program can send that file to client.\nUsually, for security reasons, most web server programs are pre-configured to serve only regular files or to avoid to use \"special file types\" like device files, along with symbolic links or hard links to them. The aim is to avoid undesirable side effects when serving static web resources.\nServe dynamic content.\nIf a web server program is capable of serving dynamic content and it has been configured to do so, then it is able to communicate with the proper internal module or external program (associated with the requested URL path) in order to pass to it the parameters of the client request. After that, the web server program reads from it its data response (that it has generated, often on the fly) and then it resends it to the client program who made the request.\nNOTE: when serving static and dynamic content, a web server program usually has to support also the following HTTP method in order to be able to safely receive data from clients and so to be able to host also websites with interactive forms that may send large data sets (e.g., lots of data entry or file uploads) to web server, external programs or modules:\nIn order to be able to communicate with its internal modules or external programs, a web server program must have implemented one or more of the many available gateway interfaces (see also Web Server Gateway Interfaces used for dynamic content).\nThe three standard and historical gateway interfaces are the following ones.\n An external CGI program is run by web server program for each dynamic request, then web server program reads from it the generated data response and then resends it to client.\n An external SCGI program (it usually is a process) is started once by web server program or by some other program or process and then it waits for network connections; every time there is a new request for it, web server program makes a new network connection to it in order to send request parameters and to read its data response, then network connection is closed.\n An external FastCGI program (it usually is a process) is started once by web server program or by some other program or process and then it waits for a network connection which is established permanently by web server; through that connection are sent the request parameters and read data responses.\nDirectory listings.\nA web server program may be capable to manage the dynamic generation (on the fly) of a directory index list of files and sub-directories.\nIf a web server program is configured to do so and a requested URL path matches an existing directory and its access is allowed and no static index file is found under that directory then a web page (usually in HTML format), containing the list of files or subdirectories of above mentioned directory, is \"dynamically generated\" (on the fly). If it cannot be generated an error is returned.\nSome web server programs allow the customization of directory listings by allowing the usage of a web page template\u2014an HTML document containing placeholders, (e.g., codice_16, etc.) that are replaced with the field values of each file entry found in directory by web server (e.g., codice_17) or the usage of HTML and embedded source code that is interpreted and executed (e.g., codice_18) or by supporting the usage of dynamic index programs such as CGIs, SCGIs, FCGIs (e.g., codice_19, codice_20, codice_21).\nUsage of dynamically generated \"directory listings\" is usually avoided or limited to a few selected directories of a website because that generation takes much more OS resources than sending a static index page.\nThe main usage of \"directory listings\" is to allow the download of files (usually when their names, sizes, modification date-times or file attributes may change randomly and frequently) \"as they are, without requiring to provide further information to requesting user\".\nProgram or module processing.\nAn external program or an internal module (\"processing unit\") can execute some sort of application function that may be used to get data from or to store data to one or more data repositories:\nA \"processing unit\" can return any kind of web content, also by using data retrieved from a data repository:\nIn practice whenever there is content that may vary, depending on one or more parameters contained in client request or in configuration settings, then, usually, it is generated dynamically.\nSend response message.\nWeb server programs are able to send response messages as replies to client request messages.\nAn error response message may be sent because a request message could not be successfully read or decoded or analyzed or executed.\nNOTE: the following sections are reported only as examples to help to understand what a web server, more or less, does; these sections are by any means neither exhaustive nor complete.\nError message.\nA web server program may reply to a client request message with many kinds of error messages, anyway these errors are divided mainly in two categories:\nWhen an error response or message is received by a client browser, then if it is related to the main user request (e.g., an URL of a web resource such as a web page) then usually that error message is shown in some browser window or message.\nURL authorization.\nA web server program may be able to verify whether the requested URL path:\nIf the authorization or access-rights feature has been implemented and enabled and access to web resource is not granted, then, depending on the required access rights, a web server program:\nURL redirection.\nA web server program \"may\" have the capability of doing URL redirections to new URLs (new locations) which consists in replying to a client request message with a response message containing a new URL suited to access a valid or an existing web resource (client should redo the request with the new URL).\nURL redirection of location is used:\nExample 1: a URL path points to a directory name but it does not have a final slash '/' so web server sends a redirect to client in order to instruct it to redo the request with the fixed path name.\nFrom:\n\u00a0\u00a0codice_22\nTo:\n\u00a0\u00a0codice_23\nExample 2: a whole set of documents has been moved inside website in order to reorganize their file system paths.\nFrom:\n\u00a0\u00a0codice_24\nTo:\n\u00a0\u00a0codice_25\nExample 3: a whole set of documents has been moved to a new website and now it is mandatory to use secure HTTPS connections to access them.\nFrom:\n\u00a0\u00a0codice_26\nTo:\n\u00a0\u00a0codice_27\nAbove examples are only a few of the possible kind of redirections.\nSuccessful message.\nA web server program is able to reply to a valid client request message with a successful message, optionally containing requested web resource data.\nIf web resource data is sent back to client, then it can be static content or dynamic content depending on how it has been retrieved (from a file or from the output of some program or module).\nContent cache.\nIn order to speed up web server responses by lowering average HTTP response times and hardware resources used, many popular web servers implement one or more content caches, each one specialized in a content category.\nContent is usually cached by its origin:\nFile cache.\nHistorically, static contents found in files which had to be accessed frequently, randomly and quickly, have been stored mostly on electro-mechanical disks since mid-late 1960s and 1970s; regrettably reads from and writes to those kind of devices have always been considered very slow operations when compared to RAM speed and so, since early OSs, first disk caches and then also OS file cache sub-systems were developed to speed up I/O operations of frequently accessed data.\nEven with the aid of an OS file cache, the relative or occasional slowness of I/O operations involving directories and files stored on disks became soon a bottleneck in the increase of performances expected from top level web servers, specially since mid-late 1990s, when web Internet traffic started to grow exponentially along with the constant increase of speed of Internet or network lines.\nThe problem about how to further efficiently speed-up the serving of static files, thus increasing the maximum number of requests or responses per second (RPS), started to be studied and researched since mid 1990s, with the aim to propose useful cache models that could be implemented in web server programs.\nIn practice, nowadays, many web server programs include their own \"userland\" file cache, tailored for a web server usage and using their specific implementation and parameters.\nThe wide spread adoption of RAID and fast solid-state drives (storage hardware with very high I/O speed) has slightly reduced but of course not eliminated the advantage of having a file cache incorporated in a web server.\nDynamic cache.\nDynamic content, output by an internal module or an external program, may not always change very frequently (given a unique URL with keys or parameters) and so, maybe for a while (e.g., from one second to several hours or more), the resulting output can be cached in RAM or even on a fast disk.\nThe typical usage of a dynamic cache is when a website has dynamic web pages about news, weather, images, maps, etc. that do not change frequently (e.g., every \"n\" minutes) and that are accessed by a huge number of clients per minute per hour; in those cases it is useful to return cached content too (without calling the internal module or the external program) because clients often do not have an updated copy of the requested content in their browser caches.\nAnyway, in most cases those kind of caches are implemented by external servers (e.g., reverse proxy) or by storing dynamic data output in separate computers, managed by specific applications (e.g., memcached), in order to not compete for hardware resources (CPU, RAM, disks) with web servers.\nKernel-mode and user-mode web servers.\nA web server software can be either incorporated into the OS and executed in kernel space, or it can be executed in user space (like other regular applications).\nWeb servers that run in kernel mode (usually called kernel space web servers) can have direct access to kernel resources and so they can be, in theory, faster than those running in user mode, but there are disadvantages in running a web server in kernel mode (e.g., difficulties in developing and debugging software) whereas run-time critical errors may lead to serious problems in OS kernel.\nWeb servers that run in user-mode have to ask the system for permission to use more memory or more CPU resources. Not only do these requests to the kernel take time, but they might not always be satisfied because the system reserves resources for its own usage and has the responsibility to share hardware resources with all the other running applications. Executing in user mode can also mean using more buffer or data copies (between user-space and kernel-space) which can lead to a decrease in the performance of a user-mode web server.\nNowadays almost all web server software is executed in user mode (because many of the aforementioned small disadvantages have been overcome by faster hardware, new OS versions, much faster OS system calls and new optimized web server software). See also comparison of web server software to discover which of them run in kernel mode or in user mode (also referred as kernel space or user space).\nPerformances.\nTo improve the user experience (on client or browser side), a web server should reply quickly (as soon as possible) to client requests; unless content response is throttled (by configuration) for some type of files (e.g., big or huge files), also returned data content should be sent as fast as possible (high transfer speed).\nIn other words, a web server should always be very responsive, even under high load of web traffic, in order to keep total user's wait (sum of browser time + network time + web server response time) for a response as low as possible.\nPerformance metrics.\nFor web server software, main key performance metrics (measured under vary operating conditions) usually are at least the following ones:\nAmong the operating conditions, the number (1 .. \"n\") of concurrent client connections used during a test is an important parameter because it allows to correlate the concurrency level supported by web server with results of the tested performance metrics.\nSoftware efficiency.\nThe specific web server software design and model adopted:\n... and other programming techniques, such as:\n... used to implement a web server program, can bias a lot the performances and in particular the scalability level that can be achieved under heavy load or when using high end hardware (many CPUs, disks and lots of RAM).\nIn practice some web server software models may require more OS resources (specially more CPUs and more RAM) than others to be able to work well and so to achieve target performances.\nOperating conditions.\nThere are many operating conditions that can affect the performances of a web server; performance values may vary depending on:\nBenchmarking.\nPerformances of a web server are typically benchmarked by using one or more of the available\nautomated load testing tools.\nLoad limits.\nA web server (program installation) usually has pre-defined load limits for each combination of operating conditions, also because it is limited by OS resources and because it can handle only a limited number of concurrent client connections (usually between 2 and several tens of thousands for each active web server process, see also the C10k problem and the C10M problem).\nWhen a web server is near to or over its load limits, it gets overloaded and so it may become unresponsive.\nCauses of overload.\nAt any time web servers can be overloaded due to one or more of the following causes:\nSymptoms of overload.\nThe symptoms of an overloaded web server are usually the following ones:\nAnti-overload techniques.\nTo partially overcome above average load limits and to prevent overload, most popular websites use common techniques like the following ones:\nMarket share.\nBelow are the latest statistics of the market share of all sites of the top web servers on the Internet by Netcraft.\nNOTE: (*) percentage rounded to integer number, because its decimal values are not publicly reported by source page (only its rounded value is reported in graph).\nSee also.\nStandard Web Server Gateway Interfaces used for dynamic contents:\nA few other Web Server Interfaces (server or programming language specific) used for dynamic contents:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33456", "revid": "17350134", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33456", "title": "Well-order", "text": "Class of mathematical orderings\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Stack/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn mathematics, a well-order (or well-ordering or well-order relation) on a set S is a total ordering on S with the property that every non-empty subset of S has a least element in this ordering. The set S together with the ordering is then called a well-ordered set (or woset). In some academic articles and textbooks these terms are instead written as wellorder, wellordered, and wellordering or well order, well ordered, and well ordering.\nEvery non-empty well-ordered set has a least element. Every element s of a well-ordered set, except a possible greatest element, has a unique successor (next element), namely the least element of the subset of all elements greater than s. There may be elements, besides the least element, that have no predecessor (see below for an example). A well-ordered set S contains for every subset T with an upper bound a least upper bound, namely the least element of the subset of all upper bounds of T in S.\nIf \u2264 is a non-strict well ordering, then &lt; is a strict well ordering. A relation is a strict well ordering if and only if it is a well-founded strict total order. The distinction between strict and non-strict well orders is often ignored since they are easily interconvertible.\nEvery well-ordered set is uniquely order isomorphic to a unique ordinal number, called the order type of the well-ordered set. The well-ordering theorem, which is equivalent to the axiom of choice, states that every set can be well ordered. If a set is well ordered (or even if it merely admits a well-founded relation), the proof technique of transfinite induction can be used to prove that a given statement is true for all elements of the set.\nThe observation that the natural numbers are well ordered by the usual less-than relation is commonly called the well-ordering principle (for natural numbers).\nOrdinal numbers.\nEvery well-ordered set is uniquely order isomorphic to a unique ordinal number, called the order type of the well-ordered set. The position of each element within the ordered set is also given by an ordinal number. In the case of a finite set, the basic operation of counting, to find the ordinal number of a particular object, or to find the object with a particular ordinal number, corresponds to assigning ordinal numbers one by one to the objects. The size (number of elements, cardinal number) of a finite set is equal to the order type. Counting in the everyday sense typically starts from one, so it assigns to each object the size of the initial segment with that object as last element. Note that these numbers are one more than the formal ordinal numbers according to the isomorphic order, because these are equal to the number of earlier objects (which corresponds to counting from zero). Thus for finite n, the expression \"n-th element\" of a well-ordered set requires context to know whether this counts from zero or one. In an expression \"\u03b2-th element\" where \u03b2 can also be an infinite ordinal, it will typically count from zero.\nFor an infinite set, the order type determines the cardinality, but not conversely: sets of a particular infinite cardinality can have well-orders of many different types (see , below, for an example). For a countably infinite set, the set of possible order types is uncountable.\nExamples and counterexamples.\nNatural numbers.\nThe standard ordering \u2264 of the natural numbers is a well ordering and has the additional property that every non-zero natural number has a unique predecessor.\nAnother well ordering of the natural numbers is given by defining that all even numbers are less than all odd numbers, and the usual ordering applies within the evens and the odds:\nformula_1\nThis is a well-ordered set of order type \"\u03c9\" + \"\u03c9\". Every element has a successor (there is no largest element). Two elements lack a predecessor: 0 and 1.\nIntegers.\nUnlike the standard ordering \u2264 of the natural numbers, the standard ordering \u2264 of the integers is not a well ordering, since, for example, the set of negative integers does not contain a least element.\nThe following binary relation R is an example of well ordering of the integers: x R y if and only if one of the following conditions holds:\nThis relation R can be visualized as follows: \nformula_2\nR is isomorphic to the ordinal number \"\u03c9\" + \"\u03c9\".\nAnother relation for well ordering the integers is the following definition: formula_3 if and only if \nformula_4\nThis well order can be visualized as follows: \nformula_5\nThis has the order type \u03c9.\nReals.\nThe standard ordering \u2264 of any real interval is not a well ordering, since, for example, the open interval &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; does not contain a least element. From the ZFC axioms of set theory (including the axiom of choice) one can show that there is a well order of the reals. Also Wac\u0142aw Sierpi\u0144ski proved that ZF + GCH (the generalized continuum hypothesis) imply the axiom of choice and hence a well order of the reals. Nonetheless, it is possible to show that the ZFC+GCH axioms alone are not sufficient to prove the existence of a definable (by a formula) well order of the reals. However it is consistent with ZFC that a definable well ordering of the reals exists\u2014for example, it is consistent with ZFC that V=L, and it follows from ZFC+V=L that a particular formula well orders the reals, or indeed any set.\nAn uncountable subset of the real numbers with the standard ordering \u2264 cannot be a well order: Suppose X is a subset of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; well ordered by \u2264. For each x in X, let \"s\"(\"x\") be the successor of x in \u2264 ordering on X (unless x is the last element of X). Let formula_6 whose elements are nonempty and disjoint intervals. Each such interval contains at least one rational number, so there is an injective function from A to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; There is an injection from X to A (except possibly for a last element of X, which could be mapped to zero later). And it is well known that there is an injection from &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; to the natural numbers (which could be chosen to avoid hitting zero). Thus there is an injection from X to the natural numbers, which means that X is countable. On the other hand, a countably infinite subset of the reals may or may not be a well order with the standard \u2264. For example,\nExamples of well orders:\nEquivalent formulations.\nIf a set is totally ordered, then the following are equivalent to each other:\nOrder topology.\nEvery well-ordered set can be made into a topological space by endowing it with the order topology.\nWith respect to this topology there can be two kinds of elements:\nFor subsets we can distinguish:\nA subset is cofinal in the whole set if and only if it is unbounded in the whole set or it has a maximum that is also maximum of the whole set.\nA well-ordered set as topological space is a first-countable space if and only if it has order type less than or equal to \u03c91 (omega-one), that is, if and only if the set is countable or has the smallest uncountable order type.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33458", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33458", "title": "Well-ordering theorem", "text": "Theorem that every set can be well-ordered\nIn mathematics, the well-ordering theorem, also known as Zermelo's theorem, states that every set can be well-ordered. A set \"X\" is \"well-ordered\" by a strict total order if every non-empty subset of \"X\" has a least element under the ordering. The well-ordering theorem together with Zorn's lemma are the most important mathematical statements that are equivalent to the axiom of choice (often called AC, see also ). Ernst Zermelo introduced the axiom of choice as an \"unobjectionable logical principle\" to prove the well-ordering theorem. One can conclude from the well-ordering theorem that every set is susceptible to transfinite induction, which is considered by mathematicians to be a powerful technique. One famous consequence of the theorem is the Banach\u2013Tarski paradox.\nHistory.\nGeorg Cantor considered the well-ordering theorem to be a \"fundamental principle of thought\". However, it is considered difficult or even impossible to visualize a well-ordering of formula_1, the set of all real numbers; such a visualization would have to incorporate the axiom of choice. In 1904, Gyula K\u0151nig claimed to have proven that such a well-ordering cannot exist. A few weeks later, Felix Hausdorff found a mistake in the proof. It turned out, though, that in first-order logic the well-ordering theorem is equivalent to the axiom of choice, in the sense that the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms with the axiom of choice included are sufficient to prove the well-ordering theorem, and conversely, the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel axioms without the axiom of choice but with the well-ordering theorem included are sufficient to prove the axiom of choice. (The same applies to Zorn's lemma.) In second-order logic, however, the well-ordering theorem is strictly stronger than the axiom of choice: from the well-ordering theorem one may deduce the axiom of choice, but from the axiom of choice one cannot deduce the well-ordering theorem.\nThere is a well-known joke about the three statements, and their relative amenability to intuition:The axiom of choice is obviously true, the well-ordering principle obviously false, and who can tell about Zorn's lemma?\nProof from axiom of choice.\nThe well-ordering theorem follows from the axiom of choice as follows.Let the set we are trying to well-order be formula_2, and let formula_3 be a choice function for the family of non-empty subsets of formula_2. For every ordinal formula_5, define an element formula_6 that is in formula_2 by setting formula_8 if this complement formula_9 is nonempty, or leaves formula_6 undefined if it is. That is, formula_6 is chosen from the set of elements of formula_2 that have not yet been assigned a place in the ordering (or undefined if the entirety of formula_2 has been successfully enumerated). Then the order formula_14 on formula_2 defined by formula_16 if and only if formula_17 (in the usual well-order of the ordinals) is a well-order of formula_2 as desired, of order type formula_19.\nProof of axiom of choice.\nThe axiom of choice can be proven from the well-ordering theorem as follows.\nTo make a choice function for a collection of non-empty sets, formula_20, take the union of the sets in formula_20 and call it formula_22. There exists a well-ordering of formula_22; let formula_24 be such an ordering. The function that to each set formula_25 of formula_20 associates the smallest element of formula_25, as ordered by (the restriction to formula_25 of) formula_24, is a choice function for the collection formula_20.\nAn essential point of this proof is that it involves only a single arbitrary choice, that of formula_24; applying the well-ordering theorem to each member formula_25 of formula_20 separately would not work, since the theorem only asserts the existence of a well-ordering, and choosing for each formula_25 a well-ordering would require just as many choices as simply choosing an element from each formula_25. Particularly, if formula_20 contains uncountably many sets, making all uncountably many choices is not allowed under the axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory without the axiom of choice."}
{"id": "33477", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33477", "title": "Worms/Rope Race", "text": ""}
{"id": "33480", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33480", "title": "Worms/Shopper", "text": ""}
{"id": "33481", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33481", "title": "Worms/Roper", "text": ""}
{"id": "33483", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33483", "title": "Worms/Warmer", "text": ""}
{"id": "33484", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33484", "title": "Worms/Full Wormage", "text": ""}
{"id": "33493", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33493", "title": "WTO", "text": ""}
{"id": "33496", "revid": "51023716", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33496", "title": "Weapon", "text": "Implement or device used to inflict damage, harm, or kill\nA weapon, arm, or armament is any implement or device that is used to deter, threaten, inflict physical damage, harm, or kill. Weapons are used to increase the efficacy and efficiency of activities such as hunting, crime (e.g., murder), law enforcement, self-defense, warfare, or suicide. In a broader context, weapons may be construed to include anything used to gain a tactical, strategic, material, or mental advantage over an adversary or enemy target.\nWhile ordinary objects such as rocks and bottles can be used as weapons, many objects are expressly designed for the purpose; these range from simple implements such as clubs and swords to complicated modern firearms, tanks, missiles and biological weapons. Something that has been repurposed, converted, or enhanced to become a weapon of war is termed weaponized, such as a weaponized virus or weaponized laser.\nThe evolution of weaponry has been closely tied to advancements in technology and societal needs, with historical shifts from rudimentary tools to sophisticated systems reflecting broader changes in warfare and security paradigms.\nHistory.\nThe use of weapons has been a major driver of cultural evolution and human history up to today since weapons are a type of tool that is used to dominate and subdue autonomous agents such as animals and, by doing so, allow for an expansion of the cultural niche, while simultaneously other weapon users (i.e., agents such as humans, groups, and cultures) can adapt to the weapons of enemies by learning, triggering a continuous process of competitive technological, skill, and cognitive improvement (arms race).\nPrehistoric.\nThe use of objects as weapons has been observed among chimpanzees, leading to speculation that early hominids used weapons as early as five million years ago. However, this cannot be confirmed using physical evidence because wooden clubs, spears, and unshaped stones would have left an ambiguous record. The earliest unambiguous weapons to be found are the Sch\u00f6ningen spears, eight wooden throwing spears dating back more than 300,000 years. At the site of Nataruk in Turkana, Kenya, numerous human skeletons dating to 10,000 years ago may present evidence of traumatic injuries to the head, neck, ribs, knees, and hands, including obsidian projectiles embedded in the bones that might have been caused by arrows and clubs during conflict between two hunter-gatherer groups. But the interpretation of warfare at Nataruk has been challenged due to conflicting evidence.\nAncient history.\nThe earliest ancient weapons were evolutionary improvements of late Neolithic implements, but significant improvements in materials and crafting techniques led to a series of revolutions in military technology.\nThe development of metal tools began with copper during the Copper Age (about 3,300\u00a0BC) and was followed by the Bronze Age, leading to the creation of the Bronze Age sword and similar weapons.\nDuring the Bronze Age, the first defensive structures and fortifications appeared as well, indicating an increased need for security. Weapons designed to breach fortifications followed soon after, such as the battering ram, which was in use by 2500\u00a0BC.\nThe development of ironworking around 1300\u00a0BC in Greece had an important impact on the development of ancient weapons. It was not the introduction of early Iron Age swords, however, as they were not superior to their bronze predecessors, but rather the domestication of the horse and widespread use of spoked wheels by c.\u20092000 BC. This led to the creation of the light, horse-drawn chariot, whose improved mobility proved important during this era. Spoke-wheeled chariot usage peaked around 1300\u00a0BC and then declined, ceasing to be militarily relevant by the 4th century BC.\nCavalry developed once horses were bred to support the weight of a human. The horse extended the range and increased the speed of attacks.\nAlexander's conquest saw the increased use of spears and shields in the Middle East and Western Asia; as Greek culture spread, many Greek and other European weapons came to be used in these regions. Many of these weapons were then adapted to fit their new uses in war.\nIn addition to land-based weaponry, warships, such as the trireme, were in use by the 7th century BC.\nDuring the first First Punic War, the use of advanced warships contributed to a Roman victory over the Carthaginians.\nPost-classical history.\nEuropean warfare during post-classical history was dominated by elite groups of knights supported by massed infantry. They were involved in mobile combat and sieges, which involved various siege weapons and tactics. Knights on horseback developed tactics for charging with lances, providing an impact on the enemy formations, and then drawing more practical weapons (such as swords) once they entered melee. By contrast, infantry, in the age before structured formations, relied on cheap, sturdy weapons such as spears and billhooks in close combat and bows from a distance. As armies became more professional, their equipment was standardized, and infantry transitioned to pikes. Pikes are normally seven to eight feet in length and used in conjunction with smaller sidearms (short swords).\nIn Eastern and Middle Eastern warfare, similar tactics were developed independent of European influences.\nThe introduction of gunpowder from Asia at the end of this period revolutionized warfare. Formations of musketeers, protected by pikemen, came to dominate open battles, and the cannon replaced the trebuchet as the dominant siege weapon.\nThe Ottomans used the cannon to destroy much of the fortifications at Constantinople, which would change warfare as gunpowder became more available and technology improved.\nModern history.\nEarly modern.\nThe European Renaissance marked the beginning of the implementation of firearms in western warfare. Guns and rockets were introduced to the battlefield.\nFirearms are qualitatively different from earlier weapons because they release energy from combustible propellants, such as gunpowder, rather than from a counterweight or spring. This energy is released very rapidly and can be replicated without much effort by the user. Therefore, even early firearms such as the arquebus were much more powerful than human-powered weapons. Firearms became increasingly important and effective during the 16th\u201319th centuries, with progressive improvements in ignition mechanisms followed by revolutionary changes in ammunition handling and propellant. During the American Civil War, new applications of firearms, including the machine gun and ironclad warship, emerged that would still be recognizable and useful military weapons today, particularly in limited conflicts. In the 19th century, warship propulsion changed from sail power to fossil fuel-powered steam engines.\nSince the mid-18th century North American French-Indian war through the beginning of the 20th century, human-powered weapons were reduced from the primary weaponry of the battlefield to yielding gunpowder-based weaponry. Sometimes referred to as the \"Age of Rifles\", this period was characterized by the development of firearms for infantry and cannons for support, as well as the beginnings of mechanized weapons such as the machine gun. Artillery pieces such as howitzers were able to destroy masonry fortresses and other fortifications, and this single invention caused a revolution in military affairs, establishing tactics and doctrine that are still in use today.\nWorld War I.\nAn important feature of industrial age warfare was technological escalation \u2013 innovations were rapidly matched through replication or countered by another innovation.\nWorld War I marked the entry of fully industrialized warfare as well as weapons of mass destruction (\"e.g.\", chemical and biological weapons), and new weapons were developed quickly to meet wartime needs. The technological escalation during World War I was profound, including the wide introduction of aircraft into warfare and naval warfare with the introduction of aircraft carriers. Above all, it promised the military commanders independence from horses and a resurgence in maneuver warfare through the extensive use of motor vehicles. The changes that these military technologies underwent were evolutionary but defined their development for the rest of the century.\nInterwar.\nThis period of innovation in weapon design continued in the interwar period (between WWI and WWII) with the continuous evolution of weapon systems by all major industrial powers. The major armament firms were Schneider-Creusot (based in France), \u0160koda Works (Czechoslovakia), and Vickers (Great Britain). The 1920s were committed to disarmament and the outlawing of war and poison gas, but rearmament picked up rapidly in the 1930s. The munitions makers responded nimbly to the rapidly shifting strategic and economic landscape. The main purchasers of munitions from the big three companies were Romania, Yugoslavia, Greece, and Turkey\u00a0\u2013 and, to a lesser extent, Poland, Finland, the Baltic States, and the Soviet Union.\nCriminalizing poison gas.\nRealistic critics understood that war could not really be outlawed, but its worst excesses might be banned. Poison gas became the focus of a worldwide crusade in the 1920s. Poison gas did not win battles, and the generals did not want it. The soldiers hated it far more intensely than bullets or explosive shells. By 1918, chemical shells made up 35 percent of French ammunition supplies, 25 percent of British, and 20 percent of American stock. The \"Protocol for the Prohibition of the Use in War of Asphyxiating, Poisonous, or Other Gases and of Bacteriological Methods of Warfare\", also known as the Geneva Protocol, was issued in 1925 and was accepted as policy by all major countries. In 1937, poison gas was manufactured in large quantities but not used except against nations that lacked modern weapons or gas masks.\nWorld War II and postwar.\nMany modern military weapons, particularly ground-based ones, are relatively minor improvements to weapon systems developed during World War II. World War II marked perhaps the most frantic period of weapon development in the history of humanity. Massive numbers of new designs and concepts were fielded, and all existing technologies were improved between 1939 and 1945. The most powerful weapon invented during this period was the nuclear bomb; however, many other weapons influenced the world, such as jet aircraft and radar, but were overshadowed by the visibility of nuclear weapons and long-range rockets.\nNuclear weapons.\nSince the realization of mutual assured destruction (MAD), the nuclear option of all-out war is no longer considered a survivable scenario. During the Cold War in the years following World War II, both the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a nuclear arms race. Each country and their allies continually attempted to out-develop each other in the field of nuclear armaments. Once the joint technological capabilities reached the point of being able to ensure the destruction of the Earth by 100 fold, a new tactic had to be developed. With this realization, armaments development funding shifted back to primarily sponsoring the development of conventional arms technologies for support of limited wars rather than total war.\nInternational arm cooperation.\nIt is essential to highlight the growing relevance of international military cooperation and the global diffusion of deterrence strategies. As outlined in Baizidi's theory on deterrence, the internationalization of deterrence involves the transfer of arms and other military capabilities to aligned states and non-state actors, as a means of amplifying strategic reach and threat credibility.\nIn today\u2019s interconnected security environment, the deterrent value of weapons often hinges not only on their technical specifications but also on how they are deployed collaboratively across borders. Missile sharing arrangements, forward-defense networks, and alliance-building exemplify how arm's cooperation has shifted from a purely national doctrine toward a regional and even global concept. Such internationalized deterrence mechanisms, both conventional and unconventional, reshape strategic calculations and expand the zones of influence \u2014 redefining the tactical significance of weapons far beyond their immediate geography.\n\"\u2013 what person or unit uses the weapon\"\n\"\u2013 the construction of the weapon and the principle of operation\"\n\"\u2013 the type of target the weapon is designed to attack\"\nManufacture of weapons.\nThe arms industry is a global industry that involves the sale and manufacture of weaponry. It consists of a commercial industry involved in the research and development, engineering, production, and servicing of military material, equipment, and facilities. Many industrialized countries have a domestic arms industry to supply their own military forces, and some also have a substantial trade in weapons for use by their citizens for self-defense, hunting, or sporting purposes.\nContracts to supply a given country's military are awarded by governments, making arms contracts of substantial political importance. The link between politics and the arms trade can result in the development of a \"military\u2013industrial complex\", where the armed forces, commerce, and politics become closely linked.\nAccording to research institute SIPRI, the volume of international transfers of major weapons in 2010\u20132014 was 16 percent higher than in 2005\u20132009, and the arms sales of the world's 100 largest private arms-producing and military services companies totaled $420 billion in 2018.\nLegislation.\nThe production, possession, trade, and use of many weapons are controlled. This may be at a local or central government level or by international treaty. Examples of such controls include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nGun laws.\nAll countries have laws and policies regulating aspects such as the manufacture, sale, transfer, possession, modification, and use of small arms by civilians.\nCountries that regulate access to firearms will typically restrict access to certain categories of firearms and then restrict the categories of persons who may be granted a license for access to such firearms. There may be separate licenses for hunting, sport shooting (a.k.a. target shooting), self-defense, collecting, and concealed carry, with different sets of requirements, permissions, and responsibilities.\nArms control laws.\nInternational treaties and agreements place restrictions on the development, production, stockpiling, proliferation, and usage of weapons, from small arms and heavy weapons to weapons of mass destruction. Arms control is typically exercised through the use of diplomacy, which seeks to impose such limitations upon consenting participants, although it may also comprise efforts by a nation or group of nations to enforce limitations upon a non-consenting country.\nArms trafficking laws.\nArms trafficking is the trafficking of contraband weapons and ammunition. What constitutes legal trade in firearms varies widely, depending on local and national laws. In 2001, the United Nations had made a protocol against the manufacturing and trafficking of illicit arms. This protocol made governments dispose illegal arms, and to license new firearms being produced, to ensure them being legitimate. It was signed by 122 parties.\nLifecycle problems.\nThere are a number of issues around the potential ongoing risks from deployed weapons, the safe storage of weapons, and their eventual disposal when they are no longer effective or safe.\nIn science fiction.\nStrange and exotic weapons are a recurring feature or theme in science fiction. In some cases, weapons first introduced in science fiction have now become a reality. Other science fiction weapons, such as force fields and stasis fields, remain purely fictional and are often beyond the realms of known physical possibility.\nAt its most prosaic, science fiction features an endless variety of sidearms, mostly variations on real weapons such as guns and swords. Among the best-known of these are the phaser used in the \"Star Trek\" television series, films, and novels, and the lightsaber and blaster featured in the \"Star Wars\" movies, comics, novels, and TV series.\nIn addition to adding action and entertainment value, weaponry in science fiction sometimes becomes a theme when it touches on deeper concerns, often motivated by contemporary issues. One example is science fiction that deals with weapons of mass destruction like doomsday devices.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33497", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33497", "title": "WWI", "text": ""}
{"id": "33498", "revid": "4968133", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33498", "title": "Wire", "text": "Single, usually cylindrical, flexible strand or bar or rod of metal\nA wire is a flexible, round bar of metal. Wires are commonly formed by drawing the metal through a hole in a die or draw plate. Wire gauges come in various standard sizes, as expressed in terms of a gauge number or cross-sectional area.\nWires are used to bear mechanical loads, often in the form of wire rope. In electricity and telecommunications signals, \"wire\" can refer to electrical cable, which can contain a solid core of a single wire or separate strands in stranded or braided forms.\nUsually cylindrical in geometry, wire can also be made in square, hexagonal, flattened rectangular, or other cross-sections, either for decorative purposes, or for technical purposes such as high-efficiency voice coils in loudspeakers. Edge-wound coil springs, such as the Slinky toy, are made of special flattened wire.\nHistory.\nIn antiquity, jewelry often contained large amounts of wire in the form of chains and applied decoration that was accurately made and which must have been produced by some efficient, if not technically advanced, means. In some cases, strips cut from metal sheet were made into wire by pulling them through perforations in stone beads. This causes the strips to fold round on themselves to form thin tubes. This strip drawing technique was in use in Egypt by the 2nd Dynasty (c.\u20092890\u00a0\u2013 c.\u20092686\u00a0BCE). From the middle of the 2nd millennium BCE most of the gold wires in jewelry are characterized by seam lines that follow a spiral path along the wire. Such twisted strips can be converted into solid round wires by rolling them between flat surfaces or the strip wire drawing method. The strip twist wire manufacturing method was superseded by drawing in the ancient Old World sometime between about the 8th and 10th centuries AD. There is some evidence for the use of drawing further East prior to this period.\nSquare and hexagonal wires were possibly made using a swaging technique. In this method a metal rod was struck between grooved metal blocks, or between a grooved punch and a grooved metal anvil. Swaging is of great antiquity, possibly dating to the beginning of the 2nd millennium BCE in Egypt and in the Bronze and Iron Ages in Europe for torcs and fibulae. Twisted square-section wires are a very common filigree decoration in early Etruscan jewelry.\nIn about the middle of the 2nd millennium BCE, a new category of decorative tube was introduced which imitated a line of granules. True beaded wire, produced by mechanically distorting a round-section wire, appeared in the Eastern Mediterranean and Italy in the seventh century BCE, perhaps disseminated by the Phoenicians. Beaded wire continued to be used in jewellery into modern times, although it largely fell out of favour in about the tenth century CE when two drawn round wires, twisted together to form what are termed 'ropes', provided a simpler-to-make alternative. A forerunner to beaded wire may be the notched strips and wires which first occur from around 2000 BCE in Anatolia.\nWire was drawn in England from the medieval period. The wire was used to make wool cards and pins, manufactured goods whose import was prohibited by Edward IV in 1463. The first wire mill in Great Britain was established at Tintern in about 1568 by the founders of the Company of Mineral and Battery Works, who had a monopoly on this. Apart from their second wire mill at nearby Whitebrook, there were no other wire mills before the second half of the 17th century. Despite the existence of mills, the drawing of wire down to fine sizes continued to be done manually.\nAccording to a description in the early 20th century, \"[w]ire is usually drawn of cylindrical form; but it may be made of any desired section by varying the outline of the holes in the draw-plate through which it is passed in the process of manufacture. The draw-plate or die is a piece of hard cast-iron or hard steel, or for fine work it may be a diamond or a ruby. The object of utilising precious stones is to enable the dies to be used for a considerable period without losing their size, and so producing wire of incorrect diameter. Diamond dies must be re-bored when they have lost their original diameter of hole, but metal dies are brought down to size again by hammering up the hole and then drifting it out to correct diameter with a punch.\"\nProduction.\nWire is often reduced to the desired diameter and properties by repeated drawing through progressively smaller dies, or traditionally holes in draw plates. After a number of passes the wire may be annealed to facilitate more drawing or, if it is a finished product, to maximise ductility and conductivity.\nElectrical wires are usually covered with insulating materials, such as plastic, rubber-like polymers, or varnish. Insulating and jacketing of wires and cables is nowadays done by passing them through an extruder. Formerly, materials used for insulation included treated cloth or paper and various oil-based products. Since the mid-1960s, plastic and polymers exhibiting properties similar to rubber have predominated.\nTwo or more wires may be wrapped concentrically, separated by insulation, to form coaxial cable. The wire or cable may be further protected with substances like paraffin, some kind of preservative compound, bitumen, lead, aluminum sheathing, or steel taping. Stranding or covering machines wind material onto wire which passes through quickly. Some of the smallest machines for cotton covering have a large drum, which grips the wire and moves it through toothed gears; the wire passes through the centre of disks mounted above a long bed, and the disks carry each a number of bobbins varying from six to twelve or more in different machines. A supply of covering material is wound on each bobbin, and the end is led on to the wire, which occupies a central position relatively to the bobbins; the latter being revolved at a suitable speed bodily with their disks, the cotton is consequently served on to the wire, winding in spiral fashion so as to overlap. If many strands are required the disks are duplicated, so that as many as sixty spools may be carried, the second set of strands being laid over the first.\nFor heavier cables that are used for electric light and power as well as submarine cables, the machines are somewhat different in construction. The wire is still carried through a hollow shaft, but the bobbins or spools of covering material are set with their spindles at right angles to the axis of the wire, and they lie in a circular cage which rotates on rollers below. The various strands coming from the spools at various parts of the circumference of the cage all lead to a disk at the end of the hollow shaft. This disk has perforations through which each of the strands pass, thence being immediately wrapped on the cable, which slides through a bearing at this point. Toothed gears having certain definite ratios are used to cause the winding drum for the cable and the cage for the spools to rotate at suitable relative speeds which do not vary. The cages are multiplied for stranding with many tapes or strands, so that a machine may have six bobbins on one cage and twelve on the other.\nForms.\nSolid.\nSolid wire, also called solid-core or single-strand wire, consists of one piece of metal wire. Solid wire is useful for wiring breadboards. Solid wire is cheaper to manufacture than stranded wire and is used where there is little need for flexibility in the wire. Solid wire also provides mechanical ruggedness; and, because it has relatively less surface area which is exposed to attack by corrosives, protection against the environment.\nStranded.\nStranded wire is composed of a number of small wires bundled or wrapped together to form a larger conductor. Stranded wire is more flexible than solid wire of the same total cross-sectional area. Stranded wire is used when higher resistance to metal fatigue is required. Such situations include connections between circuit boards in multi-printed-circuit-board devices, where the rigidity of solid wire would produce too much stress as a result of movement during assembly or servicing; A.C. line cords for appliances; musical instrument cables; computer mouse cables; welding electrode cables; control cables connecting moving machine parts; mining machine cables; trailing machine cables; and numerous others. At high frequencies, current travels near the surface of the wire because of the \"skin effect\", resulting in increased power loss in the wire. Stranded wire might seem to reduce this effect, since the total surface area of the strands is greater than the surface area of the equivalent solid wire, but ordinary stranded wire does not reduce the skin effect because all the strands are short-circuited together and behave as a single conductor. A stranded wire will have higher resistance than a solid wire of the same diameter because the cross-section of the stranded wire is not all copper; there are unavoidable gaps between the strands (this is the circle packing problem for circles within a circle). A stranded wire with the same cross-section of conductor as a solid wire is said to have the same equivalent gauge and is always a larger diameter. However, for many high-frequency applications, \"proximity effect\" is more severe than skin effect, and in some limited cases, simple stranded wire can reduce proximity effect. For better performance at high frequencies, litz wire, which has the individual strands insulated and twisted in special patterns, may be used.\nThe more individual wire strands in a wire bundle, the more flexible, kink-resistant, break-resistant, and stronger the wire becomes. However, more strands increases manufacturing complexity and cost. For geometrical reasons, the lowest number of strands usually seen is 7: one in the middle, with 6 surrounding it in close contact. The next level up is 19, which is another layer of 12 strands on top of the 7. After that the number varies, but 37 and 49 are common, then in the 70 to 100 range (the number is no longer exact). Larger numbers than that are typically found only in very large cables. For application where the wire moves, 19 is the lowest that should be used (7 should only be used in applications where the wire is placed and then does not move), and 49 is much better. For applications with constant repeated movement, such as assembly robots and headphone wires, 70 to 100 is mandatory . For applications that need even more flexibility, even more strands are used (welding cables are the usual example, but also any application that needs to move wire in tight areas). One example is a 2/0 wire made from 5,292 strands of No. 36 gauge wire. The strands are organized by first creating a bundle of 7 strands. Then 7 of these bundles are put together into super bundles. Finally 108 super bundles are used to make the final cable. Each group of wires is wound in a helix so that when the wire is flexed, the part of a bundle that is stretched moves around the helix to a part that is compressed to allow the wire to have less stress.\nPrefused wire is stranded wire made up of strands that are heavily tinned, then fused together. Prefused wire has many of the properties of solid wire, except it is less likely to break.\nBraided.\nA braided wire consists of a number of small strands of wire braided together. Braided wires do not break easily when flexed. Braided wires are often suitable as an electromagnetic shield in noise-reduction cables.\nUses.\nWire has many uses. It forms the raw material of many important manufacturers, such as the wire netting industry, engineered springs, wire-cloth making and wire rope spinning, in which it occupies a place analogous to a textile fiber. Wire-cloth of all degrees of strength and fineness of mesh is used for sifting and screening machinery, for draining paper pulp, for window screens, and for many other purposes. Vast quantities of aluminium, copper, nickel and steel wire are employed for telephone and data cables, and as conductors in electric power transmission, and heating. It is in no less demand for fencing, and much is consumed in the construction of suspension bridges, and cages, etc. In the manufacture of stringed musical instruments and scientific instruments, wire is again largely used. Carbon and stainless spring steel wire have significant applications in engineered springs for critical automotive or industrial manufactured parts/components. Pin and hairpin making; the needle and fish-hook industries; nail, peg, and rivet making; and carding machinery consume large amounts of wire as feedstock.\nNot all metals and metallic alloys possess the physical properties necessary to make useful wire. The metals must in the first place be ductile and strong in tension, the quality on which the utility of wire principally depends. The principal metals suitable for wire, possessing almost equal ductility, are platinum, silver, iron, copper, aluminium, and gold; and it is only from these and certain of their alloys with other metals, principally brass and bronze, that wire is prepared.\nBy careful treatment, extremely thin wire can be produced. Special purpose wire is however made from other metals (e.g. tungsten wire for light bulb and vacuum tube filaments, because of its high melting temperature). Copper wires are also plated with other metals, such as tin, nickel, and silver to handle different temperatures, provide lubrication, and provide easier stripping of rubber insulation from copper.\nMetallic wires are often used for the lower-pitched sound-producing \"strings\" in stringed instruments, such as violins, cellos, and guitars, and percussive string instruments such as pianos, dulcimers, dobros, and cimbaloms. To increase the mass per unit length (and thus lower the pitch of the sound even further), the main wire may sometimes be helically wrapped with another, finer strand of wire. Such musical strings are said to be \"overspun\"; the added wire may be circular in cross-section (\"round-wound\"), or flattened before winding (\"flat-wound\").\nExamples include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33501", "revid": "41932176", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33501", "title": "White dwarf", "text": "Stellar core remnant\nA white dwarf is a stellar core remnant composed mostly of electron-degenerate matter. A white dwarf is very dense: in an Earth-sized volume, it packs a mass that is comparable to the Sun. No nuclear fusion takes place in a white dwarf; what light it radiates is from its residual heat. The nearest known white dwarf is Sirius B, at 8.6\u00a0light years, the smaller component of the Sirius binary star. There are currently thought to be eight white dwarfs among the one hundred star systems nearest the Sun. The unusual faintness of white dwarfs was first recognized in 1910.1 The name \"white dwarf\" was coined by Willem Jacob Luyten in 1922.\nWhite dwarfs are thought to be the final evolutionary state of stars whose mass is not high enough to become a neutron star or black hole. This includes over 97% of the stars in the Milky Way. After the hydrogen-fusing period of a main-sequence star of low or intermediate mass ends, such a star will expand to a red giant and fuse helium to carbon and oxygen in its core by the triple-alpha process. If a red giant has insufficient mass to generate the core temperatures required to fuse carbon (around ), an inert mass of carbon and oxygen will build up at its center. After such a star sheds its outer layers and forms a planetary nebula, it will leave behind a core, which is the remnant white dwarf. Usually, white dwarfs are composed of carbon and oxygen (CO white dwarf). If the mass of the progenitor is between 7 and 9\u00a0solar masses (M\u2609), the core temperature will be sufficient to fuse carbon but not neon, in which case an oxygen\u2013neon\u2013magnesium (ONeMg or ONe) white dwarf may form. Stars of very low mass will be unable to fuse helium; hence, a helium white dwarf may be formed by mass loss in an interacting binary star system.\nBecause the material in a white dwarf no longer undergoes fusion reactions, it lacks a heat source to support it against gravitational collapse. Instead, it is supported only by electron degeneracy pressure, causing it to be extremely dense. The physics of degeneracy yields a maximum mass for a non-rotating white dwarf, the Chandrasekhar limit\u2014 approximately 1.44\u00a0times M\u2609\u2014 beyond which electron degeneracy pressure cannot support it. A carbon\u2013oxygen white dwarf which approaches this limit, typically by mass transfer from a companion star, may explode as a Type Ia supernova via a process known as carbon detonation; SN 1006 is a likely example.\nA white dwarf, very hot when it forms, gradually cools as it radiates its energy. This radiation, which initially has a high color temperature, lessens and reddens over time. Eventually, a white dwarf will cool enough that its material will begin to crystallize into a cold black dwarf. The oldest known white dwarfs still radiate at temperatures of a few thousand kelvins, which establishes an observational limit on the maximum possible age of the universe.\nDiscovery.\nThe first white dwarf discovered was in the triple star system of 40 Eridani, which contains the relatively bright main sequence star 40 Eridani A, orbited at a distance by the closer binary system of the white dwarf 40 Eridani B and the main sequence red dwarf 40 Eridani C. The pair 40 Eridani B/C was discovered by William Herschel on 31 January 1783. In 1910, Henry Norris Russell, Edward Charles Pickering and Williamina Fleming discovered that, despite being a dim star, 40\u00a0Eridani\u00a0B was of spectral type\u00a0A, or white. In 1939, Russell looked back on the discovery and noted that Pickering had suggested that such exceptions lead to breakthroughs and in this case it led to the discovery of white dwarfs.1\nThe spectral type of 40 Eridani B was officially described in 1914 by Walter Adams.\nThe white dwarf companion of Sirius, Sirius\u00a0B, was next to be discovered. During the nineteenth century, positional measurements of some stars became precise enough to measure small changes in their location. Friedrich Bessel used position measurements to determine that the stars Sirius (\u03b1\u00a0Canis Majoris) and Procyon (\u03b1\u00a0Canis Minoris) were changing their positions periodically. In 1844 he predicted that both stars had unseen companions.\nBessel roughly estimated the period of the companion of Sirius to be about half a century; C.A.F. Peters computed an orbit for it in 1851. It was not until 31\u00a0January 1862 that Alvan Graham Clark observed a previously unseen star close to Sirius, later identified as the predicted companion. Adams announced in 1915 that he had found the spectrum of Sirius\u00a0B to be similar to that of Sirius.\nIn 1917, Adriaan van Maanen discovered van Maanen's Star, an isolated white dwarf. These three white dwarfs, the first discovered, are the so-called \"classical white dwarfs\".2 Eventually, many faint white stars that had high proper motion were found, indicating that they could be suspected to be low-luminosity stars close to the Earth, and hence white dwarfs. Willem Luyten appears to have been the first to use the term \"white dwarf\" when he examined this class of stars in 1922; the term was later popularized by Arthur Eddington. Despite these suspicions, the first non-classical white dwarf was not definitely identified until the 1930s. 18\u00a0white dwarfs had been discovered by 1939.3 Luyten and others continued to search for white dwarfs in the 1940s. By 1950, over a hundred were known, and by 1999, over 2000 were known. Since then the Sloan Digital Sky Survey has found over 9000\u00a0white dwarfs, mostly new.\nComposition and structure.\nHertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram\nSpectral type\nO\nB\nA\nF\nG\nK\nM\nL\nT\nBrown dwarfs\nWhite dwarfs\nRed dwarfs\nSubdwarfs\nMain sequence&lt;br&gt;(\"dwarfs\")\nSubgiants\nGiants\nRed giants\nBlue giants\nBright giants\nSupergiants\nRed supergiant\nHypergiants\nabsolutemagni-tude(MV)\nAlthough white dwarfs are known with estimated masses as low as 0.17\u00a0M\u2609 and as high as 1.33\u00a0M\u2609, the mass distribution is strongly peaked at 0.6\u00a0M\u2609, and the majority lie between 0.5 and 0.7\u00a0M\u2609. The estimated radii of observed white dwarfs are typically 0.8\u20132% the radius of the Sun; this is comparable to the Earth's radius of approximately 0.9% solar radius. A white dwarf, then, packs mass comparable to the Sun's into a volume that is typically one millionth of the Sun's; the average density of matter in a white dwarf must therefore be, very roughly, \u00a0times greater than the average density of the Sun, or approximately , or 1\u00a0tonne per cubic centimetre. A typical white dwarf has a density of between 104 and . White dwarfs are composed of one of the densest forms of matter known, surpassed only by other compact stars such as neutron stars and the hypothetical quark stars.\nWhite dwarfs were found to be extremely dense soon after their discovery. If a star is in a binary system, as is the case for Sirius\u00a0B or 40\u00a0Eridani\u00a0B, it is possible to estimate its mass from observations of the binary orbit. This was done for Sirius\u00a0B by 1910, yielding a mass estimate of 0.94\u00a0M\u2609, which compares well with a more modern estimate of 1.00\u00a0M\u2609. Since hotter bodies radiate more energy than colder ones, a star's surface brightness can be estimated from its effective surface temperature, and that from its spectrum. If the star's distance is known, its absolute luminosity can also be estimated. From the absolute luminosity and distance, the star's surface area and its radius can be calculated. Reasoning of this sort led to the realization, puzzling to astronomers at the time, that due to their relatively high temperature and relatively low absolute luminosity, Sirius\u00a0B and 40\u00a0Eridani\u00a0B must be very dense. When Ernst \u00d6pik estimated the density of visual binary stars in 1916, he found that 40\u00a0Eridani\u00a0B had a density of over \u00a0times that of the Sun, which was so high that he called it \"impossible\". As Eddington put it in 1927:50\nWe learn about the stars by receiving and interpreting the messages which their light brings to us. The message of the companion of Sirius when it was decoded ran: \"I am composed of material 3000\u00a0times denser than anything you have ever come across; a ton of my material would be a little nugget that you could put in a matchbox.\" What reply can one make to such a message? The reply which most of us made in 1914 was\u2014\"Shut up. Don't talk nonsense.\"\nAs Eddington pointed out in 1924, densities of this order implied that, according to the theory of general relativity, the light from Sirius\u00a0B should be gravitationally redshifted. This was confirmed when Adams measured this redshift in 1925.\nSuch densities are possible because white dwarf material is not composed of atoms joined by chemical bonds, but rather consists of a plasma of unbound nuclei and electrons. There is therefore no obstacle to placing nuclei closer than normally allowed by electron orbitals limited by normal matter. Eddington wondered what would happen when this plasma cooled and the energy to keep the atoms ionized was no longer sufficient. This paradox was resolved by R. H. Fowler in 1926 by an application of the newly devised quantum mechanics. Since electrons obey the Pauli exclusion principle, no two electrons can occupy the same state, and they must obey Fermi\u2013Dirac statistics, also introduced in 1926 to determine the statistical distribution of particles that satisfy the Pauli exclusion principle. At zero temperature, therefore, electrons cannot all occupy the lowest-energy, or \"ground\", state; some of them would have to occupy higher-energy states, forming a band of lowest-available energy states, the \"Fermi sea\". This state of the electrons, called \"degenerate\", meant that a white dwarf could cool to zero temperature and still possess high energy.\nCompression of a white dwarf will increase the number of electrons in a given volume. Applying the Pauli exclusion principle, this will increase the kinetic energy of the electrons, thereby increasing the pressure. This \"electron degeneracy pressure\" supports a white dwarf against gravitational collapse. The pressure depends only on density and not on temperature. Degenerate matter is relatively compressible; this means that the density of a high-mass white dwarf is much greater than that of a low-mass white dwarf and that the radius of a white dwarf decreases as its mass increases.\nThe existence of a limiting mass that no white dwarf can exceed without collapsing to a neutron star is another consequence of being supported by electron degeneracy pressure. Such limiting masses were calculated for cases of an idealized, constant density star in 1929 by Wilhelm Anderson and in 1930 by Edmund C. Stoner. This value was corrected by considering hydrostatic equilibrium for the density profile, and the presently known value of the limit was first published in 1931 by Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar in his paper \"The Maximum Mass of Ideal White Dwarfs\". For a non-rotating white dwarf, it is equal to approximately 5.7\u00a0M\u2609 / \"\u03bc\"e2, where \"\u03bc\"e is the average molecular weight per electron of the star. As the carbon-12 and oxygen-16 that predominantly compose a carbon\u2013oxygen white dwarf both have atomic numbers equal to half their atomic weight, one should take \"\u03bc\"e equal to 2 for such a star, leading to the commonly quoted value of 1.4\u00a0M\u2609. (Near the beginning of the 20th\u00a0century, there was reason to believe that stars were composed chiefly of heavy elements,955 so, in his 1931 paper, Chandrasekhar set the average molecular weight per electron, \"\u03bc\"e, equal to 2.5, giving a limit of 0.91\u00a0M\u2609.) Together with William Alfred Fowler, Chandrasekhar received the Nobel Prize for this and other work in 1983. The limiting mass is now called the \"Chandrasekhar limit\".\nIf a carbon-oxygen white dwarf accreted enough matter to reach the Chandrasekhar limit of about 1.44 solar masses (for a non-rotating star), it would no longer be able to support the bulk of its mass through electron degeneracy pressure and, in the absence of nuclear reactions, would begin to collapse. The current view is that this limit is not normally attained; increasing temperature and density inside the core ignite carbon fusion as the star approaches the limit (to within about 1%) before collapse is initiated. In contrast, for a core primarily composed of oxygen, neon and magnesium, the collapsing white dwarf will typically form a neutron star. In this case, only a fraction of the star's mass will be ejected during the collapse.\nIf a white dwarf star accumulates sufficient material from a stellar companion to raise its core temperature enough to ignite carbon fusion, it will undergo runaway nuclear fusion, completely disrupting it. There are three avenues by which this detonation is theorised to happen: stable accretion of material from a companion, the collision of two white dwarfs, or accretion that causes ignition in a shell that then ignites the core. The dominant mechanism by which type Ia supernovae are produced remains unclear. Despite this uncertainty in how type Ia supernovae are produced, type Ia supernovae have very uniform properties and are useful standard candles over intergalactic distances. Some calibrations are required to compensate for the gradual change in properties or different frequencies of abnormal luminosity supernovae at high redshift, and for small variations in brightness identified by light curve shape or spectrum.\nWhite dwarfs have low luminosity and therefore occupy a strip at the bottom of the Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram, a graph of stellar luminosity versus color or temperature. They should not be confused with low-luminosity objects at the low-mass end of the main sequence, such as the hydrogen-fusing red dwarfs, whose cores are supported in part by thermal pressure, or the even lower-temperature brown dwarfs.\nMass\u2013radius relationship.\nThe relationship between the mass and radius of white dwarfs can be estimated using the nonrelativistic Fermi gas equation of state, which gives\nformula_1\nwhere R is the radius, M is the mass of the white dwarf, and the subscript formula_2 indicates relative to the Sun. The chemical potential, formula_3 is a thermodynamic property giving the change in energy as one electron is added or removed; it relates to the composition of the star. Numerical treatment of more complete models have been tested against observational data with good agreement.\nSince this analysis uses the non-relativistic formula \"p\"2\u2009/\u20092\"m\" for the kinetic energy, it is non-relativistic. When the electron velocity in a white dwarf is close to the speed of light, the kinetic energy formula approaches \"pc\" where \"c\" is the speed of light, and it can be shown that the Fermi gas model has no stable equilibrium in the ultrarelativistic limit. In particular, this analysis yields the maximum mass of a white dwarf, which is:\nformula_4\nThe observation of many white dwarf stars implies that either they started with masses similar to the Sun or something dramatic happened to reduce their mass.\nFor a more accurate computation of the mass-radius relationship and limiting mass of a white dwarf, one must compute the equation of state that describes the relationship between density and pressure in the white dwarf material. If the density and pressure are both set equal to functions of the radius from the center of the star, the system of equations consisting of the hydrostatic equation together with the equation of state can then be solved to find the structure of the white dwarf at equilibrium. In the non-relativistic case, the radius is inversely proportional to the cube root of the mass. Relativistic corrections will alter the result so that the radius becomes zero at a finite value of the mass. This is the limiting value of the mass\u2014called the \"Chandrasekhar limit\"\u2014at which the white dwarf can no longer be supported by electron degeneracy pressure. The graph on the right shows the result of such a computation. It shows how radius varies with mass for non-relativistic (blue curve) and relativistic (green curve) models of a white dwarf. Both models treat the white dwarf as a cold Fermi gas in hydrostatic equilibrium. The average molecular weight per electron, \"\u03bc\"e, has been set equal to 2. Radius is measured in standard solar radii and mass in standard solar masses.\nThese computations all assume that the white dwarf is non-rotating. If the white dwarf is rotating, the equation of hydrostatic equilibrium must be modified to take into account the centrifugal pseudo-force arising from working in a rotating frame. For a uniformly rotating white dwarf, the limiting mass increases only slightly. If the star is allowed to rotate nonuniformly, and viscosity is neglected, then, as was pointed out by Fred Hoyle in 1947, there is no limit to the mass for which it is possible for a model white dwarf to be in static equilibrium. Not all of these model stars will be dynamically stable.\nRotating white dwarfs and the estimates of their diameter in terms of the angular velocity of rotation has been treated in the rigorous mathematical literature. The fine structure of the free boundary of white dwarfs has also been analysed mathematically rigorously.\nRadiation and cooling.\nThe degenerate matter that makes up the bulk of a white dwarf has a very low opacity, because any absorption of a photon requires that an electron must transition to a higher empty state, which may not be possible as the energy of the photon may not be a match for the possible quantum states available to that electron, hence radiative heat transfer within a white dwarf is low, but it has a high thermal conductivity. As a result, the interior of the white dwarf maintains an almost uniform temperature as it cools down, starting at approximately 108\u00a0K shortly after the formation of the white dwarf and reaching less than 106\u00a0K for the coolest known white dwarfs. An outer shell of non-degenerate matter sits on top of the degenerate core. The outermost layers, which are cooler than the interior, radiate roughly as a black body. A white dwarf remains visible for a long time, as its tenuous outer atmosphere slowly radiates the thermal content of the degenerate interior.\nThe visible radiation emitted by white dwarfs varies over a wide color range, from the whitish-blue color of an O-, B- or A-type main sequence star to the yellow-orange of a late K- or early M-type star. White dwarf effective surface temperatures extend from over \u00a0K to barely under 4000\u00a0K. In accordance with the Stefan\u2013Boltzmann law, luminosity increases with increasing surface temperature (proportional to \"T\"4); this surface temperature range corresponds to a luminosity from over 100 times that of the Sun to under &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20441 that of the Sun. Hot white dwarfs, with surface temperatures in excess of , have been observed to be sources of soft (i.e., lower-energy) X-rays. This enables the composition and structure of their atmospheres to be studied by soft X-ray and extreme ultraviolet observations.\nWhite dwarfs also radiate neutrinos through the Urca process. This process has more effect on hotter and younger white dwarfs. Because neutrinos can pass easily through stellar plasma, they can drain energy directly from the dwarf's interior; this mechanism is the dominant contribution to cooling for approximately the first 20 million years of a white dwarf's existence.\nAs was explained by Leon Mestel in 1952, unless the white dwarf accretes matter from a companion star or other source, its radiation comes from its stored heat, which is not replenished. White dwarfs have an extremely small surface area to radiate this heat from, so they cool gradually, remaining hot for a long time. As a white dwarf cools, its surface temperature decreases, the radiation that it emits reddens, and its luminosity decreases. Since the white dwarf has no energy sink other than radiation, it follows that its cooling slows with time. The rate of cooling has been estimated for a carbon white dwarf of 0.59\u00a0M\u2609 with a hydrogen atmosphere. After initially taking approximately 1.5\u00a0billion years to cool to a surface temperature of 7140\u00a0K, cooling approximately 500 more kelvins to 6590\u00a0K takes around 0.3\u00a0billion years, but the next two steps of around 500\u00a0kelvins (to 6030\u00a0K and 5550\u00a0K) take first 0.4 and then 1.1\u00a0billion years.\nMost observed white dwarfs have relatively high surface temperatures, between 8000\u00a0K and . A white dwarf, though, spends more of its lifetime at cooler temperatures than at hotter temperatures, so we should expect that there are more cool white dwarfs than hot white dwarfs. Once we adjust for the selection effect that hotter, more luminous white dwarfs are easier to observe, we do find that decreasing the temperature range examined results in finding more white dwarfs. This trend stops when we reach extremely cool white dwarfs; few white dwarfs are observed with surface temperatures below , and one of the coolest so far observed, WD J2147\u20134035, has a surface temperature of approximately 3050\u00a0K. The reason for this is that the Universe's age is finite; there has not been enough time for white dwarfs to cool below this temperature. The white dwarf luminosity function can therefore be used to find the time when stars started to form in a region; an estimate for the age of our galactic disk found in this way is 8\u00a0billion years. A white dwarf will eventually, in many trillions of years, cool and become a non-radiating \"black dwarf\" in approximate thermal equilibrium with its surroundings and with the cosmic background radiation. No black dwarfs are thought to exist yet.\nAt very low temperatures (&lt;4000 K) white dwarfs with hydrogen in their atmosphere will be affected by collision induced absorption (CIA) of hydrogen molecules colliding with helium atoms. This affects the optical red and infrared brightness of white dwarfs with a hydrogen or mixed hydrogen-helium atmosphere. This makes old white dwarfs with this kind of atmosphere bluer than the main cooling sequence. White dwarfs with hydrogen-poor atmospheres, such as WD J2147\u20134035, are less affected by CIA and therefore have a yellow to orange color.\nWhite dwarf core material is a completely ionized plasma\u2014a mixture of nuclei and electrons\u2014that is initially in a fluid state. It was theoretically predicted in the 1960s that at a late stage of cooling, it should crystallize into a solid state, starting at its center. The crystal structure is thought to be a body-centered cubic lattice. In 1995 it was suggested that asteroseismological observations of pulsating white dwarfs yielded a potential test of the crystallization theory, and in 2004, observations were made that suggested approximately 90% of the mass of BPM 37093 had crystallized. Other work gives a crystallized mass fraction of between 32% and 82%.\nAs a white dwarf core undergoes crystallization into a solid phase, latent heat is released, which provides a source of thermal energy that delays its cooling. Another possible mechanism that was suggested to explain this cooling anomaly in some types of white dwarfs is a solid\u2013liquid distillation process: the crystals formed in the core are buoyant and float up, thereby displacing heavier liquid downward, thus causing a net release of gravitational energy. Chemical fractionation between the ionic species in the plasma mixture can release a similar or even greater amount of energy. This energy release was first confirmed in 2019 after the identification of a pile up in the cooling sequence of more than white dwarfs observed with the \"Gaia\" satellite.\nLow-mass helium white dwarfs (mass &lt; 0.20\u00a0M\u2609), often referred to as extremely low-mass white dwarfs (ELM WDs), are formed in binary systems. As a result of their hydrogen-rich envelopes, residual hydrogen burning via the CNO cycle may keep these white dwarfs hot for hundreds of millions of years. In addition, they remain in a bloated proto-white dwarf stage for up to 2\u00a0Gyr before they reach the cooling track.\nAtmosphere and spectra.\nAlthough most white dwarfs are thought to be composed of carbon and oxygen, spectroscopy typically shows that their emitted light comes from an atmosphere that is observed to be either hydrogen or helium dominated. The dominant element is usually at least 1000\u00a0times more abundant than all other elements. As explained by Schatzman in the 1940s, the high surface gravity is thought to cause this purity by gravitationally separating the atmosphere so that heavy elements are below and the lighter above. This atmosphere, the only part of the white dwarf visible to us, is thought to be the top of an envelope that is a residue of the star's envelope in the AGB phase and may also contain material accreted from the interstellar medium. The envelope is believed to consist of a helium-rich layer with mass no more than &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044100 of the star's total mass, which, if the atmosphere is hydrogen-dominated, is overlain by a hydrogen-rich layer with mass approximately &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20441 of the star's total mass.\nAlthough thin, these outer layers determine the thermal evolution of the white dwarf. The degenerate electrons in the bulk of a white dwarf conduct heat well. Most of a white dwarf's mass is therefore at almost the same temperature (isothermal), and it is also hot: a white dwarf with surface temperature between and will have a core temperature between approximately and . The white dwarf is kept from cooling very quickly only by its outer layers' opacity to radiation.\nThe first attempt to classify white dwarf spectra appears to have been by G. P. Kuiper in 1941, and various classification schemes have been proposed and used since then. The system currently in use was introduced by Edward M. Sion, Jesse L. Greenstein and their coauthors in 1983 and has been subsequently revised several times. It classifies a spectrum by a symbol that consists of an initial D, a letter describing the primary feature of the spectrum followed by an optional sequence of letters describing secondary features of the spectrum (as shown in the adjacent table), and a temperature index number, computed by dividing by the effective temperature. For example, a white dwarf with only He I lines in its spectrum and an effective temperature of could be given the classification of DB3, or, if warranted by the precision of the temperature measurement, DB3.5. Likewise, a white dwarf with a polarized magnetic field, an effective temperature of , and a spectrum dominated by He I lines that also had hydrogen features could be given the classification of DBAP3. The symbols \"?\" and \":\" may also be used if the correct classification is uncertain.\nWhite dwarfs whose primary spectral classification is DA have hydrogen-dominated atmospheres. They make up the majority, approximately 80%, of all observed white dwarfs. The next class in number is of DBs, approximately 16%. The hot, above , DQ class (roughly 0.1%) have carbon-dominated atmospheres. Those classified as DB, DC, DO, DZ, and cool DQ have helium-dominated atmospheres. Assuming that carbon and metals are not present, which spectral classification is seen depends on the effective temperature. Between approximately to , the spectrum will be classified DO, dominated by singly ionized helium. From to , the spectrum will be DB, showing neutral helium lines, and below about , the spectrum will be featureless and classified DC.\nMolecular hydrogen (H2) has been detected in spectra of the atmospheres of some white dwarfs. While theoretical work suggests that some types of white dwarfs may have stellar corona, searches at X-ray and radio wavelengths, where coronae are most easily detected, have been unsuccessful.\nA few white dwarfs have been observed to have inhomogeneous atmosphere with one side dominated by hydrogen and the other side dominated by helium.\nMetal-rich white dwarfs.\nAround 25\u201333% of white dwarfs have metal lines in their spectra, which is notable because any heavy elements in a white dwarf should sink into the star's interior in just a small fraction of the star's lifetime. The prevailing explanation for metal-rich white dwarfs is that they have recently accreted rocky planetesimals. The bulk composition of the accreted object can be measured from the strengths of the metal lines. For example, a 2015 study of the white dwarf Ton 345 concluded that its metal abundances were consistent with those of a differentiated, rocky planet whose mantle had been eroded by the host star's wind during its asymptotic giant branch phase.\nMagnetic field.\nMagnetic fields in white dwarfs with a strength at the surface of c. 1\u00a0million gauss (100\u00a0teslas) were predicted by P. M. S. Blackett in 1947 as a consequence of a physical law he had proposed, which stated that an uncharged, rotating body should generate a magnetic field proportional to its angular momentum. This putative law, sometimes called the \"Blackett effect\", was never generally accepted, and by the 1950s even Blackett felt it had been refuted.39\u201343 In the 1960s, it was proposed that white dwarfs might have magnetic fields due to conservation of total surface magnetic flux that existed in its progenitor star phase. A surface magnetic field of c. 100\u00a0gauss (0.01\u00a0T) in the progenitor star would thus become a surface magnetic field of c. 100\u00a0\u00d7\u00a01002\u00a0= 1\u00a0million gauss (100\u00a0T) once the star's radius had shrunk by a factor of 100.484 The first magnetic white dwarf to be discovered was GJ 742 (also known as GRW +70 8247), which was identified by James Kemp, John Swedlund, John Landstreet and Roger Angel in 1970 to host a magnetic field by its emission of circularly polarized light. It is thought to have a surface field of approximately 300\u00a0million gauss (30\u00a0kT).\nSince 1970, magnetic fields have been discovered in well over 200\u00a0white dwarfs, ranging from to \u00a0gauss (0.2\u00a0T to 100\u00a0kT). Many of the presently known magnetic white dwarfs are identified by low-resolution spectroscopy, which is able to reveal the presence of a magnetic field of 1\u00a0megagauss or more. Thus the basic identification process also sometimes results in discovery of magnetic fields. White dwarf magnetic fields may also be measured without spectral lines, using the techniques of broadband circular polarimetry, or maybe through measurement of their frequencies of radio emission via the electron cyclotron maser. It has been estimated that at least 10% of white dwarfs have fields in excess of 1\u00a0million gauss (100\u00a0T). The magnetic fields in a white dwarf may allow for the existence of a new type of chemical bond, perpendicular paramagnetic bonding, in addition to ionic and covalent bonds, though detecting molecules bonded in this way is expected to be difficult.\nThe highly magnetized white dwarf in the binary system AR Scorpii was identified in 2016 as the first pulsar in which the compact object is a white dwarf instead of a neutron star. A second white dwarf pulsar was discovered in 2023.\nVariability.\nEarly calculations suggested that there might be white dwarfs whose luminosity varied with a period of around 10 seconds, but searches in the 1960s failed to observe this. The first variable white dwarf found was HL Tau 76; in 1965 and 1966, and was observed to vary with a period of approximately 12.5\u00a0minutes. The reason for this period being longer than predicted is that the variability of HL Tau 76, like that of the other pulsating variable white dwarfs known, arises from non-radial gravity wave pulsations. Known types of pulsating white dwarf include the \"DAV\", or \"ZZ Ceti\", stars, including HL Tau 76, with hydrogen-dominated atmospheres and the spectral type DA; \"DBV\", or \"V777\u00a0Her\", stars, with helium-dominated atmospheres and the spectral type DB; and \"GW Vir stars\", sometimes subdivided into \"DOV\" and \"PNNV\" stars, with atmospheres dominated by helium, carbon, and oxygen. GW Vir stars are not, strictly speaking, white dwarfs, but are stars that are in a position on the Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram between the asymptotic giant branch and the white dwarf region. They may be called \"pre-white dwarfs\". These variables all exhibit small (1%\u201330%) variations in light output, arising from a superposition of vibrational modes with periods of hundreds to thousands of seconds. Observation of these variations gives asteroseismological evidence about the interiors of white dwarfs.\nFormation.\nWhite dwarfs are thought to represent the end point of stellar evolution for main-sequence stars with masses from about 0.07 to 10\u00a0M\u2609. The composition of the white dwarf produced will depend on the initial mass of the star. Current galactic models suggest the Milky Way galaxy currently contains about ten billion white dwarfs.\nStars with very low mass.\nWhite dwarf stars with less than 25% of a solar mass are all found in binary star systems. The proportion of white dwarfs in binary systems declines to 34% for masses in the range . These objects all have helium cores. It is thought that, over a lifespan that considerably exceeds the age of the universe (c. 13.8\u00a0billion years), such a star will eventually burn all its hydrogen, for a while becoming a blue dwarf, and end its evolution as a helium white dwarf composed chiefly of helium-4 nuclei. Due to the very long time this process takes, it is not thought to be the origin of the observed helium white dwarfs. Rather, they are believed to be mostly the product of mass loss in binary systems. Proposals to explain those helium white dwarfs that are not part of binary systems include mass loss due to a large exoplanetary companion, stars being stripped of material by companions exploding as supernovae, and various types of stellar mergers.\nStars with low to medium mass.\nIf the mass of a main-sequence star is between 0.5 and 8\u00a0M\u2609, its core will become sufficiently hot to fuse helium into carbon and oxygen via the triple-alpha process, but it will never become sufficiently hot to fuse neon. Near the end of the period in which it undergoes fusion reactions, such a star will have a carbon\u2013oxygen or oxygen-neon core that does not undergo fusion reactions, surrounded by an inner helium-burning shell and an outer hydrogen-burning shell. On the Hertzsprung\u2013Russell diagram, it will be found on the asymptotic giant branch. It will then expel most of its outer material to form a planetary nebula, leaving only the carbon\u2013oxygen core.\nWhite dwarfs with a mass greater than are termed ultramassive white dwarfs. When formed in single-star systems, these are expected to have an oxygen-neon core. However, a significant fraction (~20%) of ultramassive white dwarfs are formed through white dwarf mergers. In this case the result is a carbon-oxygen ultramassive white dwarf.\nStars with medium to high mass.\nIf a star is massive enough, its core will eventually become sufficiently hot to fuse carbon to neon, and then to fuse neon to iron. Such a star will not become a white dwarf, because the mass of its central, non-fusing core, initially supported by electron degeneracy pressure, will eventually exceed the largest possible mass supportable by degeneracy pressure. At this point the core of the star will collapse and it will explode in a core-collapse supernova that will leave behind a remnant neutron star, black hole, or possibly a more exotic form of compact star. Some main-sequence stars, of perhaps 8 to 10\u00a0M\u2609, although sufficiently massive to fuse carbon to neon and magnesium, may be insufficiently massive to fuse neon. Such a star may leave a remnant white dwarf composed chiefly of oxygen, neon, and magnesium, provided that its core does not collapse, and provided that fusion does not proceed so violently as to blow apart the star in a supernova. Although a few white dwarfs have been identified that may be of this type, most evidence for the existence of such comes from the novae called \"ONeMg\" or \"neon\" novae. The spectra of these novae exhibit abundances of neon, magnesium, and other intermediate-mass elements that appear to be only explicable by the accretion of material onto an oxygen\u2013neon\u2013magnesium white dwarf.\nType Iax supernova.\nType Iax supernovae, that involve helium accretion by a white dwarf, have been proposed to be a channel for transformation of this type of stellar remnant. In this scenario, the carbon detonation produced in a Type Ia supernova is too weak to destroy the white dwarf, expelling just a small part of its mass as ejecta, but produces an asymmetric explosion that kicks the star, often known as a \"zombie star\", to the high speeds of a hypervelocity star. The matter processed in the failed detonation is re-accreted by the white dwarf with the heaviest elements such as iron falling to its core where it accumulates. These \"iron-core\" white dwarfs would be smaller than the carbon\u2013oxygen kind of similar mass and would cool and crystallize faster than those.\nFate.\nOnce formed, a white dwarf is stable and will usually continue to cool almost indefinitely, eventually to become a black dwarf. Assuming that the universe continues to expand, it is thought that in 1019 to 1020 years, the galaxies will evaporate as their stars escape into intergalactic space. White dwarfs should generally survive galactic dispersion, although an occasional collision between white dwarfs may produce a new fusing star (e.g. an extreme helium star) or a super-Chandrasekhar mass white dwarf that will explode in a Type Ia supernova. \nThe lifetime of a white dwarf is thought to be on the order of the hypothetical lifetime of the proton, known to be at least 1034\u20131035 years. Some grand unified theories predict a proton lifetime between 1030 and 1036 years. If these theories are not valid, the proton might still decay by complicated nuclear reactions or through quantum gravitational processes involving virtual black holes; in these cases, the lifetime is estimated to be no more than 10200 years. If protons do decay, the mass of a white dwarf will decrease very slowly with time as its nuclei decay, until it loses enough mass to become a non-degenerate lump of matter, and finally disappears completely.\nA white dwarf can also be cannibalized or evaporated by a companion star, causing the white dwarf to lose so much mass that it becomes a planetary mass object. The resultant object, orbiting the former companion, now host star, could be a helium planet or diamond planet.\nDebris disks and planets.\nA white dwarf's stellar and planetary system is inherited from its progenitor star and may interact with the white dwarf in various ways. There are several indications that a white dwarf has a remnant planetary system.\nThe most common observable evidence of a remnant planetary system is pollution of the spectrum of a white dwarf with metal absorption lines. 27\u201350% of white dwarfs show a spectrum polluted with metals, but these heavy elements settle out in the atmosphere of white dwarfs colder than . The most widely accepted hypothesis is that this pollution comes from tidally disrupted rocky bodies. The first observation of a metal-polluted white dwarf was by van Maanen in 1917 at the Mount Wilson Observatory and is now recognized as the first evidence of exoplanets in astronomy. The white dwarf van Maanen 2 shows iron, calcium and magnesium in its atmosphere, but van Maanen misclassified it as the faintest F-type star based on the calcium H- and K-lines. The nitrogen in white dwarfs is thought to come from nitrogen-ice of extrasolar Kuiper Belt objects, the lithium is thought to come from accreted crust material and the beryllium is thought to come from exomoons.\nA less common observable evidence is infrared excess due to a flat and optically thick debris disk, which is found in around 1%\u20134% of white dwarfs. The first white dwarf with infrared excess was discovered by Zuckerman and Becklin in 1987 in the near-infrared around Giclas 29-38 and later confirmed as a debris disk. White dwarfs hotter than sublimate all the dust formed by tidally disrupting a rocky body, preventing the formation of a debris disk. In colder white dwarfs, a rocky body might be tidally disrupted near the Roche radius and forced into a circular orbit by the Poynting\u2013Robertson drag, which is stronger for less massive white dwarfs. The Poynting\u2013Robertson drag will also cause the dust to orbit closer and closer towards the white dwarf, until it will eventually sublimate and the disk will disappear. A debris disk will have a lifetime of around a few million years for white dwarfs hotter than . Colder white dwarfs can have disk-lifetimes of a few 10 million years, which is enough time to tidally disrupt a second rocky body and forming a second disk around a white dwarf, such as the two rings around LSPM J0207+3331.\nThe least common observable evidence of planetary systems are detected major or minor planets. Only a handful of giant planets and a handful of minor planets are known around white dwarfs. \nSome estimations based on the metal content of the atmospheres of the white dwarfs consider that at least 15% of them may be orbited by planets or asteroids, or at least their debris. Another suggested idea is that white dwarfs could be orbited by the stripped cores of rocky planets, that would have survived the red giant phase of their star but losing their outer layers and, given those planetary remnants would likely be made of metals, to attempt to detect them looking for the signatures of their interaction with the white dwarf's magnetic field. Other suggested ideas of how white dwarfs are polluted with dust involve the scattering of asteroids by planets or via planet-planet scattering.\nLiberation of exomoons from their host planet could cause white dwarf pollution with dust. Either the liberation could cause asteroids to be scattered towards the white dwarf or the exomoon could be scattered into the Roche radius of the white dwarf. The mechanism behind the pollution of white dwarfs in binaries was also explored as these systems are more likely to lack a major planet, but this idea cannot explain the presence of dust around single white dwarfs. While old white dwarfs show evidence of dust accretion, white dwarfs older than ~1 billion years or &gt;7000 K with dusty infrared excess were not detected until the discovery of LSPM J0207+3331 in 2018, which has a cooling age of ~3 billion years. The white dwarf shows two dusty components that are being explained with two rings with different temperatures.\nAnother possible way to detect planetary systems around white dwarfs is through their radio emissions. In 2004 and 2005, A. J. Willes and K. Wu hypothesized that when an exoplanet travels through the magnetosphere of a white dwarf, it may generate auroral radio emissions from the magnetic poles of the white dwarf, similar to how Io stimulates radio emissions from Jupiter; a search for such radio emission from nine white dwarfs by researchers using the Arecibo radio telescope did not find any so far.\nExamples.\nInfrared spectroscopic observations made by NASA's Spitzer Space Telescope of WD 2226-210, the central star of the Helix Nebula, suggest the presence of a dust cloud, which may be caused by cometary collisions. It is possible that infalling material from this may cause X-ray emission from the central star. Similarly, observations made in 2004 indicated the presence of a dust cloud around the young (estimated to have formed from its AGB progenitor about 500\u00a0million years ago) white dwarf G29-38, which may have been created by tidal disruption of a comet passing close to the white dwarf.\nThe metal-rich white dwarf WD 1145+017 is the first white dwarf observed with a disintegrating minor planet that transits the star. The disintegration of the planetesimal generates a debris cloud that passes in front of the star every 4.5\u00a0hours, causing a 5-minute-long fade in the star's optical brightness. The depth of the transit is highly variable.\nThe giant planet WD J0914+1914b is first gas planet orbiting around a white dwarf and is being evaporated by the strong ultraviolet radiation of the hot white dwarf. Part of the evaporated material is being accreted in a gaseous disk around the white dwarf. The weak hydrogen line as well as other lines in the spectrum of the white dwarf revealed the presence of the giant planet.\nThe white dwarf WD 0145+234 shows brightening in the mid-infrared, seen in NEOWISE data. The brightening, not seen before 2018, may be due to the tidal disruption of an exoasteroid, the first time such an event has been observed.\nWD 1856+534 is the first transiting major planet to be observed orbiting a white dwarf, and remains the only such example as of 2023. MOA-2010-BLG-477L, a white dwarf discovered thanks to a microlensing event, is also known to have a giant planet.\nGD 140 and LAWD 37 are suspected to have giant exoplanets due to anomaly in the Hipparcos-Gaia proper motion. For GD 140 it is suspected to be a planet several times more massive than Jupiter and for LAWD 37 it is suspected to be a planet less massive than Jupiter. Additionally, WD 0141-675 was suspected to have a super-Jupiter with an orbital period of 33.65 days based on Gaia astrometry. This is remarkable because WD 0141-675 is polluted with metals and metal polluted white dwarfs have long been suspected to host giant planets that disturb the orbits of minor planets, causing the pollution. Both GD 140 and WD 0141 will be observed with JWST in cycle 2 with the aim to detect infrared excess caused by the planets. The planet candidate at WD 0141-675 was found to be a false positive caused by a software error.\nHabitability.\nA search has been proposed for transits of hypothetical Earth-like planets around white dwarfs with surface temperatures of less than . Such stars that could harbor a habitable zone at a distance of c.\u00a00.005 to 0.02\u00a0AU that would last upwards of 3\u00a0billion years. This is so close that any habitable planets would be tidally locked. As a white dwarf has a size similar to that of a planet, these kinds of transits would produce strong eclipses.\nNewer research casts some doubts on this idea, given that the close orbits of those hypothetical planets around their parent stars would subject them to strong tidal forces that could render them uninhabitable by triggering a greenhouse effect. Another suggested constraint to this idea is the origin of those planets. Leaving aside formation from the accretion disk surrounding the white dwarf, there are two ways a planet could end in a close orbit around stars of this kind: by surviving being engulfed by the star during its red giant phase, and then spiralling inward, or inward migration after the white dwarf has formed. The former case is implausible for low-mass bodies, as they are unlikely to survive being absorbed by their stars. In the latter case, the planets would have to expel so much orbital energy as heat, through tidal interactions with the white dwarf, that they would likely end as uninhabitable embers.\nBinary stars and novae.\nIf a white dwarf is in a binary star system and is accreting matter from its companion, a variety of phenomena may occur, including novae and Type Ia supernovae. It may also be a super-soft x-ray source if it is able to take material from its companion fast enough to sustain fusion on its surface. On the other hand, phenomena in binary systems such as tidal interaction and star\u2013disc interaction, moderated by magnetic fields or not, act on the rotation of accreting white dwarfs. In fact, the (securely known) fastest-spinning white dwarfs are members of binary systems (the fastest one being the white dwarf in CTCV J2056-3014). A close binary system of two white dwarfs can lose angular momentum and radiate energy in the form of gravitational waves, causing their mutual orbit to steadily shrink until the stars merge.\nType Ia supernovae.\nThe mass of an isolated, nonrotating white dwarf cannot exceed the Chandrasekhar limit of ~\u00a01.4\u00a0M\u2609. This limit may increase if the white dwarf is rotating rapidly and nonuniformly. White dwarfs in binary systems can accrete material from a companion star, increasing both their mass and their density. As their mass approaches the Chandrasekhar limit, this could theoretically lead to either the explosive ignition of fusion in the white dwarf or its collapse into a neutron star.\nThere are two models that might explain the progenitor systems of Type Ia supernovae: the \"single-degenerate model\" and the \"double-degenerate model\". In the \"single-degenerate model\", a carbon\u2013oxygen white dwarf accretes mass and compresses its core by pulling mass from a companion non-degenerate star. It is believed that compressional heating of the core leads to ignition of carbon fusion as the mass approaches the Chandrasekhar limit. Because the white dwarf is supported against gravity by quantum degeneracy pressure instead of by thermal pressure, adding heat to the star's interior increases its temperature but not its pressure, so the white dwarf does not expand and cool in response. Rather, the increased temperature accelerates the rate of the fusion reaction, in a runaway process that feeds on itself. The thermonuclear flame consumes much of the white dwarf in a few seconds, causing a Type Ia supernova explosion that obliterates the star. In another possible mechanism for Type\u00a0Ia supernovae, the \"double-degenerate model\", two carbon\u2013oxygen white dwarfs in a binary system merge, creating an object with mass greater than the Chandrasekhar limit in which carbon fusion is then ignited. In both cases, the white dwarfs are not expected to survive the Type Ia supernova.\nThe \"single-degenerate model\" was the favored mechanism for Type Ia supernovae, but now, because of observations, the \"double-degenerate model\" is thought to be the more likely scenario. Predicted rates of white dwarf-white dwarf mergers are comparable to the rate of Type Ia supernovae and would explain the lack of hydrogen in the spectra of Type Ia supernovae. The main mechanism for Type Ia supernovae remains an open question. In the single-degenerate scenario, the accretion rate onto the white dwarf needs to be within a narrow range dependent on its mass so that the hydrogen burning on the surface of the white dwarf is stable. If the accretion rate is too low, novae on the surface of the white dwarf will blow away accreted material. If it is too high, the white dwarf will expand and the white dwarf and companion star will be in a common envelope. This stops the growth of the white dwarf thus preventing it from reaching the Chandrasekhar limit and exploding. For the single-degenerate model its companion is expected to survive, but there is no strong evidence of such a star near Type Ia supernovae sites. In the double-degenerate scenario, white dwarfs need to be in very close binaries; otherwise their inspiral time is longer than the age of the universe. It is also likely that instead of a Type Ia supernova, the merger of two white dwarfs will lead to core-collapse. As a white dwarf accretes material quickly, the core can ignite off-center, which leads to gravitational instabilities that could create a neutron star.\nThe historical bright SN 1006 is thought to have been a Type Ia supernova from a white dwarf, possibly the merger of two white dwarfs. Tycho's Supernova of 1572 was also a type\u00a0Ia supernova, and its remnant has been detected. WD 0810\u2013353, a white dwarf 11 parsecs away from the Sun, is possibly a hypervelocity runaway ejected from a Type Ia supernova, though this has been disputed.\nPost-common envelope binary.\nA post-common envelope binary (PCEB) is a binary consisting of a white dwarf or hot subdwarf and a closely tidally-locked red dwarf (in other cases this might be a brown dwarf instead of a red dwarf). These binaries form when the red dwarf is engulfed in the red giant phase. As the red dwarf orbits inside the common envelope, it is slowed down in the denser environment. This slowed orbital speed is compensated with a decrease of the orbital distance between the red dwarf and the core of the red giant. The red dwarf spirals inwards towards the core and might merge with the core. If this does not happen and instead the common envelope is ejected, then the binary ends up in a close orbit, consisting of a white dwarf and a red dwarf. This type of binary is called a post-common envelope binary. The evolution of the PCEB continues as the two dwarf stars orbit closer and closer due to magnetic braking and by releasing gravitational waves. The binary might then evolve into one of several dramatic outcomes: a high-field magnetic white dwarf, a white dwarf pulsar, a double-degenerate binary, or even a Type Ia supernova. Because a PCEB may evolve at some point into a cataclysmic variable, some of them are also called pre-cataclysmic variables.\nCataclysmic variables.\nBefore accretion of material pushes a white dwarf close to the Chandrasekhar limit, accreted hydrogen-rich material on the surface may ignite in a less destructive type of thermonuclear explosion powered by hydrogen fusion. These surface explosions can be repeated as long as the white dwarf's core remains intact. This weaker kind of repetitive cataclysmic phenomenon is called a (classical) nova. Astronomers have also observed dwarf novae, which have smaller, more frequent luminosity peaks than the classical novae. These are thought to be caused by the release of gravitational potential energy when part of the accretion disc collapses onto the star, rather than through a release of energy due to fusion. In general, binary systems with a white dwarf accreting matter from a stellar companion are called cataclysmic variables. As well as novae and dwarf novae, several other classes of these variables are known, including polars and intermediate polars, both of which feature highly magnetic white dwarfs. Both fusion- and accretion-powered cataclysmic variables have been observed to be X-ray sources.\nOther multiple-star systems.\nOther binaries include those that consist of a main sequence star (or giant) and a white dwarf. The binary Sirius AB is an example pair of this type. White dwarfs can also exist as binaries or multiple star systems that only consist of white dwarfs. An example of a resolved triple white dwarf system is WD J1953\u22121019, discovered with Gaia DR2 data. One interesting field is the study of remnant planetary systems around white dwarfs. It is expected that planets orbiting several AU from a star will survive the star's post-main-sequence transformation into a white dwarf. Moreover, white dwarfs, being much smaller and correspondingly less luminous than their progenitors, are less likely to outshine any bodies in orbit around them. This makes white dwarfs advantageous targets for direct-imaging searches for exoplanets and brown dwarfs. The first brown dwarf to be detected by direct imaging was the companion to the white dwarf GD 165 A, discovered in 1988. More recently, the white dwarf WD 0806\u2212661 was found to have a cold companion body of substellar mass, variously described as a brown dwarf or an exoplanet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33507", "revid": "1316633040", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33507", "title": "Wabash College", "text": "Men's college in Crawfordsville, Indiana, US\nWabash College is a private, men's liberal arts college in Crawfordsville, Indiana, United States. Founded in 1832 by a group of Dartmouth College graduates and Midwestern leaders, the institution was originally named \"The Wabash Teachers Seminary and Manual Labor College\". It was later renamed Wabash College in 1851. The college was founded with the intention of providing classical and English education to young men in the region, aiming to develop future educators and clergy.\nCaleb Mills, a Dartmouth alumnus and graduate of Andover Theological Seminary, was the first faculty member of Wabash College. He played a pivotal role in shaping the institution's academic character and later became instrumental in establishing Indiana's public education system. The college's mission is to educate men to think critically, act responsibly, lead effectively, and live humanely.\nAs of 2024, Wabash College enrolls approximately 835 undergraduate students. The academic program is structured into three divisions: natural sciences, humanities and arts, and social sciences. Students can choose from 36 majors and minors, with popular fields of study including rhetoric, economics, history, and biology. A distinctive feature of the Wabash curriculum is the comprehensive examination process for seniors, which includes both written and oral components to assess students' mastery in their major disciplines.\nWabash College is one of only three non-religious, all-male, four-year colleges remaining in the United States, alongside Hampden\u2013Sydney College and Morehouse College. The college maintains a strong tradition of single-sex education, emphasizing close-knit community and leadership development.\nHistory.\nWabash College was founded on November 21, 1832, by a group of Presbyterian ministers and laymen in Crawfordsville, Indiana. Seeking to bring classical and moral education to the American frontier, the founders envisioned a \"classical and English high school, rising into a college as soon as the wants of the country demand.\" The next day, they dedicated the campus grounds in prayer while kneeling in the snow\u2014a moment that became symbolic of Wabash's spiritual and intellectual mission.\nClasses began in 1833 on education, and Elihu W. Baldwin became the college's first president in 1835. Early instruction emphasized Classical education, Theology, and a short-lived Manual labor school model. Despite early financial hardship and a devastating fire in 1838, Wabash quickly rebuilt. It developed a distinguished faculty, notably Caleb Mills, a founder of Indiana Department of Education, and Edmund Otis Hovey, who served as professor, trustee, treasurer, and fundraiser for over four decades.\nBy the mid-19th century, Wabash had become known for its liberal arts education, rooted in classical studies, rhetoric, and moral philosophy. Student life was centered around literary societies such as the Euphronean and Calliopean, which provided early platforms for oratory and debate.\nUnder President Joseph F. Tuttle (1862\u20131892), the campus added buildings such as Center Hall and Peck Hall, while Wabash increasingly emphasized scientific education alongside the classics.\nIn the 20th century, President George L. Mackintosh (1903\u20131926) instituted major reforms, including the development of the Wabash Plan, which emphasized faculty-student dialogue, senior comprehensive exams, and a distinctive curriculum rooted in interdisciplinary learning. During World War I, Wabash hosted a Student Army Training Corps unit, and during World War II, the college trained Navy officers through the V-12 Navy College Training Program.\nThe postwar period brought enrollment growth through the G.I. Bill and further academic reform. Despite broader national trends toward coeducation, Wabash remained a men's college, reaffirming that identity via a campus-wide referendum in 1992. In 1996, under the direction of James Fisher, Wabash became the first college in America to stage Tony Kushner's \"Angels in America\".\nIn the 21st century, Wabash has prioritized global learning, undergraduate research, and leadership programs like WabashX. The college maintains vibrant traditions such as Chapel Sing, Ringing In and Out, and the annual Monon Bell Classic against DePauw University. With a strong alumni network, modern facilities, and enduring commitment to the liberal arts, Wabash continues its mission: \"to educate men to think critically, act responsibly, lead effectively, and live humanely.\"\nAcademics.\nWabash College offers a liberal arts education leading exclusively to the Bachelor of Arts degree. All students follow a structured curriculum that emphasizes critical thinking, effective communication, ethical reasoning, and global citizenship.\nStudents complete general education requirements in three academic divisions: Humanities, Social Sciences, and Natural Sciences. They must also demonstrate core competencies in writing, oral communication, quantitative reasoning, and diversity and inclusion. One of the college's signature academic features is the comprehensive examination, a capstone assessment required of all seniors in their major field.\nMajors and minors.\nWabash offers more than 25 majors and minors across the arts, humanities, sciences, and social sciences. Popular majors include Political Science, Economics, Psychology, Biology, and Rhetoric. Interdisciplinary and special programs include:\nStudents may also propose independent majors with faculty approval.\nRankings.\nWabash is consistently ranked among the top liberal arts colleges in the United States. In its 2024 rankings, \"U.S. News &amp; World Report\" placed Wabash:\n\"The Princeton Review\" (2024 edition) recognized Wabash in several categories:\nWabash is also frequently ranked among the top U.S. colleges for alumni giving and faculty accessibility\nComprehensive examinations.\nAll Wabash seniors are required to pass a comprehensive examination in their major field of study, a hallmark of the college's academic program. These exams assess students' mastery of core disciplinary concepts, their ability to synthesize information, and their written and oral communication skills.\nStudent life.\nAs of 2024, Wabash College enrolled 822 undergraduate students. The college remains one of the few all-male liberal arts institutions in the United States.\nRacial and ethnic breakdown.\n\"Source: https://\"\nSocioeconomic breakdown.\n\"Source: https://, 2024\"\nTraditions.\nOne of Wabash's most symbolic ceremonies is Ringing In Saturday, which marks the beginning of each student's college experience. Incoming freshmen are formally welcomed by the dean of students, the dean of admissions, the president of the alumni association, and the college president. Each student is ceremonially \"rung in\" by the president using the same bell that Caleb Mills, the college's first teacher, used in the 1830s.\nDuring Homecoming Week, Wabash hosts Chapel Sing, a spirited and widely recognized tradition where fraternity pledges (and independent students) attempt to sing the college fight song, \"Old Wabash\", in unison before a panel of judges. Organized by the Student Senate and the Sphinx Club, Chapel Sing symbolizes school pride and serves as a rite of passage.\nStudent government.\nThe Wabash College student government is formally known as the Student Body of Wabash College. It operates under a tripartite structure with executive, legislative, and judicial branches.\nStudent organizations.\nWabash supports a diverse array of student-led clubs and organizations. Groups represent interests including academics, community service, performing arts, political advocacy, identity and culture, and recreation. All organizations are eligible to receive funding through the Student Senate, which manages the student activity fee assessed each semester.\nThe college newspaper, \"The Bachelor,\" has been continuously published since 1908 and covers news, sports, editorials, and student opinion.\nFraternities.\nApproximately 50\u201360% of Wabash students join one of the college's fraternities, which play a significant role in social, residential, and extracurricular life. The first chapter, Beta Theta Pi, was founded at Wabash in 1846 and has remained active since.\nThe Gentleman's Rule.\nWabash College does not employ a traditional student code of conduct. Instead, the institution relies on a single guiding principle known as the Gentleman's Rule:The student is expected to conduct himself at all times, both on and off campus, as a gentleman and a responsible citizen.This rule entrusts students with personal responsibility for their actions and is considered the college's oldest and most defining tradition. It is enforced through community standards, administrative discretion, and peer accountability rather than a formal disciplinary code.\nEndowment.\nAs of June 30, 2023, Wabash College's endowment was valued at approximately $391 million, equating to about $462,700 per student. This positions Wabash among the top liberal arts colleges in the United States in terms of endowment per student.\nGiant Steps campaign.\nFrom July 1, 2017, to June 30, 2023, Wabash College conducted the \"Giant Steps\" campaign, the largest fundraising effort in its history. The campaign raised over $250 million from 12,029 donors who made 82,272 gifts, surpassing the original goal of $225 million.\nA notable contribution to the campaign was a $40 million gift from alumni Paul Woolls '75 and his wife, Betty O'Shaughnessy Woolls, marking the largest single donation in the college's history.\nEndowment management.\nIn 2015, Wabash College partnered with Strategic Investment Group to serve as its outsourced chief investment officer (OCIO). This collaboration has yielded significant returns; over a seven-year period, endowment returns exceeded benchmarks by $14.1 million.\nThe college employs a 12-quarter rolling average to determine its annual endowment draw, which was set at 5.5% for fiscal years 2022 and 2023. This approach aims to provide a predictable stream of funding while preserving the endowment's long-term purchasing power.\nFinancial aid and scholarships.\nApproximately 99% of Wabash students receive some form of financial aid, supported in part by the endowment. The college's commitment to affordability is reflected in its extensive scholarship offerings, many of which were expanded through the Giant Steps campaign.\nAthletics.\nWabash College competes in NCAA Division III as a member of the North Coast Athletic Conference (NCAC). The college fields 13 intercollegiate varsity sports, all for men, consistent with its status as one of the nation's last remaining all-male colleges. The school's athletic teams are known as the Little Giants.\nSince 2021, Wabash has fielded a varsity men's volleyball team, competing in the Midwest Collegiate Volleyball League, as the NCAC sponsors volleyball only for women. Wabash's athletic cheer is \"Wabash Always Fights\", and the college maintains a strong tradition of athletic excellence, student involvement, and alumni support.\nThe school's varsity sports include: baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, lacrosse, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and wrestling.\nNational championships.\nWabash has won several NCAA Division III national team and individual championships.\nRivalries.\nWabash College maintains one of the oldest and most storied football rivalries in the United States with DePauw University through the annual Monon Bell Classic. First played in 1890, the game has been held annually since 1911 (with exceptions during World War II and the COVID-19 pandemic) and features the two Indiana schools vying for the 300-pound locomotive bell known as the Monon Bell.\nHistorical highlights.\nInter-collegiate football at Wabash dates back to 1884, when student-coach Edwin R. Taber assembled a team and defeated Butler University by a score of 4\u20130 in the first intercollegiate football game in the history of the state of Indiana.\nWabash's athletic history also includes early success in basketball, where the Little Giants reached the Final Four of the 1982 NCAA Division III Tournament, and in wrestling, where the program has produced multiple individual NCAA champions and team podium finishes in recent years.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33508", "revid": "100426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33508", "title": "The Dartmoor Worker", "text": ""}
