{"id": "42047", "revid": "50346119", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42047", "title": "Mastectomy", "text": "Surgical removal of one or both breasts\nMastectomy is the medical term for the surgical removal of one or both breasts, partially or completely. A mastectomy is usually carried out to treat breast cancer. In some cases, women believed to be at high risk of breast cancer choose to have the operation as a preventive measure. Alternatively, some women can choose to have a wide local excision, also known as a lumpectomy, an operation in which a small volume of breast tissue containing the tumor and a surrounding margin of healthy tissue is removed to conserve the breast. Both mastectomy and lumpectomy are referred to as \"local therapies\" for breast cancer, targeting the area of the tumor, as opposed to systemic therapies, such as chemotherapy, hormonal therapy, or immunotherapy.\nThe decision to perform a mastectomy to treat cancer is based on various factors, including breast size, the number of lesions, biologic aggressiveness of a breast cancer, the availability of adjuvant radiation, and the willingness of the patient to accept higher rates of tumor recurrences after lumpectomy and/or radiation. Outcome studies comparing mastectomy to lumpectomy with radiation have suggested that routine radical mastectomy surgeries will not always prevent later distant secondary tumors arising from micro-metastases prior to discovery, diagnosis, and operation. In most circumstances, there is no difference in both overall survival and breast cancer recurrence rate. While there are both medical and non-medical indications for mastectomy, the clinical guidelines and patient expectations for before and after surgery remain the same.\nMastectomies may also be carried out for transgender men and non-binary people to alleviate gender dysphoria. When part of gender-affirming care, mastectomies are commonly referred to as \"top surgery\".\nCisgender men with gynecomastia may also choose to undergo mastectomies.\nMastectomy indications.\nBreast Cancer.\nDespite the increased ability to offer breast conservation techniques to those with breast cancer, certain groups may be better served by traditional mastectomy procedures including:\nOther uses.\nMastectomy has non-cancer medical uses as well, including cosmetic or reconstructive surgery. Men with gynecomastia may be eligible for mastectomy, but minimally invasive surgical techniques also exist. \nTransgender men and non-binary people assigned female at birth may undergo a mastectomy as a gender-affirming surgery. Within the transgender community, double mastectomies are more commonly referred to as \"top surgery\".\nSide effects.\nAside from the post-surgical pain and the obvious change in the shape of the chest and/or breast(s), possible side effects of a mastectomy include soreness, scar tissue at the site of the incision, short-term swelling, phantom breast pain (pain in the breast or tissue that has been removed), wound infection or bleeding, hematoma (buildup of blood in the wound), and seroma (buildup of clear fluid in the wound). If the lymph nodes are also removed, additional side effects such as lymphedema (swelling of the lymph nodes) may occur.\nUpper limb problems such as shoulder and arm pain, weakness, and restricted movement are a common side effect after breast cancer surgery. According to research in the UK, an exercise programme started 7\u201310 days after surgery can reduce upper limb problems.\nTypes.\nCurrently, there are several surgical approaches to mastectomy, and the type that a person decides to undergo (or whether they will decide instead to have a lumpectomy) depends on factors such as the size, location, and behavior of the tumor (if one is present), whether or not the surgery is prophylactic or preventative, and whether the person intends to undergo reconstructive surgery after the mastectomy. For trans people undergoing a gender-affirming mastectomy, the type of procedure chosen can also vary depending on the desired results, the scarring (or lack thereof), the recovery process, the person's desire for nipple sensation, and other different factors based both on personal preference and input from medical experts.\nBefore surgery.\nPrior to undergoing the mastectomy, it is important to meet with the surgeon to discuss the relevant risks and benefits of receiving the surgery. Depending on the indication for mastectomy, there may be other options to address the clinical condition. One important consideration to discuss with the surgeon is whether breast reconstruction will occur and when this procedure will take place. One option is to have the reconstruction immediately after the mastectomy in the same surgery, whereas other patients opt for a subsequent surgery for reconstruction. This breast reconstruction surgery will be conducted by a plastic surgeon. In addition to the surgeon, a meeting with an anesthesiologist is pertinent in order to review the patient's medical history and determine the plan of anesthesia.\nLeading up to the day of the surgery, there are various considerations that patients can be cognizant of to facilitate their recovery following surgery. As with other surgeries that may lead to appreciable blood loss, it is advised not to take aspirin or aspirin-containing products for 10 days before the surgery. The reason for this is to prevent the anti-coagulative function of aspirin and other blood thinners that would make it difficult to achieve coagulation during the surgery. In addition, it is important for patients to tell the doctor about any medications, vitamins, or supplements that they are taking because some substances could interfere with the surgery. It is also pertinent for patients to not eat or drink 8 to 12 hours before surgery, however, there may be specific pre-operative instructions given by each patient's care team.\nMaintaining fitness and proper nutrition is also an important measure to consider prior to receiving a surgery because it has been shown that postoperative outcomes are improved in patients that exercise and maintain a healthy diet prior to surgery. In addition to nutrition and exercise, it is advised to reduce alcohol consumption and smoking. This concept of pre-rehabilitation is beneficial in mitigating post-operative complications and decreasing length of stay in the hospital. The rationale is that increasing a patient's functional status prior to surgery will allow for a smoother and faster recovery in the postoperative setting.\nRecent research has indicated that mammograms should not be done with any increased frequency than the normal procedure in women undergoing breast surgery, including breast augmentation, mastopexy, and breast reduction.\nAfter surgery.\nPrior to leaving the hospital, people who have had a mastectomy will typically be given a prescription for pain medication to ameliorate any pain or discomfort at the surgery site. Recognizing signs of a surgical site infection including fever, redness, swelling, or pus is important. Any signs of infection should be reported to and assessed by a medical professional. In addition, signs of lymphedema due if lymph node removal is performed during mastectomy may be detected by the presence of heaviness, tightness, or fullness in the hand, arm, or axillary area region.\nRegarding return to activity, it is advised not to engage in strenuous activity or lift objects above 5 pounds for up to six weeks after a mastectomy at the discretion of the physician. However, it is common for a member of the medical team to provide home exercises designed to maintain arm and shoulder movement and flexibility. Walking is also highly encouraged and allowed immediately after surgery. Most people who undergo a mastectomy can return to work and other regular physical activities in approximately 4 weeks after surgery.\nPeople who have had a mastectomy will usually have a post-operative follow-up visit with their provider 1\u20132 weeks after surgery. The time at which a person can start to wear a bra or reconstructive breast varies and is often at the discretion of the physician.\nSome people with breast cancer may require additional radiotherapy after their mastectomy procedure with the goal of reducing the risk of the cancer returning to the lymph nodes and the tissue remaining in the wall of the person's chest. The decision by the medical team for suggesting radiotherapy may differ between individual professionals. Most teams recommend radiotherapy after a masectomy for people who are at a higher risk of cancer recurrence including those with large breast tumours (5\u00a0cm and larger) and people with cancer that has spread to multiple axillary lymph nodes (4 or more). The necessity and usefulness of radiotherapy on people at slightly lower risk, for example, the cancer has spread to 1-3 axillary lymph nodes, is not as clear.\nTrends.\nBetween 2005 and 2013, the overall rate of mastectomy increased 36 percent, from 66 to 90 per 100,000 adult women. The rate of hospital-based bilateral mastectomies (inpatient and outpatient combined) more than tripled, from 9.1 to 29.7 per 100,000 adult women, whereas the rate of unilateral mastectomies remained relatively stable at around 60 per 100,000 women. From 2005 to 2013, the rate of bilateral outpatient mastectomies increased more than fivefold and the inpatient rate nearly tripled. The rate of unilateral mastectomies nearly doubled in the outpatient setting but decreased 28 percent in the inpatient setting. By 2013, nearly half of all mastectomies were performed outpatient. However, there are concerns that these rising rates of mastectomies are most greatly seen in women with node-negative and noninvasive lesions, which are subsets of patients that do not require mastectomy.\nFrequency.\nMastectomy rates vary tremendously worldwide, as was documented by the 2004 'Intergroup Exemestane Study', an analysis of surgical techniques used in an international trial of adjuvant treatment among 4,700 females with early breast cancer in 37 countries. The mastectomy rate was highest in central and eastern Europe at 77%. The USA had the second highest rate of mastectomy with 56%, western and northern Europe averaged 46%, southern Europe 42% and Australia and New Zealand 34%.\nHistory.\nBreast surgery was first described 3000 years ago. In the earliest stages, breast tumors were treated with simple cauterization. Later, alternating incision and cauterization with complete removal of tumors was suggested by Leonides, one of the first breast oncologic surgeons recorded in history. Other surgeons recommended excision and cauterization only if the tumor could be removed completely; otherwise, avoiding surgery was recommended. Ambrose Pare (b. 1510), a well-known surgeon from Paris who was well known for his experience treating soldiers who were injured, proposed a multi-tiered approach to breast surgery. While superficial cancers could be excised, more advanced cancers were managed through compression by lead plates to reduce blood supply to the tumor.\nIn the 1500s, William Fabry (b.1560), a German surgeon known as the father of German surgery, created a device that compressed and fixed the base of the breast during mastectomy, which subsequently allowed for faster excision of the breast. Another technique developed during this time to improve efficiency of breast dissection was using ligatures to achieve anterior traction. Despite the development of these techniques, there were few mastectomies actually performed at the time due to lack of qualified surgeons and the high morbidity, mortality and disfigurement associated with the surgery.\nDuring the 1700s, large contributions in mapping lymph nodes for surgery were made by Pieter Camper (b. 1722) and Paolo Mascagni (b. 1752). Lymph node removal was advocated for in managing breast cancer. At this time, surgeries were still performed without proper aseptics and without anesthesia.\nIn the 19th century, Seishu Hanaoka, a Japanese surgeon, performed the first surgery in the world under general anesthesia. Many more advancements in anesthesia and aseptic technique were made during this century. William Roentgen discovered x-rays in 1895, which radically shifted breast cancer treatment from a solely surgical approach to the multi-pronged approach employed today, including imaging, hormonal therapy, radiation, chemotherapy and immunotherapy.\nDuring the 20th century, progress was made towards skin-sparing mastectomies for treatment of breast cancer. Recent literature suggests that these procedures allow for improved aesthetic outcomes while also not increasing risk for local recurrence compared to conventional mastectomies.\nFor example, in 1937, the Tauton State Hospital in Massachusetts reported 1 mastectomy in its operating rooms that year, listed alongside other operations including colostomy (1), enterostomy (1), herniorrhaphy (4), laparotomy (1), and circumcision (2).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42048", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42048", "title": "Plastic surgery", "text": "Medical surgical specialty\nPlastic surgery is a surgical specialty involving restoration, reconstruction, or alteration of the human body. It can be divided into two main categories: reconstructive surgery and cosmetic surgery. Reconstructive surgery covers a wide range of specialties, including craniofacial surgery, hand surgery, microsurgery, and the treatment of burns. This kind of surgery focuses on restoring a body part or improving its function. In contrast, cosmetic (or aesthetic) surgery focuses solely on improving the physical appearance of the body. A comprehensive definition of plastic surgery has never been established, because it has no distinct anatomical object and thus overlaps with practically all other surgical specialties. An essential feature of plastic surgery is that it involves the treatment of conditions that require or may require tissue relocation skills.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"plastic\" in \"plastic surgery\" refers to the concept of \"reshaping\" and comes from the Greek \u03c0\u03bb\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03b9\u03ba\u03ae (\u03c4\u03ad\u03c7\u03bd\u03b7), \"plastik\u0113\" (\"tekhn\u0113\"), \"the art of modelling\" of malleable flesh. This meaning in English is seen as early as 1598. In the surgical context, the word \"plastic\" first appeared in 1816 and was established in 1838 by Eduard Zeis, preceding the modern technical usage of the word for the synthetic polymer material by 70 years.\nHistory.\nTreatments for the plastic repair of a broken nose are first mentioned in the c.\u20091600 BC Egyptian medical text called the Edwin Smith papyrus. The early trauma surgery textbook was named after the American Egyptologist, Edwin Smith. Reconstructive surgery techniques were being carried out in India by 800 BC. Sushruta was a physician who made contributions to the field of plastic and cataract surgery in the 6th century BC.\nThe Romans also performed plastic cosmetic surgery, using simple techniques, such as repairing damaged ears, from around the 1st century BC. For religious reasons, they did not dissect either human beings or animals, thus, their knowledge was based in its entirety on the texts of their Greek predecessors. Notwithstanding, Aulus Cornelius Celsus left some accurate anatomical descriptions, some of which\u2014for instance, his studies on the genitalia and the skeleton\u2014are of special interest to plastic surgery.\nArabs practiced the plastic surgery, during the Abbasid Caliphate in 750 AD. The Arabic translations made their way into Europe via intermediaries. In Italy, the Branca family of Sicily and Gaspare Tagliacozzi (Bologna) became familiar with the techniques of Sushruta.\nIn all fields of surgery, the Arab physician, surgeon, and chemist Al-Zahrawi talks of the use of silk thread sutures to achieve good cosmesis. He describes what is thought to be the first attempt at reduction mammaplasty for the management of gynaecomastia. He gives detailed descriptions of other basic surgical techniques such as cautery and wound management.\nBritish physicians travelled to India to see rhinoplasties being performed by Indian methods. Reports on Indian rhinoplasty performed by a Kumhar (potter) vaidya were published in the \"Gentleman's Magazine\" by 1794. Joseph Constantine Carpue spent 20 years in India studying local plastic surgery methods. Carpue was able to perform the first major surgery in the Western world in the year 1815. Instruments described in the \"Sushruta Samhita\" were further modified in the Western world.\nIn 1465, Sabuncu's book, description, and classification of hypospadias were more informative and up to date. Localization of the urethral meatus was described in detail. Sabuncuoglu also detailed the description and classification of ambiguous genitalia. In mid-15th-century Europe, Heinrich von Pfolspeundt described a process \"to make a new nose for one who lacks it entirely, and the dogs have devoured it\" by removing skin from the back of the arm and suturing it in place. However, because of the dangers associated with surgery in any form, especially that involving the head or face, it was not until the 19th and 20th centuries that such surgery became common.\nIn 1814, Joseph Carpue successfully performed an operative procedure on a British military officer who had lost his nose to the toxic effects of mercury treatments. In 1818, German surgeon Carl Ferdinand von Graefe published his major work entitled \"Rhinoplastik\". Von Graefe modified the Italian method using a free skin graft from the arm instead of the original delayed pedicle flap.\nThe first American plastic surgeon was John Peter Mettauer, who, in 1827, performed the first cleft palate operation with instruments that he designed himself.\nJohann Friedrich Dieffenbach specialized in skin transplantation and early plastic surgery. His work in rhinoplastic and maxillofacial surgery established many modern techniques of reconstructive surgery. In 1845, Dieffenbach wrote a comprehensive text on rhinoplasty, titled \"Operative Chirurgie\", and introduced the concept of reoperation to improve the cosmetic appearance of the reconstructed nose. Dieffenbach has been called the \"father of plastic surgery\".\nAnother case of plastic surgery for nose reconstruction from 1884 at Bellevue Hospital was described in \"Scientific American\".\nIn 1891, American otorhinolaryngologist John Roe presented an example of his work: a young woman on whom he reduced a dorsal nasal hump for cosmetic indications. In 1892, Robert Weir experimented unsuccessfully with xenografts (duck sternum) in the reconstruction of sunken noses. In 1896, James Israel, a urological surgeon from Germany, and in 1889 George Monks of the United States each described the successful use of heterogeneous free-bone grafting to reconstruct saddle nose defects. In 1898, Jacques Joseph, the German orthopaedic-trained surgeon, published his first account of reduction rhinoplasty. In 1910, Alexander Ostroumov, the Russian pharmacist, and perfume and cosmetics manufacturer, founded a unique plastic surgery department in his Moscow Institute of Medical Cosmetics. In 1928, Jacques Joseph published .\nNascency of maxillofacial surgery.\nThe development of weapons such as machine guns and explosive shells during World War I created trench warfare, which led to a rapid increase in the number of mutilations to the faces and the heads of soldiers because the trenches mainly offered protection to the body. The surgeons, who were not prepared for these injuries, were even less prepared for a large number of injuries and had to react quickly and intelligently to treat the greatest number. Facial injuries were hard to treat on the front line, and because of the sanitary conditions, many infections could occur. Sometimes, some stitches were made on a jagged wound without considering the amount of flesh that had been lost, so the resulting scars were hideous and disfigured soldiers. Some of the wounded had severe injuries, and the stitches were not sufficient, so some became blind or were left with gaping holes instead of their nose. Harold Gillies, scared by the number of new facial injuries and the lack of good surgical techniques, decided to dedicate an entire hospital to the reconstruction of facial injuries as fully as possible. He took into account the psychological dimension. Gillies introduced skin grafts to the treatments of soldiers, so they would be less horrified by looking at themselves in the mirror.\nIt is the multidisciplinary approach to the treatment of facial lesions, bringing together plastic surgeons, dental surgeons, technicians, and specialized nurses, which has made it possible to develop techniques leading to the reconstruction of injured faces. Before the dentist Auguste Charles Valadier and then Gillies identified the need to advance the specialty of maxillofacial surgery, which would be directly dedicated to the management of war wounds at this time. Gillies developed a new technique using rotational and transposition flaps but also bone grafts from the ribs and tibia to reconstruct facial defects caused by the weapons during the war. He experimented with this technique so he knew that he had to start by moving back healthy tissue to its normal position, and then he would be able to fill with tissue from another place on the body of the soldier. One of the most successful techniques in skin grafting had the aim of not completely severing the connection to the body. It was possible by releasing and lifting a flap of skin from the wound. The flap of skin, still connected to the donor site, would then be swung over the site of the wound, allowing the maintenance of physical connection and ensuring that blood is supplied to the skin, increasing the chances of the skin graft being accepted by the body. At this time, we also assisted in improving treating infections also meant that important injuries had become survivable, mostly thanks to the new technique of Gillies. Some soldiers arrived at the hospital of Gillies without noses, chins, cheekbones, or even eyes. But for them, the most important trauma was psychological.\nDevelopment of modern techniques.\nThe father of modern plastic surgery is generally considered to have been Sir Harold Gillies. A New Zealand otolaryngologist working in London, he developed many of the techniques of modern facial surgery in caring for soldiers with disfiguring facial injuries during the First World War.\nDuring World War I, he worked as a medical minder with the Royal Army Medical Corps. After working with the French oral and maxillofacial surgeon Hippolyte Morestin on skin grafts, he persuaded the army's chief surgeon, Arbuthnot-Lane, to establish a facial injury ward at the Cambridge Military Hospital, Aldershot, later upgraded to a new hospital for facial repairs at Sidcup in 1917. There, Gillies and his colleagues developed many techniques of plastic surgery; more than 11,000 operations were performed on more than 5,000 men (mostly soldiers with facial injuries, usually from gunshot wounds). After the war, Gillies developed a private practice with Rainsford Mowlem, including many famous patients, and travelled extensively to promote his advanced techniques worldwide.\nIn 1930, Gillies' cousin, Archibald McIndoe, joined the practice and became committed to plastic surgery. When World War II broke out, plastic surgery provision was largely divided between the different services of the armed forces, and Gillies and his team were split up. Gillies himself was sent to Rooksdown House near Basingstoke, which became the principal army plastic surgery unit; Tommy Kilner (who had worked with Gillies during the First World War, and who now has a surgical instrument named after him, the kilner cheek retractor) went to Queen Mary's Hospital, Roehampton; and Mowlem went to St Albans. McIndoe, consultant to the RAF, moved to the recently rebuilt Queen Victoria Hospital in East Grinstead, Sussex, and founded a Centre for Plastic and Jaw Surgery. There, he treated very deep burns and serious facial disfigurement, such as loss of eyelids, typical of those caused to aircrew by burning fuel.\nMcIndoe is often recognized for not only developing new techniques for treating badly burned faces and hands but also for recognising the importance of the rehabilitation of the casualties and particularly of social reintegration back into normal life. He disposed of the \"convalescent uniforms\" and let the patients use their service uniforms instead. With the help of two friends, Neville and Elaine Blond, he also convinced the locals to support the patients and invite them to their homes. McIndoe kept referring to them as \"his boys\" and the staff called him \"The Boss\" or \"The Maestro\".\nHis other important work included the development of the walking-stalk skin graft, and the discovery that immersion in saline promoted healing as well as improving survival rates for patients with extensive burns\u2014this was a serendipitous discovery drawn from observation of differential healing rates in pilots who had come down on land and in the sea. His radical, experimental treatments led to the formation of the Guinea Pig Club at Queen Victoria Hospital, Sussex. Among the better-known members of his \"club\" were Richard Hillary, Bill Foxley and Jimmy Edwards.\nSub-specialties.\nPlastic surgery is a broad field and may be subdivided further. In the United States, plastic surgeons are board certified by American Board of Plastic Surgery. Subdisciplines of plastic surgery may include:\nAesthetic surgery.\nAesthetic surgery is a central component of plastic surgery and includes facial and body aesthetic surgery. Plastic surgeons use cosmetic surgical principles in all reconstructive surgical procedures as well as isolated operations to improve overall appearance.\nBurn surgery.\nBurn surgery generally takes place in two phases. Acute burn surgery is the treatment immediately after a burn. Reconstructive burn surgery takes place after the burn wounds have healed.\nCraniofacial surgery.\nCraniofacial surgery is divided into pediatric and adult craniofacial surgery. Pediatric craniofacial surgery mostly revolves around the treatment of congenital anomalies of the craniofacial skeleton and soft tissues, such as cleft lip and palate, microtia, craniosynostosis, and pediatric fractures. Adult craniofacial surgery deals mostly with reconstructive surgeries after trauma or cancer and revision surgeries, along with orthognathic surgery and facial feminization surgery. Craniofacial surgery is an important part of all plastic surgery training programs. Further training and subspecialisation are obtained via a craniofacial fellowship. Craniofacial surgery is also practiced by maxillofacial surgeons.\nEthnic plastic surgery.\nEthnic plastic surgery is plastic surgery performed to change ethnic attributes, often considered used as a way of \"passing\".\nHand surgery.\nHand surgery is concerned with acute injuries and chronic diseases of the hand and wrist, correction of congenital malformations of the upper extremities, and peripheral nerve problems (such as brachial plexus injuries or carpal tunnel syndrome). Hand surgery is an important part of training in plastic surgery, as well as microsurgery, which is necessary to replant an amputated extremity. The hand surgery field is also practiced by orthopedic surgeons and general surgeons. Scar tissue formation after surgery can be problematic on the delicate hand, causing loss of dexterity and digit function if severe enough. There have been cases of surgery on women's hands in order to correct perceived flaws to create the perfect engagement ring photo.\nMicrosurgery.\nMicrosurgery is generally concerned with the reconstruction of missing tissues by transferring a piece of tissue to the reconstruction site and reconnecting blood vessels. Popular subspecialty areas are breast reconstruction, head and neck reconstruction, hand surgery/replantation, and brachial plexus surgery.\nPediatric plastic surgery.\nChildren often face medical issues very different from the experiences of an adult patient. Many birth defects or syndromes present at birth are best treated in childhood, and pediatric plastic surgeons specialize in treating these conditions in children. Conditions commonly treated by pediatric plastic surgeons include craniofacial anomalies, Syndactyly (webbing of the fingers and toes), Polydactyly (excess fingers and toes at birth), cleft lip and palate, and congenital hand deformities.\nPrison plastic surgery.\n Plastic surgery was performed on an incarcerated population in order to affect their recidivism rate, a practice instituted in the early 20th century that lasted until the mid-1990s. Separate from surgery performed for medical need.\nTechniques and procedures.\nIn plastic surgery, the transfer of skin tissue (skin grafting) is a very common procedure. Skin grafts can be derived from the recipient or donors:\nUsually, good results would be expected from plastic surgery that emphasize careful planning of incisions so that they fall within the line of natural skin folds or lines, appropriate choice of wound closure, use of best available suture materials, and early removal of exposed sutures so that the wound is held closed by buried sutures.\nCosmetic surgery procedures.\nCosmetic surgery is a voluntary or elective surgery that is performed on normal parts of the body with the only purpose of improving a person's appearance or removing signs of aging. Some cosmetic surgeries such as breast reduction are also functional and can help to relieve symptoms of discomfort such as back ache or neck ache. Cosmetic surgeries are also undertaken following breast cancer and mastectomy to recreate the natural breast shape which has been lost during the process of removing the cancer. In 2014, nearly 16 million cosmetic procedures were performed in the United States alone. The number of cosmetic procedures performed in the United States has almost doubled since the start of the century. In 2014, 92% of cosmetic procedures were performed on women, up from 88% in 2001. 15.6 million cosmetic procedures were performed in 2020, with the five most common surgeries being rhinoplasties, blepharoplasties, rhytidectomies, liposuctions, and breast augmentation. Breast augmentation continues to be one of the top 5 cosmetic surgical procedures and has been since 2006. Silicone implants were used in 84% and saline implants in 16% of all breast augmentations in 2020. The American Society for Aesthetic Plastic Surgery looked at the statistics for 34 different cosmetic procedures. Nineteen of the procedures were surgical, such as rhinoplasties or rhytidectomies. The nonsurgical procedures included botox and laser hair removal. In 2010, their survey revealed that there were 9,336,814 total procedures in the United States. Of those, 1,622,290 procedures were surgical (p.\u00a05). They also found that a large majority, 81%, of the procedures were done on Caucasian people (p.\u00a012).\nIn 1949, 15,000 Americans underwent cosmetic surgery procedures and by 1969 this number rose to almost half a million people. The American Society of Plastic Surgeons estimates that more than 333,000 cosmetic procedures were performed on patients 18 years of age or younger in the US in 2005 compared to approx. 14,000 in 1996. In 2018, more than 226,994 patients between the ages of 13 and 19 underwent plastic surgery compared to just over 218,900 patients in the same age group in 2010. Concerns about young people undergoing plastic surgery include the financial burden of additional surgical procedures needed to correct problems after the initial cosmetic surgery, long-term health complications from plastic surgery, and unaddressed mental health issues that may have led to surgery. The increased use of cosmetic procedures crosses racial and ethnic lines in the U.S., with increases seen among African-Americans, Asian Americans and Hispanic Americans as well as Caucasian Americans. In Asia, cosmetic surgery has become more popular, and countries such as China and India have become Asia's biggest cosmetic surgery markets. South Korea is also rising in popularity in Asian and Western countries due to their expertise in facial bone surgeries (see cosmetic surgery in South Korea).\nPlastic surgery is increasing slowly, rising 115% from 2000 to 2015. \"According to the annual plastic surgery procedural statistics, there were 15.9 million surgical and minimally-invasive cosmetic procedures performed in the United States in 2015, a 2 percent increase over 2014.\" A study from 2021 found that requests for cosmetic procedures had increased significantly since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, possibly due to the increase in videoconferencing; cited estimates include a 10% increase in the United States and a 20% increase in France.\nThe most popular aesthetic/cosmetic procedures include:\nIn 2015, the most popular surgeries were botox, liposuction, blepharoplasties, breast implants, rhynoplasties, and rhytidectomies. According to the 2020 Plastic Surgery Statistics Report, which is published by the American Society of Plastic Surgeons, the most surgical procedure performed in the U.S. was rhinoplasty (nose reshaping) accounting for 15.2% of all cosmetic surgical procedures that year, followed by blepharoplasty (eyelid surgery), which accounted for 14% of all procedures. The third most populous procedure was rhytidectomy (facelift) (10% of all procedures), then liposuction (9.1% of all procedures).\nComplications, risks, and reversals.\nAll surgery has risks. Common complications of cosmetic surgery includes hematoma, nerve injury, infection, scarring, implant failure and end organ damage. Breast implants can have many complications, including rupture. In a study of his 4761 augmentation mammaplasty patients, Eisenberg reported that overfilling saline breast implants 10\u201313% significantly reduced the rupture-deflation rate to 1.83% at 8-years post-implantation. In 2011 FDA stated that one in five patients who received implants for breast augmentation will need them removed within 10 years of implantation.\nPsychological disorders.\nAlthough media and advertising do play a large role in influencing many people's lives, such as by making people believe plastic surgery to be an acceptable course to change one's identity to their liking, researchers believe that plastic surgery obsession is linked to psychological disorders such as body dysmorphic disorder. There exists a correlation between those with BDD and the predilection toward cosmetic plastic surgery in order to correct a perceived defect in their appearance.\nBDD is a disorder resulting in the individual becoming \"preoccupied with what they regard as defects in their bodies or faces\". Alternatively, where there is a slight physical anomaly, then the person's concern is markedly excessive. While 2% of people have body dysmorphic disorder in the United States, 15% of patients seeing a dermatologist and cosmetic surgeons have the disorder. Half of the patients with the disorder who have cosmetic surgery performed are not pleased with the aesthetic outcome. BDD can lead to suicide in some people with the condition. While many with BDD seek cosmetic surgery, the procedures do not treat BDD, and can ultimately worsen the problem. The psychological root of the problem is usually unidentified; therefore causing the treatment to be even more difficult. Some say that the fixation or obsession with correction of the area could be a sub-disorder such as anorexia or muscle dysmorphia. The increased use of body and facial reshaping applications such as Snapchat and Facetune have been identified as potential triggers of BDD. Recently, a phenomenon referred to as 'Snapchat dysmorphia' has appeared to describe people who request surgery to resemble the edited version of themselves as they appear through Snapchat filters. In response to the detrimental trend, Instagram banned all augmented reality (AR) filters that depict or promote cosmetic surgery.\nIn some cases, people whose physicians refuse to perform any further surgeries, have turned to \"do it yourself\" plastic surgery, injecting themselves and facing extreme safety risks.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42050", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42050", "title": "Hellene", "text": ""}
{"id": "42051", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42051", "title": "The IPCRESS File", "text": "Spy novel\nThe IPCRESS File is Len Deighton's first spy novel, published in 1962. The story involves Cold War brainwashing and includes scenes in Lebanon and on an atoll for a United States atomic weapon test, as well as information about Joe One, the Soviet Union's first atomic bomb. The story was made into a 1965 film and a 2022 TV series.\nPlot.\nThe novel takes the form of the unnamed protagonist's personal report to the Minister of Defence, thus becoming the 'IPCRESS File' of the title. Events begin soon after the protagonist's transfer from military intelligence to WOOC(P), a small civilian intelligence agency reporting directly to the British Cabinet, where he works under the command of a man named Dalby. An intelligence broker code-named \"Jay\" is suspected to be behind a series of kidnappings of British VIPs with the intention of selling them to the Soviets, and the protagonist is assigned to meet Jay to secure the release of \"Raven\", a high-ranking scientist. While trying to meet Jay at a Soho strip club to negotiate Raven's release, the protagonist discovers Raven's unconscious body in a back room but is unsuccessful in trying to rescue him. \nWOOC(P) learns that Raven is to be transferred to the Soviets in Beirut, and a rescue mission is organised. The protagonist is assigned as a lookout and kills the occupants of a car which suddenly arrives on the scene, believing them to be operatives working for Jay; they instead turn out to be members of the US Office of Naval Intelligence. The operation is otherwise a success and Raven is recovered, but investigation into Jay continues. A break appears when Housemartin, one of Jay's high-ranking operatives, is arrested in Shoreditch, but the protagonist and another operative arrive at the police station only to discover that Housemartin has been murdered in his cell. Information from the arrest enables WOOC(P) and the police to storm one of Jay's safe-houses, but it has been abandoned. \nA military statistician, Carswell, and his assistant Murray, are assigned to WOOC(P) to attempt to find a statistical link between the disappearances of the scientists and to help with the administration of the department, while the protagonist is assigned an assistant, Jean Tonnesen, a beautiful young woman towards whom he begins to develop romantic feelings. \nDalby reveals intelligence suggesting that Jay's operations will interfere with an American neutron bomb test in the Pacific. He, Jean and the protagonist are sent to the test site as British observers and while there the protagonist learns from an old friend in the CIA that the Americans suspect him of being a double-agent due to the deaths of the US operatives. Jean reveals that Dalby has been visiting an abandoned Japanese bunker on the island and while following Dalby to the scene the protagonist is present when the site is sabotaged, setting back the bomb test and killing a military police officer. The protagonist is arrested by the Americans and interrogated, before apparently being transferred to Hungary on suspicion of being a Soviet agent. There he is drugged and subjected to psychological and physical torture, and nearly cracks before eventually managing to escape\u2014only to discover that he is in fact in London. The protagonist takes refuge with Charlie Cavendish, the father of a friend killed during the Second World War, and attempts to re-establish contact with WOOC(P) without being arrested. Charlie is killed by Jay's operatives, forcing the protagonist on the run; he approaches Dalby at his home, but discovers Dalby with Jay, Murray and another of Jay's operatives\u2014confirming the protagonist's suspicions that Dalby is in fact the traitor.\nThe protagonist is discovered by Murray, who turns out to be an undercover operative from military intelligence also investigating Dalby. The protagonist escapes, but is captured and taken to meet Jay\u2014he has, however, allowed military intelligence to follow them, and Jay and Dalby are arrested by Colonel Ross. The protagonist reveals to Jean that Jay and Dalby were using a process called \"Induction of Psycho-neuroses by Conditioned REflex with StresS\" (IPCRESS) to brainwash the VIPs into loyalty to the Soviet Union. The links that Carswell had discovered were in fact indicators of the personality traits that Jay had used to determine which VIPs would easily succumb to the process. Colonel Ross\u2019 earlier attempt to sell information to the protagonist had been a test of his loyalty. The novel ends with the protagonist concluding his report to the Minister, revealing that Jay has turned and begun working for the British, while Dalby has ostensibly died in a car accident.\nBackground.\nDeighton wrote in 1966, \"I was earning enough money as an artist to write anything I chose. I chose a spy novel\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I liked to have a problem or enigma that could follow the action of the book, but I wanted the book to be ragged and untidy, as life is. I wanted the characterization and the dialog to control the enigma, rather than the other way around as had been the case with the detective novels of the Thirties, which had become puzzles rather than stories. Above all, I was interested in the permutations of deceit and mistake.&lt;br&gt;\nToo many people in the fiction I had read told the whole truth all the time and never seemed to make a mistake of judgment. I decided to write a first-person narrative in which the narrator would lie to anyone if it would suit his purpose[, and] chose a secret-agent format so that I could use the political background that interested me.\n\"It owed a debt to Chandler, but was inspired by \"Beat the Devil\", an old Bogart-Lorre film\", Deighton added. In 1992 he said that the inspiration to write the novel came from his real-life neighbour Anna Wolkoff, a White Russian \u00e9migr\u00e9e who collaborated with a cipher clerk from the American embassy to spy for Germany in World War II. Deighton's mother cooked for Wolkoff's dinner parties and he said that he \"vividly\" remembered when MI5 officers came to arrest her: \"The experience was a major factor in my decision to write a spy story at my first attempt at fiction.\" The plot involves mind control, the acronym IPCRESS of the title standing for \"Induction of Psycho-neuroses by Conditioned Reflex under Stress\". The brainwashing is similar to a shock technique called psychic driving pioneered by Donald Ewen Cameron in the 1950s, originally on unwitting mental hospital patients, which was used and funded by the Central Intelligence Agency's secret MKULTRA program in Canada.\nNovel.\nDeighton's protagonist is unnamed, and this is maintained through all the sequels. Early in the novel we learn that he worked for Military Intelligence for three years before joining his present agency \u2013 WOOC(P) \u2013 as a civilian employee. WOOC(P) is described as \"one of the smallest and most important of the Intelligence Units\". It is never stated exactly what the initials stand for, although his previous boss refers to it as \"Provisional\".\nWe also learn in passing that he is from Burnley, Lancashire, and that he was born in 1922 or 1923.\nWOOC(P) is a small department and the unnamed protagonist has a great deal of autonomy. He is resourceful and prepared for any eventuality, keeping an \"escape package\" containing money, a false passport and other documents circulating in the mail; he picks up the package from an accommodation address at a seedy London shop, and re-mails it to that address in a fresh envelope. He is also a gourmet who enjoys good food. Cooking features frequently in both the film and the novel; Deighton himself is an accomplished cook.\nIn common with several of his other early novels, the chapter headings have a \"feature\". In \"The IPCRESS File\" these take the form of each chapter being headed with a quote from a horoscope, which relates to the action in the chapter, though vaguely, as in most horoscopes.\nThe front cover, by Deighton's friend Raymond Hawkey, has been described as \"the template for the covers of all subsequent airport novels\".\nFilm.\nA film adaptation starring Michael Caine was released in 1965 and produced by the James Bond co-producer Harry Saltzman, assisted by several prominent members of the Bond production family. The film medium made it difficult to maintain the anonymity of Deighton's hero, who acquired the name Harry Palmer.\nThe character's name was chosen by Caine, who was having lunch with Harry Saltzman. They were trying to think of a name for the protagonist, and agreed that a boring name would best suit the protagonist's persona. Saltzman asked what would be the most boring name they could think of and Caine suggested the name Harry, then immediately apologised to Saltzman. However, Saltzman saw the funny side and pointed out that his real first name was actually Herschel, not Harry, so Saltzman was satisfied with it. The inspiration for the surname came from a boy called Palmer whom Caine knew at school. Caine described Palmer as: \"the most boring boy I'd ever met\".\nThe given name \"Harry\" actually occurs in a short sequence in the book where the unnamed protagonist is greeted by someone saying \"Hello, Harry.\" This causes him to think, \"Now my name isn't Harry, but in this business it's hard to remember whether it ever had been.\"\nTV series.\nA television adaptation of the same name, directed by James Watkins and starring Joe Cole as Palmer, premiered on ITV on 6 March 2022.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42052", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42052", "title": "Mescaline", "text": "Naturally occurring psychedelic compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMescaline, also known as mescalin or mezcalin, and in chemical terms 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenethylamine, is a naturally occurring psychedelic protoalkaloid of the substituted phenethylamine class, found in cacti like peyote (\"Lophophora williamsii\") and San Pedro (certain species of the genus \"Echinopsis\") and known for its serotonergic hallucinogenic effects.\nMescaline is typically taken orally and used recreationally, spiritually, and medically, with psychedelic effects occurring at doses from 100 to 1,000mg, including microdosing below 75mg, and it can be consumed in pure form or via mescaline-containing cacti. Mescaline induces a psychedelic experience characterized by vivid visual patterns, altered perception of time and self, synesthesia, and spiritual effects, with an onset of 0.5 to 0.9hours and a duration that increases with dose, ranging from about 6 to 14hours. Ketanserin blocks mescaline\u2019s psychoactive effects, and while it's unclear if mescaline is metabolized by monoamine oxidase enzymes, preliminary evidence suggests harmala alkaloids may potentiate its effects.\nMescaline primarily acts as a partial agonist at serotonin 5-HT2A receptors, with varying affinity and efficacy across multiple serotonin, adrenergic, dopamine, histamine, muscarinic, and trace amine receptors, but shows low affinity for most non-serotonergic targets. It is a relatively hydrophilic psychedelic compound structurally related to catecholamines but acting on the serotonergic system, first synthesized in 1919, with numerous synthetic methods and potent analogues developed since. Mescaline occurs naturally in various cacti species, with concentrations varying widely, and is biosynthesized in plants from phenylalanine via catecholamine pathways likely linked to stress responses.\nMescaline-containing cacti use dates back over 6,000 years. Peyote was studied scientifically in the 19th and 20th centuries, culminating in the isolation of mescaline as its primary psychoactive compound, legal recognition of its religious use, and ongoing exploration of its therapeutic potential. Mescaline is largely illegal worldwide, though exceptions exist for religious, scientific, or ornamental use, and it has influenced many notable cultural figures through its psychoactive effects. Very few studies concerning mescaline's activity and potential therapeutic effects in people have been conducted since the early 1970s.\nUse and effects.\nMescaline is used recreationally, spiritually (as an entheogen), and medically. It is typically taken orally. The drug is used as a psychedelic at doses of 100 to 1,000mg orally. Low doses are 100 to 200mg, an intermediate or \"good effect\" dose is 500mg, and a high or ego-dissolution dose is 1,000mg. Microdosing involves the use of subthreshold mescaline doses of less than 75mg. In addition to pure form, mescaline is used in the form of mescaline-containing cacti such as peyote and San Pedro.\nThe onset of the effects of mescaline given orally is 0.5 to 0.9hours on average with a range of 0.1 to 2.7hours. Its effects peak after 1.9 to 4.0hours with a range of 0.5 to 8.0hours. The duration of mescaline appears to be dose-dependent, varying from 6.4hours on average (range 3.0\u201310hours) at a dose of 100mg, 9.7 to 11hours on average (range 5.6\u201322hours) at moderate doses of 300 to 500mg, and 14hours on average (range 7.2\u201322hours) at a dose of 800mg.\nMescaline induces a psychedelic state comparable to those produced by LSD and psilocybin, but with unique characteristics. Subjective effects may include altered thinking processes, an altered sense of time and self-awareness, and closed- and open-eye visual phenomena. In his book \"PiHKAL\" (\"Phenethylamines I Have Known and Loved\"), Alexander Shulgin comprehensively described the effects of mescaline based on a collection of experience reports. Its effects included brightened colors, increased visual contrast, open-eye visuals like colors and patterns, pareidolia, increased significance of objects, enhanced music appreciation, feeling intoxicated, self-analysis, insights, increased body awareness, feelings of joy, happiness, and peacefulness, feeling hyper and energized, feelings of empathy, things feeling ridiculous, humor and laughter, religious feelings, restlessness, social discomfort and avoidance, and nausea, among others. Mescaline was one of Shulgin's \"magical half-dozen\" psychedelic compounds in \"PiHKAL\".\nProminence of color with mescaline is distinctive, appearing brilliant and intense. Recurring visual patterns observed during the mescaline experience include stripes, checkerboards, angular spikes, multicolor dots, and very simple fractals that turn very complex. The English writer Aldous Huxley described these self-transforming amorphous shapes as like animated stained glass illuminated from light coming through the eyelids in his autobiographical book \"The Doors of Perception\" (1954). Like LSD, mescaline induces distortions of form and kaleidoscopic experiences but they manifest more clearly with eyes closed and under low lighting conditions. Heinrich Kl\u00fcver coined the term \"cobweb figure\" in the 1920s to describe one of the four form constant geometric visual hallucinations experienced in the early stage of a mescaline trip: \"Colored threads running together in a revolving center, the whole similar to a cobweb\". The other three are the chessboard design, tunnel, and spiral. Kl\u00fcver wrote that \"many 'atypical' visions are upon close inspection nothing but variations of these form-constants.\" An unusual but unique characteristic of mescaline use is the \"geometrization\" of three-dimensional objects. The object can appear flattened and distorted, similar to the presentation of a Cubist painting.\nAccording to a study in the Netherlands, ceremonial San Pedro use seems to be characterized by relatively strong spiritual experiences, and low incidence of challenging experiences.\nSide effects.\nSide effects of mescaline include fatigue, weakness, impaired concentration, restlessness, tension, anxiety, panic, and social discomfort and avoidance, headache, pupil dilation, nausea, vomiting, sweating, trembling, discomfort, feeling hot or cold, palpitations, chest and neck pains, shortness of breath, increased heart rate and blood pressure, and increased body temperature, among others. In addition to its psychoactive effects, mescaline elicits a pattern of sympathetic arousal, with the peripheral nervous system being a major target for this substance. Rarely, in susceptible individuals such as people with a family history of schizophrenia, mescaline may cause psychosis.\nTolerance.\nMescaline is associated with rapid tolerance development, including cross-tolerance with other psychedelics like LSD and psilocybin. This tolerance is apparent within a few days and resets after 3 or 4days of abstinence.\nOverdose.\nIn terms of extrapolated human lethal dose based on animal studies and human case reports, the lethal dose of mescaline relative to a typical recreational dose is estimated to be 24-fold. The LD50 of mescaline has also been determined in various animal species, with the values including 212 to 315mg/kg i.p. in mice, 132 to 410mg/kg i.p. in rats, 328mg/kg i.p. in guinea pigs, 54mg/kg in dogs, and 130mg/kg i.v. in rhesus macaques. It has been said based on the animal data that it would be very difficult to consume enough mescaline to cause death in humans.\nInteractions.\nThe serotonin 5-HT2A receptor antagonist ketanserin has been found to block the psychoactive effects of mescaline.\nIt is unclear whether mescaline is metabolized by monoamine oxidase (MAO) enzymes or whether monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) might increase the effects of mescaline. However, there are preliminary reports that harmala alkaloids, which are reversible inhibitors of monoamine oxidase A (RIMAs), may potentiate the effects of mescaline in humans, and the combination of mescaline or mescaline-containing cacti with harmala alkaloids has been referred to as \"peyohuasca\". In accordance with these findings, the harmala alkaloid and RIMA harmine has been reported to augment the effects of mescaline in animals.\nPharmacology.\nPharmacodynamics.\nIn humans, mescaline acts similarly to other psychedelic agents. It acts as an agonist, binding to and activating the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. Its EC50Tooltip half-maximal effective concentration at the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor is approximately 10,000nM and at the serotonin 5-HT2B receptor is greater than 20,000nM. How activating the 5-HT2A receptor leads to psychedelic effects is still unknown, but it is likely that somehow it involves excitation of neurons in the prefrontal cortex. In addition to the serotonin 5-HT2A and 5-HT2B receptors, mescaline is also known to bind to the serotonin 5-HT2C receptor and a number of other targets. The drug shows pronounced biased agonism at the serotonin 5-HT2C receptor.\nMescaline lacks affinity for the monoamine transporters, including the serotonin transporter (SERT), norepinephrine transporter (NET), and dopamine transporter (DAT) (Ki &gt; 30,000nM). However, it has been found to increase levels of the major serotonin metabolite 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) at high doses in rodents. This finding suggests that mescaline might inhibit the reuptake and/or induce the release of serotonin at such doses. In any case, this possibility has not yet been further assessed or demonstrated. Besides serotonin, mescaline might also weakly induce the release of dopamine, but this is probably of modest significance, if it occurs. In accordance, there is no evidence of the drug showing addiction or dependence. Mescaline appears to be inactive in terms of norepinephrine release induction and indirect sympathomimetic activity. Other psychedelic phenethylamines, including the closely related 2C, DOx, and TMA drugs, are inactive as monoamine releasing agents and reuptake inhibitors. However, an exception is trimethoxyamphetamine (TMA), the amphetamine analogue of mescaline, which is a very low-potency serotonin releasing agent (EC50Tooltip half-maximal effective concentration = 16,000nM). The possible monoamine-releasing effects of mescaline would likely be related to its structural similarity to substituted amphetamines and related compounds.\nMescaline is a relatively low-potency psychedelic, with active doses in the hundreds of milligrams and micromolar affinities for the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor. For comparison, psilocybin is approximately 20-fold more potent (doses in the tens of milligrams) and lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) is approximately 2,000-fold more potent (doses in the tens to hundreds of micrograms). There have been efforts to develop more potent analogues of mescaline. Difluoro\u00admescaline and trifluoro\u00admescaline are more potent than mescaline, as is its amphetamine homologue TMA. Escaline and proscaline are also both more potent than mescaline, showing the importance of the 4-position substituent with regard to receptor binding.\nThere is no evidence of acute tolerance with mescaline. However, tolerance to mescaline builds with repeated use, lasting for a few days. The drug causes cross-tolerance with other serotonergic psychedelics such as LSD and psilocybin.\nThe cryo-EM structures of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptor with mescaline, as well as with various other psychedelics and serotonin 5-HT2A receptor agonists, have been solved and published by Bryan L. Roth and colleagues.\nPharmacokinetics.\nAbsorption.\nMescaline is usually taken orally, although it may also be insufflated, smoked, or given intravenously. Taken orally, it is rapidly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. The oral bioavailability of mescaline is unknown. However, since at least 53% of orally administered mescaline is excreted in urine unchanged, the bioavailability appears to be at least 53%. Peak concentrations of mescaline occur after approximately 1.6 to 2.3hours on average (range 1.0\u20136.0hours). The pharmacokinetics of mescaline are dose-proportional over an oral dose range of 100 to 800mg.\nDistribution.\nMescaline is distributed to the liver, spleen, and kidneys at many times higher levels than blood or brain based on animal studies. It is said that a great proportion of mescaline is combined with hepatic proteins, which is said to delay its onset and elimination half-life. The exact portion bound to plasma proteins appears to be unknown.\nMescaline appears to have relatively poor blood\u2013brain barrier permeability due to its low lipophilicity. However, it is still able to cross into the central nervous system and produce psychoactive effects at sufficiently high doses. The poor central permeability of mescaline appears to be responsible for its delayed onset of effects and is also thought to contribute to its low potency.\nMetabolism.\nMescaline given orally appears to be subject to first-pass metabolism of about 50%. Following the first pass, mescaline appears to be subject to relatively limited metabolism.\nThe primary metabolic pathway of mescaline is oxidative deamination. The specific enzymes mediating the deamination of mescaline are controversial however. Monoamine oxidase (MAO), diamine oxidase (DAO; histamine oxidase), and/or other enzymes may be responsible. Preclinical studies of mescaline given in combination with inhibitors of MAO and/or DAO, such as iproniazid, pargyline, and semicarbazide, have been conducted, but findings have been conflicting. Mescaline has been reported to be a poor or negligible substrate of highly purified human MAO \"in-vitro\".\nMescaline appears not to be subject to metabolism by CYP2D6 based on \"in-vitro\" studies with human liver microsomes. Similarly, the \"in-vitro\" cytotoxicity of mescaline does not appear to be affected by cytochrome P450 (CYP450) enzyme inhibitors. Conversely, it was potentiated by the MAO-A inhibitor clorgiline but not by the MAO-B inhibitor rasagiline. These findings were in contrast to those with the related compound 2C-B, which was potentiated by rasagiline but not by clorgiline.\nCirculating peak and area-under-the-curve concentrations of mescaline and 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenylacetic acid (TMPAA) are similar with oral administration of mescaline. Conversely, levels of \"N\"-acetylmescaline (NAM) are far lower than those of mescaline or TMPAA and are thought not to be of clinical relevance. Intravenous injection of mescaline may result in less hepatic deamination than with oral administration.\nActive metabolites of mescaline might contribute to its psychoactive effects. However, both TMPAA and NAM have been said to be inactive based on human tests. Similarly, 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenylethanol (TMPE), 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenylacetaldehyde (TMPA), and NAM all failed to produce mescaline-like effects in rodent drug discrimination tests.\n3,4,5-Trimethoxyamphetamine (TMA), the \u03b1-methyl analogue of mescaline and an MAO-resistant psychedelic, is only about twice as potent as mescaline as a psychedelic in humans despite having similar serotonin receptor affinity. This suggests that the deamination of mescaline has a relatively limited impact on its potency, compared to for example the 2C series of psychedelics.\nElimination.\nMescaline given orally is excreted 87% in urine within 24hours and 92% in urine within 48hours. During the first hour after administration, 81.4% of mescaline is excreted unchanged while 13.2% is excreted as its deaminated metabolite 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenylacetic acid (TMPAA). However, after the first hour, the percentage excreted as unchanged mescaline declines and the percentage excreted as TMPAA rises. Ultimately, mescaline is excreted in urine 28 to 60% unchanged, 27 to 30% or more as TMPAA, 5% as \"N\"-acetyl-3,4-dimethoxy-5-hydroxyphenylethylamine, and less than 0.1% as \"N\"-acetylmescaline. Other minor or trace excreted metabolites have also been observed. In a more modern study published in 2025, mescaline was eliminated in urine 53% as unchanged mescaline and 31% as TMPAA.\nMescaline was originally reported to have an elimination half-life of 6hours based on a study conducted in the 1960s. However, subsequent research published in the 2020s found that its half-life is actually about 3.6hours (range 2.6\u20135.3hours). The previous higher estimate is believed to have been due to small sample numbers and collective measurement of mescaline metabolites. The elimination half-life of mescaline does not appear to be dose-dependent. TMPAA has a half-life of about 3.7 to 4.1hours, similar to that of mescaline. Mescaline has a similar half-life as LSD yet has a longer duration. This is due to mescaline having slower absorption and onset rather than a longer half-life.\nChemistry.\nMescaline, also known as 3,4,5-trimethoxyphenethylamine (3,4,5-TMPEA), is a substituted phenethylamine derivative. It is closely structurally related to the dopamine (3,4-dihydroxyphenethylamine), norepinephrine (3,4,\u03b2-trihydroxyphenethylamine), and epinephrine (3,4,\u03b2-trihydroxy-\"N\"-methylphenethylamine). In contrast to the catecholamine neurotransmitters however, mescaline acts on the serotonergic system rather than on the dopaminergic or adrenergic systems.\nProperties.\nThe physical properties and general chemistry of mescaline have been reviewed. The compound is relatively hydrophilic with low fat solubility. Its predicted log P (XLogP3) is 0.7.\nSynthesis.\nMescaline was first synthesized in 1919 by Ernst Sp\u00e4th from 3,4,5-trimethoxy\u00adbenzoyl chloride. Several approaches using different starting materials have been developed since, including the following:\nAnalogues.\nA large number of structural analogues of mescaline that act as psychedelics have been developed. These drugs often have far greater potency than mescaline itself. Examples include scalines like escaline, 3Cs like 3,4,5-trimethoxyamphetamine (TMA or TMA-1; \u03b1-methylmescaline), 2Cs like 2C-B, and DOx drugs like DOM, among others. Other notable analogues of mescaline include \"N\"-methylmescaline (found in \"Pachycereus pringlei\"), trichocereine (\"N\",\"N\"-dimethylmescaline), mescaline-FLY, and NBOMe-mescaline, among others.\nNatural occurrence.\nIt occurs naturally in several species of cacti. It is also reported to be found in small amounts in certain members of the bean family, Fabaceae, including \"Senegalia berlandieri\" (syn. \"Acacia berlandieri\"), although these reports have been challenged and have been unsupported in any additional analyses.\nAs shown in the accompanying table, the concentration of mescaline in different specimens can vary largely within a single species. Moreover, the concentration of mescaline within a single specimen varies as well.\nIn plants, mescaline may be the end-product of a pathway utilizing catecholamines as a method of stress response, similar to how animals may release such compounds and others such as cortisol when stressed. The \"in vivo\" function of catecholamines in plants has not been investigated, but they may function as antioxidants, as developmental signals, and as integral cell wall components that resist degradation from pathogens. The deactivation of catecholamines via methylation produces alkaloids such as mescaline.\nBiosynthesis.\nMescaline is biosynthesized from tyrosine, which, in turn, is derived from phenylalanine by the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase. In \"Lophophora williamsii\" (Peyote), dopamine converts into mescaline in a biosynthetic pathway involving \"m\"-\"O\"-methylation and aromatic hydroxylation.\nTyrosine and phenylalanine serve as metabolic precursors towards the synthesis of mescaline. Tyrosine can either undergo a decarboxylation via tyrosine decarboxylase to generate tyramine and subsequently undergo an oxidation at carbon 3 by a monophenol hydroxylase or first be hydroxylated by tyrosine hydroxylase to form L-DOPA and decarboxylated by DOPA decarboxylase. These create dopamine, which then experiences methylation by a catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) by an \"S\"-adenosyl methionine (SAM)-dependent mechanism. The resulting intermediate is then oxidized again by a hydroxylase enzyme, likely monophenol hydroxylase again, at carbon 5, and methylated by COMT. The product, methylated at the two meta positions with respect to the alkyl substituent, experiences a final methylation at the 4 carbon by a guaiacol-O-methyltransferase, which also operates by a SAM-dependent mechanism. This final methylation step results in the production of mescaline.\nPhenylalanine serves as a precursor by first being converted to -tyrosine by L-amino acid hydroxylase. Once converted, it follows the same pathway as described above.&lt;ref name=\"10.1016/j.plantsci.2006.10.013\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHistory.\nArchaeological evidence from sites in the United States, Mexico, and Peru indicates that mescaline-containing cacti have been used for over 6,000 years. Europeans recorded use of peyote in Native American religious ceremonies upon early contact with the Huichol people in Mexico. Other mescaline-containing cacti such as the San Pedro have a long history of use in South America, from Peru to Ecuador. While religious and ceremonial peyote use was widespread in the Aztec Empire and northern Mexico at the time of the Spanish conquest, religious persecution confined it to areas near the Pacific coast and up to southwest Texas. However, by 1880, peyote use began to spread north of South-Central America with \"a new kind of peyote ceremony\" inaugurated by the Kiowa and Comanche people. These religious practices, incorporated legally in the United States in 1920 as the Native American Church, have since spread as far as Saskatchewan, Canada.\nIn traditional peyote preparations, the top of the cactus is cut off, leaving the large tap root along with a ring of green photosynthesizing area to grow new heads. These heads are then dried to make disc-shaped buttons. Buttons are chewed to produce the effects or soaked in water to drink. However, the taste of the cactus is bitter, so modern users will often grind it into a powder and pour it into capsules to avoid having to taste it. The typical dose is 200 to 400mg of mescaline sulfate or 178 to 356mg of mescaline hydrochloride. The average peyote button contains about 25mg mescaline. Some analyses of traditional preparations of San Pedro cactus have found doses ranging from 34mg to 159mg of total alkaloids, a relatively low and barely psychoactive amount. It appears that patients who receive traditional treatments with San Pedro ingest sub-psychoactive doses and do not experience psychedelic effects.\nBotanical studies of peyote began in the 1840s and the drug was listed in the Mexican pharmacopeia. The first use of mescal buttons was published by John Raleigh Briggs in 1887. In 1887, the German pharmacologist Louis Lewin received his first sample of the peyote cactus, found numerous new alkaloids and later published the first methodical analysis of it. Mescaline was first isolated and identified in 1897 by the German chemist Arthur Heffter. He showed that mescaline was exclusively responsible for the psychoactive or hallucinogenic effects of peyote. However, other components of peyote, such as hordenine, pellotine, and anhalinine, are also active. Mescaline was first synthesized in 1919 by Ernst Sp\u00e4th.\nIn 1955, English politician Christopher Mayhew took part in an experiment for BBC's \"Panorama\", in which he ingested 400mg of mescaline under the supervision of psychiatrist Humphry Osmond. Though the recording was deemed too controversial and ultimately omitted from the show, Mayhew praised the experience, calling it \"the most interesting thing I ever did\".\nStudies of the potential therapeutic effects of mescaline started in the 1950s.\nThe mechanism of action of mescaline, activation of the serotonin 5-HT2A receptors, became known in the 1990s.\nSociety and culture.\nLegal status.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, mescaline was made illegal in 1970 by the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act, categorized as a Schedule I hallucinogen. The drug is prohibited internationally by the 1971 Convention on Psychotropic Substances. Mescaline is legal only for certain religious groups (such as the Native American Church by the American Indian Religious Freedom Act of 1978) and in scientific and medical research. In 1990, the Supreme Court ruled that the state of Oregon could ban the use of mescaline in Native American religious ceremonies. The Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA) in 1993 allowed the use of peyote in religious ceremony, but in 1997, the Supreme Court ruled that the RFRA is unconstitutional when applied against states. Many states, including the state of Utah, have legalized peyote usage with \"sincere religious intent\", or within a religious organization, regardless of race. Synthetic mescaline, but not mescaline derived from cacti, was officially decriminalized in the state of Colorado by ballot measure Proposition 122 in November 2022.\nWhile mescaline-containing cacti of the genus \"Echinopsis\" are technically controlled substances under the Controlled Substances Act, they are commonly sold publicly as ornamental plants.\nUnited Kingdom.\nIn the United Kingdom, mescaline in purified powder form is a Class A drug. However, dried cactus can be bought and sold legally.\nAustralia.\nMescaline is considered a schedule 9 substance in Australia under the Poisons Standard (February 2020). A schedule 9 substance is classified as \"Substances with a high potential for causing harm at low exposure and which require special precautions during manufacture, handling or use. These poisons should be available only to specialised or authorised users who have the skills necessary to handle them safely. Special regulations restricting their availability, possession, storage or use may apply.\"\nOther countries.\nIn Canada, France, The Netherlands and Germany, mescaline in raw form and dried mescaline-containing cacti are considered illegal drugs. However, anyone may grow and use peyote, or \"Lophophora williamsii\", as well as \"Echinopsis pachanoi\" and \"Echinopsis peruviana\" without restriction, as it is specifically exempt from legislation. In Canada, mescaline is classified as a schedule III drug under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, whereas peyote is exempt.\nIn Russia mescaline, its derivatives and mescaline-containing plants are banned as narcotic drugs (Schedule I).\nResearch.\nMescaline has a wide array of suggested medical usage, including treatment of depression, anxiety, PTSD, and alcoholism. However, its status as a Schedule I controlled substance in the Convention on Psychotropic Substances limits availability of the drug to researchers. Because of this, very few studies concerning mescaline's activity and potential therapeutic effects in people have been conducted since the early 1970s.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42053", "revid": "3736169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42053", "title": "Spy film", "text": "Film genre\nThe spy film, also known as the spy thriller, is a genre of film that deals with the subject of fictional espionage, either in a realistic way (such as the adaptations of John le Carr\u00e9) or as a basis for fantasy (such as many James Bond films). Many novels in the spy fiction genre have been adapted as films, including works by John Buchan, le Carr\u00e9, Ian Fleming (Bond) and Len Deighton. It is a significant aspect of British cinema, with leading British directors such as Alfred Hitchcock and Carol Reed making notable contributions and many films set in the British Secret Service.\nSpy films show the espionage activities of government agents and their risk of being discovered by their enemies. From the Nazi espionage thrillers of the 1940s to the James Bond films of the 1960s and to the high-tech blockbusters of today, the spy film has always been popular with audiences worldwide. Offering a combination of exciting escapism, technological thrills, and locales, many spy films combine the action and science fiction genres, presenting clearly delineated heroes for audiences to root for and villains they want to see defeated. They may also involve elements of political thrillers. However, there are many that are comedic (mostly action comedy films if they fall under that genre).\nJames Bond is the most famous of film spies, but there were also more serious, probing works like le Carr\u00e9's \"The Spy Who Came in from the Cold\" that also emerged from the Cold War. As the Cold War ended, the newest villain became terrorism and more often involved the Middle East.\nHistory.\nThe spy film genre began in the silent era, with the paranoia of invasion literature and the onset of the Great War. These fears produced the British 1914 \"The German Spy Peril\", centered on a plot to blow up the Houses of Parliament, and 1913's \"O.H.M.S.\", standing for \"Our Helpless Millions Saved\" as well as On His Majesty's Service (and introducing for the first time a strong female character who helps the hero).\nIn 1928, Fritz Lang made the film \"Spies\" which contained many tropes that became popular in later spy dramas, including secret headquarters, an agent known by a number, and the beautiful foreign agent who comes to love the hero. Lang's Dr. Mabuse films from the period also contain elements of spy thrillers, though the central character is a criminal mastermind only interested in espionage for profit. Additionally, several of Lang's American films, such as \"Hangmen Also Die\", deal with spies during World War II.\nAlfred Hitchcock did much to popularize the spy film in the 1930s with his influential thrillers \"The Man Who Knew Too Much\" (1934), \"The 39 Steps\" (1935), \"Sabotage\" (1937) and \"The Lady Vanishes\" (1938). These often involved innocent civilians being caught up in international conspiracies or webs of saboteurs on the home front, as in \"Saboteur\" (1942). Some, however, dealt with professional spies, as in Hitchcock's \"Secret Agent\" (1936), based on W. Somerset Maugham's \"\" stories, or the Mr. Moto series, based on the books of John P. Marquand.\nIn the 1940s and early 1950s, several films were made about the exploits of Allied agents in occupied Europe, which could be considered a subgenre. \"13 Rue Madeleine\" and \"O.S.S.\" were fictional stories about American agents in German-occupied France. There were several films based on the stories of real-life British S.O.E. agents, including \"Odette\" and \"Carve Her Name With Pride\". A more recent fictional example is \"Charlotte Gray\", based on the novel by Sebastian Faulks.\nAlso during the period, there were many detective films (\"The Thin Man Goes Home\" and \"Charlie Chan in the Secret Service\" for example) in which the mystery involved who stole the secret blue-prints, or who kidnapped the famous scientist.\nIn the mid-1950s, Alfred Hitchcock returned to the spy genre with \"The Man Who Knew Too Much (1956 film)\", a remake of his 1934 film of the same name. He followed this up in 1959 with \"North by Northwest\" (1959), widely considered one of the most influential works within the spy genre. \nThe peak of popularity of spy films is often considered to be the 1960s when Cold War fears meshed with a desire by audiences to see exciting and suspenseful films. The espionage film developed in two directions at this time. On the one hand, the realistic spy novels of Len Deighton and John le Carr\u00e9 were adapted into relatively serious Cold War thrillers that dealt with some of the realities of the espionage world. Some of these films included \"The Spy Who Came in from the Cold\" (1965), \"The Deadly Affair\" (1966), \"Torn Curtain\" (1966), and the \"Harry Palmer\" series, based on the novels of Len Deighton.\nIn another direction, the \"James Bond\" novels by Ian Fleming were adapted into an increasingly fantastical series of tongue-in-cheek adventure films by producers Harry Saltzman and Albert R. Broccoli, with Sean Connery as the star. They featured secretive and flamboyant supervillains, an archetype that would later become a staple of the explosion of spy movies in the mid-to-late 1960s.\nThe phenomenal success of the \"Bond\" series leads to a deluge of imitators, such as the eurospy genre and several from America. Notable examples include the two \"Derek Flint\" films starring James Coburn, \"The Quiller Memorandum\" (1966) with George Segal, and the \"Matt Helm\" series with Dean Martin. Television also got into the act with series like \"The Man from U.N.C.L.E\" and \"I Spy\" in the U.S., and \"Danger Man\" and \"The Avengers\" in Britain. Spies have remained popular on TV to the present day with series such as \"Callan\", \"Alias\" and \"Spooks\".\nSpy films also enjoyed something of a revival in the late 1990s, although these were often action films with espionage elements or comedies like \"Austin Powers\". Some critics identify a trend away from fantasy in favor of realism, as observed in \"Syriana\", the \"Bourne\" film series and the \"James Bond\" films starring Daniel Craig since \"Casino Royale\" (2006).\nFilms.\nSome of the most popular films include:\nMovie series (franchises)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nMovies\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelevision series.\nSome of the most popular television series include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nClassic era\nModern era\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42056", "revid": "35585582", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42056", "title": "Greeks", "text": "Ethnic group and nation\nGreeks or Hellenes (; , ) are an ethnic group and nation native to Greece, Cyprus, southern Albania, Anatolia, parts of Italy and Egypt, and to a lesser extent, other countries surrounding the Eastern Mediterranean and Black Sea. They also form a significant diaspora (), with many Greek communities established around the world.\nGreek colonies and communities have been historically established on the shores of the Mediterranean Sea and Black Sea, but the Greek people themselves have always been centered on the Aegean and Ionian seas, where the Greek language has been spoken since the Bronze Age. Until the early 20th century, Greeks were distributed between the Greek peninsula, the western coast of Asia Minor, the Black Sea coast, Cappadocia in central Anatolia, Egypt, the Balkans, Cyprus, and Constantinople. Many of these regions coincided to a large extent with the borders of the Byzantine Empire of the late 11th century and the Eastern Mediterranean areas of ancient Greek colonization. The cultural centers of the Greeks have included Athens, Thessalonica, Alexandria, Smyrna, and Constantinople at various periods.\nIn recent times, most ethnic Greeks live within the borders of the modern Greek state or in Cyprus. The Greek genocide and population exchange between Greece and Turkey nearly ended the three millennia-old Greek presence in Asia Minor. Other longstanding Greek populations can be found from southern Italy to the Caucasus and southern Russia and Ukraine and in the Greek diaspora communities in a number of other countries. Today, most Greeks are officially registered as members of the Greek Orthodox Church.\nGreeks have greatly influenced and contributed to culture, visual arts, exploration, theatre, literature, philosophy, ethics, politics, architecture, music, mathematics, medicine, science, technology, commerce, cuisine and sports. The Greek language is the oldest recorded living language and its vocabulary has been the basis of many languages, including English as well as international scientific nomenclature. Greek was the most widely spoken \"lingua franca\" in the Mediterranean world since the fourth century BC and the New Testament of the Christian Bible was also originally written in Greek.\nHistory.\nThe Greeks speak the Greek language, which forms its own unique branch within the Indo-European family of languages, the Hellenic. They are part of a group of classical ethnicities, described by Anthony D. Smith as an \"archetypal diaspora people\".\nOrigins.\nThe Proto-Greeks probably arrived at the area now called Greece, in the southern tip of the Balkan peninsula, at the end of the 3rd millennium BC between 2200 and 1900 BC. The sequence of migrations into the Greek mainland during the 2nd millennium BC has to be reconstructed on the basis of the ancient Greek dialects, as they presented themselves centuries later and are therefore subject to some uncertainties. There were at least two migrations, the first being the Ionians and Achaeans, which resulted in Mycenaean Greece by the 16th century BC, and the second, the Dorian invasion, around the 11th century BC, displacing the Arcadocypriot dialects, which descended from the Mycenaean period. Both migrations occur at incisive periods, the Mycenaean at the transition to the Late Bronze Age and the Doric at the Bronze Age collapse.\nMycenaean.\nIn c. 1600 BC, the Mycenaean Greeks borrowed from the Minoan civilization its syllabic writing system (Linear A) and developed their own syllabic script known as Linear B, providing the first and oldest written evidence of Greek. The Mycenaeans quickly penetrated the Aegean Sea and, by the 15th century BC, had reached Rhodes, Crete, Cyprus and the shores of Asia Minor.\nAround 1200 BC, the Dorians, another Greek-speaking people, followed from Epirus. Older historical research often proposed Dorian invasion caused the collapse of the Mycenaean civilization, but this narrative has been abandoned in all contemporary research. It is likely that one of the factors which contributed to the Mycenaean palatial collapse was linked to raids by groups known in historiography as the \"Sea Peoples\" who sailed into the eastern Mediterranean around 1180 BC. The Dorian invasion was followed by a poorly attested period of migrations, appropriately called the Greek Dark Ages, but by 800 BC the landscape of Archaic and Classical Greece was discernible.\nThe Greeks of classical antiquity idealized their Mycenaean ancestors and the Mycenaean period as a glorious era of heroes, closeness of the gods and material wealth. The Homeric Epics (i.e. \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\") were especially and generally accepted as part of the Greek past and it was not until the time of Euhemerism that scholars began to question Homer's historicity. As part of the Mycenaean heritage that survived, the names of the gods and goddesses of Mycenaean Greece (e.g. Zeus, Poseidon and Hades) became major figures of the Olympian Pantheon of later antiquity.\nClassical.\nThe ethnogenesis of the Greek nation is linked to the development of Pan-Hellenism in the 8th century BC. According to some scholars, the foundational event was the Olympic Games in 776 BC, when the idea of a common Hellenism among the Greek tribes was first translated into a shared cultural experience and Hellenism was primarily a matter of common culture. The works of Homer (i.e. \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\") and Hesiod (i.e. \"Theogony\") were written in the 8th century BC, becoming the basis of the national religion, ethos, history and mythology. The Oracle of Apollo at Delphi was established in this period.\nThe classical period of Greek civilization covers a time spanning from the early 5th century BC to the death of Alexander the Great, in 323 BC (some authors prefer to split this period into \"Classical\", from the end of the Greco-Persian Wars to the end of the Peloponnesian War, and \"Fourth Century\", up to the death of Alexander). It is so named because it set the standards by which Greek civilization would be judged in later eras. The Classical period is also described as the \"Golden Age\" of Greek civilization, and its art, philosophy, architecture and literature would be instrumental in the formation and development of Western culture.\nAt the battles of Marathon, Thermopylae, Salamis, and Platea, some Greek city-states formed a victorious alliance led by Sparta and Athens. The Delian league, under the leadership of Athens, continued the war with the Achaemenid Empire after the end of the Persian invasions.\nWhile the Greeks of the classical era understood themselves to belong to a common Hellenic genos, their first loyalty was to their city and they saw nothing incongruous about warring, often brutally, with other Greek city-states. The Peloponnesian War, the large scale civil war between the two most powerful Greek city-states Athens and Sparta and their allies, left both greatly weakened. A brief Spartan hegemony, and then a short-lived Theban hegemony, followed up until the Battle of Mantinea in 362 BC.\nAfter the rise of Macedon and the Battle of Chaeronea, most of the feuding Greek city-states became members of the Hellenic league under the leadership of Philip, the Argead king of Macedon, in order to invade the Achaemenid Empire. The Pan-Hellenic campaign had the slogans of \"freeing the Greeks\" in Asia and \"punishing the Persians\" for their past sacrileges during their own invasion of Greece a century and a half earlier. The campaign was led successfully by his son Alexander the Great, as Philip was assassinated in 336 BC.\nAlexander's toppling of the Achaemenid Empire, after his victories at the battles of the Granicus, Issus and Gaugamela, and his advance as far as modern-day Pakistan and Tajikistan, provided an important outlet for Greek culture, via the creation of colonies and trade routes along the way. While the Alexandrian empire did not survive its creator's death intact, the cultural implications of the spread of Hellenism across much of the Middle East and Asia were to prove long lived as Greek became the \"lingua franca\", a position it retained even in Roman times. Many Greeks settled in Hellenistic cities like Alexandria, Antioch and Seleucia.\nHellenistic.\nThe Hellenistic civilization was the next period of Greek civilization, the beginnings of which are usually placed at Alexander's death. This Hellenistic age, so called because it saw the partial Hellenization of many non-Greek cultures, extending all the way into India and Bactria, both of which maintained Greek cultures and governments for centuries. The end is often placed around conquest of Egypt by Rome in 30 BC, although the Indo-Greek kingdoms lasted for a few more decades.\nThis age saw the Greeks move towards larger cities and a reduction in the importance of the city-state. These larger cities were parts of the still larger Kingdoms of the Diadochi. Greeks, however, remained aware of their past, chiefly through the study of the works of Homer and the classical authors. An important factor in maintaining Greek identity was contact with \"barbarian\" (non-Greek) peoples, which was deepened in the new cosmopolitan environment of the multi-ethnic Hellenistic kingdoms. This led to a strong desire among Greeks to organize the transmission of the Hellenic \"paideia\" to the next generation. Greek science, technology and mathematics are generally considered to have reached their peak during the Hellenistic period.\nIn the Indo-Greek and Greco-Bactrian kingdoms, Greco-Buddhism was spreading and Greek missionaries would play an important role in propagating it to China. Further east, the Greeks of Alexandria Eschate became known to the Chinese people as the Dayuan.\nRoman Empire.\nBetween 280 BC and 30 BC, after the Pyrrhic, Macedonian, and Mithridatic Wars, most of the Hellenistic world was conquered by Rome, and almost all of the world's Greek speakers lived as citizens or subjects of the Roman Empire. Despite their military superiority, the Romans admired and became heavily influenced by the achievements of Greek culture, hence Horace's famous statement: \"Graecia capta ferum victorem cepit\" (\"Greece, although captured, took its wild conqueror captive\"). In the centuries following the Roman conquest of the Greek world, the Greek and Roman cultures merged into a single Greco-Roman culture.\nIn the religious sphere, this was a period of profound change. The spiritual revolution that took place, saw a waning of the old Greek religion, whose decline beginning in the 3rd century BC continued with the introduction of new religious movements from the East. The cults of deities like Isis and Mithra were introduced into the Greek world. Greek-speaking communities of the Hellenized East were instrumental in the spread of early Christianity in the 2nd and 3rd centuries, and Christianity's early leaders and writers (notably Saint Paul) were generally Greek-speaking, though none were from Greece proper. However, Greece itself had a tendency to cling to paganism and was not one of the influential centers of early Christianity: in fact, some ancient Greek religious practices remained in vogue until the end of the 4th century, with some areas such as the southeastern Peloponnese remaining pagan until well into the mid-Byzantine 10th century AD. The region of Tsakonia remained pagan until the ninth century and as such its inhabitants were referred to as \"Hellenes\", in the sense of being pagan, by their Christianized Greek brethren in mainstream Byzantine society.\nWhile ethnic distinctions still existed in the Roman Empire, they became secondary to religious considerations, and the renewed empire used Christianity as a tool to support its cohesion and promote a robust Roman national identity. From the early centuries of the Common Era, the Greeks self-identified as Romans (Greek: \"Rh\u014dma\u00eeoi\"). By that time, the name \"Hellenes\" denoted pagans but was revived as an ethnonym in the 11th century.\nMiddle Ages.\nDuring most of the Middle Ages, the Byzantine Greeks self-identified as \"Rh\u014dma\u00eeoi\" (, \"Romans\", meaning citizens of the Roman Empire), a term which in the Greek language had become synonymous with Christian Greeks. The Latinizing term \"Graiko\u00ed\" (\u0393\u03c1\u03b1\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03af, \"Greeks\") was also used, though its use was less common, and nonexistent in official Byzantine political correspondence, prior to the Fourth Crusade of 1204. The Eastern Roman Empire (today conventionally named the \"Byzantine Empire\", a name not used during its own time) became increasingly influenced by Greek culture after the 7th century when Emperor Heraclius (r. 610\u2013641 AD) decided to make Greek the empire's official language. Although the Catholic Church recognized the Eastern Empire's claim to the Roman legacy for several centuries, after Pope Leo III crowned Charlemagne, king of the Franks, as the \"Roman Emperor\" on 25 December 800, an act which eventually led to the formation of the Holy Roman Empire, the Latin West started to favour the Franks and began to refer to the Eastern Roman Empire largely as the \"Empire of the Greeks\" (\"Imperium Graecorum\"). While this Latin term for the ancient \"Hellenes\" could be used neutrally, its use by Westerners from the 9th century onwards in order to challenge Byzantine claims to ancient Roman heritage rendered it a derogatory exonym for the Byzantines who barely used it, mostly in contexts relating to the West, such as texts relating to the Council of Florence, to present the Western viewpoint. Additionally, among the Germanic and the Slavic peoples, the \"Rh\u014dma\u00eeoi\" were just called Greeks.\nThere are three schools of thought regarding this Byzantine Roman identity in contemporary Byzantine scholarship: The first considers \"Romanity\" the mode of self-identification of the subjects of a multi-ethnic empire at least up to the 12th century, where the average subject identified as Roman; a perennialist approach, which views Romanity as the medieval expression of a continuously existing Greek nation; while a third view considers the eastern Roman identity as a pre-modern national identity. The Byzantine Greeks' essential values were drawn from both Christianity and the Homeric tradition of ancient Greece.\nA distinct Greek identity re-emerged in the 11th century in educated circles and became more forceful after the fall of Constantinople to the Crusaders of the Fourth Crusade in 1204. In the Empire of Nicaea, a small circle of the elite used the term \"Hellene\" as a term of self-identification. For example, in a letter to Pope Gregory IX, the Nicaean emperor John III Doukas Vatatzes (r. 1221\u20131254) claimed to have received the gift of royalty from Constantine the Great, and put emphasis on his \"Hellenic\" descent, exalting the wisdom of the Greek people. After the Byzantines recaptured Constantinople, however, in 1261, \"Rhomaioi\" became again dominant as a term for self-description and there are few traces of \"Hellene\" (\u0388\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b1\u03c2), such as in the writings of George Gemistos Plethon, who abandoned Christianity and in whose writings culminated the secular tendency in the interest in the classical past. However, it was the combination of Orthodox Christianity with a specifically Greek identity that shaped the Greeks' notion of themselves in the empire's twilight years. In the twilight years of the Byzantine Empire, prominent Byzantine personalities proposed referring to the Byzantine Emperor as the \"Emperor of the Hellenes\". These largely rhetorical expressions of Hellenic identity were confined within intellectual circles, but were continued by Byzantine intellectuals who participated in the Italian Renaissance.\nThe interest in the Classical Greek heritage was complemented by a renewed emphasis on Greek Orthodox identity, which was reinforced in the late Medieval and Ottoman Greeks' links with their fellow Orthodox Christians in the Russian Empire. These were further strengthened following the fall of the Empire of Trebizond in 1461, after which and until the second Russo-Turkish War of 1828\u201329 hundreds of thousands of Pontic Greeks fled or migrated from the Pontic Alps and Armenian Highlands to southern Russia and the Russian South Caucasus (see also Greeks in Russia, Greeks in Armenia, Greeks in Georgia, and Caucasian Greeks).\nThese Byzantine Greeks were largely responsible for the preservation of the literature of the classical era. Byzantine grammarians were those principally responsible for carrying, in person and in writing, ancient Greek grammatical and literary studies to the West during the 15th century, giving the Italian Renaissance a major boost. The Aristotelian philosophical tradition was nearly unbroken in the Greek world for almost two thousand years, until the Fall of Constantinople in 1453.\nTo the Slavic world, the Byzantine Greeks contributed by the dissemination of literacy and Christianity. The most notable example of the latter was the work of the two Byzantine Greek brothers, the monks Saints Cyril and Methodius from the port city of Thessalonica, capital of the theme of Thessalonica, who are credited today with formalizing the first Slavic alphabet.\nOttoman Empire.\nFollowing the Fall of Constantinople on 29 May 1453, many Greeks sought better employment and education opportunities by leaving for the West, particularly Italy, Central Europe, Germany and Russia. Greeks are greatly credited for the European cultural revolution, later called the Renaissance. In Greek-inhabited territory itself, Greeks came to play a leading role in the Ottoman Empire, due in part to the fact that the central hub of the empire, politically, culturally, and socially, was based on Western Thrace and Macedonia, both in Northern Greece, and of course was centred on the mainly Greek-populated, former Byzantine capital, Constantinople. As a direct consequence of this situation, Greek-speakers came to play a hugely important role in the Ottoman trading and diplomatic establishment, as well as in the church. Added to this, in the first half of the Ottoman period men of Greek origin made up a significant proportion of the Ottoman army, navy, and state bureaucracy, having been levied as adolescents (along with especially Albanians and Serbs) into Ottoman service through the devshirme. Many Ottomans of Greek (or Albanian or Serb) origin were therefore to be found within the Ottoman forces which governed the provinces, from Ottoman Egypt, to Ottomans occupied Yemen and Algeria, frequently as provincial governors.\nFor those that remained under the Ottoman Empire's millet system, religion was the defining characteristic of national groups (\"milletler\"), so the exonym \"Greeks\" (\"Rumlar\" from the name Rhomaioi) was applied by the Ottomans to all members of the Orthodox Church, regardless of their language or ethnic origin. The Greek speakers were the only ethnic group to actually call themselves \"Romioi\", (as opposed to being so named by others) and, at least those educated, considered their ethnicity (\"genos\") to be Hellenic. There were, however, many Greeks who escaped the second-class status of Christians inherent in the Ottoman millet system, according to which Muslims were explicitly awarded senior status and preferential treatment. These Greeks either emigrated, particularly to their fellow Orthodox Christian protector, the Russian Empire, or simply converted to Islam, often only very superficially and whilst remaining crypto-Christian. The most notable examples of large-scale conversion to Turkish Islam among those today defined as Greek Muslims\u2014excluding those who had to convert as a matter of course on being recruited through the devshirme\u2014were to be found in Crete (Cretan Turks), Greek Macedonia (for example among the Vallahades of western Macedonia), and among Pontic Greeks in the Pontic Alps and Armenian Highlands. Several Ottoman sultans and princes were also of part Greek origin, with mothers who were either Greek concubines or princesses from Byzantine noble families, one famous example being sultan Selim the Grim (r. 1517\u20131520), whose mother G\u00fclbahar Hatun was a Pontic Greek.\nThe roots of Greek success in the Ottoman Empire can be traced to the Greek tradition of education and commerce exemplified in the Phanariotes. It was the wealth of the extensive merchant class that provided the material basis for the intellectual revival that was the prominent feature of Greek life in the half century and more leading to the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence in 1821. Not coincidentally, on the eve of 1821, the three most important centres of Greek learning were situated in Chios, Smyrna and Aivali, all three major centres of Greek commerce. Greek success was also favoured by Greek domination in the leadership of the Eastern Orthodox church.\nModern.\nThe movement of the Greek enlightenment, the Greek expression of the Age of Enlightenment, contributed not only in the promotion of education, culture and printing among the Greeks, but also in the case of independence from the Ottomans, and the restoration of the term \"Hellene\". Adamantios Korais, probably the most important intellectual of the movement, advocated the use of the term \"Hellene\" (\u0388\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b1\u03c2) or \"Graikos\" (\u0393\u03c1\u03b1\u03b9\u03ba\u03cc\u03c2) in the place of \"Romi\u00f3s\", that was seen negatively by him.\nThe relationship between ethnic Greek identity and Greek Orthodox religion continued after the creation of the modern Greek nation-state in 1830. According to the second article of the first Greek constitution of 1822, a Greek was defined as any native Christian resident of the Kingdom of Greece, a clause removed by 1840. A century later, when the Treaty of Lausanne was signed between Greece and Turkey in 1923, the two countries agreed to use religion as the determinant for ethnic identity for the purposes of population exchange, although most of the Greeks displaced (over a million of the total 1.5 million) had already been driven out by the time the agreement was signed. The Greek genocide, in particular the harsh removal of Pontian Greeks from the southern shore area of the Black Sea, contemporaneous with and following the failed Greek Asia Minor Campaign, was part of this process of Turkification of the Ottoman Empire and the placement of its economy and trade, then largely in Greek hands under ethnic Turkish control.\nIdentity.\nThe terms used to define Greekness have varied throughout history but were never limited or completely identified with membership to a Greek state. Herodotus gave a famous account of what defined Greek (Hellenic) ethnic identity in his day, enumerating \nBy Western standards, the term \"Greeks\" has traditionally referred to any native speakers of the Greek language, whether Mycenaean, Byzantine or modern Greek. Byzantine Greeks self-identified as \"Romaioi\" (\"Romans\"), \"Graikoi\" (\"Greeks\") and \"Christianoi\" (\"Christians\") since they were the political heirs of imperial Rome, the descendants of their classical Greek forebears and followers of the Apostles; during the mid-to-late Byzantine period (11th\u201313th century), a growing number of Byzantine Greek intellectuals deemed themselves \"Hellenes\" although for most Greek-speakers, \"Hellene\" still meant pagan. On the eve of the Fall of Constantinople the Last Emperor urged his soldiers to remember that they were the descendants of Greeks and Romans.\nBefore the establishment of the modern Greek nation-state, the link between ancient and modern Greeks was emphasized by the scholars of Greek Enlightenment especially by Rigas Feraios. In his \"Political Constitution\", he addresses to the nation as \"the people descendant of the Greeks\". The modern Greek state was created in 1829, when the Greeks liberated a part of their historic homelands, Peloponnese, from the Ottoman Empire. The large Greek diaspora and merchant class were instrumental in transmitting the ideas of western romantic nationalism and philhellenism, which together with the conception of Hellenism, formulated during the last centuries of the Byzantine Empire, formed the basis of the Diafotismos and the current conception of Hellenism.\nThe Greeks today are a nation in the meaning of an \"ethnos\", defined by possessing Greek culture and having a Greek mother tongue, not by citizenship, race, and religion or by being subjects of any particular state. In ancient and medieval times and to some extent today the Greek term was \"genos\", which also indicates a common ancestry.\nNames.\nGreeks and Greek-speakers have used different names to refer to themselves collectively. The term Achaeans (\u1f08\u03c7\u03b1\u03b9\u03bf\u03af) is one of the collective names for the Greeks in Homer's \"Iliad\" and \"Odyssey\" (the Homeric \"long-haired Achaeans\" would have been a part of the Mycenaean civilization that dominated Greece from c. 1600 BC until 1100 BC). The other common names are Danaans (\u0394\u03b1\u03bd\u03b1\u03bf\u03af) and Argives (\u1f08\u03c1\u03b3\u03b5\u1fd6\u03bf\u03b9) while Panhellenes (\u03a0\u03b1\u03bd\u03ad\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b5\u03c2) and Hellenes (\u1f1d\u03bb\u03bb\u03b7\u03bd\u03b5\u03c2) both appear only once in the \"Iliad\"; all of these terms were used, synonymously, to denote a common Greek identity. In the historical period, Herodotus identified the Achaeans of the northern Peloponnese as descendants of the earlier, Homeric Achaeans.\nHomer refers to the \"Hellenes\" as a relatively small tribe settled in Thessalic Phthia, with its warriors under the command of Achilleus. The Parian Chronicle says that Phthia was the homeland of the Hellenes and that this name was given to those previously called Greeks (). In Greek mythology, Hellen, the patriarch of the Hellenes who ruled around Phthia, was the son of Pyrrha and Deucalion, the only survivors after the Great Deluge. The Greek philosopher Aristotle names ancient Hellas as an area in Epirus between Dodona and the Achelous river, the location of the Great Deluge of Deucalion, a land occupied by the Selloi and the \"Greeks\" who later came to be known as \"Hellenes\". In the Homeric tradition, the Selloi were the priests of Dodonian Zeus.\nIn the Hesiodic \"Catalogue of Women\", Graecus is presented as the son of Zeus and Pandora II, sister of Hellen the patriarch of the Hellenes. According to the Parian Chronicle, when Deucalion became king of Phthia, the Graikoi (\u0393\u03c1\u03b1\u03b9\u03ba\u03bf\u03af) were named Hellenes. Aristotle notes in his \"Meteorologica\" that the Hellenes were related to the Graikoi.\nEtymology.\nThe English names \"Greece\" and \"Greek\" are derived, via the Latin ' and ', from the name of the Graeci (, ; , ), who were among the first ancient Greek tribes to settle southern Italy (the so-called \"Magna Graecia\"). The term is possibly derived from the Proto-Indo-European root \"*\u01f5erh\u2082-\", \"to grow old\", more specifically from Graea (ancient city), said by Aristotle to be the oldest in Greece, and the source of colonists for the Naples area.\nContinuity.\nThe most obvious link between modern and ancient Greeks is their language, which has a documented tradition from at least the 14th century BC to the present day, albeit with a break during the Greek Dark Ages from which written records are absent (11th\u20138th cent. BC, though the Cypriot syllabary was in use during this period). Scholars compare its continuity of tradition to Chinese alone. Since its inception, Hellenism was primarily a matter of common culture and the national continuity of the Greek world is a lot more certain than its demographic. Yet, Hellenism also embodied an ancestral dimension through aspects of Athenian literature that developed and influenced ideas of descent based on autochthony. During the later years of the Eastern Roman Empire, areas such as Ionia and Constantinople experienced a Hellenic revival in language, philosophy, and literature and on classical models of thought and scholarship. This revival provided a powerful impetus to the sense of cultural affinity with ancient Greece and its classical heritage. Throughout their history, the Greeks have retained their language and alphabet, certain values and cultural traditions, customs, a sense of religious and cultural difference and exclusion (the word \"barbarian\" was used by 12th-century historian Anna Komnene to describe non-Greek speakers), a sense of Greek identity and common sense of ethnicity despite the undeniable socio-political changes of the past two millennia. In recent anthropological studies, both ancient and modern Greek osteological samples were analyzed demonstrating a bio-genetic affinity and continuity shared between both groups. There is also a direct genetic link between ancient Greeks and modern Greeks.\nDemographics.\nToday, Greeks are the majority ethnic group in the Hellenic Republic, where they constitute 93% of the country's population, and the Republic of Cyprus where they make up 78% of the island's population (excluding Turkish settlers in the occupied part of the country). Greek populations have not traditionally exhibited high rates of growth; a large percentage of Greek population growth since Greece's foundation in 1832 was attributed to annexation of new territories, as well as the influx of 1.5 million Greek refugees after the 1923 population exchange between Greece and Turkey. About 80% of the population of Greece is urban, with 28% concentrated in the city of Athens.\nGreeks from Cyprus have a similar history of emigration, usually to the English-speaking world because of the island's colonization by the British Empire. Waves of emigration followed the Turkish invasion of Cyprus in 1974, while the population decreased between mid-1974 and 1977 as a result of emigration, war losses, and a temporary decline in fertility. After the ethnic cleansing of a third of the Greek population of the island in 1974, there was also an increase in the number of Greek Cypriots leaving, especially for the Middle East, which contributed to a decrease in population that tapered off in the 1990s. Today more than two-thirds of the Greek population in Cyprus is urban.\nAround 1990, most Western estimates of the number of ethnic Greeks in Albania were around 200,000 but in the 1990s, a majority of them migrated to Greece. The Greek minority of Turkey, which numbered upwards of 200,000 people after the 1923 exchange, has now dwindled to a few thousand, after the 1955 Constantinople Pogrom and other state sponsored violence and discrimination. This effectively ended, though not entirely, the three-thousand-year-old presence of Hellenism in Asia Minor. There are smaller Greek minorities in the rest of the Balkan countries, the Levant and the Black Sea states, remnants of the Old Greek Diaspora (pre-19th century).\nDiaspora.\nThe total number of Greeks living outside Greece and Cyprus today is a contentious issue. Where census figures are available, they show around three million Greeks outside Greece and Cyprus. Estimates provided by the SAE \u2013 World Council of Hellenes Abroad put the figure at around seven million worldwide. According to George Prevelakis of Sorbonne University, the number is closer to just below five million. Integration, intermarriage, and loss of the Greek language influence the self-identification of the Greek diaspora (\"omogenia\"). Important centres include New York City, Chicago, Boston, Los Angeles, Sydney, Melbourne, London, Toronto, Montreal, Vancouver, Auckland, and Sao Paulo. In 2010, the Hellenic Parliament introduced a law that allowed members of the diaspora to vote in Greek elections; this law was repealed in early 2014.\nAncient.\nIn ancient times, the trading and colonizing activities of the Greek tribes and city states spread the Greek culture, religion and language around the Mediterranean and Black Sea basins, especially in Southern Italy (the so-called \"Magna Graecia\"), Spain, the south of France and the Black sea coasts. Under Alexander the Great's empire and successor states, Greek and Hellenizing ruling classes were established in the Middle East, India and in Egypt. The Hellenistic period is characterized by a new wave of Greek colonization that established Greek cities and kingdoms in Asia and Africa. Under the Roman Empire, easier movement of people spread Greeks across the Empire and in the eastern territories, Greek became the lingua franca rather than Latin. The modern-day Griko community of southern Italy, numbering about 60,000, may represent a living remnant of the ancient Greek populations of Italy.\nModern.\nDuring and after the Greek War of Independence, Greeks of the diaspora were important in establishing the fledgling state, raising funds and awareness abroad. Greek merchant families already had contacts in other countries and during the disturbances many set up home around the Mediterranean (notably Marseilles in France, Livorno in Italy, Alexandria in Egypt), Russia (Odesa and Saint Petersburg), and Britain (London and Liverpool) from where they traded, typically in textiles and grain. Businesses frequently comprised the extended family, and with them they brought schools teaching Greek and the Greek Orthodox Church.\nAs markets changed and they became more established, some families grew their operations to become shippers, financed through the local Greek community, notably with the aid of the Ralli or Vagliano Brothers. With economic success, the Diaspora expanded further across the Levant, North Africa, India and the USA.\nIn the 20th century, many Greeks left their traditional homelands for economic reasons resulting in large migrations from Greece and Cyprus to the United States, Great Britain, Australia, Canada, Germany, and South Africa, especially after the Second World War (1939\u20131945), the Greek Civil War (1946\u20131949), and the Turkish Invasion of Cyprus in 1974.\nWhile official figures remain scarce, polls and anecdotal evidence point to renewed Greek emigration as a result of the Greek financial crisis. According to data published by the Federal Statistical Office of Germany in 2011, 23,800 Greeks emigrated to Germany, a significant increase over the previous year. By comparison, about 9,000 Greeks emigrated to Germany in 2009 and 12,000 in 2010.\nCulture.\nGreek culture has evolved over thousands of years, with its beginning in the Mycenaean civilization, continuing through the classical era, the Hellenistic period, the Roman and Byzantine periods and was profoundly affected by Christianity, which it in turn influenced and shaped. Ottoman Greeks had to endure through several centuries of adversity that culminated in genocide in the 20th century. The Diafotismos is credited with revitalizing Greek culture and giving birth to the synthesis of ancient and medieval elements that characterize it today.\nLanguage.\nMost Greeks speak the Greek language, an independent branch of the Indo-European languages, with its closest relations possibly being Armenian (see Graeco-Armenian) or the Indo-Iranian languages (see Graeco-Aryan). It has the longest documented history of any living language and Greek literature has a continuous history of over 2,500 years. The oldest inscriptions in Greek are in the Linear B script, dated as far back as 1450 BC. Following the Greek Dark Ages, from which written records are absent, the Greek alphabet appears in the 9th\u20138th century BC. The Greek alphabet derived from the Phoenician alphabet, and in turn became the parent alphabet of the Latin, Cyrillic, and several other alphabets. The earliest Greek literary works are the Homeric epics, variously dated from the 8th to the 6th century BC. Notable scientific and mathematical works include Euclid's Elements, Ptolemy's Almagest, and others. The New Testament was originally written in Koine Greek.\nGreek demonstrates several linguistic features that are shared with other Balkan languages, such as Albanian, Bulgarian and Eastern Romance languages (see Balkan sprachbund), and has absorbed many foreign words, primarily of Western European and Turkish origin. Because of the movements of Philhellenism and the Diafotismos in the 19th century, which emphasized the modern Greeks' ancient heritage, these foreign influences were excluded from official use via the creation of Katharevousa, a somewhat artificial form of Greek purged of all foreign influence and words, as the official language of the Greek state. In 1976, however, the Hellenic Parliament voted to make the spoken Dimotiki the official language, making Katharevousa obsolete.\nModern Greek has, in addition to Standard Modern Greek or Dimotiki, a wide variety of dialects of varying levels of mutual intelligibility, including Cypriot, Pontic, Cappadocian, Griko and Tsakonian (the only surviving representative of ancient Doric Greek). Yevanic is the language of the Romaniotes, and survives in small communities in Greece, New York and Israel. In addition to Greek, many Greek citizens in Greece and the diaspora are bilingual in other languages such as English, Arvanitika/Albanian, Aromanian, Megleno-Romanian, Macedonian Slavic, Russian and Turkish.\nReligion.\nMost Greeks are Christians, belonging to the Greek Orthodox Church. During the first centuries after Jesus Christ, the New Testament was originally written in Koine Greek, which remains the liturgical language of the Greek Orthodox Church, and most of the early Christians and Church Fathers were Greek-speaking. There are small groups of ethnic Greeks adhering to other Christian denominations like Latin and Greek Byzantine Catholics, Greek Evangelicals, Pentecostals, Mormons, and groups adhering to other religions including Romaniot and Sephardic Jews, Greek Muslims and Jehovah's Witnesses. About 2,000 Greeks are members of Hellenic Polytheistic Reconstructionism congregations.\nGreek-speaking Muslims live mainly outside Greece in the contemporary era. There are both Christian and Muslim Greek-speaking communities in Lebanon and Syria, while in the Pontus region of Turkey there is a large community of indeterminate size who were spared from the population exchange because of their religious affiliation.\nArts.\nGreek art has a long and varied history. Greeks have contributed to the visual, literary and performing arts. In the West, classical Greek art was influential in shaping the Roman and later the modern Western artistic heritage. Following the Renaissance in Europe, the humanist aesthetic and the high technical standards of Greek art inspired generations of European artists. Well into the 19th century, the classical tradition derived from Greece played an important role in the art of the Western world. In the East, Alexander the Great's conquests initiated several centuries of exchange between Greek, Central Asian and Indian cultures, resulting in Indo-Greek and Greco-Buddhist art, whose influence reached as far as Japan.\nByzantine Greek art, which grew from the Hellenistic classical art and adapted the pagan motifs in the service of Christianity, provided a stimulus to the art of many nations. Its influences can be traced from Venice in the West to Kazakhstan in the East. In turn, Greek art was influenced by eastern civilizations (i.e. Egypt, Persia, etc.) during various periods of its history.\nNotable modern Greek artists include: \nNotable cinema or theatre actors include Marika Kotopouli, Melina Mercouri, Ellie Lambeti, Academy Award winner Katina Paxinou, Alexis Minotis, Dimitris Horn, Thanasis Veggos, Manos Katrakis and Irene Papas. Alekos Sakellarios, Karolos Koun, Vasilis Georgiadis, Kostas Gavras, Michael Cacoyannis, Giannis Dalianidis, Nikos Koundouros and Theo Angelopoulos are among the most important directors.\nAmong the most significant modern-era architects are Stamatios Kleanthis, Lysandros Kaftanzoglou, Anastasios Metaxas, Panagis Kalkos, Anastasios Orlandos, the naturalized Greek Ernst Ziller, Dimitris Pikionis and urban planners Stamatis Voulgaris and George Candilis.\nScience.\nThe Greeks of the Classical and Hellenistic eras made seminal contributions to science and philosophy, laying the foundations of several western scientific traditions, such as astronomy, geography, historiography, mathematics, medicine, philosophy and political science. The scholarly tradition of the Greek academies was maintained during Roman times with several academic institutions in Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria and other centers of Greek learning, while Byzantine science was essentially a continuation of classical science. Greeks have a long tradition of valuing and investing in \"paideia\" (education). \"Paideia\" was one of the highest societal values in the Greek and Hellenistic world while the first European institution described as a university was founded in 5th century Constantinople and operated in various incarnations until the city's fall to the Ottomans in 1453. The University of Constantinople was Christian Europe's first secular institution of higher learning since no theological subjects were taught, and considering the original meaning of the word university as a corporation of students, the world's first university as well.\nAs of 2007, Greece had the eighth highest percentage of tertiary enrollment in the world (with the percentages for female students being higher than for male) while Greeks of the Diaspora are equally active in the field of education. Hundreds of thousands of Greek students attend western universities every year while the faculty lists of leading Western universities contain a striking number of Greek names. Notable Greek scientists of modern times include: physician Georgios Papanicolaou (pioneer in cytopathology, inventor of the Pap test); mathematician Constantin Carath\u00e9odory (acclaimed contributor to real and complex analysis and the calculus of variations); archaeologists Manolis Andronikos (unearthed the tomb of Philip II), Valerios Stais (recognised the Antikythera mechanism), Spyridon Marinatos (specialised in Mycenaean sites) and Ioannis Svoronos; chemists Leonidas Zervas (of Bergmann-Zervas synthesis and Z-group discovery fame), K. C. Nicolaou (first total synthesis of taxol) and Panayotis Katsoyannis (first chemical synthesis of insulin); computer scientists Michael Dertouzos and Nicholas Negroponte (known for their early work with the World Wide Web), John Argyris (co-creator of the FEM), Joseph Sifakis (2007 Turing Award), Christos Papadimitriou (2002 Knuth Prize) and Mihalis Yannakakis (2005 Knuth Prize); physicist-mathematician Demetrios Christodoulou (renowned for work on Minkowski spacetime) and physicists Achilles Papapetrou (known for solutions of general relativity), Dimitri Nanopoulos (extensive work on particle physics and cosmology), and John Iliopoulos (2007 Dirac Prize for work on the charm quark); astronomer Eugenios Antoniadis; biologist Fotis Kafatos (contributor to cDNA cloning technology); botanist Theodoros Orphanides; economist Xenophon Zolotas (held various senior posts in international organisations such as the IMF); Indologist Dimitrios Galanos; linguist Yiannis Psycharis (promoter of Demotic Greek); historians Constantine Paparrigopoulos (founder of modern Greek historiography) and Helene Glykatzi Ahrweiler (excelled in Byzantine studies); and political scientists Nicos Poulantzas (a leading Structural Marxist) and Cornelius Castoriadis (philosopher of history and ontologist, social critic, economist, psychoanalyst).\nSignificant engineers and automobile designers include Nikolas Tombazis, Alec Issigonis and Andreas Zapatinas.\nSymbols.\nThe most widely used symbol is the flag of Greece, which features nine equal horizontal stripes of blue alternating with white representing the nine syllables of the Greek national motto \"Eleftheria i Thanatos\" (Freedom or Death), which was the motto of the Greek War of Independence. The blue square in the upper hoist-side corner bears a white cross, which represents Greek Orthodoxy. The Greek flag is widely used by the Greek Cypriots, although Cyprus has officially adopted a neutral flag to ease ethnic tensions with the Turkish Cypriot minority (see flag of Cyprus).\nThe pre-1978 (and first) flag of Greece, which features a Greek cross (\"crux immissa quadrata\") on a blue background, is widely used as an alternative to the official flag, and they are often flown together. The national emblem of Greece features a blue escutcheon with a white cross surrounded by two laurel branches. A common design involves the current flag of Greece and the pre-1978 flag of Greece with crossed flagpoles and the national emblem placed in front.\nAnother highly recognizable and popular Greek symbol is the double-headed eagle, the imperial emblem of the last dynasty of the Eastern Roman Empire and a common symbol in Asia Minor and, later, Eastern Europe. It is not part of the modern Greek flag or coat-of-arms, although it is officially the insignia of the Greek Army and the flag of the Church of Greece. It had been incorporated in the Greek coat of arms between 1925 and 1926.\nPolitics.\nClassical Athens is considered the birthplace of Democracy. The term appeared in the 5th century BC to denote the political systems then existing in Greek city-states, notably Athens, to mean \"rule of the people\", in contrast to aristocracy (, \"\"), meaning \"rule by an excellent elite\", and to oligarchy. While theoretically these definitions are in opposition, in practice the distinction has been blurred historically. Led by Cleisthenes, Athenians established what is generally held as the first democracy in 508\u2013507 BC, which took gradually the form of a direct democracy. The democratic form of government declined during the Hellenistic and Roman eras, only to be revived as an interest in Western Europe during the early modern period.\nThe European enlightenment and the democratic, liberal and nationalistic ideas of the French Revolution was a crucial factor to the outbreak of the Greek War of Independence and the establishment of the modern Greek state.\nNotable modern Greek politicians include Ioannis Kapodistrias, founder of the First Hellenic Republic, reformist Charilaos Trikoupis, Eleftherios Venizelos, who marked the shape of modern Greece, social democrats Georgios Papandreou and Alexandros Papanastasiou, Konstantinos Karamanlis, founder of the Third Hellenic Republic, and socialist Andreas Papandreou.\nSurnames and personal names.\nGreek surnames began to appear in the 9th and 10th century, at first among ruling families, eventually supplanting the ancient tradition of using the father's name as disambiguator. Nevertheless, Greek surnames are most commonly patronymics, such those ending in the suffix \"-opoulos\" or \"-ides\", while others derive from trade professions, physical characteristics, or a location such as a town, village, or monastery. Commonly, Greek male surnames end in -s, which is the common ending for Greek masculine proper nouns in the nominative case. Occasionally (especially in Cyprus), some surnames end in \"-ou\", indicating the genitive case of a patronymic name. Many surnames end in suffixes that are associated with a particular region, such as \"-akis\" (Crete), \"-eas\" or \"-akos\" (Mani Peninsula), \"-atos\" (island of Cephalonia), \"-ellis\" (island of Lesbos) and so forth. In addition to a Greek origin, some surnames have Turkish or Latin/Italian origin, especially among Greeks from Asia Minor and the Ionian Islands, respectively. Female surnames end in a vowel and are usually the genitive form of the corresponding males surname, although this usage is not followed in the diaspora, where the male version of the surname is generally used.\nWith respect to personal names, the two main influences are Christianity and classical Hellenism; ancient Greek nomenclatures were never forgotten but have become more widely bestowed from the 18th century onwards. As in antiquity, children are customarily named after their grandparents, with the first born male child named after the paternal grandfather, the second male child after the maternal grandfather, and similarly for female children. Personal names are often familiarized by a diminutive suffix, such as \"-akis\" for male names and \"-itsa\" or \"-oula\" for female names. Greeks generally do not use middle names, instead using the genitive of the father's first name as a middle name. This usage has been passed on to the Russians and other East Slavs (otchestvo).\nSea: exploring and commerce.\nThe traditional Greek homelands have been the Greek peninsula and the Aegean Sea, Southern Italy (the so called \"Magna Graecia\"), the Black Sea, the Ionian coasts of Asia Minor and the islands of Cyprus and Sicily. In Plato's \"Phaidon\", Socrates remarks, \"we (Greeks) live around a sea like frogs around a pond\" when describing to his friends the Greek cities of the Aegean. This image is attested by the map of the Old Greek Diaspora, which corresponded to the Greek world until the creation of the Greek state in 1832. The sea and trade were natural outlets for Greeks since the Greek peninsula is mostly rocky and does not offer good prospects for agriculture.\nNotable Greek seafarers include people such as Pytheas of Massalia who sailed to Great Britain, Euthymenes who sailed to Africa, Scylax of Caryanda who sailed to India, the navarch of Alexander the Great Nearchus, Megasthenes, explorer of India, later the 6th century merchant and monk Cosmas Indicopleustes (\"Cosmas who sailed to India\"), and the explorer of the Northwestern Passage Ioannis Fokas also known as Juan de Fuca. In later times, the Byzantine Greeks plied the sea-lanes of the Mediterranean and controlled trade until an embargo imposed by the Byzantine emperor on trade with the Caliphate opened the door for the later Italian pre-eminence in trade. Panayotis Potagos was another explorer of modern times who was the first to reach Mbomu and Uele River from the north.\nThe Greek shipping tradition recovered during the late Ottoman rule (especially after the Treaty of K\u00fc\u00e7\u00fck Kaynarca and during the Napoleonic Wars), when a substantial merchant middle class developed, which played an important part in the Greek War of Independence. Today, Greek shipping continues to prosper to the extent that Greece has one of the largest merchant fleets in the world, while many more ships under Greek ownership fly flags of convenience. The most notable shipping magnate of the 20th century was Aristotle Onassis, others being Yiannis Latsis, Stavros G. Livanos, and Stavros Niarchos.\nGenetics.\nIn their archaeogenetic study, Lazaridis et al. (2017) found that Minoans and Mycenaean Greeks were genetically highly similar, but not identical; modern Greeks resembled the Mycenaeans, but with some additional dilution of the early Neolithic ancestry. The results of the study support the idea of genetic continuity between these civilizations and modern Greeks, but not isolation in the history of populations of the Aegean, before and after the time of its earliest civilizations. Furthermore, proposed migrations by Egyptian or Phoenician colonists was not discernible in their data, thus \"rejecting the hypothesis that the cultures of the Aegean were seeded by migrants from the old civilizations of these regions.\" The FST between the sampled Bronze Age populations and present-day West Eurasians was estimated, finding that Mycenaean Greeks and Minoans were least differentiated from the populations of modern Greece, Cyprus, Albania, and Italy. In a subsequent study, Lazaridis et al. (2022) concluded that around ~58.4\u201365.8% of the ancestry of the Mycenaeans came from Anatolian Neolithic Farmers (ANF), while the remainder mainly came from ancient populations related to the Caucasus Hunter-Gatherers (CHG) (~20.1\u201322.7%) and the Pre-Pottery Neolithic (PPN) culture in the Levant (~7\u201314%). The Mycenaeans had also inherited ~3.3\u20135.5% ancestry from a source related to the Eastern European Hunter-Gatherers (EHG), introduced via a proximal source related to the inhabitants of the Eurasian steppe who are hypothesized to be the Proto-Indo-Europeans, and ~0.9\u20132.3% from the Iron Gates Hunter-Gatherers in the Balkans. Mycenaean elites were genetically the same as Mycenaean commoners in terms of their steppe ancestry, while some Mycenaeans lacked it altogether.\nA genetic study by Clemente et al. (2021) found that in the Early Bronze Age, the populations of the Minoan, Helladic, and Cycladic civilizations in the Aegean, were genetically homogeneous. In contrast, the Aegean population during the Middle Bronze Age was more differentiated; probably due to gene flow from a Yamnaya-related population from the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe. This is corroborated by sequenced genomes of Middle Bronze Age individuals from northern Greece, who had a much higher proportion of steppe-related ancestry; the timing of this gene flow was estimated at ~2,300 BCE, and is consistent with the dominant linguistic theories explaining the emergence of the Proto-Greek language. Present-day Greeks share ~90% of their ancestry with them, suggesting continuity between the two time periods. In the case of Mycenaean Greeks however, their steppe-related ancestry was diluted. The ancestry of the Mycenaeans could be explained via a 2-way admixture model of such MBA individuals in northern Greece, and either an EBA Aegean or MBA Minoan population; the difference between the two time periods could be explained by the general decline of the Mycenaean civilization.\nGenetic studies using multiple autosomal, Y-DNA, and mtDNA markers, show that Greeks share similar backgrounds as the rest of the Europeans and especially Southern Europeans (Italians and Balkan populations such as Albanians, Slavic Macedonians and Romanians). A study in 2008 showed that Greeks are genetically closest to Italians and Romanians and another 2008 study showed that they are close to Italians, Albanians, Romanians and southern Balkan Slavs such as Slavic Macedonians and Bulgarians. A 2003 study showed that Greeks cluster with other South European (mainly Italians) and North-European populations and are close to the Basques, and FST distances showed that they group with other European and Mediterranean populations, especially with Italians (\u22120.0001) and Tuscans (0.0005). A study in 2008 showed that Greek regional samples from the mainland cluster with those from the Balkans, principally Albanians while Cretan Greeks cluster with the central Mediterranean and Eastern Mediterranean samples. Studies using mitochondrial DNA gene markers (mtDNA) showed that Greeks group with other Mediterranean European populations and principal component analysis (PCA) confirmed the low genetic distance between Greeks and Italians and also revealed a cline of genes with highest frequencies in the Balkans and Southern Italy, spreading to lowest levels in Britain and the Basque country, which Cavalli-Sforza (1993) associates with \"the Greek expansion, which reached its peak in historical times around 1000 and 500 BC but which certainly began earlier\". Greeks also have a degree of Eastern-European-related ancestry which is observed in all Balkan peoples; it was acquired after 700 CE, coinciding with the arrival of Slavic-speaking peoples in the Balkans, but the proportion of this ancestry varies considerably between different studies and subregions. A 2019 study showed that Cretans share high IBD with Western (CEU), Central (German and Polish), Northern (CEU, Scandinavian) and Eastern Europeans (Ukrainian, Russian), similar to mainland Greeks who share high IBD with Eastern Europeans. This reflects settlement patterns in Crete, driven by Myceneans and Dorians, Goths and Slavs. Peoples like Andalusians, Near Eastern Arabs and Venetians left a minimal genetic impact on Cretans. But a PCA analysis shows that Cretans overlap with Peloponneseans, Sicilians and Ashkenazi Jews. A 2022 study discovered high genetic affinities between present-day southeastern Peloponnesian populations and Apulians, Calabrians and southeastern Sicilians, which are \"all characterised by a cluster composition different from those displayed by other Greek groups\", due to low influence from inland populations such as Slavic-related people and/or genetic drift in Tsakones and Maniots. Individuals from western Sicily additionally show similarities with peoples from the western part of the Peloponnese. A 2023 study states that early Cretan farmers shared the same ancestry as other Neolithic Aegeans but received 'eastern' gene flow of Anatolian origin at the end of the Neolithic Age. From the 17th to 12th centuries BCE, genetic signatures of Central and East European ancestry gradually increased in Crete, indicative of mainland Greek influence.\nPhysical appearance.\nA study from 2013 for prediction of hair and eye colour from DNA of the Greek people showed that the self-reported phenotype frequencies according to hair and eye colour categories was as follows: 119 individuals \u2013 hair colour, 11 blond, 45 dark blond/light brown, 49 dark brown, 3 brown red/auburn and 11 had black hair; eye colour, 13 with blue, 15 with intermediate (green, heterochromia) and 91 had brown eye colour.\nAnother study from 2012 included 150 dental school students from the University of Athens, and the results of the study showed that light hair colour (blonde/light ash brown) was predominant in 10.7% of the students. 36% had medium hair colour (light brown/medium darkest brown), 32% had darkest brown and 21% black (15.3 off black, 6% midnight black). In conclusion, the hair colour of young Greeks are mostly brown, ranging from light to dark brown with significant minorities having black and blonde hair. The same study also showed that the eye colour of the students was 14.6% blue/green, 28% medium (light brown) and 57.4% dark brown.\nA 2017 study found that Bronze Age Aegean populations had mostly dark hair (brown to black) and eyes. The genetic phenotype predictions matched the visual representations made by the Greeks of themselves, suggesting that art of this period reproduced phenotypes naturalistically.\nTimeline.\nThe history of the Greek people is closely associated with the history of Greece, Cyprus, Southern Italy, Constantinople, Asia Minor and the Black Sea. During the Ottoman rule of Greece, a number of Greek enclaves around the Mediterranean were cut off from the core, notably in Southern Italy, the Caucasus, Syria and Egypt. By the early 20th century, over half of the overall Greek-speaking population was settled in Asia Minor (now Turkey), while later that century a huge wave of migration to the United States, Australia, Canada and elsewhere created the modern Greek diaspora.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nExternal links.\nDiaspora\nReligious\nAcademic\nTrade organizations\nCharitable organizations"}
{"id": "42057", "revid": "22251493", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42057", "title": "Recording Artists' Coalition", "text": "The Recording Artists' Coalition (RAC) is an American music industry organization that represents recording artists, and attempts to defend their rights and interests. Compare and contrast with the RIAA, which represents the recording industry. In 2009, it became an element of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences. \nTheir most vocal and energetic actions have been in support of repealing laws which tie artists to contracts with record labels for seven years, and in successfully lobbying to repeal supposedly \"technical revisions\" to American copyright statutes which shifted ownership of some copyrights from artists to record labels.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42058", "revid": "50911719", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42058", "title": "Unknown God", "text": "Theory by Eduard Norden\nThe Unknown God or Agnostos Theos () is a theory by Eduard Norden first published in 1913 that proposes, based on the Christian Apostle Paul's Areopagus speech in Acts 17:23, that in addition to the twelve main gods and the innumerable lesser deities, ancient Greeks worshipped a deity they called \"Agnostos Theos\"; that is: \"Unknown God\", which Norden called \"Un-Greek\". In Athens, there was a temple specifically dedicated to that god and very often Athenians would swear \"in the name of the Unknown God\" (, ). Apollodorus, Philostratus and Pausanias wrote about the Unknown God as well.\nPaul at Athens.\nAccording to the book of Acts, contained in the Christian New Testament, when the Apostle Paul visited Athens, he saw an altar with an inscription dedicated to that god (possibly connected to the Cylonian affair), and, when invited to speak to the Athenian elite at the Areopagus, gave the following speech:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;22Paul stood in the middle of the Areopagus, and said, \"You men of Athens, I perceive that you are very religious in all things. 23For as I passed along, and observed the objects of your worship, I found also an altar with this inscription: 'TO AN UNKNOWN GOD.' What therefore you worship in ignorance, this I announce to you. 24The God who made the world and all things in it, he, being Lord of heaven and earth, doesn't dwell in temples made with hands, 25neither is he served by men's hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he himself gives to all life and breath, and all things. 26He made from one blood every nation of men to dwell on all the surface of the earth, having determined appointed seasons, and the boundaries of their dwellings, 27that they should seek the Lord, if perhaps they might reach out for him and find him, though he is not far from each one of us. 28'For in him we live, and move, and have our being.' As some of your own poets have said, 'For we are also his offspring.' 29Being then the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Divine Nature is like gold, or silver, or stone, engraved by art and design of man. 30The times of ignorance therefore God overlooked. But now he commands that all people everywhere should repent, 31because he has appointed a day in which he will judge the world in righteousness by the man whom he has ordained; of which he has given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead.\"\u2014\u200a\nBecause Paul's God could not be named, according to the customs of his people, it is possible that Paul's Athenian listeners would have considered his God to be \"the unknown god par excellence\". His listeners may also have understood the introduction of a new god by allusions to Aeschylus' \"The Eumenides\"; the irony would have been that just as the Eumenides were not new gods at all but the Furies in a new form, so was the Christian God not a new god but rather the god the Greeks already worshipped as the Unknown God. His audience would also have recognized the quotes in verse 28 as coming from Epimenides and Aratus, respectively.\nFrom Aratus (poet educated in the Stoic philosophy), Paul borrowed his poem \"Phaenomena 5\" and compared it with Acts 17:28, stating that indeed humans are the offspring of Zeus (the Creator according to the Stoics and other philosophical schools) but in order for humans to know him in a personal relationship, they must first follow the teachings of his son, the Logos incarnated, Jesus Christ.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From Zeus let us begin; him do we mortals never leave unnamed; full of Zeus are all the streets and all the market-places of men; full is the sea and the havens thereof; always we all have need of Zeus. For we are also his offspring; and he in his kindness unto men giveth favourable signs and wakeneth the people to work, reminding them of livelihood. He tells what time the soil is best for the labour of the ox and for the mattock, and what time the seasons are favourable both for the planting of trees and for casting all manner of seeds. For himself it was who set the signs in heaven, and marked out the constellations, and for the year devised what stars chiefly should give to men right signs of the seasons, to the end that all things might grow unfailingly. Wherefore him do men ever worship first and last. Hail, O Father, mighty marvel, mighty blessing unto men. Hail to thee and to the Elder Race! Hail, ye Muses, right kindly, every one! But for me, too, in answer to my prayer direct all my lay, even as is meet, to tell the stars.\nArchaeology.\nThere is an altar, perhaps dedicated to the Unknown God, which was unearthed in 1820 on the Palatine Hill of Rome. It contains a Latin inscription:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThis could be translated into English as: \"Whether sacred to god or to goddess, Gaius Sextius Calvinus, son of Gaius, praetor, restored this on a vote of the senate.\"\nThe altar is currently exhibited in the Palatine Museum.\nIn Ancient Egypt.\nThe idea of an unknown god, however, seems to predate the Greeks. For in Ancient Egypt, Amun was an unknowable god, not only in the sense of his name being unknown, but also his identity or essence.\nIn Neoplatonism.\nFor Plotinus, the first principle of reality is \"the One\", an utterly simple, ineffable, unknowable subsistence which is both the creative source of the Universe and the teleological end of all existing things.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42061", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42061", "title": "Statistical probability", "text": ""}
{"id": "42064", "revid": "37371155", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42064", "title": "Oneida Community", "text": "Religious commune in Oneida, New York (1848\u20131881)\nThe Oneida Community ( ) was a perfectionist religious communal society founded by John Humphrey Noyes and his followers in 1848 near Oneida, New York. The community believed that Jesus had already returned in AD 70, making it possible for them to bring about Jesus's millennial kingdom themselves, and be perfect and free of sin in this world, not just in Heaven, a belief called \"perfectionism\". The Oneida Community practiced communalism \u2013 in the sense of communal property and possessions \u2013 group marriage, male sexual continence, Oneida stirpiculture (a form of eugenics), and mutual criticism.\nThe community's original 87 members grew to 172 by February 1850, 208 by 1852, and 306 by 1878. There were smaller Noyesian communities in Wallingford, Connecticut; Newark, New Jersey; Putney and Cambridge, Vermont. The branches were closed in 1854 except for the Wallingford branch, which operated until the 1878 tornado devastated it.\nThe Oneida Community dissolved in 1881, converting itself to a joint-stock company. This eventually became the silverware company Oneida Limited, one of the largest in the world.\nStructure.\nEven though the community only reached a maximum population of about 300, it had a complex bureaucracy of 27 standing committees and 48 administrative sections.\nAll community members were expected to work, each according to their abilities. Women tended to do many of the domestic duties. Although more skilled jobs tended to remain with an individual member (the financial manager, for example, held his post throughout the life of the community), community members rotated through the more unskilled jobs, working in the house, the fields, or the various industries. As Oneida thrived, it also began to hire outsiders to work in these positions. They were a major employer in the area, with approximately 200 employees by 1870.\nSecondary industries included manufacturing leather travel bags, weaving palm frond hats, construction of rustic garden furniture, and tourism. One member, Canadian Sewell Newhouse, invented and patented the Oneida trap, which was popular among trappers at the time. Silverware manufacturing began in 1877, relatively late in the community's life, and still exists.\nComplex marriage.\nThe Oneida community strongly believed in a system of free love \u2013 a term which Noyes is credited with coining \u2013 which was known as complex marriage, where any member was free to have sex with any other who consented. Possessiveness and exclusive relationships were frowned upon.\nNoyes developed a distinction between amative and propagative love.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Complex marriage meant that everyone in the community was married to everyone else. All men and women were expected to have sexual relations and did. The basis for complex marriage was the Pauline passage about there being no marriage in heaven meant that there should be no marriage on earth, but that no marriage did not mean no sex. But sex meant children; not only could the community not afford children in the early years, the women were not enthusiastic about a regime that would have kept them pregnant most of the time. They developed a distinction between amative and propagative love. Propagative love was sex for the purpose of having children; amative love was sex for the purpose of expressing love. The difference was what Noyes called \"male continence\", in which the male partner avoided ejaculation. Noyes argued that this practice not only kept them from producing unwanted children but also taught the male considerable self-control. The system worked very well.\nWomen over 40 were to act as sexual \"mentors\" to adolescent boys because these relationships had a minimal chance of conceiving. Furthermore, these women became religious role models for the young men. Likewise, older men often introduced young women to sex. Noyes often used his judgment in determining the partnerships that would form, and he would often encourage relationships between the non-devout and the devout in the community in the hope that the attitudes and behaviors of the devout would influence the attitudes of the non-devout.\nIn 1993, the community archives were made available to scholars for the first time. Contained within the archives was the journal of Tirzah Miller, Noyes' niece, who wrote extensively about her romantic and sexual relations with other members of Oneida.\nMutual criticism.\nEvery member of the community was subject to criticism by a committee or the community as a whole during a general meeting. The goal was to eliminate undesirable character traits. Various contemporary sources contend that Noyes himself was the subject of criticism, although less often and of probably less severe criticism than the rest of the community. Charles Nordhoff said he had witnessed the criticism of a member he referred to as \"Charles\", writing the following account of the incident:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Charles sat speechless, looking before him; but as the accusations multiplied, his face grew paler, and drops of perspiration began to stand on his forehead. The remarks I have reported took up about half an hour; and now, each one in the circle having spoken, Mr. Noyes summed up. He said that Charles had some serious faults; that he had watched him with some care; and that he thought the young man was earnestly trying to cure himself. He spoke in general praise of his ability, his good character, and of certain temptations he had resisted in the course of his life. He thought he saw signs that Charles was making a real and earnest attempt to conquer his faults; and as one evidence of this, he remarked that Charles had lately come to him to consult him upon a difficult case in which he had had a severe struggle, but had in the end succeeded in doing right. \"In the course of what we call stirpiculture\", said Noyes, \"Charles, as you know, is in the situation of one who is by and by to become a father. Under these circumstances, he has fallen under the too common temptation of selfish love, and a desire to wait upon and cultivate an exclusive intimacy with the woman who was to bear a child through him. This is an insidious temptation, very apt to attack people under such circumstances; but it must nevertheless be struggled against.\" Charles, he went on to say, had come to him for advice in this case, and he (Noyes) had at first refused to tell him any thing, but had asked him what he thought he ought to do; that after some conversation, Charles had determined, and he agreed with him, that he ought to isolate himself entirely from the woman, and let another man take his place at her side; and this Charles had accordingly done, with a most praiseworthy spirit of selfsacrifice. Charles had indeed still further taken up his cross, as he had noticed with pleasure, by going to sleep with the smaller children, to take charge of them during the night. Taking all this in view, he thought Charles was in a fair way to become a better man, and had manifested a sincere desire to improve, and to rid himself of all selfish faults.\nMale continence.\nThe Oneida community enacted a system of male continence or \"coitus reservatus\" to control reproduction within it. John Humphrey Noyes decided that sexual intercourse served two distinct purposes. In \"Male Continence\", Noyes argues that the method simply \"proposes the subordination of the flesh to the spirit, teaching men to seek principally the elevated spiritual pleasures of sexual connection\". The primary purpose of male continence was social satisfaction, \"to allow the sexes to communicate and express affection for one another\". The second purpose was procreation. Of around two hundred adults using male continence as birth control, there were twelve unplanned births within Oneida between 1848 and 1868, indicating that it was a highly effective form of birth control. Young men were introduced to male continence by post-menopausal women, and experienced, older males introduced young women.\nNoyes believed that ejaculation \"drained men's vitality and led to disease\" and pregnancy and childbirth \"levied a heavy tax on the vitality of women\". Noyes founded male continence to spare his wife, Harriet, from more difficult childbirths after five traumatizing births of which four led to the death of the child. They favored this method of male continence over other methods of birth control because they found it to be natural, healthy, and favorable for the development of intimate relationships. Women found increased sexual satisfaction in the practice, and Oneida is regarded as highly unusual in the value they placed on women's sexual satisfaction. If a male failed, he faced public disapproval or private rejection.\nIt is unclear whether the practice of male continence led to significant problems. Sociologist Lawrence Foster sees hints in Noyes' letters indicating that masturbation and anti-social withdrawal from community life may have been issues. Oneida's practice of male continence did not lead to impotence.\nStirpiculture.\nStirpiculture was a proto-eugenics program of selective controlled reproduction within the community devised by Noyes and implemented in 1869. It was designed to create more spiritually and physically perfect children. Community members who wished to be parents would go before a committee to be approved and matched based on their spiritual and moral qualities. 53 women and 38 men participated in this program, which necessitated the construction of a new wing of the Oneida Community Mansion House. The experiment yielded 58 children, nine of whom were fathered by Noyes.\nOnce children were weaned (usually at around the age of one), they were raised communally in the Children's Wing, or South Wing. Their parents were allowed to visit, but the children's department held jurisdiction over raising the offspring. If the department suspected a parent and child were bonding too closely, the community would enforce a period of separation because the group wanted to stop the affection between parents and children. The Children's department had a male and female supervisor to look after children between ages two and twelve. The supervisors made sure the children followed the routine. Dressing, prayers, breakfast, work, school, lunch, work, playtime, supper, prayers, and study, which were \"adjusted according to 'age and ability'.\"\nStirpiculture was the first positive eugenics experiment in the United States, although it was not recognized as such because of the religious framework from which it emerged.\nRole of women.\nOneida embodied one of the most radical institutional efforts to change women's roles and improve female status in 19th-century America. Women had freedoms in the commune that they could not get outside of it. Some of these privileges included not having to care for their own children, as Oneida had a communal child care system, and freedom from unwanted pregnancies due to Oneida's male continence practice. In addition, they were able to wear functional, Bloomer-style clothing and maintain short haircuts. Women could participate in practically all types of community work. While domestic duties remained a primarily female responsibility, women were free to explore positions in business and sales, or as artisans or craftspersons, and many did so, particularly in the late 1860s and early 1870s. Finally, women actively shaped commune policy, participating in daily religious and business meetings.\nThe complex marriage and free love systems practiced at Oneida further acknowledged female status. Through the complex marriage arrangement, women and men had equal freedom in sexual expression and commitment. Indeed, sexual practices at Oneida accepted female sexuality. A woman's right to satisfying sexual experiences was recognized, and women were encouraged to have orgasms. However, a woman's right to refuse a sexual overture was limited depending on the status of the man who made the advance.\nEllen Wayland-Smith, wrote in \"The Status and Self-Perception of Women in the Oneida Community\" that men and women had roughly equal status in the community. She points out that while both sexes were ultimately subject to Noyes' vision and will, women did not suffer undue oppression.\nInteractions with society.\nThe community experienced freedom from wider society. The previously mentioned unorthodox marital, sexual, and religious practices caused them to face some criticism. However, between the community's beginning in the 1850s until the 1870s, their interactions with broader society were mostly favorable. These are the best-known instances of conflict and peace resolution.\nOutside criticism.\nIn 1870, a \"nineteenth century cultural critic\" Dr. John B. Ellis wrote a book against Free Love communities that Noyes inspired, including \"Individual Sovereigns, Berlin Heights Free Lovers, Spiritualists, Advocates of Woman Suffrage, or Friends of Free Divorce\". He saw their joint goal to be ending marriage. Dr. Ellis described this as an attack on the prevailing moral order. Historian Gayle Fischer mentions that Dr. Ellis also criticized Oneida women's clothing, saying \"'healthful' uniforms did not rid Oneida women of their 'peculiar air of unhealthiness' \u2014 brought on by \"sexual excess.\"\nNoyes responded to Ellis' criticism four years later in a pamphlet, \"Dixon and His Copytists\", in which he claimed that Dr. John B. Ellis is a pseudonym for a \"literary gentleman living in the upper part of the city.\" Noyes argued that AMS press employed the writer after they read a Philadelphia paper article on the community and saw a chance to profit off sensationalist writing.\nTryphena Hubbard's legal battle.\nIn Anthony Wonderly's \"Oneida Utopia\", he covers the 1848\u20131851 Hubbard affair as a moment where a legal conflict almost ended the group, which was only a mere \"Association\" at the time. Twenty-one-year-old Tryphena Hubbard learned Noyes' ideas about marriage and sex through his manuscript \"Bible Argument\" in 1848. She joined the community and became the group's first local convert. Tryphena Hubbard soon married Henry Seymour, a young man in the community.\nEarly in 1849, Tryphena's father, Noahdiah Hubbard, learned of the Association's open marriages and demanded his daughter's return. Tryphena refused, and for two years, Noahdiah \"made a sulking nuisance of himself at the Mansion House.\"\nAn 1850 criticism of Tryphena mentioned her \"insubordination to the church\" and \"excess egotism amounting to insanity.\" There was marriage before the community attempted perfectionism, and Tryphena's husband's supervision over her was increased along with the \"disciplinary norms of the day, physical punishment.\"\nIn September 1851, Tryphena began displaying signs of mental illness, \"crying at night, speaking incoherently, and wandering around.\" Seymour went to the Hubbard family to report their daughter's insanity, and both parents were appalled by Seymour's physical violence.\nOn September 27, 1851, Noahdiah Hubbard lodged assault and battery charges on behalf of his daughter. Seymour was indicted, and other community members were served arrest warrants as accessories.\nThe case was settled on November 26, 1851. The community agreed to Tryphena's expenses while she was in the asylum and after her release $125 a year if she was well and $200 a year if she remained unwell. The Hubbards eventually accepted a $350 settlement in lieu of long-term payments. Tryphena Hubbard eventually returned to Henry Seymour and had a child by him. She died at the age of 49 in 1877.\nDecline.\nThe community lasted until John Humphrey Noyes attempted to pass leadership to his son, Theodore Noyes. This move was unsuccessful because Theodore was an agnostic and lacked his father's talent for leadership. The move also divided the community, as Communitarian James W. Towner attempted to wrest control for himself. Towner and a breakaway group eventually moved to California, where they convinced the government to create a new municipality for them, Orange County.\nWithin the commune, there was a debate about when children should be initiated into sex and by whom. There was also much debate about its practices as a whole. The founding members were aging or deceased, and many younger communitarians desired to enter into exclusive, traditional marriages.\nThe capstone to all these pressures was the campaign by Professor John Mears of Hamilton College against the community. He called for a protest meeting against the Oneida Community, attended by forty-seven clergy members. John Humphrey Noyes was informed by trusted adviser Myron Kinsley that a warrant for his arrest on charges of statutory rape was imminent. Noyes fled the Oneida Community Mansion House and the country in the middle of a June night in 1879, never to return to the United States. Shortly afterward, he wrote to his followers from Niagara Falls, Ontario, recommending that complex marriage be abandoned.\nComplex marriage was abandoned in 1879 following external pressures, and the community soon broke apart, with some of the members reorganizing as a joint-stock company. Marital partners normalized their status with the partners with whom they were cohabiting at the time of the re-organization. Over 70 Community members entered into a traditional marriage in the following year.\nDuring the early 20th century, the new company, Oneida Community Limited, narrowed its focus to silverware. The animal trap business was sold in 1912, the silk business in 1916, and the canning was discontinued as unprofitable in 1915.\nIn 1947, embarrassed by their progenitor's legacy, Noyes' descendants burned the group's records.\nThe joint-stock corporation still exists and is a major producer of cutlery under the brand name \"Oneida Limited\". In September 2004, Oneida Limited announced that it would cease all U.S. manufacturing operations at the beginning of 2005, ending a 124-year tradition. The company continues to design and market products that are manufactured overseas. The company has been selling off its manufacturing facilities. Most recently, the distribution center in Sherrill, New York, was closed. Administrative offices remain in the Oneida area.\nThe last original member of the community, Ella Florence Underwood (1850\u20131950), died on June 25, 1950, in Kenwood, New York, near Oneida, New York.\nLegacy.\nMany histories and first-person accounts of the Oneida Community have been published since the commune dissolved itself. Among those are: \"The Oneida Community: An Autobiography, 1851\u20131876\" and \"The Oneida Community: The Breakup, 1876\u20131881\", both by Constance Noyes Robertson; \"Desire and Duty at Oneida: Tirzah Miller's Intimate Memoir\" and \"Special Love/Special Sex: An Oneida Community Diary\", both by Robert S. Fogarty; \"Without Sin\" by Spencer Klaw; \"Oneida, From Free Love Utopia to the Well-Set Table\" by Ellen Wayland-Smith; and biographical/autobiographic accounts by once-members including Jessie Catherine Kinsley, Corinna Ackley Noyes, George Wallingford Noyes, and Pierrepont B. Noyes.\nAn account of the Oneida Community is found in Sarah Vowell's book \"Assassination Vacation\". It discusses the community in general and the more than five-year membership of Charles J. Guiteau \u2013 who later assassinated President James A. Garfield \u2013 in the community. The perfectionist community in David Flusfeder's novel \"Pagan House\" (2007) is directly inspired by the Oneida Community. There is a residential building called \"Oneida\" at the Twin Oaks Community in Virginia. Twin Oaks, an intentional community, names its buildings after defunct intentional communities.\nCharles Guiteau's time at Oneida is briefly depicted in the television series \"Death by Lightning\", where Guittau is shown angrily denouncing the community as \"menial farm labor and casual fucking.\"\nOneida Community Mansion House.\nThe Oneida Community Mansion House was listed as a National Historic Landmark in 1965, and the principal surviving material culture of the Oneida Community consists of those landmarked buildings, object collections, and landscape. The five buildings of the Mansion House, separately designed by Erastus Hamilton, Lewis W. Leeds, and Theodore Skinner, comprise on a 33-acre site. This site has been continuously occupied since the community's establishment in 1848, and the existing Mansion House has been inhabited since 1862. Today, the Oneida Community Mansion House is a non-profit educational organization chartered by the State of New York. It welcomes visitors throughout the year with guided tours, programs, and exhibits. It preserves, collects, and interprets the intangible and material culture of the Oneida Community and related themes of the 19th and 20th centuries. The Mansion House also houses residential apartments, overnight guest rooms, and meeting spaces.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42068", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42068", "title": "Freddie Mercury", "text": "British rock musician (1946\u20131991)\nFreddie Mercury (born Farrokh Bulsara; 5 September 1946\u00a0\u2013 24 November 1991) was a British singer and songwriter who achieved global fame as the lead vocalist and pianist of the rock band Queen. Regarded as one of the greatest singers in the history of rock music, he was known for his flamboyant stage persona and four-octave vocal range. Mercury defied the conventions of a rock frontman with his theatrical style, influencing the artistic direction of Queen.\nBorn in 1946 in Zanzibar to Parsi-Indian parents, Mercury attended British boarding schools in India from the age of eight and returned to Zanzibar after secondary school. In 1964, his family fled the Zanzibar Revolution, moving to Middlesex, England. Having previously studied and written music, he formed Queen in 1970 with guitarist Brian May and drummer Roger Taylor. Mercury wrote numerous hits for Queen, including \"Killer Queen\", \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", \"Somebody to Love\", \"We Are the Champions\", \"Don't Stop Me Now\" and \"Crazy Little Thing Called Love\". His charismatic stage performances often saw him interact with the audience, as displayed at the 1985 Live Aid concert. He also led a solo career and was a producer and guest musician for other artists.\nMercury was diagnosed with AIDS in 1987. He continued to record with Queen, and was posthumously featured on their final album, \"Made in Heaven\" (1995). In 1991, the day after publicly announcing his diagnosis, he died from complications of the disease at the age of 45. In 1992, a concert in tribute to him was held at Wembley Stadium, in benefit of AIDS awareness.\nAs a member of Queen, Mercury was posthumously inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001, the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2003, and the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2004. In 1990, he and the other Queen members received the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music. One year after his death, Mercury received the same award individually. In 2005, Queen were awarded an Ivor Novello Award for Outstanding Song Collection from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers, and Authors. In 2002, Mercury was voted number 58 in the BBC's poll of the 100 Greatest Britons.\nEarly life.\nZanzibar and India.\nMercury was born Farrokh Bulsara in Stone Town in the British protectorate of Zanzibar (now part of Tanzania) on 5 September 1946. His parents, Bomi and Jer Bulsara, were from the Parsi community of western India. The Bulsaras had origins in the city of Bulsar (now Valsad) in Gujarat. He had a younger sister, Kashmira (b. 1952).\nThe family had moved to Zanzibar so that Bomi could continue his job as a cashier at the British Colonial Office. As Parsis, the Bulsaras practised Zoroastrianism. Mercury was born with four extra incisors, to which he attributed his enhanced vocal range. As Zanzibar was a British protectorate until 1963, Mercury was born a British subject, and on 2 June 1969 was registered a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies after the family had emigrated to England.\nMercury spent most of his childhood in India, where he began taking piano lessons at the age of seven while living with relatives. In 1954, at the age of eight, Mercury was sent to study at St. Peter's School, a British-style boarding school for boys, in Panchgani near Bombay.\nInheriting his father's interest in philately, between 9 and 12 years old Mercury collected stamps, many of which were from the British Commonwealth. One of the rare personal possessions of Mercury in museum ownership, his stamp album is displayed in the collection of the Postal Museum in London. At the age of 12, he formed a school band, the Hectics, and covered rock and roll artists such as Cliff Richard, Elvis Presley and Little Richard. One of Mercury's former bandmates from the Hectics has said \"the only music he listened to, and played, was Western pop music\". A friend recalls that he had \"an uncanny ability to listen to the radio and replay what he heard on piano\". It was also at St. Peter's where he began to call himself \"Freddie\". In February 1963, he moved back to Zanzibar where he joined his parents at their flat.\nFleeing to England.\nIn the spring of 1964, Mercury and his family fled to England from Zanzibar to escape the violence of the revolution against the Sultan of Zanzibar and his mainly Arab government, in which thousands of ethnic Arabs and Indians were killed. They moved to 19 Hamilton Close, Feltham, Middlesex, a town west of central London. The Bulsaras briefly relocated to 122 Hamilton Road, before settling into a small house at 22 Gladstone Avenue in late October. After first studying art at Isleworth Polytechnic in West London, Mercury studied graphic art and design at Ealing Art College, graduating with a diploma in 1969. He later used these skills to design heraldic arms for his band Queen.\nFollowing graduation, Mercury joined a series of bands and sold second-hand Edwardian clothes and scarves in Kensington Market in London with drummer and future bandmate Roger Taylor. Taylor recalls, \"Back then, I didn't really know him as a singer\u2014he was just my mate. My crazy mate! If there was fun to be had, Freddie and I were usually involved.\" He also held a job as a baggage handler at Heathrow Airport. Other friends from the time remember him as a quiet and shy young man with a great interest in music. In 1969, he joined Liverpool-based band Ibex, later renamed Wreckage, which played \"very Hendrix-style, heavy blues\". He briefly lived in a flat above the Dovedale Towers, a pub on Penny Lane in Liverpool's Mossley Hill district. When this band failed to take off, he joined an Oxford-based band, Sour Milk Sea, but by early 1970 this group had broken up as well.\nIn April 1970, Mercury teamed up with Taylor and guitarist Brian May to become lead singer of their band Smile. They were joined by bassist John Deacon in 1971. Despite the reservations of the other members and Trident Studios, the band's initial management, Mercury chose the name \"Queen\" for the new band. He later said, \"It's very regal obviously, and it sounds splendid. It's a strong name, very universal and immediate. I was certainly aware of the gay connotations, but that was just one facet of it.\" At about the same time, he legally changed his surname, Bulsara, to Mercury.\nShortly before the release of Queen's self-titled first album, Mercury designed the band's logo, known as the \"Queen crest\". The logo combines the zodiac signs of the four band members: two lions for Deacon and Taylor (sign Leo), a crab for May (Cancer), and two fairies for Mercury (Virgo). The lions embrace a stylised letter Q, the crab rests atop the letter with flames rising directly above it, and the fairies are each sheltering below a lion. A crown is shown inside the Q, and the whole logo is over-shadowed by an enormous phoenix. The Queen crest bears a passing resemblance to the Royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom, particularly with the lion supporters.\nArtistry.\nVocals.\nAlthough Mercury's speaking voice naturally fell in the baritone range, he delivered most songs in the tenor range. His known vocal range extended from bass low F (F2) to soprano high F (F6). He could belt up to tenor high F (F5). Biographer David Bret described his voice as \"escalating within a few bars from a deep, throaty rock-growl to tender, vibrant tenor, then on to a high-pitched, perfect coloratura, pure and crystalline in the upper reaches\". Spanish soprano Montserrat Caball\u00e9, with whom Mercury recorded an album, expressed her opinion that \"the difference between Freddie and almost all the other rock stars was that he was selling the voice\". She adds:\nHis technique was astonishing. No problem of tempo, he sang with an incisive sense of rhythm, his vocal placement was very good and he was able to glide effortlessly from a register to another. He also had a great musicality. His phrasing was subtle, delicate and sweet or energetic and slamming. He was able to find the right colouring or expressive nuance for each word.\nThe Who lead singer Roger Daltrey described Mercury as \"the best virtuoso rock 'n' roll singer of all time. He could sing anything in any style. He could change his style from line to line and, God, that's an art. And he was brilliant at it.\" Discussing what type of person he wanted to play the lead role in his musical \"Jesus Christ Superstar\", Andrew Lloyd Webber said: \"He has to be of enormous charisma, but he also has to be a genuine, genuine rock tenor. That's what it is. Really think Freddie Mercury, I mean that's the kind of range we're talking about.\"\nA research team undertook a study in 2016 to understand the appeal behind Mercury's voice. Led by Professor Christian Herbst, the team identified his notably faster vibrato and use of subharmonics as unique characteristics of Mercury's voice, particularly in comparison to opera singers. The research team studied vocal samples from 23 commercially available Queen recordings, his solo work, and a series of interviews of the late artist. They also used an endoscopic video camera to study a rock singer brought in to imitate Mercury's singing voice.\nSongwriting.\nMercury wrote 10 of the 17 songs on Queen's \"Greatest Hits\" album: \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", \"Seven Seas of Rhye\", \"Killer Queen\", \"Somebody to Love\", \"Good Old-Fashioned Lover Boy\", \"We Are the Champions\", \"Bicycle Race\", \"Don't Stop Me Now\", \"Crazy Little Thing Called Love\", and \"Play the Game\". In 2003 Mercury was posthumously inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame with the rest of Queen, and in 2005 all four band members were awarded an Ivor Novello Award for Outstanding Song Collection from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers, and Authors.\nThe most notable aspect of his songwriting involved the wide range of genres that he used, which included, among other styles, rockabilly, progressive rock, heavy metal, gospel, and disco. As he explained in a 1986 interview, \"I hate doing the same thing again and again and again. I like to see what's happening now in music, film and theatre and incorporate all of those things.\" Compared to many popular songwriters, Mercury also tended to write musically complex material. For example, \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" is non-cyclical in structure and comprises dozens of chords. He also wrote six songs from \"Queen II\" which deal with multiple key changes and complex material. \"Crazy Little Thing Called Love\", on the other hand, contains only a few chords. Although Mercury often wrote very intricate harmonies, he said that he could barely read music. He composed most of his songs on the piano and used a wide variety of key signatures.\nLive performer.\nMercury was noted for his live performances, which were often delivered to stadium audiences around the world. He displayed a highly theatrical style that often evoked a great deal of participation from the crowd. A writer for \"The Spectator\" described him as \"a performer out to tease, shock and ultimately charm his audience with various extravagant versions of himself.\" David Bowie, who performed at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert and recorded the song \"Under Pressure\" with Queen, praised Mercury's performance style, saying: \"Of all the more theatrical rock performers, Freddie took it further than the rest\u00a0... he took it over the edge. And of course, I always admired a man who wears tights. I only saw him in concert once and as they say, he was definitely a man who could hold an audience in the palm of his hand.\" Queen guitarist Brian May wrote that Mercury could make \"the last person at the back of the furthest stand in a stadium feel that he was connected\". Mercury's main prop on stage was a broken microphone stand; after accidentally snapping it off the heavy base during an early performance, he realised it could be used in endless ways.\nOne of Mercury's most notable performances with Queen took place at Live Aid in 1985. Queen's performance at the event has since been voted by a group of music executives as the greatest live performance in the history of rock music. The results were aired on a television program called \"The World's Greatest Gigs\". Mercury's powerful, sustained note during the a cappella section came to be known as \"The Note Heard Round the World\". In 2005, John Harris wrote, \"Those who compile lists of Great Rock Frontmen and award the top spots to Mick Jagger, Robert Plant et al are guilty of a terrible oversight. Freddie, as evidenced by his Dionysian Live Aid performance, was easily the most godlike of them all.\" Photographer Denis O'Regan, who captured a definitive pose of Mercury on stage\u2014arched back, knee bent and facing toward the sky\u2014during his final tour with Queen in 1986, commented \"Freddie was a once-in-a-lifetime showman\". Queen roadie Peter Hince states, \"It wasn't just about his voice but the way he commanded the stage. For him it was all about interacting with the audience and knowing how to get them on his side. And he gave everything in every show.\"\nThroughout his career, Mercury performed an estimated 700 concerts in countries around the world with Queen. A notable aspect of Queen concerts was the large scale involved. He once explained, \"We're the Cecil B. DeMille of rock and roll, always wanting to do things bigger and better.\" The band was the first ever to play in South American stadiums, breaking worldwide records for concert attendance in the Morumbi Stadium in S\u00e3o Paulo in 1981. In 1986, Queen also played behind the Iron Curtain when they performed to a crowd of 80,000 in Budapest, in what was one of the biggest rock concerts ever held in Eastern Europe. Mercury's final live performance with Queen took place on 9 August 1986 at Knebworth Park in England and drew an attendance estimated as high as 200,000. A week prior to Knebworth, May recalled Mercury saying \"I'm not going to be doing this forever. This is probably the last time.\" With the British national anthem \"God Save the Queen\" playing at the end of the concert, Mercury's final act on stage saw him draped in a robe, holding a golden crown aloft, bidding farewell to the crowd.\nInstrumentalist.\nAs a young boy in India, Mercury received formal piano training up to the age of nine. Later on, while living in London, he learned guitar. Much of the music he liked was guitar-oriented: his favourite artists at the time were the Who, the Beatles, Jimi Hendrix, David Bowie, and Led Zeppelin. He was often self-deprecating about his skills on both instruments. Brian May said that Mercury \"had a wonderful touch on the piano. He could play what came from inside him like nobody else \u2013 incredible rhythm, incredible passion and feeling.\" Keyboardist Rick Wakeman praised Mercury's playing style, saying he \"discovered [the piano] for himself\" and successfully composed a number of Queen songs on the instrument. From the early 1980s Mercury began extensively using guest keyboardists. Most notably, he enlisted Fred Mandel (a Canadian musician who also worked for Pink Floyd, Elton John, and Supertramp) for his first solo project. From 1982 Mercury collaborated with Morgan Fisher (who performed with Queen in concert during the Hot Space leg), and from 1985 onward Mercury collaborated with Mike Moran (in the studio) and Spike Edney (in concert).\nMercury played the piano in many of Queen's most popular songs, including \"Killer Queen\", \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", \"Good Old-Fashioned Lover Boy\", \"We Are the Champions\", \"Somebody to Love\", and \"Don't Stop Me Now\". He used concert grand pianos (such as a Bechstein) and, occasionally, other keyboard instruments such as the harpsichord. From 1980 onward, he also made frequent use of synthesisers in the studio. Brian May said that Mercury used the piano less over time because he wanted to walk around on stage and entertain the audience. Although he wrote many lines for the guitar, Mercury possessed only rudimentary skills on the instrument. Songs like \"Ogre Battle\" and \"Crazy Little Thing Called Love\" were composed on the guitar; the latter featured Mercury playing rhythm guitar on stage and in the studio.\nSolo career.\nAs well as his work with Queen, Mercury put out two solo albums and several singles. Although his solo work was not as commercially successful as most Queen albums, the two off-Queen albums and several of the singles debuted in the top 10 of the UK music charts. His first solo effort goes back to 1972 under the pseudonym Larry Lurex, when Trident Studios' house engineer Robin Geoffrey Cable was working in a musical project, at the time when Queen were recording their debut album; Cable enlisted Mercury to perform lead vocals on the songs \"I Can Hear Music\" and \"Goin' Back\", both were released together as a single in 1973. Eleven years later, Mercury contributed to the soundtrack for the restoration of the 1927 Fritz Lang film \"Metropolis\". The song \"Love Kills\" was written for the film by Giorgio Moroder in collaboration with Mercury, and produced by Moroder and Mack; in 1984 it debuted at the number 10 position in the UK singles chart.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI won't be touring on my own or splitting up with Queen. Without the others I would be nothing. The press always makes out that I'm the wild one and they're all quiet, but it's not true. I've got some wild stories about Brian May you wouldn't believe.\n\u2014Mercury on his solo career, January 1985.\nMercury's two full albums outside the band were \"Mr. Bad Guy\" (1985) and \"Barcelona\" (1988). His first album, \"Mr. Bad Guy\", debuted in the top ten of the UK Album Charts. In 1993, a remix of \"Living on My Own\", a single from the album, posthumously reached number one on the UK singles chart. The song also garnered Mercury a posthumous Ivor Novello Award from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers and Authors. AllMusic critic Eduardo Rivadavia described \"Mr. Bad Guy\" as \"outstanding from start to finish\" and expressed his view that Mercury \"did a commendable job of stretching into uncharted territory\".\nMercury's second album, \"Barcelona\", recorded with Spanish soprano vocalist Montserrat Caball\u00e9, combines elements of popular music and opera. Many critics were uncertain what to make of the album; one referred to it as \"the most bizarre CD of the year\". The album was a commercial success, and the album's title track debuted at No.\u00a08 in the UK and was also a hit in Spain. The title track received massive airplay as the official anthem of the 1992 Summer Olympics (held in Barcelona one year after Mercury's death). Caball\u00e9 sang it live at the opening of the Olympics with Mercury's part played on a screen, and again before the start of the 1999 UEFA Champions League Final between Manchester United and Bayern Munich in Barcelona.\nIn addition to the two solo albums, Mercury released several singles, including his own version of the 1950s hit \"The Great Pretender\" by the Platters, which peaked at number four in the UK in 1987. In September 2006 a compilation album featuring Mercury's solo work was released in the UK in honour of what would have been his 60th birthday. The album debuted in the UK top 10. In 2012, \"\", a documentary film on Mercury's attempts to forge a solo career, directed by Rhys Thomas, premiered on BBC One.\nIn 1986, Mercury recorded two songs for Dave Clark's West End sci-fi musical \"Time\". Mercury performed the title song and Clark played it to Laurence Olivier, who starred as the hologram Akash in a pre-filmed segment for the musical in one of his last roles. Clark recalled: \"Laurence Olivier was a huge god of an actor. He narrated the album (\"Time\"), and, when Freddie came on, singing \"Time\", Olivier said, 'Now, my dear boy, \"there's\" an actor.'\" Clark relayed the reaction of Olivier to Mercury: \"I told Freddie and he was over the moon. I arranged for a dinner party at my place, Olivier came along and they got on like a house on fire.\"\nBetween 1981 and 1983, Mercury recorded several tracks with Michael Jackson, including a demo of \"State of Shock\", \"Victory\", and \"There Must Be More to Life Than This\". None of these collaborations were officially released at the time, although bootleg recordings exist. Jackson went on to record the single \"State of Shock\" with Mick Jagger for the Jacksons' album \"Victory\". Mercury included the solo version of \"There Must Be More to Life Than This\" on his album \"Mr. Bad Guy\". \"There Must Be More to Life Than This\" was eventually reworked by Queen and released on their compilation album \"Queen Forever\" in 2014. Mercury and Roger Taylor sang on the title track for Billy Squier's 1982 studio release, \"Emotions in Motion\", and later contributed to two tracks on Squier's 1986 release, \"Enough Is Enough\", providing vocals on \"Love is the Hero\" and musical arrangements on \"Lady With a Tenor Sax\". In 2020, Mercury's music video for \"Love Me Like There's No Tomorrow\" was nominated for Best Animation at the Berlin Music Video Awards. Woodlock studio is behind the animation.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships.\nIn 1969, a year before Queen had formed, Mercury met Mary Austin through Brian May. Austin worked at the fashion boutique Biba in Kensington, where they met. They subsequently began a long-term relationship. He lived with Austin for several years in West Kensington, London. By the mid-1970s, he had begun an affair with David Minns, an American record executive at Elektra Records. In December 1976, Mercury told Austin of his sexuality, which ended their romantic relationship. Mercury moved out of the flat they shared, and bought Austin a place of her own near his new address of 12 Stafford Terrace, Kensington.\nMercury and Austin remained friends through the years; Mercury often referred to her as his only true friend. In a 1985 interview, he said of Austin: \"All my lovers asked me why they couldn't replace Mary, but it's simply impossible. The only friend I've got is Mary, and I don't want anybody else. To me, she was my common-law wife. To me, it was a marriage. We believe in each other, that's enough for me.\" Mercury's final home, Garden Lodge, an 8-bedroom Georgian mansion in Kensington set in a quarter-acre manicured garden surrounded by a high brick wall, was picked out by Austin. Austin married the painting artist Piers Cameron; they have two children. Mercury was the godfather of her older son, Richard. In his will, Mercury left his London home to Austin, having told her, \"You would have been my wife, and it would have been yours anyway.\"\nFrom 1979 to 1985, while living in Munich, Mercury was friends with Austrian actress Barbara Valentin, who is featured in the video for \"It's a Hard Life\", and initially lived together with her and her daughter before moving into his own apartment. In Munich, Mercury was able to escape the media spotlight, lived out his sexuality, drifted in the local gay scene, and had an intense love relationship with German restaurateur Winfried \"Winnie\" Kirchberger. Mercury also lived temporarily at Kirchberger's apartment and thanked him \"for board and lodging\" in the liner notes of his 1985 album \"Mr. Bad Guy\". He wore a silver wedding band given to him by Kirchberger. A close friend described him as Mercury's \"great love\" in Germany.\nBy 1985, he began another long-term relationship, with Irish-born hairdresser Jim Hutton (1949\u20132010) whom he referred to as his husband. Mercury described their relationship as one built on solace and understanding, and said that he \"honestly couldn't ask for better\". Hutton, who tested HIV-positive in 1990, lived with Mercury for the last seven years of his life, nursed him during his illness, and was present at his bedside when he died. Mercury wore a gold wedding band, given to him by Hutton in 1986, until the end of his life. He was cremated with it on. Hutton later relocated from London to the bungalow he and Mercury had built for themselves in Ireland.\nAlleged daughter.\nAccording to the 2025 biography \"Love, Freddie\" by Lesley-Ann Jones, Mercury fathered a daughter in 1976 following an affair with the wife of a friend, and shared parental responsibilities with the child's mother and her husband. Mercury's alleged daughter approached Jones with journal entries claimed to be written for her by Mercury, detailing his personal history. The claims were first reported in May 2025, ahead of the biography's release. His alleged daughter was referred to in the publication simply as \"B\". News outlets reported that very few people knew of her existence, though Mary Austin and the other members of Queen were supposedly aware. \nIn July 2025, Brian May's wife Anita Dobson said she and her husband were sceptical of the story, and Austin told \"The Sunday Times\" the following month: \"I cannot imagine he would have wanted to, or been able to, keep such a joyful event a secret, either from me or other people closest to him [...] I've never known of any child, or of any diaries. If Freddie had indeed had a child without me knowing anything about it, that would be astonishing to me.\"\nFriendship with Kenny Everett.\nRadio disc jockey Kenny Everett met Mercury in 1974, when he invited the singer onto his Capital London breakfast show. As two of Britain's most flamboyant, outrageous and popular entertainers, they shared much in common and became close friends. In 1975, Mercury visited Everett, bringing with him an advance copy of the single \"Bohemian Rhapsody\". Despite doubting that any station would play the six-minute track, Everett placed the song on the turntable, and, after hearing it, exclaimed: \"Forget it, it's going to be number one for centuries\". Although Capital Radio had not officially accepted the song, Everett talked incessantly about a record he possessed but could not play. He then frequently proceeded to play the track with the excuse: \"Oops, my finger must've slipped.\" On one occasion, Everett aired the song fourteen times over a single weekend. Capital's switchboard was overwhelmed with callers inquiring when the song would be released.\nDuring the 1970s, Everett became advisor and mentor to Mercury and Mercury served as Everett's confidant. Throughout the early-to-mid-1980s, they continued to explore their homosexuality and use drugs. Although they were never lovers, they did experience London nightlife together. By 1985, they had fallen out, and their friendship was further strained when Everett was outed in the autobiography of his ex-wife Lee Everett Alkin. In 1989, with their health failing, Mercury and Everett were reconciled.\nOther friendships.\nMercury saw the stage version of the London musical \"The Rocky Horror Show\" at the Royal Court Theatre in Chelsea, and in 1975 went to see the film version, both of which starred Tim Curry. Curry and Mercury became friends, and as a keen horticulturalist Curry later told the UK edition of \"House And Garden\" magazine about designing Mercury's garden: \"Freddie came back from a tour and said, 'The garden, dear, it's dead.' I said, 'What? Did you water it?' And Freddie said, 'Water it, dear?'\" Both Mercury and Curry were also close friends with Peter Straker; Straker, who first met Mercury at a London restaurant in November 1975, was a frequent diner at Mercury's home in Garden Lodge.\nMercury was a long-time friend of Elton John. Shortly before his own death in November 1991, Mercury ordered that a watercolour by John's favourite artist, the 19th-century English impressionist painter Henry Scott Tuke, be given to John on Christmas Day. In a 2021 interview, John recalled: \"Here was this beautiful man, dying from AIDS, and in his final days, he had somehow managed to find me a lovely Christmas present\".\nSexual orientation.\nWhile some commentators said Mercury hid his sexual orientation from the public, others said he was \"openly gay\". In December 1974, when asked directly, \"So how about being bent?\" by the \"New Musical Express\", Mercury replied, \"You're a crafty cow. Let's put it this way: there were times when I was young and green. It's a thing schoolboys go through. I've had my share of schoolboy pranks. I'm not going to elaborate further.\" Homosexual acts between adult males over the age of 21 had been decriminalised in the United Kingdom in 1967, seven years earlier. During public events in the 1980s, Mercury often kept a distance from his partner, Jim Hutton.\nMercury's flamboyant stage performances sometimes led journalists to allude to his sexuality. Dave Dickson, reviewing Queen's performance at Wembley Arena in 1984 for \"Kerrang!\", noted Mercury's \"camp\" addresses to the audience and even described him as a \"posing, pouting, posturing tart\". In 1992, John Marshall of \"Gay Times\" opined: \"[Mercury] was a 'scene-queen,' not afraid to publicly express his gayness, but unwilling to analyse or justify his 'lifestyle'\u00a0... It was as if Freddie Mercury was saying to the world, 'I am what I am. So what?' And that in itself for some was a statement.\" In an article for \"AfterElton\", Robert Urban said: \"Mercury did not ally himself to 'political outness,' or to LGBTQ causes.\"\nSome believe Mercury was bisexual; for example, regarding the creation of Celebrate Bisexuality Day, Wendy Curry said: \"We were sitting around at one of the annual bi conventions, venting and someone\u00a0\u2013 I think it was Gigi\u00a0\u2013 said we should have a party. We all loved the great bisexual, Freddie Mercury. His birthday was in September, so why not Sept? We wanted a weekend day to ensure the most people would do something. Gigi's birthday was September 23rd. It fell on a weekend day, so, poof! We had a day.\" \"The Advocate\" said in May 2018, \"Closeted throughout his life, Mercury, who was bisexual, engaged in affairs with men but referred to a woman he loved in his youth, Mary Austin, as 'the love of his life,' according to the biography \"Somebody to Love: The Life, Death, and Legacy of Freddie Mercury\".\" Additionally, according to an obituary Mercury was a \"self-confessed bisexual\".\nThe 2018 biopic of Mercury, \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", received criticism for its portrayal of Mercury's sexuality, which was described as \"sterilized\" and \"confused\", and was even accused of being \"dangerous\".\nPersonality.\nAlthough he cultivated a flamboyant stage personality, Mercury was shy and retiring when not performing, particularly around people he did not know well, and granted very few interviews. He once said of himself: \"When I'm performing I'm an extrovert, yet inside I'm a completely different man.\" On this contrast to \"his larger-than-life stage persona\", BBC music broadcaster Bob Harris adds he was \"lovely, bright, sensitive, and quite vulnerable\". While on stage, Mercury basked in the love from his audience. Nirvana frontman Kurt Cobain's suicide note mentions how he admired and envied the way Mercury \"seemed to love, relish in the love and adoration from the crowd\".\nMercury never discussed his ethnic or religious background with journalists. The closest he came to doing so was in response to a question about his outlandish persona, he said, \"that's something inbred, it's a part of me. I will always walk around like a Persian popinjay\", an oblique reference to his Indian Parsi background. Feeling a connection to Britain prior to arriving in England, the young Bulsara was heavily influenced by British fashion and music trends while growing up. According to his longtime assistant Peter Freestone, \"if Freddie had his way, he would have been born aged 18 in Feltham.\" Harris states, \"One of the things about Freddie was that he was very civilised and quite 'English'. I'd go over to his flat near Shepherd's Bush in the afternoon, and he'd get out the fine china and the sugar lumps and we'd have a cup of tea.\" His flamboyant dress sense and the emergence of glam rock in the UK in the early 1970s saw Mercury wear outfits designed by Zandra Rhodes.\nWhen asked by \"Melody Maker\" in 1981 if rock stars should use their power to try to shape the world for the better, Mercury responded, \"Leave that to the politicians. Certain people can do that kind of thing, but very few. John Lennon was one. Because of his status, he could do that kind of preaching and affect people's thoughts. But to do this you have to have a certain amount of intellect and magic together, and the John Lennons are few and far between. People with mere talent, like me, have not got the ability or power.\" Mercury dedicated the song \"Life Is Real (Song for Lennon)\", from the 1982 album \"Hot Space\", to Lennon. Mercury did occasionally express his concerns about the state of the world in his lyrics. His most notable \"message\" songs are \"Under Pressure\", \"Is This the World We Created...?\" (a song which Mercury and May performed at Live Aid, and also featured in \"Greenpeace \u2013 The Album\"), \"There Must Be More to Life Than This\", \"The Miracle\" (a song May called \"one of Freddie's most beautiful creations\") and \"Innuendo\". According to the 1998 biography \"Freddie Mercury: An intimate memoir by the man who knew him best\", written by his long-term personal assistant Peter Freestone, Mercury abhorred bands like U2 for using their celebrity status to put over their political views. He was also unaware of Mercury ever voting in any election, but he was always interested in Freestone's voting and the politics at the time. Freestone wrote that Mercury would have favoured a Conservative government if he had voted, due to the 1970s Labour government's high income taxation, but that he never voiced his political opinions as he thought they were \"relevant only to the individual\".\nMercury cared for at least ten cats throughout his life, including: Tom, Jerry, Oscar, Tiffany, Dorothy, Delilah, Goliath, Miko, Romeo, and Lily. He was against the inbreeding of cats for specific features and all except for Tiffany and Lily, both given as gifts, were adopted from the Blue Cross. Mercury \"placed as much importance on these beloved animals as on any human life\", and showed his adoration by having the artist Ann Ortman paint portraits of each of them. Mercury wrote a song for Delilah, \"his favourite cat of all\", which appeared on the Queen album \"Innuendo\". Mercury dedicated his liner notes in his 1985 solo album \"Mr. Bad Guy\" to Jerry and his other cats. It reads, \"This album is dedicated to my cat Jerry\u2014also Tom, Oscar, and Tiffany and all the cat lovers across the universe\u2014screw everybody else!\"\nIn 1987, Mercury celebrated his 41st birthday at the Pikes Hotel, Ibiza, Spain, several months after discovering that he had contracted HIV. Mercury sought much comfort at the retreat and was a close friend of the owner, Anthony Pike, who described Mercury as \"the most beautiful person I've ever met in my life. So entertaining and generous.\" According to biographer Lesley-Ann Jones, Mercury \"felt very much at home there. He played some tennis, lounged by the pool, and ventured out to the odd gay club or bar at night.\" The birthday party, held on 5 September 1987, has been described as \"the most incredible example of excess the Mediterranean island had ever seen\", and was attended by some 700 people. A cake in the shape of Antoni Gaudi's \"Sagrada Fam\u00edlia\" was provided for the party. The original cake collapsed and was replaced with a two-metre-long sponge cake decorated with the notes from Mercury's song \"Barcelona\". The bill, which included 232 broken glasses, was presented to Queen's manager, Jim Beach. Before his death, Mercury had told Beach, \"You can do what you want with my music, but don't make me boring.\"\nIllness and death.\nMercury exhibited HIV/AIDS symptoms as early as 1982. Authors Matt Richards and Mark Langthorne have stated in their biographical book about Mercury, \"Somebody to Love: The Life, Death, and Legacy of Freddie Mercury\", that Mercury secretly visited a doctor in New York City to get a white lesion on his tongue checked (which might have been hairy leukoplakia, one of the first signs of an infection) a few weeks before Queen's final American appearance with Mercury on \"Saturday Night Live\" on 25 September 1982, where he began to exhibit the symptoms of someone recently infected with HIV.\nIn October 1986, two months after Mercury's final live performance with Queen at Knebworth House on the Magic Tour, the British newspapers the \"News of the World\" and \"The Sun\" reported that he had his blood tested for HIV/AIDS at a Harley Street clinic, but he was quoted as saying he was \"perfectly fit and healthy\". According to his partner, Jim Hutton, Mercury was diagnosed with AIDS in late April 1987. Around that time, he said in an interview that he had tested negative for HIV. He told his Queen bandmates of his illness in May 1989.\nThe British press pursued rumours about Mercury's health during the final years of his life, fuelled by his increasingly gaunt appearance, Queen's absence from touring, and reports from his former lovers to tabloid journalists. By 1990, rumours about his health were rife. Mercury and his inner circle of colleagues and friends continually denied the stories. It has been suggested that he could have helped AIDS awareness by speaking earlier about his illness. At the 1990 Brit Awards held at the Dominion Theatre, London, on 18 February, Mercury made his final appearance on stage when he joined the rest of Queen to collect the award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music.\nFilmed in May 1991, the music video for \"These Are the Days of Our Lives\" features a very thin Mercury in his final scenes in front of the camera. The video's director, Rudi Dolezal, said, \"AIDS was never a topic. We never discussed it. He didn't want to talk about it. Most of the people didn't even 100 percent know if he had it, apart from the band and a few people in the inner circle. He always said, 'I don't want to put any burden on other people by telling them my tragedy.'\" The rest of the band were ready to record when Mercury felt able to come into the studio, for an hour or two at a time. May said of Mercury: \"He just kept saying. 'Write me more. Write me stuff. I want to just sing this and do it and when I am gone you can finish it off.' He had no fear, really.\" Justin Shirley-Smith, the assistant engineer for those last sessions, said: \"This is hard to explain to people, but it wasn't sad, it was very happy. He [Freddie] was one of the funniest people I ever encountered. I was laughing most of the time, with him. Freddie was saying [of his illness] 'I'm not going to think about it, I'm going to do this.'\"\nAfter the conclusion of his work with Queen in June 1991, Mercury retired to his home in Kensington, West London. His former partner, Mary Austin, was a particular comfort in his final years, and in the last few weeks made regular visits to look after him. Near the end of his life, Mercury began to lose his sight, and declined so that he was unable to leave his bed. Mercury chose to hasten his death by refusing medication and took only painkillers. On 22 November 1991, Mercury called Queen's manager Jim Beach to his Kensington home to prepare a public statement, which was released the following day:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Following the enormous conjecture in the press over the last two weeks, I wish to confirm that I have been tested HIV positive and have AIDS. I felt it correct to keep this information private to date to protect the privacy of those around me. However, the time has come now for my friends and fans around the world to know the truth and I hope that everyone will join with me, my doctors and all those worldwide in the fight against this terrible disease. My privacy has always been very special to me and I am famous for my lack of interviews. Please understand this policy will continue.\nDeath.\nOn the evening of 24 November 1991, about 24 hours after issuing the statement, Mercury died at the age of 45 at his home in Kensington. The cause of death was bronchial pneumonia resulting from AIDS. His close friend Dave Clark of the Dave Clark Five was at the bedside vigil when Mercury died. Austin phoned Mercury's parents and sister to break the news, which reached newspaper and television crews in the early hours of 25 November.\nMercury's funeral service was conducted on 27 November 1991 by a Zoroastrian priest at West London Crematorium, where he is commemorated by a plinth under his birth name. In attendance at Mercury's service were his family and 35 of his close friends, including Elton John and the members of Queen. His coffin was carried into the chapel to the sounds of \"Take My Hand, Precious Lord\"/\"You've Got a Friend\" by Aretha Franklin. In accordance with Mercury's wishes, Mary Austin took possession of his cremated remains and buried them in an undisclosed location. The whereabouts of his ashes are believed to be known only to Austin, who has said that she will never reveal them. However, they are traditionally held by Queen fans to be at Kensal Green Cemetery, where the plinth marks the supposed burial location.\nMercury spent and donated to charity much of his wealth during his lifetime, with his estate valued around \u00a38\u00a0million at the time of his death. He bequeathed his home, Garden Lodge, and the adjoining Mews, as well as 50% of all privately owned shares, to Mary Austin. His sister, Kashmira Cooke, received 25%, as did his parents, Bomi and Jer Bulsara, which Cooke acquired upon their deaths. He willed \u00a3500,000 to Joe Fannelli; \u00a3500,000 to Jim Hutton; \u00a3500,000 to Peter Freestone; and \u00a3100,000 to Terry Giddings. Mercury, who never drove a car because he had no licence, was often chauffeured around London in his Rolls-Royce Silver Shadow from 1979 until his death. The car was passed to his sister Kashmira who made it available for display at public events, including the West End premiere of the musical \"We Will Rock You\" in 2002, before it was auctioned off at the NEC in Birmingham in 2013 for \u00a374,600.\nFollowing his death, the outer walls of Garden Lodge in Logan Place became a shrine to Mercury where mourners paid tributes by covering the walls in graffiti messages. Three years later \"Time Out\" magazine reported that \"the wall outside the house has become London's biggest rock 'n' roll shrine\". Fans continued to visit to pay their respects with letters appearing on the walls until 2017, when Austin had the wall cleared. Hutton was involved in a 2000 biography of Mercury, \"Freddie Mercury, the Untold Story\", and also gave an interview for \"The Times\" in September 2006 for what would have been Mercury's 60th birthday.\nLegacy.\nContinued popularity.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe charisma and power in his performance style has over the years led to many artists quoting him as one of their biggest inspirations today. The diverse scope of artists that love Mercury is huge.\n \u2014Amy Weller, \"Gigwise\"\nRegarded as one of the greatest singers in the history of rock music, Mercury was known for his flamboyant stage persona and four-octave vocal range. He defied the conventions of a rock frontman, with his highly theatrical style influencing the artistic direction of Queen.\nThe extent to which Mercury's death may have enhanced Queen's popularity is not clear. In the United States, where Queen's popularity had lagged in the 1980s, sales of Queen albums went up dramatically in 1992, the year following his death. In 1992, one American critic noted, \"What cynics call the 'dead star' factor had come into play\u2014Queen is in the middle of a major resurgence.\" The movie \"Wayne's World\", which featured \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", also came out in 1992. According to the Recording Industry Association of America, Queen had sold 34.5\u00a0million albums in the United States by 2004, about half of which had been sold since Mercury's death in 1991.\nEstimates of Queen's total worldwide record sales to date have been set as high as 300\u00a0million. In the United Kingdom, Queen have now spent more collective weeks on the UK Album Charts than any other musical act (including the Beatles), and \"Queen's Greatest Hits\" is the best-selling album of all time in the United Kingdom. Two of Mercury's songs, \"We Are the Champions\" and \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", have also each been voted as the greatest song of all time in major polls by Sony Ericsson and \"Guinness World Records\". Both songs have been inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame; \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" in 2004 and \"We Are the Champions\" in 2009. In October 2007 the video for \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" was voted the greatest of all time by readers of \"Q\" magazine.\nSince his death, Queen were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2001, and all four band members were inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2003. Their Rock Hall of Fame citation reads, \"in the golden era of glam rock and gorgeously hyper-produced theatrical extravaganzas that defined one branch of '70s rock, no group came close in either concept or execution to Queen.\" The band were among the inaugural inductees into the UK Music Hall of Fame in 2004. Mercury was individually posthumously awarded the Brit Award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music in 1992. They received the Ivor Novello Award for Outstanding Song Collection from the British Academy of Songwriters, Composers, and Authors in 2005, and in 2018 they were presented the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award. Queen were awarded the Polar Music Prize in 2025, with their citation describing Mercury as \"one of the most charismatic front figures in the history of music\".\nPosthumous Queen album.\nIn November 1995, Mercury appeared posthumously on Queen's final studio album \"Made in Heaven\". The album featured Mercury's previously unreleased final recordings from 1991, as well as outtakes from previous years and reworked versions of solo works by the other members. The album cover features the Freddie Mercury statue that overlooks Lake Geneva superimposed with Mercury's Duck House lake cabin that he had rented. This is where he had written and recorded his last songs at Mountain Studios. The sleeve of the album contains the words, \"Dedicated to the immortal spirit of Freddie Mercury.\"\nFeaturing tracks such as \"Too Much Love Will Kill You\" and \"Heaven for Everyone\", the album also contains the song \"Mother Love\", the last vocal recording Mercury made before his death, which he completed using a drum machine, over which May, Taylor, and Deacon later added the instrumental track. After completing the penultimate verse, Mercury had told the band he \"wasn't feeling that great\" and stated, \"I will finish it when I come back next time\". He never made it back into the studio, so May later recorded the final verse of the song.\nTributes.\nA statue in Montreux, Switzerland, by sculptor Irena Sedleck\u00e1, was erected as a tribute to Mercury. It stands almost high overlooking Lake Geneva and was unveiled on 25 November 1996 by Mercury's father and Montserrat Caball\u00e9, with bandmates Brian May and Roger Taylor also in attendance. Beginning in 2003 fans from around the world have gathered in Switzerland annually to pay tribute to the singer as part of the \"Freddie Mercury Montreux Memorial Day\" on the first weekend of September.\nIn 1997 the three remaining members of Queen released \"No-One but You (Only the Good Die Young)\", a song dedicated to Mercury and all those that die too soon. In 1999 a Royal Mail stamp with an image of Mercury on stage was issued in his honour as part of the UK postal service's Millennium Stamp series. In 2009 a star commemorating Mercury was unveiled in Feltham, west London where his family moved upon arriving in England in 1964. The star in memory of Mercury's achievements was unveiled on Feltham High Street by his mother Jer Bulsara and Queen bandmate May.\nA statue of Mercury stood over the entrance to the Dominion Theatre in London's West End from May 2002 to May 2014 for Queen and Ben Elton's musical \"We Will Rock You\". A tribute to Queen was on display at the Fremont Street Experience in downtown Las Vegas throughout 2009 on its video canopy. In December 2009 a large model of Mercury wearing tartan was displayed in Edinburgh as publicity for the run of \"We Will Rock You\". Sculptures of Mercury often feature him wearing a military jacket with his fist in the air. In 2018, \"GQ\" called Mercury's yellow military jacket (created by British costume designer Diana Moseley) from his 1986 concerts his best known look, while CNN called it \"an iconic moment in fashion.\"\nFor Mercury's 65th birthday in 2011, Google dedicated its Google Doodle to him. It included an animation set to his song, \"Don't Stop Me Now\". Referring to \"the late, great Freddie Mercury\" in their 2012 Rock and Roll Hall of Fame induction speech, Guns N' Roses quoted Mercury's lyrics from \"We Are the Champions\"; \"I've taken my bows, my curtain calls, you've brought me fame and fortune and everything that goes with it, and I thank you all.\"\nTribute was paid to Queen and Mercury at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London. The band's performance of \"We Will Rock You\" with Jessie J was opened with a video of Mercury's \"call and response\" routine from 1986's Wembley Stadium performance, with the 2012 crowd at the Olympic Stadium responding appropriately. The frog genus \"Mercurana\", discovered in 2013 in Kerala, India, was named as a tribute because Mercury's \"vibrant music inspires the authors\". The site of the discovery is very near to where Mercury spent most of his childhood. In 2013, a newly discovered species of damselfly from Brazil was named \"Heteragrion freddiemercuryi\", honouring the \"superb and gifted musician and songwriter whose wonderful voice and talent still entertain millions\"\u00a0\u2014 one of four similar damselflies named after the Queen bandmates, in tribute to Queen's 40th anniversary.\nOn 1 September 2016, an English Heritage blue plaque was unveiled at Mercury's home in 22 Gladstone Avenue in Feltham, west London by his sister, Kashmira Cooke, and Brian May. Attending the ceremony, Karen Bradley, the UK Secretary of State for Culture, called Mercury \"one of Britain's most influential musicians\", and added he \"is a global icon whose music touched the lives of millions of people around the world\". On 24 February 2020 a street in Feltham was renamed Freddie Mercury Close during a ceremony attended by his sister Kashmira. On 5 September 2016, the 70th anniversary of Mercury's birth, asteroid 17473 Freddiemercury was named after him. Issuing the certificate of designation to the \"charismatic singer\", Joel Parker of the Southwest Research Institute added: \"Freddie Mercury sang, 'I'm a shooting star leaping through the sky'\u00a0\u2014 and now that is even more true than ever before.\" In an April 2019 interview, British rock concert promoter Harvey Goldsmith referred to Mercury as \"one of our most treasured talents\".\nIn August 2019, Mercury was one of the honorees inducted in the Rainbow Honor Walk, a walk of fame in San Francisco's Castro District noting LGBTQ people who have \"made significant contributions in their fields\". Freddie Mercury Alley is a alley next to the British embassy in the Ujazd\u00f3w district in Warsaw, Poland, which is dedicated to Mercury, and was unveiled on 22 November 2019. Until the Freddie Mercury Close in Feltham was dedicated, Warsaw was the only city in Europe with a street dedicated to the singer. In January 2020, Queen became the first band to join Queen Elizabeth II on a British coin. Issued by the Royal Mint, the commemorative \u00a35 coin features the instruments of all four band members, including Mercury's Bechstein grand piano and his mic and stand. In April 2022, a life-size statue of Mercury was unveiled in South Korea's resort island of Jeju. In May 2024, the crater Bulsara on the planet Mercury was named after his birth name.\nMercury has featured in international advertising to represent the UK. In 2001, a parody of Mercury, along with prints of other British music icons consisting of the Beatles, Elton John, Spice Girls, and the Rolling Stones, appeared in the Eurostar national advertising campaign in France for the Paris to London route. In September 2017 the airline Norwegian painted the tail fin of two of its aircraft with a portrait of Mercury to mark what would have been his 71st birthday. Mercury is one of the company's six \"British tail fin heroes\", alongside England's 1966 FIFA World Cup winning captain Bobby Moore, children's author Roald Dahl, novelist Jane Austen, pioneering pilot Amy Johnson, and aviation entrepreneur Sir Freddie Laker.\nImportance in AIDS history.\nAs the first major rock star to die of AIDS-related complications, Mercury's death represented an important event in the history of the disease. In April 1992, the remaining members of Queen founded The Mercury Phoenix Trust and organised The Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert for AIDS Awareness, to celebrate the life and legacy of Mercury and raise money for AIDS research, which took place on 20 April 1992. The Mercury Phoenix Trust has since raised millions of pounds for various AIDS charities. The tribute concert, which took place at London's Wembley Stadium for an audience of 72,000, featured a wide variety of guests including Robert Plant (of Led Zeppelin), Roger Daltrey (of the Who), Extreme, Elton John, Metallica, David Bowie, Annie Lennox, Tony Iommi (of Black Sabbath), Guns N' Roses, Elizabeth Taylor, George Michael, Def Leppard, Seal and Liza Minnelli, with U2 also appearing via satellite. Elizabeth Taylor spoke of Mercury as \"an extraordinary rock star who rushed across our cultural landscape like a comet shooting across the sky\". The concert was broadcast live to 76 countries and had an estimated viewing audience of 1\u00a0billion people. The \"Freddie for a Day\" fundraiser on behalf of the Mercury Phoenix Trust takes place every year in London, with supporters of the charity including Monty Python comedian Eric Idle and Mel B of the Spice Girls.\nThe documentary \"Freddie Mercury - The Final Act\" aired on BBC Two in 2021 and The CW in the US in April 2022. It covered Mercury's last days, how his bandmates and friends put together the tribute concert at Wembley, and interviewed medical professionals, people who tested HIV positive, and others who knew someone who died of AIDS. At the 50th International Emmy Awards in 2022, it won the International Emmy Award for Best Arts Programming.\nAppearances in lists of influential individuals.\nSeveral popularity polls conducted over the past decade indicate that Mercury's reputation may have been enhanced since his death. For instance, in a 2002 vote to determine who the UK public considers the greatest British people in history, Mercury was ranked 58 in the list of the 100 Greatest Britons, broadcast by the BBC. He was further listed at the 52nd spot in a 2007 Japanese national survey of the 100 most influential heroes. Although he had been criticised by gay activists for hiding his HIV status, author Paul Russell included Mercury in his book \"The Gay 100: A Ranking of the Most Influential Gay Men and Lesbians, Past and Present\". In 2008, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Mercury 18 on its \"Top 100 Singers Of All Time\". Mercury was voted the greatest male singer in MTV's 22 Greatest Voices in Music. In 2011 a \"Rolling Stone\" readers' pick placed Mercury in second place of the magazine's Best Lead Singers of All Time. \"Billboard\" magazine placed him second on their \"25 Best Rock Frontmen (and Women) of All Time\" list in 2015, and third on their \"50 Greatest Rock Lead Singers of All Time\" list in 2023. In 2016, \"LA Weekly\" ranked him first on the list of 20 greatest singers of all time, in any genre. In 2023, \"Rolling Stone\" ranked Mercury at No. 14 on its list of the 200 Greatest Singers of All Time.\nPortrayal on stage.\nOn 24 November 1997, a monodrama about Freddie Mercury's life, titled \"\", opened in New York City. It presented Mercury in the hereafter: examining his life, seeking redemption and searching for his true self. The play was written and directed by Charles Messina and the part of Mercury was played by Khalid Gon\u00e7alves (n\u00e9 Paul Gon\u00e7alves) and then later, Amir Darvish. Billy Squier opened one of the shows with an acoustic performance of a song he had written about Mercury titled \"I Have Watched You Fly\".\nIn 2016 a musical titled \"Royal Vauxhall\" premiered at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern in Vauxhall, London. Written by Desmond O'Connor, the musical told the alleged tales of the nights that Mercury, Kenny Everett and Princess Diana spent out at the Royal Vauxhall Tavern in London in the 1980s. Following several successful runs in London, the musical was taken to the Edinburgh Fringe Festival in August 2016 starring Tom Giles as Mercury.\nPortrayal in film and television.\nThe 2018 biographical film \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" was, at its release, the highest-grossing musical biographical film of all time. Mercury was portrayed by Rami Malek, whose performance earned him the Academy Award, BAFTA Award, Golden Globe Award and Screen Actors Guild Award for Best Actor. While the film received mixed reviews and contained historical inaccuracies, it won the Golden Globe for Best Motion Picture \u2013 Drama.\nMercury appeared as a supporting character in the BBC television drama \"Best Possible Taste: The Kenny Everett Story\", first broadcast in October 2012. He was portrayed by actor James Floyd. He was played by actor John Blunt in \"The Freddie Mercury Story: Who Wants to Live Forever\", first broadcast in the UK on Channel 5 in November 2016. Although the programme was criticised for focusing on Mercury's love life and sexuality, Blunt's performance and likeness to the singer did receive praise.\nIn 2018, David Avery portrayed Mercury in the \"Urban Myths\" comedy series in an episode focusing on the antics backstage at Live Aid, and Kayvan Novak portrayed Mercury in an episode titled \"The Sex Pistols vs. Bill Grundy\". He was also portrayed by Eric McCormack (as the character Will Truman) on \"Will &amp; Grace\" in the October 2018 episode titled \"Tex and the City\".\nAuction.\nFrom 4 August to 5 September 2023, an exhibition titled, Freddie Mercury: A World of His Own, saw almost 1,500 items of Mercury's, which he had given to his former partner Mary Austin, displayed at Sotheby's in New Bond Street, London before being sold across six auctions. Nearly 140,000 fans visited the exhibition, which Sotheby's had called \"the life and work of Britain's greatest rock showman of the 20th century\".\nA Yamaha baby grand piano used by Mercury to compose many of the band's hits, including \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", sold for \u00a31.7\u00a0million, while his handwritten lyrics for the song went for \u00a31.38\u00a0million. The door of his Garden Lodge home in west London, covered in graffiti left by fans, went for \u00a3412,750. The crown and cloak designed by Diana Moseley for the 1986 Magic tour (his final concerts) sold for \u00a3635,000. A pair of black striped Adidas high-top shoes (his principal stage footwear from 1984 onward) sold for \u00a3127,000. The final evening sale at Sotheby's on 6 September took in \u00a312.2\u00a0million ($15.4\u00a0million), while the six sales in total reached \u00a339.9\u00a0million ($50.4\u00a0million), smashing Sotheby's pre-auction estimates.\nDiscography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42069", "revid": "704854", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42069", "title": "Brian May", "text": "English musician (born 1947)\nSir Brian Harold May (born 19 July 1947) is an English musician, animal welfare activist and astrophysicist. He achieved global fame as the lead guitarist and backing vocalist of the rock band Queen, which he co-founded with singer Freddie Mercury and drummer Roger Taylor. His guitar work and songwriting contributions helped Queen become one of the most successful acts in music history.\nMay previously performed with Taylor in the progressive rock band Smile, which he had joined while he was at university. Mercury joined to form Queen in 1970, and bass guitarist John Deacon completed the line-up in 1971. They became one of the biggest rock bands in the world with the success of the album \"A Night at the Opera\" and its single \"Bohemian Rhapsody\". From the mid-1970s until 1986, Queen played at some of the biggest venues in the world, including an acclaimed performance at Live Aid in 1985. May wrote numerous hits for the band, including \"We Will Rock You\", \"I Want It All\", \"Fat Bottomed Girls\", \"Now I'm Here\", \"Headlong\", \"Flash\", \"Hammer to Fall\", \"Save Me\", \"Who Wants to Live Forever\" and \"The Show Must Go On\". Queen entered a general hiatus after Mercury died in 1991\u2014exceptions include the 1992 tribute concert, the release of \"Made in Heaven\" (1995) and the 1997 May-penned tribute single to Mercury, \"No-One but You (Only the Good Die Young)\". May and Taylor eventually reconvened Queen for further performances featuring other vocalists. \nMay is regarded as a virtuoso musician with a distinctive sound created through his layered guitar work, often using a home-built electric guitar called the Red Special. In 2005, a Planet Rock poll saw May voted the seventh-greatest guitarist of all time. He was ranked at No. 33 on \"Rolling Stone\"'s 2023 list of 250 greatest guitarists of all time. In 2012, he was further ranked the second-greatest guitarist in a \"Guitar World\" magazine readers poll. In 2001, May was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Queen and, in 2018, the band received the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award.\nMay was appointed a Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2005 for services to the music industry and for charity work. May earned a PhD degree in astrophysics from Imperial College London in 2007, and was Chancellor of Liverpool John Moores University from 2008 to 2013. He was a \"science team collaborator\" with NASA's \"New Horizons\" Pluto mission. He is also a co-founder of the awareness campaign Asteroid Day. Asteroid 52665 Brianmay was named after him. In 2023, May contributed to NASA's OSIRIS-REx mission, the agency's first successful collection and earth delivery of samples directly from an asteroid (the asteroid Bennu). May is also an animal welfare activist, campaigning against fox hunting and the culling of badgers in the UK. May was knighted by King Charles III in the 2023 New Year Honours for services to music and charity.\nEarly life.\nBrian Harold May was born on 19 July 1947 at Gloucester House Nursing Home in Hampton Hill, near Twickenham, Middlesex. He is the only child of Ruth Irving (\"n\u00e9e\" Fletcher) and Harold May, who worked as a draughtsman at the Ministry of Aviation. His mother, who was Scottish, married his father, who was English, at Moulin in Perthshire, Scotland, in 1946. May attended the local Hanworth Road state primary school, and at the age of 11 won a scholarship to Hampton Grammar School, then a voluntary aided school. During this time, he formed his first band, named \"1984\" after George Orwell's novel \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", with vocalist and bassist Tim Staffell.\nAt Hampton Grammar School, May attained ten GCE Ordinary Levels and three GCE Advanced Levels in physics, mathematics, and applied mathematics. He studied mathematics and physics at Imperial College London, graduating in 1968 with a BSc degree in physics with honours. After his graduation, May was invited by Sir Bernard Lovell to work at the Jodrell Bank Observatory while continuing to prepare his doctorate. He declined, choosing instead to remain at Imperial College to avoid leaving Smile, his London-based band.\nIn 2007, May earned a PhD degree in astrophysics from Imperial College London for work started in 1971.\nMusical career.\n1968\u20131970: Smile.\nMay formed the band Smile in 1968. The group included Tim Staffell as the lead singer and bassist, and later, drummer Roger Taylor, who also went on to play for Queen. The band lasted from 1968 to 1970, when Staffell left, leaving the band with a catalogue of nine songs. \nSmile would reunite for several songs on 22 December 1992. Taylor's band The Cross were headliners, and he brought May and Staffell on to play \"Earth\" and \"If I Were a Carpenter\". May also performed several other songs that night.\nTheir final performance was during their European tour in London's All Points East on 28 August 2022.\n1970\u20131995: Queen.\nIn Queen's three-part vocal harmonies, May was generally the lower-range backing vocalist. On some of his songs, he sings the lead vocals, most notably the first verse of \"Who Wants to Live Forever\", the final verse of \"Mother Love\", the middle eight on \"I Want It All\" and \"Flash's Theme\", and full lead vocals on \"Some Day One Day\", \"She Makes Me (Stormtrooper in Stilettoes)\", \"'39\", \"Good Company\", \"Long Away\", \"All Dead, All Dead\", \"Sleeping on the Sidewalk\", \"Leaving Home Ain't Easy\" and \"Sail Away Sweet Sister\" .\nMay wrote many songs for the band, including hits such as \"We Will Rock You\", \"Tie Your Mother Down\", \"I Want It All\", \"Fat Bottomed Girls\", \"Who Wants to Live Forever\" and \"The Show Must Go On\" as well as \"Hammer to Fall\", \"Flash\", \"Now I'm Here\", \"Brighton Rock\", \"The Prophet's Song\", \"Las Palabras de Amor\", \"No-One but You (Only the Good Die Young)\" and \"Save Me\".\nAfter the Live Aid concert in 1985, Mercury rang his band members and proposed writing a song together. The result was \"One Vision\", which was basically May on music (the \"Magic Years\" documentary shows how he came up with the opening section and the basic guitar riff); the lyrics were co-written by the four band members.\nFor their 1989 release album, \"The Miracle\", the band had decided that all of the tracks would be credited to the entire band, no matter who had been the main writer. Interviews and musical analyses tend to help identify the input of each member on each track. May composed \"I Want It All\" for that album, as well as \"Scandal\" (based on his problems with the British press). For the rest of the album, he did not contribute much creatively. However, he helped in building the basis of \"Party\" and \"Was It All Worth It\" (both being predominantly Mercury's pieces) and created the \"Chinese Torture\" guitar riff.\nQueen's subsequent album was \"Innuendo\". May's contributions increased, although more in terms of arranging than actual writing in most cases. He did some of the arrangement for the heavy solo on the title track. He added vocal harmonies to \"I'm Going Slightly Mad\" and composed the solo for \"These Are the Days of Our Lives\", a song for which the four of them decided the keyboard parts together.\nTwo songs May had composed for his first solo album, \"Headlong\" and \"I Can't Live With You\", eventually ended up on the Queen project. His other composition was \"The Show Must Go On\", which he coordinated and was the primary composer. In recent years, he has supervised the remastering of Queen albums and various DVD and greatest hits releases. In 2004, he announced that he and drummer Roger Taylor were going on tour for the first time in 18\u00a0years as \"Queen\", along with Free/Bad Company vocalist Paul Rodgers. Billed as \"Queen + Paul Rodgers\", the band played throughout 2005 and 2006 in South Africa, Europe, Aruba, Japan, and North America and released a new album with Rodgers in 2008, titled \"The Cosmos Rocks\". This album was supported by a major tour.\nPaul Rodgers left the band in May 2009. It was not until 2011 that another vocalist, Adam Lambert, was recruited. Queen + Adam Lambert toured Europe in 2012 and toured the world tour over 2014 and 2015. Their most recent outing was the 2016 Festival Tour. They also played the Big Ben New Year concert on New Year's Eve 2014 and New Year's Day 2015.\n1983\u20131999: Side projects and solo works.\nDuring 1983, several members of Queen explored side projects. On 21 and 22 April in Los Angeles, May was in a studio with Eddie Van Halen, with no intention of recording anything. The result of the two-day session was a mini album titled \"Star Fleet Project\", which was not originally going to be released. In 1986, May contributed to former Genesis guitarist Steve Hackett's album \"Feedback 86\", playing guitar on the track \"Cassandra\" and providing guitar and vocals for \"Slot Machine\", which May co-wrote. Although produced in 1986, the album was not released commercially until 2000. Another song co-written by May and Hackett during this period, \"Don't Fall Away from Me\", was eventually recorded by Hackett in 1992 for release on his \"The Unauthorised Biography\" compilation album. Also in 1986, May worked with actress Anita Dobson on her first album, most noted for the song \"Anyone Can Fall in Love\", which added lyrics to the \"EastEnders\" theme tune and reached number four on the UK Singles Chart in August 1986. May and Dobson married in 2000. In 1988, May contributed guitar solos to the song \"When Death Calls\" on Black Sabbath's 14th album \"Headless Cross\", and the Living in a Box track \"Blow The House Down\" on the album \"Gatecrashing\". Both albums were released in 1989.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAfter the tragic break-up of any band, it feels impossible to continue but I was really glad that Brian did launch a solo career. He had such a lot of music in him and a great deal more to give.\n\u00a0\u2014Joe Satriani\nIn the aftermath of the November 1991 death of Mercury, May chose to deal with his grief by committing himself as fully as possible to work, first by finishing his solo album, \"Back to the Light\", and then touring worldwide to promote it. He frequently remarked in press interviews that this was the only form of self-prescribed therapy he could think of. According to Def Leppard lead singer Joe Elliott, \"It was undoubtedly an enormous and terrible blow to lose someone he was so close to. Personally, I know it ripped the heart out of Brian, but having said that, he was in great spirits after the album was finished.\" \"Back to the Light\" featured the single \"Too Much Love Will Kill You\", on which he collaborated as a songwriter with Frank Musker and Elizabeth Lamers. A version with Freddie Mercury's vocals was later released on the Queen album \"Made in Heaven\" and won the Ivor Novello Award for Best Song Musically &amp; Lyrically in 1996.\nIn late 1992, the Brian May Band was officially formed. May had loosely formed an earlier version of the band for 19\u00a0October 1991, when May took part in the Guitar Legends guitar festival in Seville, Spain. The line-up for his performance was May on vocals and lead guitar, Cozy Powell on drums and percussion, Mike Moran and Rick Wakeman on keyboards, and Maggie Ryder, Miriam Stockley and Chris Thompson on backing vocals. The original line-up was May on vocals and lead guitar, Powell on drums and percussion, Michael Casswell on guitar, Neil Murray on bass, and Ryder, Stockley and Thompson on backing vocals. This version of the band was together only during the South American support tour (supporting The B-52's and Joe Cocker) on five dates.\nMay later made significant changes, feeling the group never quite gelled. May brought guitarist Jamie Moses on board to replace Mike Caswell. The backing vocalists, Ryder, Stockley and Thompson, were replaced by Catherine Porter and Shelley Preston. On 23\u00a0February 1993, this new line-up of The Brian May Band began its world tour in the US, supporting Guns N' Roses and headlining a few dates. The tour included dates in North America, Europe (support act: Valentine) and Japan. On 15 June 1993, the band did a show in London that would end up as The Brian May Band's only release as a collective, namely Live at the Brixton Academy. At the show, May would sing a few lines of \"Love of My Life\", and then, as Mercury used to, let the audience join in. After the tour ended on 18\u00a0December 1993, May returned to the studio with fellow surviving Queen band members Roger Taylor and John Deacon to work on tracks that became \"Made in Heaven\", the final Queen studio album. The band took Mercury's solo album demos and last recordings, which he managed to perform in the studio after the album \"Innuendo\" was finished, and completed them with their additions both musically and vocally. After Mercury's death, work on the album by Deacon and May began originally in 1992 but was left until a later date due to other commitments.\nIn 1995, May began working on a new solo album of covers tentatively titled \"Heroes\", in addition to working on various film and television projects and other collaborations. May subsequently changed the approach from covers to focus on those collaborations and new material. The songs included \"Another World\", and featured mainly Spike Edney, Cozy Powell, Neil Murray and Jamie Moses. On 5\u00a0April 1998, Cozy Powell was killed in a car accident on the M4 motorway near Bristol, England. This incident caused an unexpected disruption to the upcoming tour for the Brian May Band, which now needed a new drummer on short notice. Steve Ferrone was brought on to help May finish recording the drum tracks and join the band for the early stage promotional tour of five dates in Europe before the world tour. Following the early promotional tour, Eric Singer replaced him on the 1998 world tour.\nThe 1998 tour saw the brief introduction of a 'support act' known as T. E. Conway. Conway (Brian May in a wig and colourful suit playing the part of a teddy boy crooner) would play several 1950s rock and roll standards before May's 'arrival'. A bonus T. E. Conway EP titled \"Retro Rock Special\" was attached to some pressings of the \"Another World\" album. The Conway character was retired at the end of the tour.\nIn May 1999, May recorded lead guitars for the Guns N' Roses song \"Catcher in the Rye\" on \"Chinese Democracy\", but his performance was removed from the album by the time it was released in 2008.\n2000\u20132010.\nFrom his last solo release in 1998, May has been performing as a solo artist, as part of an ensemble, and infrequently as Queen with Roger Taylor. On 22\u00a0October 2000, he made a guest appearance at the Mot\u00f6rhead 25th Anniversary show at Brixton Academy along with Eddie Clarke (former Mot\u00f6rhead guitarist) for the encore song \"Overkill\". As part of the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II celebrations on 3\u00a0June 2002, May performed a guitar solo of \"God Save the Queen\" from the roof of Buckingham Palace, with the performance appearing on the 30th Anniversary DVD edition of \"A Night at the Opera\". May played guitar on the song \"Someone to Die For\" on the \"Spider-Man 2\" soundtrack in 2004.\nOn the Queen's birthday honours list of 2005, he was made a Commander of the Most Excellent Order of the British Empire \"for services to the music industry and for charity work\". In the same year he played the guitar on the song \"Il mare...\" for Italian singer Zucchero Fornaciari, on his album \"Zu &amp; Co.\", and he took part in the concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London held in May 2004, with the other guests of the Italian bluesman. May was a celebrity guest at the Genesis reunion concert at Twickenham Stadium in 2007. May and Genesis frontman Phil Collins worked together on two previous occasions, at The Prince's Trust Rock Gala in 1988 and the Party at the Palace in 2002, when Collins had played drums with Queen. In 2011 he contributed to a feature about Collins for \"FHM\", praising him as \"a great guy and an amazing drummer\".\nDuring the late 1960s, May became an enthusiast of stereoscope photographs, as a child, and first encountered the work of Thomas Richard Williams. In 2003, May announced a search to identify the actual location of the \"Scenes in Our Village\" images. In 2004 May reported that he had identified the location as the village of Hinton Waldrist in Oxfordshire. Along with Elena Vidal, May released a historical book in 2009 titled \"A Village Lost and Found: Scenes in Our Village\". The book is an annotated collection of stereoscopic photographs taken by the Victorian era photographer T. R. Williams. It included a focusing stereoscope.&lt;ref name=\"arstechnica/2016/12/may-owl-vr\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; May used a 3D camera to document the history of Queen.\nMay worked extensively with stage actress and singer Kerry Ellis after he cast her in the musical \"We Will Rock You\". He produced and arranged her debut studio album \"Anthems\" (2010), a follow-up to her extended play \"Wicked in Rock\" (2008), as well as appearing with Ellis at many public performances\u2014playing guitar alongside her. He also contributed a guitar solo to Meat Loaf's \"Hang Cool, Teddy Bear\" album in exchange for the use of drummer John Miceli.\nOn 20\u00a0May 2009, May and Queen bandmate Roger Taylor performed \"We Are the Champions\" live on the season finale of \"American Idol\" with winner Kris Allen and runner-up Adam Lambert providing a vocal duet. In November 2009, May appeared with Taylor on \"The X Factor\", with Queen mentoring the contestants, then later performed \"Bohemian Rhapsody\". In April 2010, May founded the \"Save Me\" 2010 project to work against any proposed repeal of the British fox-hunting ban, and to promote animal welfare in Britain. In February 2011, it was announced that May would tour with Kerry Ellis, playing 12 dates across the UK in May 2011.\n2004\u20132009: Queen + Paul Rodgers.\nAt the end of 2004, May and Taylor announced that they would reunite and return to touring in 2005, with Paul Rodgers, the founder and former lead singer of Free and Bad Company. Brian May's website also stated that Rodgers would be \"featured with\" Queen as Queen + Paul Rodgers, not replacing the late Freddie Mercury. The retired John Deacon would not be participating.\nBetween 2005 and 2006 Queen and Paul Rodgers embarked on a world tour, the first leg being Europe and the second, Japan and the US in 2006. On 25\u00a0May 2006, Queen received the inaugural VH1 Rock Honors at the Mandalay Bay Events Center in Las Vegas, Nevada, and May and Taylor were joined on stage with the Foo Fighters to perform a selection of Queen songs. On 15\u00a0August 2006, May confirmed through his website and fan club that Queen + Paul Rodgers would begin producing their first studio album in October, to be recorded at a \"secret location\". The album, titled \"The Cosmos Rocks\", was released in Europe on 12\u00a0September 2008 and in the United States on 28\u00a0October 2008. Following the album's release, the band embarked on a tour through Europe and parts of the US, opening on Kharkiv's freedom square in front of 350,000 Ukrainian fans. The show in Ukraine was later released on DVD. Queen and Paul Rodgers officially split up on 12\u00a0May 2009. Rodgers did not rule out the possibility of working together again.\n2011\u2013present.\nOn 18\u00a0 April 2011, Lady Gaga confirmed that May would play guitar on her track \"You and I\" from her album \"Born This Way\", released on 23\u00a0May 2011. May joined Gaga on stage during the performance of \"You and I\" at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards held at Nokia Theatre in Los Angeles. May performed with Tangerine Dream at the Starmus Festival on Tenerife in June 2011, celebrating the 50th anniversary of Yuri Gagarin's first spaceflight.\nMay performed \"We Will Rock You\" and \"Welcome to the Black Parade\" with the rock band My Chemical Romance at the Reading Festival on 26\u00a0August 2011. On 10 October, May made an appearance to celebrate the reunion of rock band The Darkness at an \"intimate\" 100 Club show with support from Dark Stares. A long-time fan of the group, May performed three songs onstage with The Darkness, including Queen's \"Tie Your Mother Down\", at the Hammersmith Apollo on their subsequent \"comeback\" tour.\nAt the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards on 6\u00a0November, Queen received the Global Icon Award, which Katy Perry presented to Brian May. Queen closed the awards ceremony, with Adam Lambert on vocals, performing \"The Show Must Go On\", \"We Will Rock You\" and \"We Are the Champions\". The collaboration garnered a positive response from both fans and critics, resulting in speculation about future projects together. Queen + Adam Lambert played two shows at the Hammersmith Apollo, London, on 11 and 12 July 2012. Both shows sold out within 24 hours of tickets going on open sale. A third London date was added for 14\u00a0July. On 30\u00a0June, Queen + Lambert performed in Kyiv, Ukraine at a joint concert with Elton John for the Elena Pinchuk ANTIAIDS Foundation. Queen also performed with Lambert on 3\u00a0July 2012 at Moscow's Olympic Stadium, and on 7\u00a0July 2012 at the Municipal Stadium in Wroclaw, Poland.\nIn January 2012, May featured on N-Dubz frontman Dappy's solo single \"Rockstar\", providing \"rumbling guitar riffs which culminate in an electrifying solo\". The pair also collaborated on a performance of \"We Will Rock You\" for BBC Radio 1's Live Lounge.\nQueen performed at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London on 12\u00a0August 2012. May performed part of the \"Brighton Rock\" solo before being joined by Taylor and solo artist Jessie J for a performance of \"We Will Rock You\". On 16\u00a0September 2012, May appeared at the Sunflower Jam charity concert at the Royal Albert Hall, performing alongside bassist John Paul Jones (of Led Zeppelin), drummer Ian Paice (of Deep Purple), and vocalists Bruce Dickinson (of Iron Maiden) and Alice Cooper.\nIn a 2013 West End run of \"Spamalot\" (the musical adaptation of Monty Python's 1975 film \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\"), May was among the celebrities who played the part of voicing God for a week in aid of charity. In 2015, May played guitar on the end credits song \"One Voice\" from the film \"A Dog Named Gucci\". The song also features the talents of: Norah Jones, Aimee Mann, Susanna Hoffs, Lydia Loveless, Neko Case, and Kathryn Calder. It was produced by Dean Falcone, who wrote the film's score. \"One Voice\" was released on Record Store Day, 16\u00a0April 2016, with profits from the sale of the single going to benefit animal charities.\nWelsh electronic musician Jayce Lewis collaborated with May in 2018 on the song \"We Are One\", taken from Lewis' 2018 album release \"Million\". Incorporating a repurposed \"Finger tapping/Hammering\" riff from May's solo track \"Cyborg\" from his album; Another World, both artists re-recorded May's guitar at a slower speed, and included it to the new song composition.\nOn 29\u00a0March 2019, May inducted Def Leppard into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. He worked with contemporary metal band Five Finger Death Punch and blues artist Kenny Wayne Shepherd to re-record a new version of \"Blue on Black\" in support of The Gary Sinise Foundation in April 2019. The artists came together to merge country and mainstream rock to re-create the classic song originally co-written by Shepherd.\nIn 2024, May contributed guitar to a re-release of Mark Knopfler's \"\" in aid of the Teenage Cancer Trust.\nQueen + Adam Lambert.\nNot long after performing with \"American Idol\" finalists Kris Allen and Adam Lambert during the programme's season finale in 2009, May and Taylor began contemplating the future of Queen after the group's amicable split with frontman Paul Rodgers. At the 2011 MTV Europe Music Awards, Queen was presented with that year's Global Icon Award, accepted by May. As part of the broadcast, Queen performed a short set with Lambert, receiving an overwhelmingly welcoming response. Speculation regarding collaboration with Lambert soon arose, with the three formally announcing a short summer tour of Europe in 2012, including three dates at the Hammersmith Apollo in London, as well as shows in Ukraine, Russia and Poland.\nThe collaboration was revived in 2013, when the three performed together at the iHeartRadio Music Festival at the MGM Grand Hotel &amp; Casino in Las Vegas on 20\u00a0September. Five months later, May, Taylor and Lambert announced a 19-date summer tour of North America on \"Good Morning America\". Because of ticket demand, five dates were soon added. In May 2014, shows in Australia and New Zealand were announced, along with festival performances in South Korea and Japan. The tour was extended to the UK and greater Europe in early 2015. The group performed together in South America in September 2015, including Queen's first performance at the Rock in Rio Festival since 1985.\nIn 2016, the group embarked across Europe and Asia on the Queen + Adam Lambert 2016 Summer Festival Tour. This included closing the Isle of Wight Festival in England on 12\u00a0June where they performed \"Who Wants to Live Forever\" as a tribute to the victims of the mass shooting at a gay nightclub in Orlando, Florida earlier that day. On 12\u00a0September they performed at the Yarkon Park in Tel Aviv, Israel for the first time in front of 58,000 people. In September 2018 the group had a residency in the MGM Park Theater in Las Vegas. Though the collaboration remains active, there are currently no plans to record a studio album, though the three are willing to do so in the future.\nOn 31 March 2020, Queen + Adam Lambert confirmed that their touring dates were postponed until 2021 because of the global COVID-19 pandemic.\nOn 4 June 2022, Queen + Adam Lambert opened the Platinum Party at the Palace outside Buckingham Palace to mark the Platinum Jubilee of Elizabeth II. Performing a three-song set, May appeared in front of the Victoria Memorial monument as they opened with \"We Will Rock You\" which had been introduced in a comedy segment where the Queen and Paddington Bear tapped their tea cups to the beat of the song.\n2025 BBC Proms.\nOn 13 September 2025, May performed, alongside Roger Taylor, at the Last Night of the Proms, joining the BBC Symphony Orchestra and Chorus, BBC Singers and National Youth Choir for a new orchestral arrangement of \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", by Stuart Morley, marking the 50th anniversary of the song.\nMusicianship.\nGuitar style.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI can listen to any player and pantomime their sound, but I can't do Brian May. He's just walking on higher ground.\n \u00a0\u2014Steve Vai\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHis tone immediately grabbed me. Brian has his own style and sound, so you can always tell his work. Even in 1971 he had incredible finesse, amazing fluidity.\n \u00a0\u2014Andy Powell, Wishbone Ash\nMay has been referred to as a virtuoso guitarist by many publications and musicians. He has featured in various music polls of the greatest rock guitarists, and in 2011 was ranked number 26 on \"Rolling Stone\" magazine's list of the \"100 Greatest Guitarists of All Time\". In January 2007, the readers of \"Guitar World\" voted May's guitar solos on \"Bohemian Rhapsody\" and \"Brighton Rock\" into the \"top 50 Greatest Guitar Solos of all time\" (No.20 and No.41 respectively). Former Van Halen vocalist Sammy Hagar stated, \"I thought Queen were really innovative and made some great sounding records... I like the rockin' stuff. I think Brian May has one of the great guitar tones on the planet, and I really, really love his guitar work.\" Justin Hawkins, lead guitarist of the Darkness, cites May as his earliest influence, saying \"I really loved his tone and vibrato and everything. I thought his playing sounded like a singing voice. I wanted to be able to do that. Whenever I went to guitar lessons, I was always asking to learn Queen stuff.\"\nAmerican guitar virtuoso Steve Vai has spoken highly of May's work, saying:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In that whole genre, in that whole period\u2014he's one of the most unique contributors. He doesn't get credit. Because what he does is so rich and so specific, and so deep, it fits so well in Queen music, you just feel it as part of that music. But when you break it down and when you look at it from a guitar player's point of view, it's unique, and nobody to this date could do what he does and make it sound like that. He is an iconic player. His tone, his choice of melody notes, he doesn't just do solos. His solos are melodies, and they're perfectly in place.\nMost of May's electric guitar work live and in the studio is done on the Red Special, which he built with his father, an electronics engineer, when he was sixteen years old. It was built with wood from an 18th-century fireplace, and was composed of household items such as mother-of-pearl buttons, shelf edging, and motorbike valve springs. While May and his father were building the Red Special, May also produced plans to build a second guitar. However, the Red Special was so successful that May did not need to build another guitar. These plans were eventually given to guitar luthier Andrew Guyton in around 2004\u201305. Guyton made some slight modifications and the guitar was built. It was named \"The Spade\" as the body's shape resembled the form shown on playing cards. The guitar also came to be known as \"The Guitar That Time Forgot\".\nMay commented on the Red Special:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I like a big neck \u2013 thick, flat and wide. I lacquered the fingerboard with Rustin's Plastic Coating. The tremolo is interesting in that the arm's made from an old bicycle saddle bag carrier, the knob from the ends of a knitting needle, and the springs are valve springs from an old motorbike.\nIn addition to using his home-made guitar he prefers to use coins (especially a sixpence from the farewell proof set of 1970), instead of a more traditional plastic plectrum, because he feels their rigidity gives him more control in playing. He is known to carry coins in his pockets specifically for this purpose.\nA meticulous arranger, he focuses on multi-part harmonies, often more contrapuntal than parallel\u2014a relative rarity for rock guitar. Examples are found in Queen's albums \"A Night at the Opera\" and \"A Day at the Races\", where he arranged a jazz band for guitar mini-orchestra (\"Good Company\"), a vocal canon (\"The Prophet's Song\") and guitar and vocal counterpoints (\"Teo Torriatte\").\nMay explored a wide variety of styles in guitar, including: sweep picking (\"Was It All Worth It\" \"Chinese Torture\"); tremolo (\"Brighton Rock\", \"Stone Cold Crazy\", \"Death on Two Legs\", \"Sweet Lady\", \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", \"Get Down Make Love\", \"Dragon Attack\"); tapping (\"Bijou\", \"It's Late\", \"Resurrection\", \"Cyborg\", \"Rain Must Fall\", \"Business\", \"China Belle\", \"I Was Born To Love You\"); slide guitar (\"Drowse\", \"Tie Your Mother Down\"); Hendrix sounding licks (\"Liar\", \"Brighton Rock\"); tape-delay (\"Brighton Rock\", \"White Man\"); and melodic sequences (\"Bohemian Rhapsody\", \"Killer Queen\", \"These Are the Days of Our Lives\"). Some of his solos and orchestral parts were composed by Freddie Mercury, who then asked May to bring them to life (\"Bicycle Race\", \"Lazing on a Sunday Afternoon\", \"Killer Queen\", \"Good Old Fashioned Lover Boy\"). May also performed notable acoustic works, including the finger-picked solo of \"White Queen\" (from \"Queen II\"), \"Love of My Life\" and the skiffle-influenced \"'39\" (both from \"A Night at the Opera\").\nAided by the uniqueness of the Red Special, May was often able to create strange and unusual sound effects. For example, he was able to imitate an orchestra in the song \"Procession\"; in \"Get Down, Make Love\" he was able to create various sound effects with his guitar; in \"Good Company\" he used his guitar to mimic a trombone, a piccolo and several other instruments for the song's Dixieland jazz band feel. Queen used a \"No synthesizers were used on this album\" sleeve note on their early albums to make this clear to the listeners. May also used his guitar to create the chime effect in \"Bohemian Rhapsody\".\nInfluences.\nMay's early influences included Cliff Richard and the Shadows, who he says were \"the most metallic thing(s) out at the time\". Many years later he gained his opportunity to play on separate occasions with the Shadows' lead guitarist Hank Marvin. He has collaborated with Richard on a re-recording of 1958 hit \"Move It\" on Richard's duets album \"Two's Company\", which was released on 6\u00a0November 2006.\nMay always stated that the Beatles, Led Zeppelin, the Who and Jimi Hendrix were the greatest influences on him. On the \"Queen for an Hour\" interview on BBC Radio\u00a01 in 1989, May listed Hendrix, Jeff Beck and Eric Clapton as his guitar heroes. In a 1991 interview for \"Guitar World\" magazine, May referred to the Who as \"my inspiration\", and on seeing Led Zeppelin stated, \"We used to look at those guys and think, 'That's the way it should be done.'\" May told \"Guitarist\" in 2004, \"I don't think anyone has epitomised riff writing better than Jimmy Page \u2014 he's one of the great brains of rock music\".\nMay also cites Rory Gallagher as a major influence, saying \"He was a magician. He was one of the very few people of that time who could make his guitar do anything, it seemed. I remember looking at that battered Stratocaster and thinking, 'How does that (sound) come out of there?'\" According to May, \"...\u00a0it was Rory that gave me my sound, and that's the sound I still have.\" May was also influenced by Steve Hackett, guitarist of the progressive rock band Genesis, in particular his harmony guitar solo at the end of the band's epic 1971 song \"The Musical Box\". Hackett said of May, \"Equally, his energetic approach to guitar inspired me.\"\nEquipment.\nGuitars.\nFrom 1975 onwards, May had some replicas made of the Red Special, some of which were also used for live and recording purposes, others being mainly spares. The most famous replicas were made by John Birch in 1975 (May smashed it during a concert in the US in 1982), Greco BM90 (featured in the promo video of \"Good Old-Fashioned Lover Boy\" in 1977), Guild (back-up from 1984 to 1993), Fryers (1997\u20131998, used both live and in the studio) and Guyton (back-up from 2003 to present). On stage, May used to carry at least one backup guitar (in case he broke a string). He occasionally would use others for specific songs or parts, such as alternative tunings. Currently, May owns a company that makes guitars whose design is modelled after the original Red Special guitar.\nHe currently has a Gibson 12-string SJ200 to replace his Guild 12-string. He previously used an Ovation Pacemaker 1615 model. Some of the non-RS electric guitars he used in the studio included:\nFor acoustic, he favoured Ovation, Martin, T\u014dkai Hummingbird, Godin and Guild. On a couple of videos, he also used some different electric guitars: a Stratocaster copy on \"Play the Game\" (1980) and a Washburn RR2V on \"Princes of the Universe\" (1986).\nIn 1984, Guild released the first official Red Special replica for mass production and made some prototypes specifically for May. However, the solid-body construction (the original RS has hollow cavities in the body) and the pick-ups (DiMarzio) that were not a replica of the Burns TriSonic did not make May happy. The production of the guitars stopped after just 300\u00a0guitars. In 1993, Guild made a second replica of the RS, made in just 1000\u00a0copies, of which May has some and used as a back-up. At the moment, he uses the two guitars made by Greg Fryer\u2014the luthier who restored the Old Lady in 1998\u2014as back-up. They are almost identical to the original, except for the Fryer logo on the headstock (May's original one has a sixpence).\nAmplifiers and effects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nI've never heard a guitar sound so loud! He had a wall of AC30s cranked, and it was like a jumbo jet taking off. It was phenomenal.\n \u00a0\u2014Marillion guitarist Steve Rothery on sharing a stage with May in the 1980s.\nMay has used Vox AC30 amplifiers almost exclusively since a meeting with his long-time hero Rory Gallagher at a gig in London during the late 1960s/early 1970s. In the mid-1970s he used six of them, with an Echoplex delay (with extended delay time) plugged into a separate amplifier, and a second Echoplex plugged into yet another amp; he used a homemade booster, his only effects pedal, which was on all the time. His choice is the model AC30TBX, the top-boost version with Blue Alnico speakers, and he runs the amp at full volume on the Normal channel.\nMay also customises his amps by removing the Brilliant and Vib-trem channels (leaving only the circuitry for the Normal). This alters the tone slightly, with a gain addition of 6\u20137\u00a0dB. He always used a treble booster which, along with the AC30 and his custom 'Deacy Amp' transistor amp, built by Queen bass player John Deacon, went a long way in helping to create many of his signature guitar tones. He used the Dallas Rangemaster for the first Queen albums, up to \"A Day at the Races\". Effects designer Pete Cornish built for him the TB-83 (32\u00a0dB of gain) that was used for all the remaining Queen albums. He switched in 2000 to the Fryer's booster, which actually gives less boost than the TB-83.\nWhen performing live, May uses banks of Vox\u00a0AC30 amplifiers, keeping some amps with only guitar and others with all effects such as delay, flanger and chorus. He has a rack of 14\u00a0AC30s, which are grouped as Normal, Chorus, Delay\u00a01, Delay\u00a02. On his pedal board, May has a custom switch unit made by Cornish and subsequently modified by Fryer that allows him to choose which amps are active. He uses a BOSS pedal from the '70s, the Chorus Ensemble CE-1, which can be heard in \"In The Lap of The Gods\" (\"Live at Wembley '86\") or \"Hammer to Fall\" (slow version played live with P.\u00a0Rodgers). Next in the chain, he uses a Foxx Foot Phaser (\"We Will Rock You\", \"We Are the Champions\", \"Keep Yourself Alive\", etc.), and two delay machines to play his trademark solo in \"Brighton Rock\".\nPiano and other instruments.\nAs a child, May was trained on classical piano. Although Freddie Mercury was the band's primary pianist, May would step in occasionally (such as on \"Save Me\" and \"Flash\"). He mostly used Freddie Mercury's 1972 Steinway piano. From 1979 onwards, he also played synthesisers, organ (\"Wedding March\", \"Let Me Live\") and programmed drum-machines for both Queen and outside projects (such as producing other artists and his own solo records). In the studio, May used Yamaha DX7 synths for the opening sequence of \"One Vision\" and the backgrounds of \"Who Wants to Live Forever\" (also on stage), \"Scandal\" and \"The Show Must Go On\".\nThe first instrument May learned to play was the banjolele. He used a \"genuine George Formby Ukulele-Banjo\" in \"Bring Back That Leroy Brown\" and \"Good Company\". Occasionally, May would also record on other string instruments such as harp (one chord per take, then copied and pasted by the engineer to make it sound like a continuous performance) and bass (on some demos and many songs in his solo career, and the Queen + Paul Rodgers album). May was keen on using some toys as instruments as well. He used a Yamaha plastic piano in \"Teo Torriatte\" and a toy mini koto in \"The Prophet's Song\".\nVocals.\nMay is also an accomplished singer. From Queen's \"Queen II\" to \"The Game\", May contributed lead vocals to at least one song per album. May co-composed a mini-opera with Lee Holdridge, \"Il Colosso\", for Steve Barron's 1996 film, \"The Adventures of Pinocchio\". May performed the opera with Jerry Hadley, Sissel Kyrkjebo, and Just William. On-screen, it was performed entirely by puppets.\nScientific career.\nMay studied physics and mathematics at Imperial College London, graduating with a BSc (Hons) degree and ARCS in physics with Upper Second-Class Honours. From 1970 to 1974, he studied for a PhD degree at Imperial College, studying reflected light from interplanetary dust and the velocity of dust in the plane of the Solar System. When Queen began to have international success in 1974, he abandoned his doctoral studies, but nonetheless co-authored two peer-reviewed research papers, which were based on his observations at the Teide Observatory in Tenerife.\nIn October 2006, May re-registered for his doctorate at Imperial College, and he submitted his thesis in August 2007 (one year earlier than he estimated it would take to complete). As well as writing up the previous work he had done, May had to review the work on zodiacal dust undertaken during the intervening 33 years, which included the discovery of the zodiacal dust bands by NASA's IRAS satellite. After a viva voce, the revised thesis (titled \"A Survey of Radial Velocities in the Zodiacal Dust Cloud\") was approved in September 2007, some 37 years after it had been commenced. He was able to submit his thesis only because of the minimal amount of research on the topic during the intervening years and has described the subject as one that became in-demand again in the 2000s. In his doctoral research, he investigated radial velocity using absorption spectroscopy and doppler spectroscopy of zodiacal light using a Fabry\u2013P\u00e9rot interferometer based at the Teide Observatory in Tenerife. His research was initially supervised by Jim Ring, Ken Reay and in the latter stages by Michael Rowan-Robinson. He graduated at the awards ceremony of Imperial College held in the Royal Albert Hall on 14 May 2008.\nIn October 2007, May was appointed a visiting researcher in Imperial College and he continues his interest in astronomy and involvement with the Imperial Astrophysics Group. He is co-author, with Sir Patrick Moore and Chris Lintott, of \"Bang! \u2013 The Complete History of the Universe\" and \"The Cosmic Tourist\". May appeared on the 700th episode of \"The Sky at Night\" hosted by Sir Patrick Moore, along with Chris Lintott, Jon Culshaw, Professor Brian Cox, and the Astronomer Royal Martin Rees who, on departing the panel, told Brian May, who was joining it, \"I don't know a scientist who looks as much like Isaac Newton as you do.\" May was also a guest on the first episode of the third series of the BBC's \"Stargazing Live\", on 8 January 2013.\nOn 17 November 2007, May was appointed chancellor of Liverpool John Moores University, and he was installed in 2008 having also been awarded an honorary fellowship from the university for his contribution to astronomy and services to the public understanding of science. He held the post until 2013. Asteroid 52665 Brianmay was named after him on 18 June 2008 on the suggestion of Patrick Moore (probably influenced by the asteroid's provisional designation of 1998 BM30).\nIn 2014, May co-founded Asteroid Day with Apollo 9 astronaut Rusty Schweickart, B612 Foundation COO Danica Remy and German filmmaker Grigorij Richters. Asteroid Day is a global awareness campaign where people from around the world come together to learn about asteroids and what we can do to protect our planet. May was a guest at the 2016 Starmus Festival where he also performed on stage with composer Hans Zimmer. The theme was \"Beyond The Horizon: A Tribute To Stephen Hawking\".\nDuring the \"New Horizons\" Pluto flyby NASA press conference held on 17 July 2015 at Johns Hopkins Applied Physics Lab, May was introduced as a science team collaborator. He told the panel \"You have inspired the world.\" From 31 December 2018 until 1 January 2019, May was in attendance at the watch party for the New Horizons flyby of the Kuiper belt object, 486958 Arrokoth, and performed an updated version of his \"New Horizons\" celebratory song. As part of May's role as a collaborator with NASA's science team on the New Horizons mission, he worked on the first stereoanaglyph based on images of (486958) Arrokoth that were captured by the spacecraft.\nIn 2019, he was awarded the Lawrence J. Burpee Medal of the Royal Canadian Geographical Society for outstanding contributions to the advancement of geography.\nIn 2020, he participated in the team that contributed the stereography images of numerical simulations of asteroid disruptions and re-accumulations in a publication in the peer-reviewed journal Nature Communications by Michel, P. et al. (2020) presenting a scenario of formation of the asteroids (101955) Bennu and (162173) Ryugu, visited by NASA OSIRIS-REx and JAXA Hayabusa2 probes, respectively. He was awarded the JAXA Hayabusa2 Honor Award for his contribution by making stereoscopic images of Ryugu.\nIn 2021, he contributed the stereography images of the structural stability of double asteroid (65803) Didymos, the target of the NASA DART and ESA Hera missions, in a publication in the peer-reviewed journal Icarus by DART and Hera team members. He is also on the advisory board of the NEO-MAPP project (Near-Earth-Object Modelling and Payloads for Protection), funded by the European Union.\nIn 2022, May was awarded a Doctorate of Science honoris causa by Professor Brad Gibson in the EA Milne Centre for Astrophysics at the University of Hull. Unable to attend in person, he joined the graduation ceremony via video link. At the Starmus IV festival in Yerevan, Armenia in September 2022, May was awarded the Stephen Hawking Medal for Science Communication.\nIn December 2022 May was made a Knight Bachelor in the 2023 New Year Honours, the first list of King Charles III's reign. In March 2023, May was officially knighted by the King.\nPersonal life.\nFrom 1976 to 1988, May was married to Christine Mullen. They had three children. They separated in 1988. May met actress Anita Dobson in 1986. She inspired him to write the 1989 hit \"I Want It All\". They married on 18 November 2000.\nHe has said in interviews that he had depression in the late 1980s and early 1990s, to the point of contemplating suicide, for reasons having to do with his troubled first marriage, his perceived failure as a husband and father, and the deaths of Mercury and his father Harold.\nAccording to \"The Sunday Times\" Rich List of 2019, May is worth \u00a3160\u00a0million. He has homes in London and Windlesham, Surrey. May's father Harold was a long-time heavy cigarette smoker. As a result, May dislikes smoking, to the point where he was already prohibiting smoking indoors at his concerts before many countries imposed smoking bans.\nA vegan since taking part in the 2020 Veganuary challenge, May has blamed meat eating for the COVID-19 pandemic. May describes himself as \"not belonging to an organised religion, but feels there is a god of some kind which we know very little about\".\nMay is a long-term champion of woodland as a haven and \"corridor\" for wildlife\u2014both in Surrey, where he has a house, and elsewhere. In 2012, he bought land threatened by building development at Bere Regis, Dorset, and, in 2013 and with the enthusiastic support of local villagers, initiated a project to create an area of woodland, now called May's Wood (or \"the Brian May Wood\"). The wood consists of , formerly under the plough, planted by May's team of co-workers with 100,000 trees. May's Wood is said to be flourishing.\nIn 2013, a new species of the genus \"Heteragrion\" (Odonata: Zygoptera) from Brazil was named \"Heteragrion brianmayi\"\u2014one of four \"Heteragrion\" flatwing damselflies named after the bandmates, paying tribute to the 40th anniversary of Queen's founding.\nMay experienced a small heart attack in May 2020. It required the insertion of three stents into three blocked arteries. May said he had been \"very near death\". In September 2024, he stated that he had suffered a minor stroke which rendered him temporarily without use of his left arm, though May said he was still able to play guitar.\nActivism.\nThough a Conservative Party voter most of his life, he has stated that their policies on fox hunting and the culling of badgers meant he did not vote for them in the 2010 UK general election. \nIn 2013, May joined French guitar player Jean-Pierre Danel for a charity Danel launched for the benefit of animal rights in France. The guitarists signed guitars and art photos together, and were joined by Hank Marvin.\nPrior to the 2015 general election, it was reported that May was considering standing as an independent Member of Parliament. It was also revealed that May had started a \"Common Decency\" project \"to re-establish common decency in our lives, work and Parliament\". May said he wanted to \"get rid of the current government\" and wished to see a House of Commons containing \"individuals voting according to their conscience\". May was one of several celebrities who endorsed the parliamentary candidacy of the Green Party's Caroline Lucas at the election. He also endorsed a Conservative Party candidate, Henry Smith, on the grounds of his animal welfare record.\nIn July 2015, May criticised UK Prime Minister David Cameron for giving members of parliament a free vote on amending the ban on fox hunting in England and Wales. During a live television interview, he described the pro-hunting organisation the Countryside Alliance as \"a bunch of lying bastards\" for their support for a change to the law. The government postponed the vote following the intervention of the Scottish National Party's Westminster MPs, who committed to vote to keep the ban as it existed. May told anti-hunt protesters in a rally outside Parliament that it was \"a very, very important day for our democracy\" but added \"we have not yet won the war, there's no room for complacency\".\nIn June 2017, May endorsed Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn in the 2017 general election. May shared an article on Twitter by \"The Independent\" headlined \"Jeremy Corbyn says Fox hunting is 'barbarity' and pledges to keep it banned\" and captioned it: \"Well, I guess that just about clinches it !! Anyone see any good reason not to prefer the evidently decent Corbyn over the weak and wobbly Mrs May? Bri\".\nIn October 2018, May said, \"I don't like all this separatist stuff and you know this sort of illusion that we can all stand on our own, to me the future lies in co-operation. I get up every day and put my head in my hands about Brexit \u2013 I think it's the stupidest thing we ever tried to do.\" He also said that Prime Minister Theresa May was \"driven by vanity and thirst for power\".\nIn the run-up to the 2019 United Kingdom general election May criticised what he saw as the poor conduct of the media and declined to endorse either candidate, stating that he found it \"impossible\" to vote for either Jeremy Corbyn or Boris Johnson. After the election in which the Conservatives won a majority, May vowed to continue fighting for animal welfare but in an Instagram and blog post he urged his followers to congratulate Johnson and \"wish Boris a decent chance to rebuild Britain\" before praising reforms to animal welfare laws made by Conservative Party Environment Secretary Michael Gove. In 2021 May criticised Johnson for his response to the COVID-19 pandemic, calling it inadequate.\nIn the lead up to the 2019 Okinawan referendum on landfill work at Henoko Bay for the expansion of the base in Okinawa, Japan, May advocated voting in opposition to the landfill.\nAnimal welfare.\nIn 2010, May formed an animal welfare organisation Save Me (named after the May-written Queen song). It campaigns for the protection of wild animals with a particular emphasis on preventing hunting of foxes and the culling of badgers. May has commented that \"to this day, nobody has been able to prove a mechanism for the transfer of bTB from badger to cow\" and has suggested that culling badgers has no benefit. The group's primary concern is to ensure that the Hunting Act 2004 and other laws protecting animals are retained in situ.\nIn an interview in September 2010 with Stephen Sackur for the BBC's \"HARDtalk\" programme, May said that he would rather be remembered for his animal welfare work than for his music or scientific work. May is supporter of the International Fund for Animal Welfare, the League Against Cruel Sports, PETA UK and the Harper Asprey Wildlife Rescue. In March 2012, May contributed the foreword to a target paper published by the think tank the Bow Group, urging the government to reconsider its plans to cull thousands of badgers to control bovine TB, stating that the findings of Labour's major badger culling trials, several years earlier, show that culling does not work. The paper was authored by Graham Godwin-Pearson with contributions by leading tuberculosis scientists, including Lord Krebs. This prefaced his 2024 documentary, \"Brian May: The Badgers, the Farmers and Me,\" the culmination of a four-year investigation into whether badger culling is necessary for bovine TB prevention.\nIn October 2010, May received an award from the International Fund for Animal Welfare in recognition of his animal welfare work.\nIn May 2013, May teamed up with actor Brian Blessed and Flash cartoonist Jonti \"Weebl\" Picking, as well as animal welfare groups including the RSPCA, to form Team Badger, a \"coalition of organisations that have teamed up to fight the planned cull of badgers\". With Weebl and Blessed, May recorded a single, \"Save the Badger Badger Badger\"\u2014a mashup of Weebl's viral 2003 Flash cartoon meme, \"Badger Badger Badger\", and Queen's \"Flash\", featuring vocals by Blessed. On 1\u00a0September 2013, \"Save the Badger Badger Badger\" charted at No. 79 on the UK Singles Chart, No. 39 on the UK iTunes chart and No. 1 on the iTunes Rock chart. In June 2013 naturalist Sir David Attenborough and rock guitarist Slash joined May to form a supergroup, Artful Badger and Friends, and released a song dedicated to badgers, \"Badger Swagger\".\nMay is a former vice-president of the RSPCA. In September 2024, he resigned his position as vice-president after \"damning evidence\" emerged of animal welfare failings at RSPCA Assured farms.\nStereophotography.\nMay has had a lifelong interest in collecting Victorian stereophotography. In 2009, with co-author Elena Vidal, he published his second book, \"A Village Lost and Found,\" on the work of English stereophotography innovator T. R. Williams. He was awarded The Royal Photographic Society's Saxby Medal in 2012 for achievement in the field of three-dimensional imaging.\nMay made a significant technical contribution to the book to accompany the exhibition 'Stereoscopic Photographs of Pablo Picasso by Robert Mouzillat', held at the Holburne Museum in Bath, England, from February to June 2014. The book provides photographs of Picasso in his studio, at a bullfight at Arles, and in his garden. May's 3D Owl viewer is used to view the photographs in 3D.\nThe purchase of his first card in 1973 started May on a lifelong and worldwide search for Les Diableries, which are stereoscopic photographs depicting scenes of daily life in Hell. On 10 October 2013 the book \"Diableries: Stereoscopic Adventures in Hell\" by Brian May, Denis Pellerin and Paula Fleming was published.\nIn 2017, May published \"Queen in 3-D\", chronicling the group's 50-year history. It contains over 300 of his own stereoscopic photos and is the first book about the band published by one of its members. Included with the book is May's patented OWL Stereoscopic Viewer.\nIn 2021, May was awarded an honorary fellowship and Denis Pellerin was awarded an Honorary Doctor of Literature from the Royal Holloway College, University of London. The conferred degrees recognised their work to preserve Victorian stereoscopy through the London Stereoscopic Company. It recognises their contribution to photography and preservation.\nPortrayal in film.\nIn the 2018 biographical film \"Bohemian Rhapsody\", he was portrayed by Gwilym Lee. May himself served as a creative and musical consultant for the film, and worked especially closely with Lee.\nDiscography.\nWith Queen\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSolo discography\nCollaborations\nHe composed and performed the guitar solo for the song \"When Death Calls\" from Black Sabbath album \"Headless Cross\". (1989)\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42072", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42072", "title": "John Ousterhout", "text": "American computer scientist\nJohn Kenneth Ousterhout (, born October 15, 1954) is an American computer scientist. He is a professor of computer science at Stanford University. He founded Electric Cloud with John Graham-Cumming.\nOusterhout was previously a professor of computer science at University of California, Berkeley, where he created the Tcl scripting language and the Tk platform-independent widget toolkit, and proposed the idea of coscheduling. Ousterhout led the research group that designed the experimental Sprite operating system and the first log-structured file system.\nOusterhout also led the team that developed the Magic VLSI computer-aided design (CAD) program.\nEducation and career.\nHe received a Bachelor of Science (B.S.) in physics from Yale University in 1975, and his Ph.D. in computer science from Carnegie Mellon University in 1980.\nOusterhout received the Grace Murray Hopper Award in 1987 for his work on electronic design automation CAD systems for very-large-scale integrated circuits. For the same work, he was inducted in 1994 as a Fellow of the Association for Computing Machinery. Ousterhout was elected a member of the National Academy of Engineering in 2001 for improving our ability to program computers by raising the level of abstraction.\nIn 1994, Ousterhout left Berkeley to join Sun Microsystems Laboratories, which hired a team to join him in Tcl development. After several years at Sun, he left and co-founded Scriptics, Inc. (later renamed Ajuba Solutions) in January 1998 to provide professional Tcl development tools. Most of the Tcl team followed him from Sun. Ajuba was purchased by Interwoven in October 2000. He joined the faculty of Stanford University in 2008.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42074", "revid": "1306996894", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42074", "title": "Port Authority of New York and New Jersey", "text": "American transport facility agency\nThe Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, (PANYNJ; stylized, in logo since 2020, as Port Authority NY NJ) is a joint venture between the U.S. states of New York and New Jersey, established in 1921 through an interstate compact authorized by the United States Congress. The Port Authority oversees much of the regional transportation infrastructure, including bridges, tunnels, airports, and seaports, within the geographical jurisdiction of the Port of New York and New Jersey. This port district is generally encompassed within a radius of the Statue of Liberty National Monument. The Port Authority is headquartered at 4 World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan.\nThe Port Authority operates the Port Newark\u2013Elizabeth Marine Terminal, which consistently ranks among the largest ports in the United States by tonnage handled, and the largest on the Eastern Seaboard. The Port Authority also operates six bi-state crossings: three connecting New Jersey with Manhattan, and three connecting New Jersey with Staten Island. The Port Authority Bus Terminal and the PATH rail system are also run by the Port Authority, as well as LaGuardia Airport, John F. Kennedy International Airport, Newark Liberty International Airport, Teterboro Airport, and Stewart International Airport. The agency has its own 2,100 member Port Authority Police Department.\nHistory.\nThe Port of New York and New Jersey comprised the main point of embarkation for U.S. troops and supplies sent to Europe during World War I, via the New York Port of Embarkation. The congestion at the port led experts to realize the need for a port authority to supervise the extremely complex system of bridges, highways, subways, and port facilities in the New York-New Jersey area. The solution was the 1921 creation of the Port Authority under the supervision of the governors of the two states. By issuing its own bonds, it was financially independent of either state; the bonds were paid off from tolls and fees, not from taxes. It became one of the major agencies of the metropolitan area for large-scale projects. Early bond issues were tied to specific projects, but this changed in 1935 when the Authority issued General and Refunding bonds with a claim on its general revenues.\nPrevious disputes.\nIn the early years of the 20th century, there were disputes between the states of New Jersey and New York over rail freights and boundaries. At the time, rail lines terminated on the New Jersey side of the harbor, while ocean shipping was centered on Manhattan and Brooklyn. Freight had to be shipped across the Hudson River in barges. In 1916, New Jersey launched a lawsuit against New York over issues of rail freight, with the Interstate Commerce Commission (ICC) issuing an order that the two states work together, subordinating their own interests to the public interest. The Harbor Development Commission, a joint advisory board set-up in 1917, recommended that a bi-state authority be established to oversee efficient economic development of the port district. The Port of New York Authority was established on April 30, 1921, through an interstate compact between the states of New Jersey and New York. This was the first such agency in the United States, created under a provision in the Constitution of the United States permitting interstate compacts. The idea for the Port Authority was conceived during the Progressive Era, which aimed at the reduction of political corruption and at increasing the efficiency of government. With the Port Authority at a distance from political pressures, it was able to carry longer-term infrastructure projects irrespective of the election cycles and in a more efficient manner. In 1972 it was renamed the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey to better reflect its status as a partnership between the two states.\nThroughout its history, there have been concerns about democratic accountability, or lack thereof at the Port Authority. The Port District is irregularly shaped but comprises a area roughly within a radius of the Statue of Liberty.\nInterstate crossings.\nAt the beginning of the 20th century, there were no road bridge or tunnel crossings between the two states. The initial tunnel crossings were completed privately by the Hudson and Manhattan Railroad in 1908 and 1909 (\"Hudson Tubes\"), followed by the Pennsylvania Railroad in 1910 (\"North River Tunnels\"). Under an independent agency, the Holland Tunnel was opened in 1927, with some planning and construction pre-dating the Port Authority. With the rise in automobile traffic, there was demand for more Hudson River crossings. Using its ability to issue bonds and collect revenue, the Port Authority has built and managed major infrastructure projects. Early projects included bridges across the Arthur Kill, which separates Staten Island from New Jersey. The Goethals Bridge, named after chief engineer of the Panama Canal Commission General George Washington Goethals, connected Elizabeth, New Jersey and Howland Hook, Staten Island. At the south end of Arthur Kill, the Outerbridge Crossing was built and named after the Port Authority's first chairman, Eugenius Harvey Outerbridge. Construction of both bridges was completed in 1928. The Bayonne Bridge, opened in 1931, was built across the Kill van Kull, connecting Staten Island with Bayonne, New Jersey.\nConstruction began in 1927 on the George Washington Bridge, linking the northern part of Manhattan with Fort Lee, New Jersey, with Port Authority chief engineer, Othmar Ammann, overseeing the project. The bridge was completed in October 1931, ahead of schedule and well under the estimated costs. This efficiency exhibited by the Port Authority impressed President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who used this as a model in creating the Tennessee Valley Authority and other such entities.\nIn 1930, the Holland Tunnel was placed under the control of the Port Authority, providing significant toll revenues. The Port Authority also controlled the Lincoln Tunnel, connecting New Jersey and Midtown Manhattan. The Lincoln Tunnel opened in 1937 as a single-tube tunnel; a second tube opened in 1945, and a third tube opened in 1957.\nIn 1962, the Port Authority absorbed the bankrupt Hudson &amp; Manhattan Railroad and reorganized it as Port Authority Trans-Hudson (PATH). As part of the deal, the Port Authority acquired the rights to build the original World Trade Center on the site of the old Hudson Terminal, one of two terminals in Manhattan for H&amp;M/PATH.\nAustin J. Tobin era.\nAirport expansion.\nIn 1942, Austin J. Tobin became the executive director of the Port Authority. In the post-World War II period, the Port Authority expanded its operations to include airports, and marine terminals, with projects including Newark Liberty International Airport and Port Newark-Elizabeth Marine Terminals. Meanwhile, the city-owned La Guardia Field was nearing capacity in 1939 and needed expensive upgrades and expansion. At the time, airports were operated as loss leaders, and the city was having difficulties maintaining the status quo, losing money and unable to undertake needed expansions. The city was looking to hand the airports over to a public authority, possibly to Robert Moses' Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority. After long negotiations with the City of New York, a 50-year lease, commencing on May 31, 1947, went to the Port Authority of New York to rehabilitate, develop, and operate La Guardia Airport (La Guardia Field), John F. Kennedy International Airport (Idlewild Airport), and Floyd Bennett Field. The Port Authority transformed the airports into fee-generating facilities, adding stores and restaurants.\nWorld Trade Center.\nDavid Rockefeller, president of Chase Manhattan Bank, envisioned a World Trade Center for lower Manhattan. Realizing that he needed public funding in order to construct the massive project, he approached Tobin. Although many questioned the Port Authority's entry into the real estate market, Tobin saw the project as a way to enhance the agency's power and prestige, and agreed to the project. The Port Authority was the overseer of the World Trade Center, hiring the architect Minoru Yamasaki and engineer Leslie Robertson.\nYamasaki ultimately settled on the idea of twin towers. To meet the Port Authority's requirement to build of office space, the towers would each be 110 stories tall. The size of the project raised ire from the owner of the Empire State Building, which would lose its title of tallest building in the world. Other critics objected to the idea of this much \"subsidized\" office space going on the open market, competing with the private sector. Others questioned the cost of the project, which in 1966 had risen to $575million. Final negotiations between The City of New York and the Port Authority centered on tax issues. A final agreement was made that the Port Authority would make annual payments in lieu of taxes, for the 40% of the World Trade Center leased to private tenants. The remaining space was to be occupied by state and federal government agencies. In 1962, the Port Authority signed the United States Customs Service as a tenant, and in 1964 they signed a deal with the State of New York to locate government offices at the World Trade Center.\nIn August 1968, construction on the World Trade Center's north tower started, with construction on the south tower beginning in January 1969. When the World Trade Center twin towers were completed, the total cost to the Port Authority had reached $900million. The buildings were dedicated on April 4, 1973, with Tobin, who had retired the year before, absent from the ceremonies.\nIn 1986, the Port Authority sold rights to the World Trade Center name for $10 to an organization run by an outgoing executive, Guy F. Tozzoli. He in turn made millions of dollars selling the use of the name in up to 28 different states.\nAfter the 1993 World Trade Center bombing, the Port Authority was sued by survivors of the attack for negligence in not making security upgrades to known flaws that could have prevented the attack. The Port Authority was ruled to be negligent.\nSeptember 11 attacks.\nThe terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, and the subsequent collapse of the World Trade Center buildings impacted the Port Authority. With the Port Authority's headquarters located in 1 World Trade Center, it became deprived of a base of operations and sustained a great number of casualties. An estimated 1,400 Port Authority employees worked in the World Trade Center. Eighty-four employees, including 37 Port Authority police officers, its executive director, Neil D. Levin, and police superintendent, Fred V. Morrone, died. In rescue efforts following the collapse, two Port Authority police officers, John McLoughlin and Will Jimeno, were pulled out alive after spending nearly 24 hours beneath of rubble. Their rescue was later portrayed in the 2006 Oliver Stone film \"World Trade Center\". Future Executive Director Christopher O. Ward was at the World Trade Center on 9/11, and is a survivor of the attack. Ward was Chief of External Affairs &amp; Director of Port Development under Neil Levin at the time. As the executive director from 2008 to 2011, he is credited with turning around Ground Zero construction and having the memorial ready for the 10th anniversary. A former attorney for the PANYNJ who worked on 9/11 related issues is now on the federal bench, Angel Kelley.\nFort Lee lane closure scandal.\nThe Fort Lee lane closure scandal was a US political scandal that concerns New Jersey Governor Chris Christie's staff and his Port Authority political appointees conspiring to create a traffic jam in Fort Lee, New Jersey as political retribution, and their attempts to cover up these actions and suppress internal and public disclosures. Dedicated toll lanes for one of the Fort Lee entrances (used by local traffic from Fort Lee and surrounding communities) to the upper level on the George Washington Bridge, which connects to Manhattan, were reduced from three to one from September 9\u201313, 2013. The toll lane closures caused massive Fort Lee traffic back-ups, which affected public safety due to extensive delays by police and emergency service providers and disrupted schools due to the delayed arrivals of students and teachers. Two Port Authority officials (who were appointed by Christie and would later resign) claimed that reallocating two of the toll lanes from the local Fort Lee entrance to the major highways was due to a traffic study evaluating \"traffic safety patterns\" at the bridge, but the executive director of the Port Authority was unaware of a traffic study.\nAs of \u00a02014[ [update]], the repercussions and controversy surrounding these actions continue to be under investigation by the Port Authority, federal prosecutors, and a New Jersey legislature committee. The Port Authority's chairman, David Samson, who was appointed by Governor Christie, resigned on March 28, 2014, amid allegations of his involvement in the scandal and other controversies.\nCaren Turner scandal.\nIn April 2018, Caren Turner resigned from the Board of Commissioners after an ethics investigation revealed that her attempt to intervene in a traffic stop for her daughter included what the Port Authority described as \"profoundly disturbing\" conduct. New Jersey police released a videotape of her attempting to leverage her position at the Port Authority to intimidate police officers, following a routine traffic stop of a vehicle in which her adult daughter was a passenger. Her case was referred to New Jersey's Ethics Commission.\nOwnership swap of Brooklyn Marine and Howland Hook terminals.\nIn May 2024, the Authority transferred ownership of the Brooklyn Port Authority Marine Terminal &amp; Red Hook Container Terminal to the City of New York in exchange for ownership of the Howland Hook Marine Terminal on Staten Island.\nGovernance.\nThe Port Authority is jointly controlled by the governors of New York and New Jersey, who appoint the members of the agency's Board of Commissioners and retain the right to veto the actions of the commissioners from their own state. Each governor appoints six members to the Board of Commissioners, who are subject to state senate confirmation and serve overlapping six-year terms without pay. An executive director is appointed by the board of commissioners to deal with day-to-day operations and to execute the Port Authority's policies. Under an informal power-sharing agreement, the governor of New Jersey chooses the chairman of the board and the deputy executive director, while the governor of New York selects the vice chairman and executive director.\nThe Port Authority is headquartered at 4 World Trade Center in Lower Manhattan. The agency was headquartered at 1 World Trade Center in the first World Trade Center complex, where it occupied of space. It had been headquartered in the WTC complex beginning in 1973. After the previous headquarters were destroyed in the September 11, 2001 attacks, the Port Authority moved into 225 Park Avenue South in Midtown Manhattan, with employees divided between offices in New York and New Jersey, before returning to the World Trade Center in 2015.\nFinancially, the Port Authority has no power to tax and does not receive tax money from any local or state governments. Instead, it operates on the revenues it makes from its rents, tolls, fees, and facilities.\nBoard of Commissioners.\nMeetings of the Board of Commissioners are public. Members of the public may address the Board at these meetings, subject to a prior registration process via email. Public records of the Port Authority may be requested via the Office of the Secretary according to an internal Freedom of Information policy which is intended to be consistent with and similar to the state Freedom of Information policies of both New York and New Jersey.\nMembers of the Board of Commissioners are typically business titans and political power brokers who maintain close relationships with their respective governors. On February 3, 2011, former New Jersey Attorney General David Samson was named the new chairman of the Port Authority by New Jersey Governor Chris Christie. Gov. Christie announced Samson's resignation in March 2016, a casualty of investigations into the \"Bridgegate\" scandal. Basil Paterson, father of former Governor David Paterson, served on the board from 1989 to 1995, and again from 2013 to 2014.\nThe current commissioners are:\nChairs.\nOn July 14, 2016, David Samson pleaded guilty to a felony for conspiring to impede an airport project to coerce United Airlines to reinstate a discontinued flight to an airport in South Carolina, near a home that he owned. He was appointed by Chris Christie.\nFacilities.\nThe Port Authority of New York and New Jersey manages and maintains infrastructure critical to the New York/New Jersey region's trade and transportation network\u2014five of the region's airports, the New York/New Jersey seaport, the PATH rail transit system, six tunnels and bridges between New York and New Jersey, the Port Authority Bus Terminal and George Washington Bridge Bus Station in Manhattan and The World Trade Center site.\nSeaports.\nThe Port of New York and New Jersey is the largest port complex on the East Coast of North America. In 2021, Port Authority seaports handled the fourth largest amount of shipping among U.S. ports, measured in total tonnage. As of August 2022, the Port Authority led the country when considering only containers and not bulk materials such as petroleum and grain.\nThe Port Authority operates the following seaports:\nThe Port Authority operates the ExpressRail rail services within the seaport area, including dockside trackage and railyards for transloading. It interchanges with Conrail Shared Assets Operations (CRCX) on the Chemical Coast Secondary, Norfolk Southern (NS), CSX Transportation (CSX), and Canadian Pacific (CP). From January through October 2014 the system handled 391,596 rail lifts. As of 2014, three ExpressRail systems (Elizabeth, Newark, Staten Island) were in operation with the construction of a fourth at Port Jersey underway.\nThe Port Authority has operated New York New Jersey Rail, LLC (NYNJ), since its acquisition in 1962. It serves as a switching and terminal railroad operating a car float operation across Upper New York Bay between the Greenville Yard in Jersey City and Brooklyn.\nAirports.\nThe Port Authority operates the following airports:\nBoth Kennedy and LaGuardia airports are owned by the City of New York and leased to the Port Authority for operating purposes. Newark Liberty is owned by the cities of Elizabeth and Newark and is also leased to the Authority. In 2007, Stewart International Airport, owned by the State of New York, was leased to the Port Authority. The Port Authority officially took over select management functions of the Atlantic City International Airport on July 1, 2013, in conjunction with the South Jersey Transportation Authority, which leases the airport site from the FAA.\nJFK, LaGuardia, and Newark Liberty as a whole form the largest airport system in the United States, second in the world in terms of passenger traffic, and first in the world by total flight operations, with JFK being the 19th busiest in the world and the 6th busiest in the U.S.\nHeliports.\nThe Authority operated the Downtown Manhattan Heliport (Manhattan, New York) until the lease expired in August 2007 but continued to operate it until the next lessee took over. The Authority had operated the other heliports in Manhattan but gave up leases for all of them over the years.\nBridges and tunnels.\nThe Port Authority manages every crossing between New York City and New Jersey, which include the George Washington Bridge, the Lincoln Tunnel, and the Holland Tunnel, which all connect Manhattan and Northern New Jersey, as well as the Goethals Bridge, the Bayonne Bridge, and the Outerbridge Crossing, which connect Staten Island and New Jersey. They also maintain many entrances approaches to these crossings, such as the GWB Plaza and Lincoln Tunnel Helix.\nBus and rail transit.\nThe Port Authority operates the PATH rapid transit system linking lower and midtown Manhattan with New Jersey, the AirTrain Newark system linking Newark International Airport with NJ Transit and Amtrak via a station on the Northeast Corridor rail line, and the AirTrain JFK system linking JFK with the Howard Beach subway station and the Jamaica subway and Long Island Rail Road stations.\nMajor bus depots include the Port Authority Bus Terminal at 42nd Street, the George Washington Bridge Bus Station, and the Journal Square Transportation Center in Jersey City.\nThe PANYNJ is a major stakeholder in the Gateway Program. The program will upgrade the Northeast Corridor by building two new tunnels under the Hudson River paralleling the existing North River Tunnels, as well as connecting infrastructure.\nThe Port Authority also owns and operates a network of shuttle buses on its airport properties. As of 2017, the agency operates 23 Orion buses at Newark Airport, 7 at LaGuardia Airport, and 40 at JFK Airport, all purchased in 2007 and 2009.\nReal estate.\nThe Port Authority also participates in joint development ventures around the region, including the Teleport business park on Staten Island, Bathgate Industrial Park in the Bronx, the Industrial Park at Elizabeth, the Essex County Resource Recovery Facility, Newark Legal Center, Queens West in Long Island City, and the South Waterfront in Hoboken. However, by April 2015, the agency was considering divesting itself of the properties to raise revenue and return to the core mission of supporting transportation infrastructure.\nThe Port Authority has always owned the 16-acre World Trade Center land, both the old WTC and the new WTC. However, some of the office space on the old complex and in the new one have been leased, managed, or built by Silverstein Properties, notablly 3 World Trade Center (2018) and 7 World Trade Center (1987 and 2006 respectively).\nCurrent and future projects.\nWorld Trade Center.\nMajor projects by the Port Authority include One World Trade Center and other construction at the World Trade Center complex. Other projects include a new passenger terminal at JFK International Airport, and redevelopment of Newark Liberty International Airport's Terminal B, and replacement of the Goethals Bridge. The Port Authority also has plans to buy 340 new PATH cars and begin major expansion of Stewart International Airport.\nAs owner of the World Trade Center complex, the Port Authority has worked since 2001 on plans for reconstruction of the site, along with Silverstein Properties, and the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation. In 2006, the Port Authority reached a deal with Larry Silverstein, which ceded control of One World Trade Center to the Port Authority. The deal gave Silverstein rights to build three towers along the eastern side of the site, including 150 Greenwich Street, 175 Greenwich Street, and 200 Greenwich Street. Also part of the plans was the World Trade Center Transportation Hub, which opened in March 2016 and replaced the temporary PATH station that opened in November 2003.\nAirports.\nThe Port Authority began construction of a new terminal at Newark Airport in June 2017. The new facility will replace Terminal A and will open in 2022. The PATH's Newark\u2013World Trade Center train route is planned to be extended from its terminus at Newark Penn Station to a new Newark Liberty International Airport Station. The PANYNJ announced in March 2023 that it was deferring funding for the Newark Airport extension to a future capital plan.\nAnother Port Authority project involves redeveloping LaGuardia Airport, replacing three existing terminals with a single terminal. Terminal B would be demolished and terminals C and D would be merged. Some of additional taxiways are to be built, and transportation around the terminals would be reorganized. The redevelopment is expected to cost $7.6billion in total. Construction started in 2016, and the first part of the new terminal opened in 2021, with completion in 2026. As part of the reconstruction, the AirTrain LGA people mover system was to have been built between the airport and Willets Point, Queens. The AirTrain was supposed to start construction in 2020 and be completed by 2022, but the project was canceled in March 2023 after several years of delays.\nThe Port Authority is also planning to redevelop the entirety of John F. Kennedy International Airport, replacing four existing terminals with two new terminals at a cost of $11billion. Roadway access, as well as train capacity on the AirTrain JFK, would be expanded. Under the plan, the first gates would open in 2023, and the project would be complete in 2025. Work on a new Terminal 1 began in 2022, and work on Terminal 6 began in early 2023. In addition, Terminal 4 was expanded.\nLaw enforcement.\nThe Port Authority has its own police department. In 2001, the department employed approximately 4,000 police officers and supervisors who had full police status in the states of New York and New Jersey.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42075", "revid": "48607067", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42075", "title": "Vardar", "text": "River in North Macedonia and Greece\nThe Vardar (; , , ) or Axios (, ) is the longest river in North Macedonia and a major river in Greece, where it reaches the Aegean Sea at Thessaloniki. It is long, out of which are in Greece, and drains an area of around . The maximum depth of the river is .\nEtymology.\nThe name \"Vardar\" for the river may have been derived from Thracian, although Dardanian, Paeonian, Ancient Macedonian, and Ancient Greek were also spoken in the lands drained by the river.\nThe modern Vardar is thought to derive from an earlier *\"Vard\u00e1rios\", which may ultimately derive from Proto-Indo-European (PIE) *\"(s)wordo-wori-\" \"black water\". The name \"Vard\u00e1rios\" (\u0392\u03b1\u03c1\u03b4\u03ac\u03c1\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2) was sometimes used by the Ancient Greeks in the 3rd century BC. The same name was widely used in the Byzantine era. \nVardar/Vardarios may be a translation of (or otherwise have a similar meaning as) \"Axios\", which may be Thracian and may have meant \"not-shining\" from PIE *\"n.-sk(e)i\" (cf. Avestan \"ax\u0161a\u0113na\" \"dark-coloured\"). The oldest known name of the river, \"Axios\", is mentioned by Homer (Il. 21.141, Il. 2.849) as the home of the Paeonians allies of Troy. Pjet\u00ebr Bogdani would use the form \"Asi\", an earlier Albanian-language name for the river.\nThis same hypothetical Thracian \"Axio-\" meaning \"dark, not-shining\" is theorized to be found in the name of a city at the mouth of the Danube, called Axiopolis in Greek and \"Ax\u00edopa\" (perhaps again meaning just \"dark water\") in Thracian, which may later have been translated into Slavic as \"Cernavod\u0103\", also meaning \"black water\".\nGeography.\nThe river rises at Vrutok, a few kilometers southwest of Gostivar in North Macedonia. It passes through Gostivar, Skopje and into Veles, crosses the Greek border near Gevgelija, Polykastro and Axioupoli (\"town on the Axi\u00f3s\"), before emptying into the Thermaic Gulf in Central Macedonia, west of Thessaloniki in northern Greece. The river forms a large delta along with Loudias and Haliacmon at the Axios-Loudias-Aliakmonas National Park.\nThe Vardar basin comprises two-thirds of the territory of North Macedonia. The valley features fertile lands in the Polog region, around Gevgelija and in the Thessaloniki regional unit. The river is surrounded by mountains elsewhere. The superhighways Greek National Road 1 in Greece and M1 and E75 run within the valley along the river's entire length to near Skopje.\nThe river was very famous during the Ottoman Empire and remains so in modern-day Turkey as the inspiration for many folk songs, of which the most famous is Vardar Ovasi. It has also been depicted on the coat of arms of Skopje, which in turn is incorporated in the city's flag.\nProject to construct the Danube-Vardar-Aegean Canal.\nA proposal to construct a canal connecting the Morava river valley with the Vardar, and hence linking the Danube to the Aegean Canal, has been a dream for a long time. Le Figaro published a project of Athens and Belgrade on 28.08.2017. The Greek-Serbian proposal made in Beijing is Pharaonic: 651 km. A project worth 17 billion.\nVardaris wind.\nThe \"Vardaris\" or \"Vardarec\" is a powerful prevailing northerly ravine wind which blows across the river valley in Greece as well as in North Macedonia. At first it descends along the \"canal\" of the Vardar valley, usually as a breeze. When it encounters the high mountains that separate Greece from North Macedonia, it descends the other side, gathering a tremendous momentum and bringing cold conditions to the city of Thessaloniki and the Axios delta. Somewhat similar to the mistral wind of France, it occurs when atmospheric pressure over eastern Europe is higher than over the Aegean Sea, as is often the case in winter.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42076", "revid": "24157476", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42076", "title": "Grammatical person", "text": "Grammatical category\nIn linguistics, grammatical person is the grammatical distinction between deictic references to participant(s) in an event; typically, the distinction is between the speaker (first person), the addressee (second person), and others (third person). A language's set of pronouns is typically defined by grammatical person. \"First person\" includes the speaker (English: \"I\", \"we\"), \"second person\" is the person or people spoken to (English: \"your\" or \"you\"), and \"third person\" includes all that are not listed above (English: \"he\", \"she\", \"it\", \"they\"). It also frequently affects verbs, and sometimes nouns or possessive relationships.\nRelated classifications.\nNumber.\nIn Indo-European languages, first-, second-, and third-person pronouns are typically also marked for singular and plural forms, and sometimes dual form as well (grammatical number).\nInclusive/exclusive distinction.\nSome other languages use different classifying systems, especially in the plural pronouns. One frequently found difference not present in most Indo-European languages is a contrast between inclusive and exclusive \"we\": a distinction of first-person plural pronouns between including or excluding the addressee.\nHonorifics.\nMany languages express person with different morphemes in order to distinguish degrees of formality and informality. A simple honorific system common among European languages is the T\u2013V distinction. Some other languages have much more elaborate systems of formality that go well beyond the T\u2013V distinction, and use many different pronouns and verb forms that express the speaker's relationship with the people they are addressing. Many Malayo-Polynesian languages, such as Javanese and Balinese, are well known for their complex systems of honorifics; Japanese, Korean, and Chinese also have similar systems to a lesser extent.\nEffect on verbs.\nIn many languages, the verb takes a form dependent on the person of the subject and whether it is singular or plural. In English, this happens with the verb \"to be\" as follows:\nOther verbs in English take the suffix \"-s\" to mark the present tense third person singular, excluding singular 'they'.\nIn many languages, such as French, the verb in any given tense takes a different suffix for any of the various combinations of person and number of the subject.\nAdditional persons.\nThe grammar of some languages divide the semantic space into more than three persons. The extra categories may be termed \"fourth person\", \"fifth person\", etc. Such terms are not absolute but can refer, depending on context, to any of several phenomena.\nSome Algonquian languages and Salishan languages divide the category of third person into two parts: \"proximate\" for a more topical third person, and \"obviative\" for a less topical third person. The obviative is sometimes called the fourth person. In this manner, Hindi and Bangla may also categorize pronouns in the fourth, and with the latter a fifth person. \nThe term in Finnic languages, fourth person is also sometimes used for the category of indefinite or generic referents, which work like \"one\" in English phrases such as \"one should be prepared\" or \"people\" in \"people say that...\", when the grammar treats them differently from ordinary third-person forms. The so-called \"zero person\" in Finnish and related languages, in addition to passive voice, may serve to leave the subject-referent open. Zero person subjects are sometimes translated as \"one\", although in tone it is similar to English's generic you; \"\" (\"Not allowed to touch\", \"You should not touch\").\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42078", "revid": "48535054", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42078", "title": "Hydrogen cyanide", "text": "&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nHydrogen cyanide (also called prussic acid) is a chemical compound with the formula HCN and structural formula . It is a highly toxic and flammable liquid that boils slightly above room temperature, at . HCN is produced on an industrial scale and is a highly valued precursor to many chemical compounds ranging from polymers to pharmaceuticals. Large-scale applications are for the production of potassium cyanide and adiponitrile, used in mining and plastics, respectively. It is more toxic than solid cyanide compounds due to its volatile nature. A solution of hydrogen cyanide in water, represented as HCN(aq), is called \"hydrocyanic acid\". The salts of the cyanide anion are known as cyanides.\nWhether hydrogen cyanide is an organic compound or not is a topic of debate among chemists. It is traditionally considered inorganic, but can also be considered a nitrile, giving rise to its alternative names of methanenitrile and formonitrile.\nStructure and general properties.\nHydrogen cyanide is a linear molecule, with a triple bond between carbon and nitrogen. The isomer of HCN is HNC, hydrogen isocyanide.\nOdor.\nAbout half of people are unable to detect the odor of hydrogen cyanide owing to a recessive genetic trait. For those that can detect it, the odor has been described as bitter almond-like.\nChemical properties.\nHydrogen cyanide is weakly acidic with a p\"K\"a of 9.2. It partially ionizes in water to give the cyanide anion, . HCN forms hydrogen bonds with its conjugate base, species such as .\nHydrogen cyanide reacts with alkenes to give nitriles. The conversion, which is called hydrocyanation, employs nickel complexes as catalysts.\nFour molecules of HCN will tetramerize into diaminomaleonitrile.\nMetal cyanides are typically prepared by salt metathesis from alkali metal cyanide salts, but mercuric cyanide is formed from aqueous hydrogen cyanide:\nHistory of discovery and naming.\nHydrogen cyanide was first isolated in 1752 by French chemist Pierre Macquer who converted Prussian blue to an iron oxide plus a volatile component and found that these could be used to reconstitute it. The new component was what is now known as hydrogen cyanide. It was subsequently prepared from Prussian blue by the Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele in 1782, and was eventually given the German name \"Blaus\u00e4ure\" (\"lit\". \"Blue acid\") because of its acidic nature in water and its derivation from Prussian blue. In English, it became known popularly as \"prussic acid.\"\nIn 1787, the French chemist Claude Louis Berthollet showed that prussic acid did not contain oxygen, an important contribution to acid theory, which had hitherto postulated that acids must contain oxygen (hence the name of oxygen itself, which is derived from Greek elements that mean \"acid-former\" and are likewise calqued into German as \"Sauerstoff\").\nIn 1811, Joseph Louis Gay-Lussac prepared pure, liquified hydrogen cyanide, and in 1815 he deduced prussic acid's chemical formula.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"cyanide\" for the radical in hydrogen cyanide was derived from its French equivalent, \"cyanure\", which Gay-Lussac constructed from the Ancient Greek word \"\u03ba\u03cd\u03b1\u03bd\u03bf\u03c2\" for dark blue enamel or lapis lazuli, again owing to the chemical\u2019s derivation from Prussian blue. This Greek word is also the root of the English color name \"cyan\".\nProduction and synthesis.\nThe most important process is the Andrussow oxidation invented by Leonid Andrussow at IG Farben in which methane and ammonia react in the presence of oxygen at about over a platinum catalyst:\nIn 2006, between 500 million and 1 billion pounds (between 230,000 and 450,000 t) were produced in the US. Hydrogen cyanide is produced in large quantities by several processes and is a recovered waste product from the manufacture of acrylonitrile.\nOf lesser importance is the Degussa process (BMA process) in which no oxygen is added and the energy must be transferred indirectly through the reactor wall:\nThis reaction is akin to steam reforming, the reaction of methane and water to give carbon monoxide and hydrogen.\nIn the Shawinigan Process, hydrocarbons, e.g. propane, are reacted with ammonia.\nIn the laboratory, small amounts of HCN are produced by the addition of acids to cyanide salts of alkali metals:\nThis reaction is sometimes the basis of accidental poisonings because the acid converts a nonvolatile cyanide salt into the gaseous HCN.\nHydrogen cyanide could be obtained from potassium ferricyanide and acid:\nHistorical methods of production.\nThe large demand for cyanides for mining operations in the 1890s was met by George Thomas Beilby, who patented a method to produce hydrogen cyanide by passing ammonia over glowing coal in 1892. This method was used until Hamilton Castner in 1894 developed a synthesis starting from coal, ammonia, and sodium yielding sodium cyanide, which reacts with acid to form gaseous HCN.\nApplications.\nHCN is the precursor to sodium cyanide and potassium cyanide, which are used mainly in gold and silver mining and for the electroplating of those metals. Via the intermediacy of cyanohydrins, a variety of useful organic compounds are prepared from HCN including the monomer methyl methacrylate, from acetone, the amino acid methionine, via the Strecker synthesis, and the chelating agents EDTA and NTA. Via the hydrocyanation process, HCN is added to butadiene to give adiponitrile, a precursor to Nylon-6,6.\nHCN is used globally as a fumigant against many species of pest insects that infest food production facilities. Both its efficacy and method of application lead to very small amounts of the fumigant being used compared to other toxic substances used for the same purpose. Using HCN as a fumigant also has less environmental impact, compared to some other fumigants such as sulfuryl fluoride, and methyl bromide.\nOccurrence.\nHCN is obtainable from fruits that have a pit, such as cherries, apricots, apples, and nuts such as bitter almonds, from which almond oil and extract is made. Many of these pits contain small amounts of cyanohydrins such as mandelonitrile and amygdalin, which slowly release hydrogen cyanide. One hundred grams of crushed apple seeds can yield about 70\u00a0mg of HCN. The roots of cassava plants contain cyanogenic glycosides such as linamarin, which decompose into HCN in yields of up to 370\u00a0mg per kilogram of fresh root. Some millipedes, such as \"Harpaphe haydeniana\", \"Desmoxytes purpurosea\", and \"Apheloria\" release hydrogen cyanide as a defense mechanism, as do certain insects, such as burnet moths and the larvae of \"Paropsisterna eucalyptus\". Hydrogen cyanide is contained in the exhaust of vehicles, and in smoke from burning nitrogen-containing plastics.\nOn Titan.\nHCN has been measured in Titan's atmosphere by four instruments on the Cassini space probe, one instrument on Voyager, and one instrument on Earth. One of these measurements was \"in situ\", where the Cassini spacecraft dipped between above Titan's surface to collect atmospheric gas for mass spectrometry analysis. HCN initially forms in Titan's atmosphere through the reaction of photochemically produced methane and nitrogen radicals which proceed through the H2CN intermediate, e.g., (CH3 + N \u2192 H2CN + H \u2192 HCN + H2). Ultraviolet radiation breaks HCN up into CN + H; however, CN is efficiently recycled back into HCN via the reaction CN + CH4 \u2192 HCN + CH3.\nOn the young Earth.\nIt has been postulated that carbon from a cascade of asteroids (known as the Late Heavy Bombardment), resulting from interaction of Jupiter and Saturn, blasted the surface of young Earth and reacted with nitrogen in Earth's atmosphere to form HCN.\nIn mammals.\nSome authors have shown that neurons can produce hydrogen cyanide upon activation of their opioid receptors by endogenous or exogenous opioids. They have also shown that neuronal production of HCN activates NMDA receptors and plays a role in signal transduction between neuronal cells (neurotransmission). Moreover, increased endogenous neuronal HCN production under opioids was seemingly needed for adequate opioid analgesia, as analgesic action of opioids was attenuated by HCN scavengers. They considered endogenous HCN to be a neuromodulator.\nIt has also been shown that, while stimulating muscarinic cholinergic receptors in cultured pheochromocytoma cells \"increases\" HCN production, in a living organism (\"in vivo\") muscarinic cholinergic stimulation actually \"decreases\" HCN production.\nLeukocytes generate HCN during phagocytosis, and can kill bacteria, fungi, and other pathogens by generating several different toxic chemicals, one of which is hydrogen cyanide.\nThe vasodilatation caused by sodium nitroprusside has been shown to be mediated not only by NO generation, but also by endogenous cyanide generation, which adds not only toxicity, but also some additional antihypertensive efficacy compared to nitroglycerine and other non-cyanogenic nitrates which do not cause blood cyanide levels to rise.\nHCN is a constituent of tobacco smoke.\nHCN and the origin of life.\nAs a precursor to amino acids and nucleic acids, hydrogen cyanide has been proposed to have played a part in the origin of life. Compounds of special interest are oligomers of HCN including its trimer aminomalononitrile and tetramer diaminomaleonitrile, which can be described as (HCN)3 and (HCN)4, respectively. Although the relationship of these chemical reactions to the origin of life theory remains speculative, studies in this area uncovered new pathways to organic compounds derived from the condensation of HCN (e.g. adenine).\nIn space.\nBecause hydrogen cyanide is a precursor to nucleic acids, which are critical for terrestrial life, astronomers are incentivized to search for derivatives of HCN.\nHCN has been detected in the interstellar medium and in the atmospheres of carbon stars. Since then, extensive studies have probed formation and destruction pathways of HCN in various environments and examined its use as a tracer for a variety of astronomical species and processes. HCN can be observed from ground-based telescopes through a number of atmospheric windows. The J=1\u21920, J=3\u21922, J= 4\u21923, and J=10\u21929 pure rotational transitions have all been observed.\nHCN is formed in interstellar clouds through one of two major pathways: via a neutral-neutral reaction (CH2 + N \u2192 HCN + H) and via dissociative recombination (HCNH+ + e\u2212 \u2192 HCN + H). The dissociative recombination pathway is dominant by 30%; however, the HCNH+ must be in its linear form. Dissociative recombination with its structural isomer, H2NC+, exclusively produces hydrogen isocyanide (HNC).\nHCN is destroyed in interstellar clouds through a number of mechanisms depending on the location in the cloud. In photon-dominated regions (PDRs), photodissociation dominates, producing CN (HCN + \u03bd \u2192 CN + H). At further depths, photodissociation by cosmic rays dominate, producing CN (HCN + cr \u2192 CN + H). In the dark core, two competing mechanisms destroy it, forming HCN+ and HCNH+ (HCN + H+ \u2192 HCN+ + H; HCN + HCO+ \u2192 HCNH+ + CO). The reaction with HCO+ dominates by a factor of ~3.5. HCN has been used to analyze a variety of species and processes in the interstellar medium. It has been suggested as a tracer for dense molecular gas and as a tracer of stellar inflow in high-mass star-forming regions. Further, the HNC/HCN ratio has been shown to be an excellent method for distinguishing between PDRs and X-ray-dominated regions (XDRs).\nOn 11 August 2014, astronomers released studies, using the Atacama Large Millimeter/Submillimeter Array (ALMA) for the first time, that detailed the distribution of HCN, HNC, H2CO, and dust inside the comae of comets C/2012 F6 (Lemmon) and C/2012 S1 (ISON).\nIn February 2016, it was announced that traces of hydrogen cyanide were found in the atmosphere of the hot super-Earth 55 Cancri e with NASA's Hubble Space Telescope.\nOn 14 December 2023, astronomers reported the first-time discovery, in the plumes of Saturn's sixth-largest moon Enceladus, hydrogen cyanide, a possible chemical essential for life as we know it, as well as other organic molecules, some of which are yet to be better identified and understood. According to the researchers, \"these [newly discovered] compounds could potentially support extant microbial communities or drive complex organic synthesis leading to the origin of life.\"\nAs a poison and chemical weapon.\nIn World War I, hydrogen cyanide was used by the French from 1916 as a chemical weapon against the Central Powers, and by the United States and Italy in 1918. It was not found to be effective enough due to weather conditions. The gas is lighter than air and rapidly disperses up into the atmosphere. Rapid dilution made its use in the field impractical. In contrast, denser agents such as phosgene or chlorine tended to remain at ground level and sank into the trenches of the Western Front's battlefields. Compared to such agents, hydrogen cyanide had to be present in higher concentrations in order to be fatal. To increase gas persistence, it was mixed with smoke producing compounds. For example, French composition called \"Vincennite\" combined 50% hydrogen cyanide with 30% arsenic trichloride and 15% stannic chloride for smoke production, plus 5% chloroform.\nA hydrogen cyanide concentration of 100\u2013200 ppm in breathing air will kill a human within 10 to 60 minutes. A hydrogen cyanide concentration of 2000 ppm (about 2380\u00a0mg/m3) will kill a human in about one minute. The toxic effect is caused by the action of the cyanide ion, which halts cellular respiration. It acts as a non-competitive inhibitor for an enzyme in mitochondria called cytochrome c oxidase. As such, hydrogen cyanide is commonly listed among chemical weapons as a blood agent.\nThe Chemical Weapons Convention lists it under Schedule 3 as a potential weapon which has large-scale industrial uses. Signatory countries must declare manufacturing plants that produce more than 30 metric tons per year, and allow inspection by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.\nPerhaps its most infamous use is (German: \"Cyclone B\", with the B standing for \u2013 prussic acid; also, to distinguish it from an earlier product later known as Zyklon A), used in the Nazi German extermination camps of Majdanek and Auschwitz-Birkenau during World War II to kill Jews and other persecuted minorities \"en masse\" as part of their Final Solution genocide program. Hydrogen cyanide was also used in the camps for delousing clothing in attempts to eradicate diseases carried by lice and other parasites. One of the original Czech producers continued making Zyklon B under the trademark \"Uragan D2\" until around 2015.\nDuring World War II, the US considered using it, along with cyanogen chloride and mustard gas, as part of Operation Downfall, the planned invasion of Japan, but President Harry Truman decided against it, instead using the atomic bombs developed by the secret Manhattan Project.\nHydrogen cyanide was also the agent employed in judicial execution in some U.S. states, where it was produced during the execution by the action of sulfuric acid on sodium cyanide or potassium cyanide.\nUnder the name \"prussic acid\", HCN has been used as a killing agent in whaling harpoons, though it was quickly abandoned for being dangerous to the crew. From the middle of the 18th century it was used in a number of poisoning murders and suicides.\nHydrogen cyanide gas in air is explosive at concentrations above 5.6%.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42079", "revid": "38020738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42079", "title": "Potassium ferrocyanide", "text": "Chemical compound\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nPotassium ferrocyanide is the inorganic compound with formula K4[Fe(CN)6]\u00b73H2O. It is the potassium salt of the coordination complex [Fe(CN)6]4\u2212. This salt forms lemon-yellow monoclinic crystals.\nSynthesis.\nIn 1752, the French chemist Pierre Joseph Macquer (1718\u20131784) first reported the preparation of potassium ferrocyanide, which he achieved by reacting Prussian blue (iron(III) ferrocyanide) with potassium hydroxide.\nModern production.\nPotassium ferrocyanide is produced industrially from hydrogen cyanide, iron(II) chloride, and calcium hydroxide, the combination of which affords Ca2[Fe(CN)6]\u00b711H2O. This solution is then treated with potassium salts to precipitate the mixed calcium-potassium salt CaK2[Fe(CN)6], which in turn is treated with potassium carbonate to give the tetrapotassium salt.\nHistorical production.\nHistorically, the compound was manufactured from nitrogenous organic material, iron filings, and potassium carbonate. Common nitrogen and carbon sources were torrified horn, leather scrap, offal, or dried blood. It was also obtained commercially from gasworks spent oxide (purification of city gas from hydrogen cyanide).\nChemical reactions.\nTreatment of potassium ferrocyanide with nitric acid gives H2[Fe(NO)(CN)5]. After neutralization of this intermediate with sodium carbonate, red crystals of sodium nitroprusside can be selectively crystallized.\nUpon treatment with chlorine gas, potassium ferrocyanide converts to potassium ferricyanide:\n2 K4[Fe(CN)6] + Cl2 \u2192 2 K3[Fe(CN)6] + 2 KCl\nThis reaction can be used to remove potassium ferrocyanide from a solution.\nA famous reaction involves treatment with ferric salts, most commonly iron(III) chloride, to give Prussian blue. In the reaction with iron(III) chloride, producing potassium chloride as a side-product: \n3 K4[Fe(CN)6] + 4 FeCl3 \u2192 Fe4[Fe(CN)6]3 + 12 KCl\nWith the composition Fe[Fe(CN)], this insoluble but deeply coloured material is the blue of blueprinting, as well as on many famous paintings such as The Great Wave off Kanagawa and The Starry Night.\nApplications.\nPotassium ferrocyanide finds many niche applications in industry. It and the related sodium salt are widely used as anticaking agents for both road salt and table salt. The potassium and sodium ferrocyanides are also used in the purification of tin and the separation of copper from molybdenum ores. Potassium ferrocyanide is used in the production of wine and citric acid.\nIn the EU, potassium ferrocyanides (E 535\u2013538) were, as of 2017, solely authorised in two food categories as salt additives.\nIt can also be used in animal feed.\nIn the laboratory, potassium ferrocyanide is used to determine the concentration of potassium permanganate, a compound often used in titrations based on redox reactions. Potassium ferrocyanide is used in a mixture with potassium ferricyanide and phosphate buffered solution to provide a buffer for beta-galactosidase, which is used to cleave X-Gal, giving a bright blue visualization where an antibody (or other molecule), conjugated to Beta-gal, has bonded to its target. On reacting with Fe(3) it gives a Prussian blue colour. Thus it is used as an identifying reagent for iron in labs.\nPotassium ferrocyanide can be used as a fertilizer for plants.\nPrior to 1900, before the invention of the Castner process, potassium ferrocyanide was the most important source of alkali metal cyanides. In this historical process, potassium cyanide was produced by decomposing potassium ferrocyanide:\nK4[Fe(CN)6] \u2192 4 KCN + FeC2 + N2\nPotassium ferrocyanide is a component of \"white gunpowder\" or \"Augendre's powder\", a blasting powder of high energy. It comprises 28 parts yellow potassium ferrocyanide, 23 parts cane sugar, and 49 parts of potassium chlorate, mixed under absolute alcohol to prevent premature detonation.\nStructure.\nLike other metal cyanides, solid potassium ferrocyanide, both as the hydrate and anhydrous salts, has a complicated polymeric structure. The polymer consists of octahedral [Fe(CN)6]4\u2212 centers crosslinked with K+ ions that are bound to the CN ligands. The K+---NC linkages break when the solid is dissolved in water.\nToxicity.\nThe toxicity in rats is low, with lethal dose (LD50) at 1.6\u20143.2g/kg. The kidneys are the organ for ferrocyanide toxicity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42080", "revid": "1320191935", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42080", "title": "Atlantic cod", "text": "Species of fish\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe Atlantic cod (pl.: cod; Gadus morhua) is a fish of the family Gadidae, widely consumed by humans. It is also commercially known as \"cod\" or \"codling\".\nIn the western Atlantic Ocean, cod has a distribution north of Cape Hatteras, North Carolina, and around both coasts of Greenland and the Labrador Sea; in the eastern Atlantic, it is found from the Bay of Biscay north to the Arctic Ocean, including the Baltic Sea, the North Sea, Sea of the Hebrides, areas around Iceland and the Barents Sea.\nAtlantic cod can live for up to 25 years and typically grow up to , but individuals in excess of and have been caught. They will attain sexual maturity between ages two and eight with this varying between populations and has varied over time.\nColouring is brown or green, with spots on the dorsal side, shading to silver ventrally. A stripe along its lateral line (used to detect vibrations) is clearly visible. Its habitat ranges from the coastal shoreline down to along the continental shelf.\nAtlantic cod is one of the most heavily fished species. Atlantic cod was fished for a thousand years by north European fishers who followed it across the North Atlantic Ocean to North America. It supported the US and Canadian fishing economy until 1992, when the Canadian Government implemented a ban on fishing cod.\nSeveral cod stocks collapsed in the 1990s (decline of more than 95% of maximum historical biomass) and have failed to fully recover even with the cessation of fishing. This absence of the apex predator has led to a trophic cascade in many areas. Many other cod stocks remain at risk. The Atlantic cod is labelled vulnerable on the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species, per a 1996 assessment that the IUCN notes needs updating. A 2013 assessment covering only Europe shows the Atlantic cod has rebounded in Europe, and it has been relabelled least concern.\nDry cod may be prepared as unsalted stockfish, and as cured salt cod or clipfish.\nTaxonomy.\nThe Atlantic cod is one of three cod species in the genus \"Gadus \"along with Pacific cod and Greenland cod. A variety of fish species are colloquially known as cod, but they are not all classified within the \"Gadus\", though some are in the Atlantic cod family, Gadidae.\nBehaviour.\nShoaling.\nAtlantic cod are a shoaling species and move in large, size-structured aggregations. Larger fish act as scouts and lead the shoal's direction, particularly during post spawning migrations inshore for feeding. Cod actively feed during migration and changes in shoal structure occur when food is encountered. Shoals are generally thought to be relatively leaderless, with all fish having equal status and an equal distribution of resources and benefits. However, some studies suggest that leading fish gain certain feeding benefits. One study of a migrating Atlantic cod shoal showed significant variability in feeding habits based on size and position in the shoal. Larger scouts consumed a more variable, higher quantity of food, while trailing fish had less variable diets and consumed less food. Fish distribution throughout the shoal seems to be dictated by fish size, and ultimately, the smaller lagging fish likely benefit from shoaling because they are more successful in feeding in the shoal than they would be if migrating individually, due to social facilitation.\nPredation.\nAtlantic cod are apex predators in the Baltic and adults are generally free from the concerns of predation. Juvenile cod, however, may serve as prey for adult cod, which sometimes practice cannibalism. Juvenile cod make substrate decisions based on risk of predation. Substrates refer to different feeding and swimming environments. Without apparent risk of predation, juvenile cod demonstrated a preference for finer-grained substrates such as sand and gravel-pebble. However, in the presence of a predator, they preferred to seek safety in the space available between stones of a cobble substrate. Selection of cobble significantly reduces the risk of predation. Without access to cobble, the juvenile cod simply tries to escape a predator by fleeing.\nAdditionally, juvenile Atlantic cod vary their behaviour according to the foraging behaviour of predators. In the vicinity of a passive predator, cod behaviour changes very little. The juveniles prefer finer-grained substrates and otherwise avoid the safer kelp, steering clear of the predator. In contrast, in the presence of an actively foraging predator, juveniles are highly avoidant and hide in cobble or in kelp if cobble is unavailable.\nHeavy fishing of cod in the 1990s and the collapse of American and Canadian cod stocks resulted in trophic cascades. As cod are apex predators, overfishing them removed a significant predatory pressure on other Atlantic fish and crustacean species. Population-limiting effects on several species including American lobsters, crabs, and shrimp from cod predation have decreased significantly, and the abundance of these species and their increasing range serve as evidence of the Atlantic cod's role as a major predator rather than prey.\nSwimming.\nAtlantic cod have been recorded to swim at speeds of a minimum of and a maximum of with a mean swimming speed of . In one hour, cod have been recorded to cover a mean range of . Swimming speed was higher during the day than at night. This is reflected in the fact that cod more actively search for food during the day. Cod likely modify their activity pattern according to the length of daylight, thus activity varies with time of year.\nResponse to changing temperatures.\nSwimming and physiological behaviours change in response to fluctuations in water temperature. Respirometry experiments show that heart rates of Atlantic cod change drastically with changes in temperature of only a few degrees. A rise in water temperature causes marked increases in cod swimming activity. Cod typically avoid new temperature conditions, and the temperatures can dictate where they are distributed in water. They prefer to be deeper, in colder water layers during the day, and in shallower, warmer water layers at night. These fine-tuned behavioural changes to water temperature are driven by an effort to maintain homeostasis to preserve energy. This is demonstrated by the fact that a decrease of only caused a highly costly increase in metabolic rate of 15\u201330%.\nFeeding and diet.\nThe diet of the Atlantic cod consists of fish such as herring, capelin (in the Eastern Atlantic Ocean), and sand eels, as well as mollusks, tunicates, comb jellies, crustaceans, echinoderms and sea worms. Stomach sampling studies have discovered that small Atlantic cod feed primarily on crustaceans, while large Atlantic cod feed primarily on fish. In certain regions, the main food source is decapods with fish as a complementary food item in the diet. Wild Atlantic cod throughout the North Sea depend, to a large extent, on commercial fish species also used in fisheries, such as Atlantic mackerel, haddock, whiting, Atlantic herring, European plaice, and common sole, making fishery manipulation of cod significantly easier. Ultimately, food selection by cod is affected by the food item size relative to their own size. However, providing for size, cod do exhibit food preference and are not simply driven by availability.\nAtlantic cod practice some cannibalism. In the southern North Sea, 1\u20132% (by weight) of stomach contents for cod larger than consisted of juvenile cod. In the northern North Sea, cannibalism was higher, at 10%. Other reports of cannibalism have estimated as high as 56% of the diet consists of juvenile cod.\nWhen hatched, cod larvae are altricial, entirely dependent on a yolk sac for sustenance until mouth opening at ~24 degree days. The stomach generally develops at around 240 degree days. Before this point the intestine is the main point of food digestion using pancreatic enzymes such as trypsin.\nReproduction.\nAtlantic cod will attain sexual maturity between ages two and eight with this varying between different populations and has also varied over time with a population. Their gonads take several months to develop and most populations will spawn from January to May. For many populations, the spawning grounds are located in a different area from the feeding grounds so require the fish to migrate in order to spawn. On the spawning area, males and females will form large schools. Based on behavioral observations of cod, the cod mating system has been likened to a lekking system, which is characterized by males aggregating and establishing dominance hierarchies, at which point females may visit and choose a spawning partner based on status and sexual characteristics. Evidence suggests male sound production and other sexually selected characteristics allow female cod to actively choose a spawning partner. Males also exhibit aggressive interactions for access to females.\nAtlantic cod are batch spawners, in which females will spawn approximately 5\u201320 batches of eggs over a period of time with 2\u20134 days between the release of each batch. Each female will spawn between 2 hundred thousand and 15\u00a0million eggs, with larger females spawning more eggs. Females release gametes in a ventral mount, and males then fertilize the released eggs. The eggs and newly hatched larvae float freely in the water and will drift with the current, with some populations relying upon the current to transport the larvae to nursery areas.\nParasites.\nAtlantic cod act as intermediate, paratenic, or definitive hosts to a large number of parasite species: 107 taxa listed by Hemmingsen and MacKenzie (2001) and seven new records by Perdiguero-Alonso et al. (2008). The predominant groups of cod parasites in the northeast Atlantic were trematodes (19 species) and nematodes (13 species), including larval anisakids, which comprised 58.2% of the total number of individuals. Parasites of Atlantic cod include copepods, digeneans, monogeneans, acanthocephalans, cestodes, nematodes, myxozoans, and protozoans.\nFisheries.\nAtlantic cod has been targeted by humans for food for thousands of years, and with the advent of modern fishing technology in the 1950s there was a rapid rise in landings. Cod is caught using a variety of fishing gears including bottom trawls, demersal longlines, Danish seine, jigging and hand lines. The quantity of cod landed from fisheries has been recorded by many countries from around the 1950s and attempts have been made to reconstruct historical catches going back hundreds of years. ICES and NAFO collects landings data, alongside other data, which is used to assess the status of the population against management objectives. The landings in the eastern Atlantic frequently exceed 1 million tonnes annually from across 16 populations/management units with landings from the Northeast Atlantic cod population and Iceland accounting for the majority of the landings, Since 1992, when the cod moratorium took effect in Canada, landings in the western Atlantic have been considerably lower than in the eastern Atlantic, generally being less than 50,000 tonnes annually.\nNorthwest Atlantic cod.\nThe Northwest Atlantic cod has been regarded as heavily overfished throughout its range, resulting in a crash in the fishery in the United States and Canada during the early 1990s.\nNewfoundland's northern cod fishery can be traced back to the 16th century. On average, about of cod were landed annually until the 1960s, when advances in technology enabled factory trawlers to take larger catches. By 1968, landings for the fish peaked at before a gradual decline set in. With the reopening of the limited cod fisheries in 2006, nearly of cod were hauled in. In 2007, offshore cod stocks were estimated at 1% of what they were in 1977.Technologies that contributed to the collapse of Atlantic cod include engine-powered vessels and frozen food compartments aboard ships. Engine-powered vessels had larger nets, greater range, and better navigation. The capacity to catch fish became limitless. In addition, sonar technology gave an edge to detecting and catching fish. Sonar was originally developed during World War\u00a0II to locate enemy submarines, but was later applied to locating schools of fish. These new technologies, as well as bottom trawlers that destroyed entire ecosystems, contributed to the collapse of Atlantic cod. They were vastly different from old techniques used, such as hand lines and long lines.\nThe fishery has only recently begun to recover, and may never fully recover because of a possibly stable change in the food chain. Atlantic cod was a top-tier predator, along with haddock, flounder and hake, feeding upon smaller prey, such as herring, capelin, shrimp, and snow crab. With the large predatory fish removed, their prey have had population explosions and have become the top predators, affecting the survival rates of cod eggs and fry.\nIn the winter of 2011\u20132012, the cod fishery succeeded in convincing NOAA to postpone for one year the planned 82% reduction in catch limits. Instead, the limit was reduced by 22%. The fishery brought in $15.8\u00a0million in 2010, coming second behind Georges Bank haddock among the region's 20 regulated bottom-dwelling groundfish. Data released in 2011 indicated that even closing the fishery would not allow populations to rebound by 2014 to levels required under US federal law. Restrictions on cod effectively limit fishing on other groundfish species with which the cod swim, such as flounder and haddock.\nNortheast Atlantic cod.\nThe Northeast Atlantic has the world's largest population of cod. By far, the largest part of this population is the Northeast Arctic cod, as it is labelled by the ICES, or the Arcto-Norwegian cod stock, also referred to as \"skrei\", a Norwegian name meaning something like \"the wanderer\", distinguishing it from coastal cod. The Northeast Arctic cod is found in the Barents Sea area. This stock spawns in March and April along the Norwegian coast, about 40% around the Lofoten archipelago. Newly hatched larvae drift northwards with the coastal current while feeding on larval copepods. By summer, the young cod reach the Barents Sea, where they stay for the rest of their lives, until their spawning migration. As the cod grow, they feed on krill and other small crustaceans and fish. Adult cod primarily feed on fish such as capelin and herring. The northeast Arctic cod also show cannibalistic behaviour. Estimated stock size was in 2008.\nThe North Sea cod stock is primarily fished by European Union member states, the United Kingdom and Norway. In 1999, the catch was divided among Denmark (31%), Scotland (25%), the rest of the United Kingdom (12%), the Netherlands (10%), Belgium, Germany and Norway (17%). In the 1970s, the annual catch rose to between . Due to concerns about overfishing, catch quotas were repeatedly reduced in the 1980s and 1990s. In 2003, ICES stated a high risk existed of stock collapse if then current exploitation levels continued, and recommended a moratorium on catching Atlantic cod in the North Sea during 2004. However, agriculture and fisheries ministers from the Council of the European Union endorsed the EU/Norway Agreement and set the total allowable catch at . Seafood sustainability guides, such as the Monterey Bay Aquarium's Seafood Watch, often recommend environmentally conscious customers not purchase Atlantic cod.\nThe stock of Northeast Arctic cod was more than four million tons following World War\u00a0II, but declined to a historic minimum of in 1983. The catch reached a historic maximum of in 1956, and bottomed out at in 1990. Since 2000, the spawning stock has increased quite quickly, helped by low fishing pressure. The total catch in 2012 was , the major fishers being Norway and Russia.\nBaltic cod.\nDecades of overfishing in combination with environmental problems, namely little water exchange, low salinity and oxygen-depletion at the sea bottom, caused major threats to the Baltic cod stocks.\nThere are at least two populations of cod in the Baltic Sea: One large population that spawns east of Bornholm and one population spawning west of Bornholm. Eastern Baltic cod is genetically distinct and adapted to the brackish environment. Adaptations include differences in hemoglobin type, osmoregulatory capacity, egg buoyancy, sperm swimming characteristics and spawning season. The adaptive responses to the environmental conditions in the Baltic Sea may contribute to an effective reproductive barrier, and thus, eastern Baltic cod can be viewed as an example of ongoing speciation. Due to drastically low cod population sizes, commercial fishing of eastern Baltic cod is prohibited since 2019. However, unfavourable environmental conditions in the eastern Baltic Sea, i.e., low salinity and increasing oxygen-depletion at the sea bottom, led to presently only the Bornholm Basin (Southern Baltic Sea) having sufficient conditions for successful reproduction of eastern Baltic cod.\nThe western Baltic cod consists of one or several small subpopulations that are genetically more similar to the North Sea cod. In the Arkona basin (located off Cape Arkona, R\u00fcgen), spawning and migrating cod from both the eastern and western stocks intermingle in proportions that vary seasonally. The immigration of eastern cod into the western Baltic management unit may mask a poor state of the populations in the western management unit.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nThis article incorporates CC BY-2.0 text from the reference.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPauly, Daniel, and Ashley McCrea Stru. \"Atlantic Cod: Past and Present.\" Sea Around Us, 21 May 2015, www.seaaroundus.org/atlantic-cod-past-and-present/."}
{"id": "42081", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42081", "title": "Wheel of time", "text": "Religious and philosophical concept of cyclical, repeating epochs or ages\nThe wheel of time or wheel of history (also known as \"Kalachakra\") is a concept found in several religious traditions and philosophies, notably religions of Indian origin such as Hinduism, Jainism, and Buddhism, which regard time as cyclical and consisting of repeating ages. Many other cultures contain belief in a similar concept: notably, the Q'ero people of Peru, the Hopi people of Arizona, and the Bakongo people of Angola and Democratic Republic of the Congo.\nAncient Africa.\nIn traditional Bakongo religion, the four elements are incorporated into the Kongo cosmogram. This sacred wheel depicts the physical world (\"Nseke\"), the spiritual world of the ancestors (\"Mp\u00e9mba\"), the Kal\u00fbnga line that runs between the two worlds, the sacred river (\"mb\u00fbngi\") that began as a circular void and forms a circle around the two worlds, and the path of the sun. Each element correlates to a period in the life cycle, which the Bakongo people also equate to the four cardinal directions and seasons. According to their cosmology, all living things go through this cycle.\nAncient Rome.\nThe philosopher and emperor Marcus Aurelius saw time as extending forwards to infinity and backwards to infinity, while admitting the possibility (without arguing the case) that \"the administration of the universe is organized into a succession of finite periods\".\nBuddhism.\nThe Wheel of Time or Kalachakra is a Tantric deity that is associated with Tibetan Tantric Buddhism, which encompasses all four main schools of Sakya, Nyingma, Kagyu and Gelug, and is especially important within the lesser-known Jonang tradition.\nThe Kalachakra tantra prophesies a world within which (religious) conflict is prevalent. A worldwide war will be waged which will see the expansion of the mystical Kingdom of Shambhala led by a messianic king.\nHinduism.\nIn Hindu cosmology, \"kala\" (time) is eternal, repeating general events in four types of cycles. The smallest cycle is a \"maha-yuga\" (great age), containing four \"yugas\" (\"dharmic\" ages): \"Satya Yuga\", \"Treta Yuga\", \"Dvapara Yuga\" and \"Kali Yuga\". A \"manvantara\" (age of Manu) contains 71 \"maha-yugas\". A \"kalpa\" (day of Brahma) contains 14 \"manvantaras\" and 15 \"sandhyas\" (connecting periods), which lasts for 1,000 \"maha-yugas\" and is followed by a \"pralaya\" (night of partial dissolution) of equal length, where a day and night make one full day. A \"maha-kalpa\" (life of Brahma) lasts for 100 of Brahma's years of 12 months of 30 full days (100 360-day years) or 72,000,000 \"maha-yugas\", which is followed by a \"maha-pralaya\" (full dissolution) of equal length.\nJainism.\nWithin Jainism, time is thought to be a wheel that rotates for infinity without a beginning. This wheel of time holds twelve spokes that each symbolize a different phase in the universe's cosmological history. It is further divided into two equal halves having six eras in them. While in a downward motion, the wheel of time falls into what is known as Avasarpi\u1e47\u012b and when in an upward motion, enters a state called Utsarpini. During both motions of the wheel, 24 tirthankaras come forth to teach the three jewels or sacred Jain teachings of right faith, right knowledge, and right practice, then create a spiritual ford across the ocean of rebirth for humanity.\nModern usage.\nLiterature.\nIn an interview included with the audiobook editions of his novels, author Robert Jordan has stated that his bestselling fantasy series \"The Wheel of Time\" borrows the titular concept from Hindu mythology.\nThe first chapter of every book in the series begins with the lines: \"The Wheel of Time turns, and ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend. Legends fade to myth, and even myth is long forgotten when the Age that gave it birth comes again.\" \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42083", "revid": "46912970", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42083", "title": "Clark Gable", "text": "American actor (1901\u20131960)\nWilliam Clark Gable (February 1, 1901\u00a0\u2013 November 16, 1960) was an American actor often referred to as the \"King of Hollywood\". He appeared in more than 60 motion pictures across a variety of genres during a 37-year career, three decades of which he spent as a leading man. In 1999, the American Film Institute ranked Gable as the seventh greatest male screen legend of classical Hollywood cinema.\nGable won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his role in Frank Capra's \"It Happened One Night\" (1934) and earned nominations in the same category for portraying Fletcher Christian in Frank Lloyd's \"Mutiny on the Bounty\" (1935) and Rhett Butler in Victor Fleming's \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939). For his comedic performances in George Seaton's \"Teacher's Pet\" (1958) and Walter Lang's \"But Not for Me\" (1959), Gable received nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture \u2013 Musical or Comedy. His other notable films include William A. Wellman's \"Call of the Wild\" (1935), George Sidney's \"Key to the City\" (1950), and John Ford's \"Mogambo\" (1953). His final on-screen role was as an aging cowboy in John Huston's \"The Misfits\" (1961).\nGable was one of the most consistently bankable stars in the history of Hollywood, appearing 16 times on Quigley Publishing's annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll. He appeared opposite many of the most popular actresses of their time, including Jean Harlow, Greta Garbo, Joan Crawford, Myrna Loy, Lana Turner, Norma Shearer, Ava Gardner, Carole Lombard, and Gene Tierney. He died of a heart attack in 1960 at age 59.\nEarly life.\n1901\u20131919: Family and upbringing.\nWilliam Clark Gable was born on February 1, 1901, in Cadiz, Ohio, to William Henry \"Will\" Gable (1870\u20131948), an oil-well driller, and his wife Adeline (n\u00e9e Hershelman). His father was a Protestant and his mother a Catholic. Gable was named William after his father, but he was almost always called Clark, and referred to as \"the kid\" by his father.\nGable was six months old when he was baptized at a Roman Catholic church in Dennison, Ohio. When he was ten months old, his mother died. His father refused to raise him in the Catholic faith, which provoked criticism from the Hershelman family. Gable and his father were active in the Methodist church where his father was a Sunday School teacher. The dispute was resolved when his father agreed to allow him to spend time with his maternal uncle Charles Hershelman and his wife on their farm in Vernon Township, Pennsylvania. In April 1903, Gable's father married Jennie Dunlap (1874\u20131920).\nGable's stepmother raised the tall, shy child with a loud voice to be well-dressed and well-groomed. She played the piano and gave him lessons at home. He later took up brass musical instruments, becoming the only boy in the Hopedale Men's town band at age 13. Gable was mechanically inclined and loved to repair cars with his father, who insisted that he engage in masculine activities such as hunting and hard physical work. Gable also loved literature; he would recite Shakespeare among trusted company, particularly the sonnets.\nHis father had financial difficulties in 1917 and decided to try his hand at farming, and moved the family to Palmyra Township, near Akron, Ohio. He insisted that Gable work the farm, but he soon left to work in Akron for the Firestone Tire and Rubber Company.\n1920\u20131923: Early career.\nGable was inspired to become an actor after seeing the play \"The Bird of Paradise\" at age 17, but he was unable to make a start in acting until he turned 21 and received his $300 inheritance () from a Hershelman trust. After his stepmother died in 1920, his father moved to Tulsa, Oklahoma, going back into the oil business. He worked with his father for some time wildcatting and sludge removing in the oil fields of Oklahoma before traveling to the Pacific Northwest.\nGable toured in second-class stock companies, finding work with traveling tent shows, lumber mills, and other odd jobs. He made his way across the Midwest to Portland, Oregon, where he worked as a necktie salesman in the Meier &amp; Frank department store. Also working there was local stage actor Earle Larimore (the nephew of Laura Hope Crews, who portrayed Aunt Pittypat alongside Gable in \"Gone with the Wind\"), who encouraged Gable to return to acting. Though Larimore didn't invite him to join his theater group The Red Lantern Players, he did introduce Gable to one of its members, Franz Dorfler, and they started dating. After the couple's audition for The Astoria Players, Gable's lack of training was evident, but the theater group accepted him after cajoling from Larimore. Gable and Dorfler moved to Astoria, Oregon, touring with the group until its bankruptcy, and then moved back to Portland where Gable obtained a day job with Pacific Telephone and started receiving dramatic lessons in the evening.\nGable's acting coach, Josephine Dillon, was a theater manager in Portland. She paid to have his teeth fixed and his hair styled. She guided him in building up his chronically undernourished body, and taught him better body control and posture. He slowly managed to lower his naturally high-pitched voice, his speech habits improved, and his facial expressions became more natural and convincing. After a long period of her training, Dillon considered Gable ready to attempt a film career.\nCareer.\n1924\u20131930: Stage and silent films.\nGable and Dillon traveled to Hollywood in 1924. Dillon became his manager and also his wife; she was 17 years his senior. He changed his stage name from W. C. Gable to Clark Gable and appeared as an extra in such silent films as Erich von Stroheim's \"The Merry Widow\" (1925), \"The Plastic Age\" (1925) starring Clara Bow, and \"Forbidden Paradise\" (1924) starring Pola Negri. He appeared in a series of two-reel comedies called \"The Pacemakers\" and in Fox's \"The Johnstown Flood\" (1926). He also appeared as a bit player in a series of shorts. However, he was not offered any major film roles, so he returned to the stage in \"What Price Glory?\" (1925).\nHe became lifelong friends with Lionel Barrymore, who initially scolded Gable for what he deemed amateurish acting but nevertheless urged him to pursue a stage career. During the 1927\u201328 theater season, he acted with the Laskin Brothers Stock Company in Houston, Texas; while there, he played many roles, gained considerable experience, and became a local matinee idol. He then moved to New York City, where Dillon sought work for him on Broadway. He received good reviews in \"Machinal\" (1928), with one critic describing him as \"young, vigorous, and brutally masculine\".\nGable and Dillon separated, filing for divorce in March 1929, while he began working on the play \"Hawk Island\" in New York, which ran for 24 performances. In April 1930, Gable's divorce became final, and a few days later he married Texas socialite Maria Franklin Prentiss Lucas Langham, nicknamed \"Ria\". After moving to California, they were married again in 1931, possibly due to differences in state legal requirements.\n1930\u20131935: Early success.\nIn 1930, after his impressive appearance as the seething and desperate character Killer Mears in the Los Angeles stage production of \"The Last Mile\", Gable was offered a contract with Path\u00e9 Pictures. His only film for them and first role in a sound picture was as the unshaven villain in their low-budget William Boyd western, \"The Painted Desert\" (1931). The studio experienced financial problems after the film's delayed release, so Gable left for work at Warner Bros.\nThe same year in \"Night Nurse\", Gable played a villainous chauffeur who knocked Barbara Stanwyck's character unconscious for trying to save two children whom he was methodically starving to death. The supporting role was originally slated for James Cagney until the release of \"The Public Enemy\" catapulted him to star status. \"His ears are too big and he looks like an ape\", said Warner Bros. executive Darryl F. Zanuck about Gable, after testing him for the second male lead in the studio's gangster drama \"Little Caesar\" (1931). After his failed screen test for Zanuck, Gable was signed in 1930 by MGM's Irving Thalberg for $650 per week (equivalent to approximately $ in 2024). He hired the well-connected Minna Wallis, a sister of producer Hal Wallis, as his agent, whose clients included actresses Claudette Colbert, Myrna Loy and Norma Shearer.\nGable's arrival in Hollywood occurred when MGM was looking to expand its stable of male stars, and he fit the bill. He made two pictures in 1931 with Wallace Beery. In the first, he had a seventh-billed support role in \"The Secret Six,\" although his role was much larger than the billing would indicate. Then he achieved second billing in a part almost as large as the film's star Beery in the naval aviation film \"Hell Divers.\" MGM's publicity manager Howard Strickling started developing Gable's studio image with \"Screenland\" magazine playing up his \"lumberjack-in-evening-clothes\" persona.\nTo increasing popularity, MGM frequently paired him with well-established female stars. Joan Crawford asked for him to appear with her in \"Dance, Fools, Dance\" (1931). The electricity of the pair was recognized by studio executive Louis B. Mayer, who would not only put them in seven more films but also began reshooting \"Complete Surrender\", replacing John Mack Brown as Crawford's leading man and retitling the film \"Laughing Sinners\" (1931). His fame and public visibility after \"A Free Soul\" (1931), in which he played a gangster who shoved the character played by Norma Shearer, ensured that Gable never played a supporting role again. He received extensive fan mail as a result of his performance; the studio took notice. \"The Hollywood Reporter\" wrote \"A star in the making has been made, one that, to our reckoning, will outdraw every other star ... Never have we seen audiences work themselves into such enthusiasm as when Clark Gable walks on the screen.\"\nGable co-starred in \"Susan Lenox (Her Fall and Rise)\" (1931) with Greta Garbo, and in \"Possessed\" (1931), a film about an illicit romantic affair, with Joan Crawford (who was then married to Douglas Fairbanks Jr.). Adela Rogers St. Johns later dubbed Gable and Crawford's real-life relationship as \"the affair that nearly burned Hollywood down\". Louis B. Mayer threatened to terminate both their contracts, and for a while, they kept apart when Gable shifted his attentions to Marion Davies as he costarred with her in \"Polly of the Circus\" (1932). Gable was considered for the role of Tarzan in \"Tarzan the Ape Man\", but lost out to Johnny Weissmuller's more imposing physique and superior swimming prowess. Gable then starred as the romantic lead in \"Strange Interlude\" (1932), again teaming with Shearer, the second of three films they would make together for MGM.\nNext, Gable starred with Jean Harlow in the romantic comedy-drama \"Red Dust\" (1932) set on a rubber plantation in Indochina. Gable portrayed a plantation manager involved with Harlow's wisecracking prostitute; however, upon her arrival, Gable's character started to pursue Mary Astor's prim, classy newlywed. While some critics thought Harlow stole the show, many agreed that Gable was a natural screen partner.\nGable's \"unshaven love-making\" with braless Jean Harlow in \"Red Dust\" made him MGM's most important romantic leading man. With Gable established as a star, MGM positioned him in the same manner as Harlow for Myrna Loy, a previously lesser billed actor in \"Night Flight\", moving Loy to a costar role in \"Men in White\", a movie filmed in 1933, though delayed in release due to pre-Code Legion of Decency cuts until 1934. The relationship of a doctor (Gable) and nurse (Elizabeth Allan) implied intimacy with a resulting complication of pregnancy, a sensitive issue and new image for Gable.\nGable and Harlow were then teamed in \"Hold Your Man\" (1933), \"China Seas\" (1935), in which the pair were billed above Wallace Beery, and \"Wife vs. Secretary\" (1936) with Myrna Loy costarring and supported by newcomer James Stewart. A popular combination on-screen and off, Gable and Harlow made six films together in five years. Their final film together was \"Saratoga\" (1937), a bigger hit than their previous collaborations. Harlow died during its production. The film was ninety percent completed, and the remaining scenes were filmed with long shots or the use of doubles like Mary Dees; Gable said he felt as if he were \"in the arms of a ghost\".\nWhen MGM head Louis B. Mayer decided that Gable was getting difficult and ungrateful, he loaned Gable out to the lower-rank Columbia studio, for one film \"It Happened One Night\", to teach Gable a lesson, but Columbia wanted him and had paid handsomely for it. The result was that Gable won the Academy Award for Best Actor for his 1934 performance in the film. \"Critics praised the fast-paced farce that would enter in a whole new romantic genre: the screwball comedy.\" Gable's career was revitalized by his whimsical, good-natured performance and to the director Frank Capra, Gable's character in the film closely resembled his real personality. Gable returned to MGM a bigger star than ever. From 1934 until 1942, when World War II interrupted his movie career, he was near the top of the box office money-makers lists.\nGable's first movie role back at MGM was to portray reluctant leader of mutineers Fletcher Christian, an \"Englishman in knickers and a three-cornered hat\", one he had to be talked into by friend and producer Irving Thalberg, and of which Gable said \"I stink in it\" after filming. \"Mutiny on the Bounty\" (1935) was a critical and commercial success, receiving eight Academy Award nominations. There were three Best Actor nominations for stars Gable, Charles Laughton and Franchot Tone, and the film won Best Picture, the second of three films in which Gable played a leading role to do so. The film cost $2\u00a0million and grossed $4.5\u00a0million, making it one of the top moneymakers that decade. It used life-size replicas of the \"Bounty\" and \"Pandora\", and was partly filmed in Catalina and French Polynesia.\n1936\u20131939: Tracy collaborations and \"Gone with the Wind\".\nGable made three pictures with Spencer Tracy, which boosted Tracy's career and permanently cemented them in the public mind as a team. \"San Francisco\" (1936), with Jeanette MacDonald, featured Tracy for only 17 minutes in an Oscar-nominated portrayal of a Catholic priest who knocks Gable down in a boxing ring. The film was a box office hit and remains the third-highest-grossing film of Gable's career. Their next film together was the Academy Award\u2013nominated box office success \"Test Pilot\" (1938), with Myrna Loy, who made seven pictures with Gable. He plays Jim Lane, the test pilot of the title; Tracy is his sidekick mechanic, Gunner Morse.\nFor their final film, 1940's \"Boom Town\", Tracy would play a larger role, with billing directly under Gable and above Claudette Colbert and Hedy Lamarr. The picture, a lavish epic about two oil wildcatters who become partners then rivals, was a box office success, earning $5\u00a0million. Gable and Tracy were off-screen friends; Tracy was one of the few Hollywood industry luminaries who attended Lombard's private funeral. After \"Boom Town\" no more Gable-Tracy partnerships were possible; Tracy's success led to a new contract and both stars had conflicting stipulations requiring top billing in MGM movie credits and on promotional posters.\nDespite his reluctance to play the role, Gable is best known for his Oscar-nominated performance in the Academy Award-winning best picture \"Gone with the Wind\" (1939). Carole Lombard may have been the first to suggest that he play Rhett Butler (and she play Scarlett) when she bought him a copy of the best-seller, which he refused to read. His total salary was $117,917 for the film ($ in 2024).\nButler's last line in \"Gone with the Wind\", \"Frankly, my dear, I don't give a damn\", is one of the most famous lines in movie history. Gable was an almost immediate favorite for the role of Rhett with both the public and producer David O. Selznick. Since Selznick had no male stars under long-term contract, he needed to negotiate with another studio to borrow an actor. Gary Cooper was Selznick's first choice. When Cooper turned down the role of Butler, he was quoted as saying, \"\"Gone With the Wind\" is going to be the biggest flop in Hollywood history. I'm glad it'll be Clark Gable who's falling flat on his nose, not me.\" By then, Selznick had become determined to hire Gable, and set about finding a way to borrow him from MGM. Gable was wary of potentially disappointing an audience that had decided that no one else could play the part. He later conceded, \"I think I know now how a fly must react after being caught in a spider's web.\"\nAccording to Lennie Bluett, an extra in the film, Gable almost walked off the set when he discovered the studio facilities were segregated and signage posted \"White\" and \"Colored\". Gable phoned the film's director Victor Fleming and told him, \"If you don't get those signs down, you won't get your Rhett Butler.\" The signs were then taken down. Gable tried to boycott the \"Gone with the Wind\" premiere in segregated Atlanta, because African American actors Hattie McDaniel and Butterfly McQueen were not permitted to attend. He reportedly only went after McDaniel pleaded with him to go. They appeared in several more films, remaining life-long friends and he always attended her Hollywood parties.\nGable did not want to shed tears for the scene after Rhett inadvertently causes Scarlett to miscarry their second child. Olivia de Havilland made him cry, later commenting, \"Oh, he would not do it. He would not! Victor (Fleming) tried everything with him. He tried to attack him on a professional level. We had done it without him weeping several times and then we had one last try. I said, 'You can do it, I know you can do it, and you will be wonderful...' Well, by heaven, just before the cameras rolled, you could see the tears come up at his eyes and he played the scene unforgettably well. He put his whole heart into it.\" The role was one of Gable's most layered performances and partially based on the personality of director and friend Fleming. Years later, Gable said that whenever his career would start to fade, a re-release of \"Gone with the Wind\" would soon revive his popularity, and he continued as a top leading actor for the rest of his life. One reissue publicized \"Clark Gable never tires of holding Vivien Leigh\".\n1939\u20131942: Established star.\nBetween his marriage to Lombard and her death, Gable again costarred with Norma Shearer in the World War II romantic intrigue film, \"Idiot's Delight\" (1939). He plays a nightclub singer that doesn't recognize former love (Shearer) while Nazis are closing in on guests at a hotel on the brink of war. The film is memorable for Gable's song and dance routine, \"Puttin' on the Ritz\" and an alternative ending.\nGable also starred in \"Strange Cargo\" (1940), a romantic drama with Joan Crawford, costarring Peter Lorre and Ian Hunter. The film's focus is on Gable and French Devil's Islands convicts in an escape from the penal colony, who on the way pick up a local entertainer (Crawford) whom Gable had met earlier in the movie. In their eighth and last film together, Gable and Crawford \"again demonstrated their on-screen magic\" and the film was among the top ten grossing films for the year.\nGable then made his first film with 20-year old Lana Turner, a newcomer whom MGM saw as a successor for both Crawford and the now-deceased Jean Harlow. \"Honky Tonk\" (1941) is a western where Gable's con-man/gambler character romances Turner, a prim, young judge's daughter.\n, Gable had been reluctant to act opposite the younger Turner in the required romantic scenes. But their chemistry served them well in this and three later films, with \"Honky Tonk\" finishing third at the box office that year.\nSince the couple had been popular with the public, Gable and Turner were quickly paired again in \"Somewhere I'll Find You\" (1941) as war correspondents who travel to the Pacific theatre and get caught up in a Japanese attack. The movie was another hit finishing No. 8 at the box office for 1942. Film historian David Thomson wrote the quality of his movies after \"Gone With the Wind\" \"hardly befitted a national idol\" and began a career decline for Gable.\n1942\u20131944: World War II.\nOn August 12, 1942, following Lombard's death and his completion of the film \"Somewhere I'll Find You\", Gable joined the United States Army, under the Army Air Forces. Lombard had suggested that Gable enlist as part of the war effort, but MGM was reluctant to let him go. Commanding General of the U.S. Army Air Forces Henry H. \"Hap\" Arnold offered Gable a \"special assignment\" with the First Motion Picture Unit following basic training. \"The Washington Star\" reported that Gable took a physical examination at Bolling Field on June 19, preliminary to joining the service.\n\"Mr. Gable, it was learned from a source outside the war department, conferred with Lieutenant General H. H. Arnold, head of the air forces yesterday.\" \"The Star\" continued, \"It was understood that Mr. Gable, if he is commissioned, will make movies for the air forces. Lieutenant Jimmy Stewart, another actor in uniform, has been doing this.\"\nGable had expressed an earlier interest in officer candidate school, with the intention of becoming an aerial gunner upon enlisting in bomber training school. MGM arranged for his studio friend, the cinematographer Andrew McIntyre, to enlist with him and accompany him through training.\nOn August 17, 1942, shortly after his enlistment, he and McIntyre were sent to Miami Beach, Florida, where they entered USAAF OCS Class 42-E. Both completed training on October 28, 1942, and were commissioned as second lieutenants. His class of about 2,600 students (of which he ranked about 700th) selected Gable as its graduation speaker. General Arnold presented the cadets with their commissions. Arnold then informed Gable of his special assignment: to make a recruiting film in combat with the Eighth Air Force to recruit aerial gunners. Gable and McIntyre were immediately sent to Flexible Gunnery School at Tyndall Field, Florida, followed by a photography course at Fort George Wright, Washington State and promoted to first lieutenants upon its completion.\nOn January 27, 1943, Gable reported to Biggs Army Airfield, Texas to train with and accompany the 351st Bomb Group to England as head of a six-man motion picture unit. In addition to McIntyre, he recruited the screenwriter John Lee Mahin, camera operators Sgts. Mario Toti and Robert Boles, and the sound man Lt. Howard Voss, to complete his crew. Gable was promoted to captain while he was with the 351st Bomb Group at Pueblo Army Air Base, Colorado, a rank commensurate with his position as a unit commander. (Prior to this, he and McIntyre were both first lieutenants.)\nGable spent most of 1943 in England at RAF Polebrook with the 351st Bomb Group. Gable flew five combat missions, including one to Germany, as an observer-gunner in B-17 Flying Fortresses between May 4 and September 23, 1943, earning the Air Medal and the Distinguished Flying Cross for his efforts. During one of the missions, Gable's aircraft was damaged by flak and attacked by fighters, which knocked out one of the engines and shot up the stabilizer. In the raid on Germany, one crewman was killed and two others were wounded, and flak went through Gable's boot and narrowly missed his head. When word of this reached MGM, studio executives began to badger the Army Air Forces to reassign its most valuable screen actor to noncombat duty. Many of the men he served with, such as former Tech. Sgt. Ralph Cowley, said Gable actually unofficially joined other missions and the above five were only a fraction of the total. Adolf Hitler favored Gable above all other actors. During World War II, Hitler offered a sizable reward to anyone who could capture and bring Gable to him unscathed.\nIn November 1943, Gable returned to the United States to edit his film, on an old Warner's lot donated to the war effort, assigned to the 18th AAF Base Unit (Motion Picture Unit) at Culver City, California, where other stars contributed with any film equipment they had as well. In June 1944, Gable was promoted to major. While he hoped for another combat assignment, he had been placed on inactive duty and on June 12, 1944, his discharge papers were signed by Captain (later U.S. president) Ronald Reagan. Gable completed editing of the film \"Combat America\" in September 1944, giving the narration himself and making use of numerous interviews with enlisted gunners as focus of the film.\nBecause his motion picture production schedule made it impossible for him to fulfill reserve officer duties, he resigned his commission on September 26, 1947, a week after the Air Force became an independent service branch. Gable was awarded military honors for service: the Distinguished Flying Cross, Air Medal, American Campaign Medal, European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, and World War II Victory Medal. He was a qualified aerial gunner having received his wings upon completion of flexible gunnery school at Tyndall field.\n1945\u20131953: After World War II.\nImmediately after his discharge from the service, Gable returned to his ranch and rested. Personally, he resumed a pre-war relationship with Virginia Grey, a co-star from \"Test Pilot\" and \"Idiot's Delight\", that newspapers reported might be the next Mrs. Gable. Professionally, Gable's first movie after World War II was \"Adventure\" (1946), with Greer Garson, by then the leading female star at MGM. Given the famous teaser tagline \"Gable's back, and Garson's got him\", the film was a commercial hit, earning over $6\u00a0million, but a critical failure.\nGable was acclaimed for his performance in \"The Hucksters\" (1947), a satire of post-war Madison Avenue corruption and immorality, which co-starred Deborah Kerr and Ava Gardner. The film was popular with audiences, placing 11th at the box office, but both \"Variety\" and \"The New York Times\" reviewed it as a sanitized version of the novel with script issues, that was heavy on Gable screentime, who struggled in the role. Gable followed this up with \"Homecoming\" (1948), where he played a married doctor enlisting in World War II and meeting Lana Turner's army surgical nurse character with a romance unfolding in flashbacks. After that he made the war film \"Command Decision\" (1948), a psychological drama with Walter Pidgeon, Van Johnson, Brian Donlevy, and John Hodiak. It was a hit with audiences, but it lost MGM money due to the high cost of the all-star cast. \"Variety\" said, \"[Gable's] is a believable delivery, interpreting the brigadier-general who must send his men out to almost certain death with an understanding that bespeaks his sympathy with the soldier... \".\nA very public and brief romance with Paulette Goddard occurred after that. In 1949, Gable married Sylvia Ashley, a British model and actress previously married to Douglas Fairbanks Sr. The relationship was profoundly unsuccessful; they divorced in 1952. Gable did a series of films with female co-stars: \"Any Number Can Play\" (1950) with Alexis Smith, \"Key to the City\" (1950) with Loretta Young, and \"To Please a Lady\" (1950) with Barbara Stanwyck. They were reasonably popular, but he had more success with two Westerns: \"Across the Wide Missouri\" (1951), and \"Lone Star\" (1952). He then made \"Never Let Me Go\" (1953) opposite Gene Tierney. Tierney was a favorite of Gable's, and he was very disappointed when her mental health problems caused her to be replaced in \"Mogambo\" by Grace Kelly.\n\"Mogambo\" (1953), directed by John Ford, was a somewhat sanitized and more action-oriented remake of Gable's hit pre-Code film \"Red Dust\", with Jean Harlow and Mary Astor. Ava Gardner, in her third and final pairing with Gable, was well received in Harlow's leading lady role, as was Kelly in Astor's role, with both receiving Academy Award nominations, Gardner for Lead Actress and Kelly for Supporting Actress. While on location in Africa, reports of an affair between Gable and Kelly began to surface (the result of private dinners the stars were having), but their relationship was an intense friendship according to costar Gardner, with Kelly herself later commenting on the lack of any sexual aspect, \"maybe because of the age difference\". The publicity only helped ticket sales as the film finished No. 7 at the box office, grossing 8.2\u00a0million for the year, easily his most popular hit since he returned to MGM after the war.\n1954\u20131957: Leaving MGM.\nDespite the positive critical and public response to \"Mogambo\", Gable became increasingly unhappy with what he considered mediocre roles offered by MGM, while the studio regarded his salary as excessive. Studio head Louis B. Mayer was fired in 1951, amid slumping revenue and increased Hollywood production costs, due in large part to the rising popularity of television. The new studio head, former production chief Dore Schary, struggled to maintain profits for the studio. Many long-time MGM stars were fired, or their contracts were not renewed, including Greer Garson and Judy Garland. Gable refused to renew his contract. His last film at MGM was \"Betrayed\" (1954), an espionage wartime drama with Turner and Victor Mature. Critic Paul Mavis wrote, \"Gable and Turner just don't click the way they should here...poor plots and lines never stopped these two pros from turning in good performances in other films.\" In March 1954, Gable left MGM.\nHis next two films were made for 20th Century Fox: \"Soldier of Fortune\", an adventure story in Hong Kong with Susan Hayward, and \"The Tall Men\" (1955), a Western with Jane Russell and Robert Ryan. Both were profitable, although only modest successes, earning Gable his first profit sharing royalties. In 1955, Gable would be 10th at the box office \u2013 the last time he was in the top ten. That same year, Gable married fifth wife Kay Spreckels (n\u00e9e Kathleen Williams). A former fashion model and actress, she had previously been married three times: first to Charles Capps (1937\u201339), then to Argentinian cattle tycoon Mart\u00edn de Alzaga (1942\u201343), and to sugar-refining heir Adolph B. Spreckels Jr. (1945\u201352). Gable became stepfather to her son Bunker Spreckels, who went on to live a notorious celebrity lifestyle in the late 1960s and early 1970s surfing scene, ultimately leading to his early death in 1977.\nGable also formed Russ-Field-Gabco in 1955, a production company with Jane Russell and her husband Bob Waterfield, and they produced \"The King and Four Queens\" (1956), a film Gable thought would also star Russell to capitalize on \"The Tall Men\"'s moderate success. That role instead went to Jo Van Fleet. It was Gable's only time as producer. He found producing and acting to be too much work and this Raoul Walsh western was the only film made. After turning down the lead role in Universal-International's \"Away All Boats\", his next project was the Warner Bros. production \"Band of Angels\" (1957), co-starring Yvonne De Carlo and featuring relative newcomer Sidney Poitier; it was not well received, despite Gable's role's similarities to Rhett Butler. \"Newsweek\" said, \"Here is a movie so bad that it must be seen to be disbelieved.\"\n1958\u20131961: Paramount and \"The Misfits\".\nNext, he paired with Doris Day in \"Teacher's Pet\" (1958), shot in black and white at Paramount. He did \"Run Silent, Run Deep\" (also 1958), with co-star and producer Burt Lancaster, which featured his first on-screen death since 1937, and which garnered good reviews. Gable started to receive television offers, but rejected them outright. At 57, Gable finally acknowledged, \"Now it's time I acted my age\". His contracts began including a clause that his filming and work days ended at 5 p.m.\nHis next two films were light comedies for Paramount: \"But Not for Me\" (1959) with Carroll Baker, and \"It Started in Naples\" (1960) with Sophia Loren. \"Naples\" was written and directed by Melville Shavelson and it mainly showed the beauty of Loren and the Italian island Capri. It was a box-office success and was nominated for an Academy Award for art direction and two Golden Globes, one for picture and Loren for actress in a leading role. Filmed mostly on location in Italy, it was Gable's last film released in color. While there Gable's weight had increased to , something he credited to pasta, and he started on a crash diet to achieve a goal weight of 195, along with briefly quitting drinking and smoking, to pass a required physical for his next movie.\nOn February 8, 1960, Gable received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in motion pictures, located at 1608 Vine Street.\nGable's last film was \"The Misfits\" (1961), with a script by Arthur Miller and directed by John Huston. Co-starring with Gable were Marilyn Monroe, Montgomery Clift, Eli Wallach, Thelma Ritter and Rex Bell. Many critics regard Gable's performance to be his finest, and Gable, after seeing the rough cuts, agreed, although the film did not receive any Oscar nominations. Miller wrote the screenplay for his wife Monroe; it was about two aging cowboys and a pilot that go mustanging in Reno, Nevada, who all fall for a blonde. In 1961, it was a somewhat disconnected film with its antihero western themes, but it has since become a classic.\nPortraitist Al Hirschfeld created a drawing, and then a lithograph, portraying the film's stars Clift, Monroe, and Gable with screenwriter Miller, in what is suggested as a typical \"on-the-set\" scene during the troubled production. In a 2002 documentary Eli Wallach recalled the mustang wrangling scenes Gable insisted on performing himself, \"You have to pass a physical to film that\" and \"He was a professional going home at 5 p.m. to a pregnant wife\". \"The New York Times\" found \"Mr. Gable's performance as a leathery old cowboy with a realistic slant on most plain things\" ironically vital, with his death before the film's release.\nCritical reception and commentary.\nFilm critic Pauline Kael wrote of Gable: his was a \"bold open challenge to women\" and his unspoken question was \"Well sister, what do you say?\" with the idea that \"if she said no, she was failing what might almost be nature's test. She'd become overcivilized, afraid of her instincts, afraid of being a woman.\" Kael goes on to describe Gable's sex scenes as \"violent and primal.\" \nFilmography.\nGable is known to have appeared as an \"extra\" in 13 films between 1924 and 1930. He then appeared in a total of 67 theatrically released motion pictures, as himself in 17 \"short subject\" films, and he narrated and appeared in a 1945 World War II propaganda film entitled \"Combat America\", produced by the United States Army Air Forces.\nGable was one of the most consistent box-office performers in the history of Hollywood, appearing on Quigley Publishing's annual Top Ten Money Making Stars Poll sixteen times. He appeared opposite many of the most popular actresses of their time. Joan Crawford was a favorite actress of his to work with, and he partnered with her in eight films. Myrna Loy worked with him seven times, and he was paired with Jean Harlow in six productions. He also starred with Lana Turner in four features, and in three each with Norma Shearer and Ava Gardner. Gable died of a heart attack at the age of 59; his final on-screen appearance was as an aging cowboy in \"The Misfits\", released posthumously in 1961.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages and children.\nGable married five times and was linked romantically to many other women. His first engagement was to actress Franz Dorfler when he was about 21. Dorfler introduced Gable to Josephine Dillon, who would become his acting coach, manager, and then his wife. When Gable and Dillon married on December 13, 1924, in California, Gable was 23 and Dillon was 40; the couple divorced in 1930. His second wife was Texas socialite Maria Franklin Prentiss Lucas Langham Gable (nicknamed \"Ria\"). The couple married on June 19, 1931, in California and divorced on March 7, 1939. Thirteen days after his divorce from Maria, Gable married actress Carole Lombard during a production break on \"Gone with the Wind\".\nCarole Lombard.\nGable's relationship with and marriage in 1939 to his third wife, actress Carole Lombard (1908\u20131942), was one of the happiest periods of his personal life. They met while filming 1932's \"No Man of Her Own\", when Lombard was still married to actor William Powell. A Gable and Lombard romance did not take off until 1936, after becoming reacquainted at a party. They were soon inseparable, with fan magazines and tabloids citing them as an official couple.\nGable thrived being around Lombard's youthful, charming, and frank personality, once stating: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;You can trust that little screwball with your life or your hopes or your weaknesses, and she wouldn't even know how to think about letting you down.\nGable was still legally married, having prolonged an expensive divorce from his second wife, Ria Langham, until his salary from \"Gone with the Wind\" enabled him to reach a divorce settlement with her on March 7, 1939. On March 29, during a production break on \"Gone with the Wind\", Gable and Lombard were married in Kingman, Arizona, and honeymooned in room 1201 of the Arizona Biltmore Hotel. They purchased a ranch previously owned by director Raoul Walsh in Encino, California, for $50,000, making it their home. The couple, who lovingly referred to each other as \"Ma and Pa\", owned a menagerie of animals and raised chickens and horses there. With the bombing of Pearl Harbor many Hollywood stars joined the war effort, some such as James Stewart signing up for active duty. Carole Lombard sent a telegram to President Roosevelt on behalf of Gable expressing his interest in doing so, but F.D.R. thought the 41-year-old actor could best serve by increased patriotic roles in movies and bond drives, which Lombard tirelessly began.\nOn January 16, 1942, Lombard was a passenger on Transcontinental and Western Air Flight 3 with her mother and press agent Otto Winkler. She had just finished her 57th movie, \"To Be or Not to Be\", and was on her way home from a successful war bond selling tour when the flight's Douglas DC-3 airliner crashed into Potosi Mountain near Las Vegas, Nevada, killing all 22 passengers aboard, including 15 servicemen en route to training in California. Gable flew to the crash site to claim the bodies of his wife, mother-in-law, and Winkler, who had been the best man at Gable and Lombard's wedding. Lombard was declared to be the first war-related American female casualty of World War II, and Gable received a personal note of condolence from President Roosevelt. The Civil Aeronautics Board investigation into the crash concluded that pilot error was its cause.\nGable returned to their Encino ranch and carried out her funeral wishes as she had requested in her will. A month later, he returned to the studio to work with Lana Turner in their second movie together, \"Somewhere I'll Find You\". Having lost since the tragedy, Gable evidently was emotionally and physically devastated, but Turner stated that Gable remained a \"consummate professional\" for the duration of filming. He acted in 27 more films, and remarried twice more. \"But he was never the same\", according to Esther Williams. \"He had been devastated by Carole's death.\"\nSylvia Ashley.\nIn 1949, Gable married Sylvia Ashley, an English model and actress who was the widow of Douglas Fairbanks; the couple divorced in 1952.\nKay Spreckels.\nIn 1955, Gable married Kay Spreckels (n\u00e9e Kathleen Williams), a thrice-married former fashion model and actress who had previously been married to sugar-refining heir Adolph B. Spreckels Jr.\nFour months after his 1960 death, Kay Gable gave birth to his only biological son, John Clark Gable. John Clark raced cars and trucks, most notably in the Baja 500 and 1000, turning down Hollywood offers to act until \"Bad Jim\" (1990)\",\" a straight-to-video film\".\" By 1999, his work with the Clark Gable Foundation helped restore the house in which his father was born in Cadiz, Ohio, and open it as a museum. John Clark had two children: Kayley Gable (born 1986) and Clark James Gable (1988\u20132019). Kayley is an actress, while Clark James was the host of two seasons of the nationally syndicated reality show \"Cheaters\". Clark James died of a drug overdose at age 30 on February 22, 2019.\nRelationship with Loretta Young.\nDuring the filming of \"The Call of the Wild\" in early 1935, the film's lead actress, Loretta Young, became pregnant with Gable's child. Clark Gable allegedly slept with Young while on an overnight train from a studio location to Hollywood. Their daughter, Judy Lewis, was born on November 6, 1935, in Venice, California. Young hid her pregnancy in an elaborate scheme. Nineteen months after the birth, she claimed to have adopted the baby. Most in Hollywood (and some in the general public) believed Gable was Lewis' father because of their strong resemblance and the timing of her birth. In 1950, Gable came to her mother's house to visit her briefly. Gable asked Lewis about her life and then, upon leaving, kissed her on her forehead. It was the only time that Lewis ever spoke to Gable and, at the time, she had no idea that he was her father.\nAs an adult, Lewis spoke of the confusion, isolation, and alienation she felt within her own family while growing up. Five years after Gable's death, when confronted by Judy Lewis, Loretta Young said that she was Lewis' biological mother and that Gable was her father by an affair. Young died on August 12, 2000; her autobiography, published posthumously, confirmed that Gable was indeed Lewis' father. Judy Lewis died of cancer at age 76 on November 25, 2011. In 2015, Young's daughter-in-law alleged that Young had said in 1998 that Judy Lewis was conceived by date rape. Young had previously admitted to an affair with Gable, which was a known secret in Hollywood at the time. Young's family had chosen to remain silent about the information until both Young and Lewis were deceased; they went public with the information four years after Lewis' death.\nRelationship with Joan Blondell.\nIn 1945, while filming \"Adventure\" for Victor Fleming, Gable proposed marriage to his co-star Joan Blondell unto which she declined.\nPolitics.\nGable was a conservative Republican. In 1944, Gable became an early member of the conservative Motion Picture Alliance for the Preservation of American Ideals, a group explicitly created to help root out Communists from the film industry. In addition to Gable, its members included such industry heavyweights as Walt Disney, Ayn Rand, Ronald Reagan, and John Wayne; they helped create and enforce the Hollywood blacklist, often by testifying under oath before the House Un-American Activities Committee.\nIn 1933, Gable was initiated into Freemasonry at the Beverly Hills Lodge No. 528 California.\nIllness and death.\nOn November 6, 1960, Gable was sent to Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center in Los Angeles, where doctors found that he had suffered a heart attack. Newspaper reports the following day listed his condition as satisfactory. By the morning of November 16, he seemed to be improving, but he died that evening at the age of 59 from a second heart attack caused by an infection. Medical staff did not perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation for fear that the procedure would rupture Gable's heart, and a defibrillator was not available.\nGable is interred in the Great Mausoleum, Memorial Terrace, at Glendale's Forest Lawn Memorial Park next to Carole Lombard and her mother. An honor guard and pallbearers Spencer Tracy and James Stewart were in attendance. Twenty-two years later Kay Gable died and was interred there as well.\nStyle and reception.\nIn a photo essay of Hollywood film stars, \"Life\" magazine called Gable, \"All man ... and then some.\"\nDoris Day summed up Gable's unique personality: \"He was as masculine as any man I've ever known, and as much a little boy as a grown man could be\u2014it was this combination that had such a devastating effect on women.\"\nJoan Crawford\u2014Gable's eight-time co-star, longtime friend, and on-again, off-again girlfriend\u2014stated on David Frost's TV show in January 1970 that Gable \"was a king wherever he went. He earned the title. He walked like one, he behaved like one, and he was the most masculine man that I have ever met in my life. Gable had balls\".\nRobert Taylor said Gable \"was a great, great guy, and certainly one of the great stars of all times, if not the greatest. I think that I sincerely doubt that there will ever be another like Clark Gable; he was one of a kind.\"\nIn his memoir \"Bring on the Empty Horses\", David Niven states that Gable, a close friend, was extremely supportive after the sudden, accidental death of Niven's first wife, Primula (Primmie), in 1946. Primmie had supported Gable emotionally after Carole Lombard's death four years earlier: Niven recounts Gable kneeling at Primmie's feet and sobbing while she held and consoled him. Niven also states that Arthur Miller, the author of \"The Misfits\", had described Gable as \"the man who did not know how to hate.\"\nGable has been criticized for altering aspects of a script he felt were in conflict with his image. Screenwriter Larry Gelbart, as quoted in James Garner's biography stated that Gable, \"... refused to go down with the submarine, because Gable doesn't sink.\" (In reference to Gable's film \"Run Silent, Run Deep\"). The novel's author, Capt. Beach, noted changes should be made among the crew to get a Hollywood audience and where a subsequent battle sequence was altered when he should have had script approval, feeling his book was bought by United Artists for its title.\nEli Wallach recalls in his 2006 autobiography \"The Good, The Bad and Me\", that what he felt was one of his best dramatic scenes in \"The Misfits\" was cut from the script. Wallach's character is emotionally crushed when he visits Roslyn (Marilyn Monroe), and instead runs into Gable's character and realizes any hope with Roslyn is dashed. Gable asked (within his contractual rights) that the scene be removed, and when Wallach spoke to him, Gable explained he felt that \"his character would never steal a woman from a friend.\"\nIn popular culture.\nWarner Bros. cartoons sometimes caricatured Gable. Examples include: \"Have You Got Any Castles?\" (in which his face appears seven times inside the novel \"The House of the Seven Gables\"), \"The Coo-Coo Nut Grove\" (in which his ears flap on their own), \"Hollywood Steps Out\" (in which he follows an enigmatic woman), \"Cats Don't Dance\" (in which he appears on a billboard promotion for \"Gone with the Wind\" and on the backlot of MGM\")\", and \"Jungle Jitters\" (where the queen of a village imagines a traveling salesman as Gable).\nHe also appears in Disney cartoons like \"Mickey's Polo Team\", where he is flirting with Clarabelle Cow, and \"The Autograph Hound\".\nBugs Bunny's nonchalant carrot-chewing standing position, as explained by Chuck Jones, Friz Freleng, and Bob Clampett, originated in a scene in the film \"It Happened One Night\" (1934), in which Clark Gable's character leans against a fence, eating carrots rapidly and talking with his mouth full to Claudette Colbert's character. This scene was well known while the film was popular, and viewers at the time likely recognized Bugs Bunny's behavior as parody.\nIn January 1937, Gable was honored with a block in the forecourt of Grauman's Chinese Theatre.\nAlong with actor Kent Taylor, Clark Gable served as the inspiration behind the name of Superman's alter-ego Clark Kent.\nIn the 1937 film \"Broadway Melody of 1938\", Judy Garland (aged 15) sings \"You Made Me Love You\" while looking at a composite picture of Gable. The opening lines are: \"Dear Mr Gable, I am writing this to you, and I hope that you will read it so you'll know, my heart beats like a hammer, and I stutter and I stammer, every time I see you at the picture show, I guess I'm just another fan of yours, and I thought I'd write and tell you so. You made me love you, I didn't want to do it, I didn't want to do it...\"\nThe 1948 Cole Porter tune \"Always True to You in My Fashion\" contains the lyrics \"Mister Gable, I mean Clark / Wants me on his boat to park\".\nThe 1975 film \"Monty Python and the Holy Grail\" contained a reference to impersonating Gable in the song performed by the Knights of the Round Table.\nThe 2003 music album \"Give Up\" by The Postal Service has a song titled \"Clark Gable\". The singer wants to \"find a love that looks and sounds like a movie\", and includes the lyric, \"I kissed you in a style Clark Gable would have admired, I thought it classic\".\nGable has been portrayed in a number of films. Actors who have played the role include: Phillip Waldron in \"It Happened in Hollywood\" (1937), James Brolin in \"Gable and Lombard\" (1976), Larry Pennell in ' (1980), Edward Winter in ' (1980), Boyd Holister in \"Grace Kelly\" (1983), Gary Wayne in \"Malice in Wonderland\" (1985), Gene Daily in \"The Rocketeer\" (1991), Bobby Valentino in \"RKO 281\" (1999), Bruce Hughes and Shayne Greenman in \"Blonde\" (2001), and Charles Unwin in \"Lucy\" (2003).\nIn \"Drunk History\" Season 3 2015 Miami episode 2, Josh Hartnett portrays Gable. The focus is on Gable's military service and his training in Miami.\nHe, along with Bette Davis and James Dean, are referenced in the lyrics of the song \"Girl on TV\" by the boy band LFO."}
{"id": "42085", "revid": "2907169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42085", "title": "Flash Gordon", "text": "Comic strip character created 1934\nFlash Gordon is the protagonist of a space adventure comic strip created and originally drawn by Alex Raymond. First published January 7, 1934, the strip was inspired by, and created to compete with, the already established \"Buck Rogers\" adventure strip.\nCreation.\nThe \"Buck Rogers\" comic strip had been commercially very successful, spawning novelizations and children's toys, and King Features Syndicate decided to create its own science-fiction comic strip to compete with it. At first, King Features tried to purchase the rights to the \"John Carter of Mars\" stories by Edgar Rice Burroughs, but the syndicate was unable to reach an agreement with Burroughs. King Features then turned to Alex Raymond, one of their staff artists, to create the story.\nOne source for Flash Gordon was the Philip Wylie novel \"When Worlds Collide\" (1933). The book's themes of an approaching planet threatening the Earth, and an athletic hero, his girlfriend, and a scientist traveling to the new planet by rocket, were adapted by Raymond for the comic strip's initial storyline. Raymond's first samples were dismissed for not containing enough action sequences. Raymond reworked the story and sent it back to the syndicate, which accepted it. Raymond was partnered with ghostwriter Don Moore, an experienced editor and writer. Raymond's first \"Flash Gordon\" story appeared in January 1934, alongside \"Jungle Jim\". The \"Flash Gordon\" strip was well received by newspaper readers, becoming one of the most popular American comic strips of the 1930s.\nAs with \"Buck Rogers\", the success of \"Flash Gordon\" resulted in numerous licensed products being sold, including pop-up books, coloring books, and toy spaceships and rayguns.\nComic strip characters and story.\nThe \"Flash Gordon\" comic strip ran as a Sunday strip from 1934 until 2003, and daily strip from 1940 to 1944 and 1951 to 1992. Reprints of the Sunday strip were syndicated by King Features Syndicate from 2003 until 2023, when Flash Gordon was relaunched with a new daily and Sunday strip.\nThe comic strip follows the adventures of Flash Gordon, a handsome polo player and Yale University graduate, and his companions Dale Arden and Dr. Hans Zarkov. The story begins with Earth threatened by a collision with the planet Mongo. Dr. Zarkov invents a rocket ship to fly into space in an attempt to stop the disaster. Half mad, he kidnaps Flash and Dale. Landing on the planet, and halting the collision, they come into conflict with Ming the Merciless, Mongo's evil ruler.\nFor many years, the three companions have adventures on Mongo, traveling to the forest kingdom of Arboria, ruled by Prince Barin; the ice kingdom of Frigia, ruled by Queen Fria; the jungle kingdom of Tropica, ruled by Queen Desira; the undersea kingdom of the Shark Men, ruled by King Kala; and the flying city of the Hawkmen, ruled by Prince Vultan. They are joined in several early adventures by Prince Thun of the Lion Men. Eventually, Ming is overthrown, and Mongo is ruled by a council of leaders led by Barin.\nFlash and friends visit Earth for a series of adventures before returning to Mongo and crashing in the kingdom of Tropica, later reuniting with Barin and others. Flash and his friends then travel to other worlds before returning once again to Mongo, where Barin, now married to Ming's daughter Princess Aura, has established a peaceful rule (except for frequent revolts led by Ming or by one of his many descendants).\nIn the 1950s, Flash became an astronaut who traveled to other planets besides Mongo. The long story of the Skorpi War takes Flash to other star systems, using starships that are faster than light.\nIn addition to Ming and his allies, Flash and his friends also fought several other villains, including Azura, the Witch Queen; Brukka, chieftain of the giants of Frigia; the fascistic Red Sword organisation on Earth; and Brazor, the tyrannical usurper of Tropica. After Raymond's tenure, later writers created new enemies for Flash to combat. Austin Briggs created Kang the Cruel, Ming's callous son. Prince Polon, who had the power to shrink or enlarge living creatures, the unscrupulous Queen Rubia, and Pyron the Comet Master were among the antagonists introduced during Mac Raboy's run. The Skorpi, a race of alien shape shifters who desired to conquer the galaxy, were recurring villains in both the Mac Raboy and Dan Barry stories. The Skorpi space-fighter ace Baron Dak-Tula became a periodic nemesis of Flash in the late 1970s stories.\nInternational versions of the comic strip.\nKing Features sold the \"Flash Gordon\" strip to newspapers across the world, and by the late 1930s, the strip was published in 130 newspapers, translated into eight foreign languages, and was read by 50 million people. In the 1930s and 1940s, several newspapers in Britain carried \"Flash Gordon\", including the Scottish \"Sunday Mail\". In France, his adventures were published in the magazine \"Robinson\", under the name \"Guy l'\u00c9clair\". Dale Arden was named Camille in the French translation. In Australia, the character and strip were retitled \"Speed Gordon\" to avoid a negative connotation of the word \"Flash\". (At the time, the predominant meaning of \"flashy\" was \"showy\", connoting dishonesty.)\nHowever, events in the 1930s affected the strip's distribution. Newspapers in Nazi Germany were forbidden to carry the \"Flash Gordon\" strip, while in Fascist Italy it was restricted to two newspapers. In 1938, the Spanish magazine \"Aventurero\", the only publication in the country to carry \"Flash Gordon\", ceased publication because of the Spanish Civil War. The outbreak of World War II resulted in \"Flash Gordon\" being discontinued in many countries. In Belgium, artist Edgar Pierre Jacobs was therefore asked to bring the current \"Flash Gordon\" story to a satisfactory conclusion, which he did.\nAfter the war's end, the strip enjoyed a resurgence in international popularity. \"Flash Gordon\" reappeared in Italy, Spain, and West Germany, and it was also syndicated to new markets such as Portugal and the Irish Republic. From the 1950s onward, countries including Spain, Italy, and Denmark also reprinted \"Flash Gordon\" newspaper strips in comic-book or paperback-novel form. In India, \"Flash Gordon\" comics were published by Indrajal Comics.\nLater years.\nThe popularity of Raymond's \"Flash Gordon\" Sunday strip meant a daily strip was also introduced. This strip, drawn by Austin Briggs, ran from 1941 to 1944. After Raymond left \"Flash Gordon\" in 1944 to join the US Marines, the daily strip was cancelled and Briggs took over the Sunday strip. Although Raymond wanted to return to drawing \"Flash Gordon\" after the war's end, King Features did not want to remove Briggs from his position. To conciliate Raymond, King Features allowed him to create a new strip, \"Rip Kirby\". After Briggs left the Sunday strip in 1948, he was succeeded by former comic-book artist Mac Raboy, who drew the strip until his death in 1967. In 1951, King Features created a new daily \"Flash Gordon\" strip, drawn by Dan Barry, who was assisted during his tenure by Harvey Kurtzman and Harry Harrison, who both wrote scripts for the strip. Barry also had several artists who aided him with \"Flash Gordon's\" illustrations, including Frank Frazetta, Al Williamson, Bob Fujitani, Jack Davis, Sy Barry, Fred Kida, and Emil Gershwin. When Barry left the strip in 1990, various artists and writers worked on \"Flash Gordon\". The daily strip was ended in 1993. The final artist to work on the \"Flash Gordon\" Sunday strip was Jim Keefe, who was occasionally assisted on the strip by other artists, including Williamson, John Romita Sr., and Joe Kubert. King Features ended the \"Flash Gordon\" newspaper strip in 2003, although reruns of Keefe's strip still appear in a few US newspapers.\nOn October 20, 2023, King Features Syndicate announced it would relaunch \"Flash Gordon\" on October 22 under cartoonist Dan Schkade, and would be released daily, with the Sunday strip being an overview of the week's strips.\nStrip bibliography.\nDon Moore wrote the strip during Raymond's tenure. Writers involved with Barry's daily run include Harvey Kurtzman from 1952 to 1953 and Harry Harrison from 1958 to 1964. Bruce Jones wrote during Reese and Morrow's tenure. Under Kalcik, writers included Richard Bruning, Kevin VanHook, and Thomas Warkentin. \nGuido Fantoni drew an unofficial \"Flash Gordon\" comic strip in Italy's \"L'Avventuroso\" in 1938. Edgar P. Jacobs published a similarly unofficial strip in Belgium's \"Bravo\" in 1941.\nCritical reception and influence.\n\"Flash Gordon\" is regarded as one of the best illustrated and most influential of American adventure comic strips. Historian of science-fiction art Jane Frank asserted that because of his work on \"Flash Gordon\", \"Raymond is one of the most famous science-fiction artists of all time, although he never contributed an illustration to any science-fiction magazine or book\". Comic-book artist Jerry Robinson has said, \"What made \"Flash Gordon\" a classic strip was Raymond's artistry and the rich imagination he brought to his conceptions of the future\", and described the final years of Raymond's tenure on the strip as being characterized by \"sleek, brilliantly polished brush work.\" Science-fiction historian John Clute has stated, \"The comics version of \"Flash Gordon\" was graceful, imaginative, and soaring\", and included it on a list of the most important American science-fiction comics. In an article about Raymond for \"The Comics Journal\", R.C. Harvey declared that Raymond's \"Flash Gordon\" displayed \"a technical virtuosity matched on the comics pages only by Harold Foster in \"Prince Valiant\"\". \"The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction\" stated that \"Flash Gordon\"'s \"elaborately shaded style and exotic storyline\" made it one of the most influential comics, and that its art emphasized a \"romantic baroque\".\n\"Flash Gordon\" (along with \"Buck Rogers\") was a big influence on later science-fiction comic strips, such as the American \"Don Dixon and the Hidden Empire\" (1935 to 1941) by Carl Pfeufer and Bob Moore. In Italy, Guido Fantoni drew Flash Gordon in 1938, after the prohibition by the fascist regime. In Belgium, Edgar P. Jacobs was commissioned to produce a science-fiction comic strip in the style of \"Flash Gordon\". Jacobs' new strip, \"Le Rayon U\" (\"The U-Ray\") began serial publication in \"Bravo\" in 1943. This version had text boxes that described the action and the dialogue, in the style of many Belgian comics of the time, similar to Hal Foster's version of \"Tarzan\" and \"Prince Valiant\". In 1974, Jacobs reformatted \"Le Rayon U\" to include speech bubbles. This version was published in \"Tintin\" magazine and in book form by Dargaud-Le Lombard. The British comic \"The Trigan Empire\", by Mike Butterworth and Don Lawrence, also drew on \"Flash Gordon\" for its artistic style. In Thailand Flash Gordon was a big influence for classic thai comics character Chaochaiphomthong (\u0e40\u0e08\u0e49\u0e32\u0e0a\u0e32\u0e22\u0e1c\u0e21\u0e17\u0e2d\u0e07) (meaning \"prince golden hair\") a sword and magic hero created by Jullasak Amornvej in 1958.\n\"Flash Gordon\" was also an influence on early superhero comics characters. Jerry Siegel and Joe Shuster based Superman's uniform of tights and a cape on costumes worn by Flash Gordon. Bob Kane's drawing of Batman on the cover of \"Detective Comics\" No. 27 (the first appearance of the character) was based on a 1937 Alex Raymond drawing of Flash Gordon. Dennis Neville modeled the comics hero Hawkman's costume on the \"Hawkmen\" characters in Raymond's \"Flash Gordon\" comic strip. In \"\", Iron Man mockingly refers to Star-Lord as Flash Gordon due to their similar appearance and both being space heroes.\nScientist and track-and-field olympian Meredith C. Gourdine's nickname, \"Flash\" Gourdine, was based on Flash Gordon.\nFilms.\nMost of the Flash Gordon film and television adaptations retell the early adventures on the planet Mongo.\nFilm serials.\nFlash Gordon was featured in three serial films starring Buster Crabbe: \"Flash Gordon\" (1936), \"Flash Gordon's Trip to Mars\" (1938), and \"Flash Gordon Conquers the Universe\" (1940). The 1936 \"Flash Gordon\" serial was condensed into a feature-length film titled \"Flash Gordon\" or \"Rocket Ship\" or \"Space Soldiers\" or \"Flash Gordon: Spaceship to the Unknown\"; the 1938 serial into a feature-length film entitled \"Flash Gordon: The Deadly Ray from Mars;\" and the 1940 serial into a feature-length film entitled \"The Purple Death from Outer Space\".\nThe first Flash Gordon serial remains copyrighted, but the compilation made of the second serial, and the third serial itself are in the public domain.\n\"Flash Gordon\" 1980 film.\nIn the 1970s, several noted directors attempted to make a film of the story. Federico Fellini optioned the \"Flash Gordon\" rights from Dino De Laurentiis, but never made the film. George Lucas also attempted to make a \"Flash Gordon\" film in the 1970s, but was unable to acquire the rights from De Laurentiis, so he decided to create \"Star Wars\", instead. De Laurentiis then hired Nicolas Roeg to make a \"Flash Gordon\" film, but was unhappy with Roeg's ideas, and Roeg left the project. De Laurentiis also discussed hiring Sergio Leone to helm the \"Flash Gordon\" film; Leone declined because he believed the script was not faithful to the original Raymond comic strips. Finally, De Laurentiis hired Mike Hodges to direct the \"Flash Gordon\" film.\nHodges' 1980 \"Flash Gordon\" film stars former \"Playgirl\"-centerfold Sam J. Jones in the title role. Its plot is based loosely on the first few years of the comic strip, revising Flash's backstory by making him the quarterback of the New York Jets instead of a polo player. Raymond's drawings feature heavily in the opening credits, as does the signature theme-song \"Flash\" by rock band Queen, who composed and performed the entire musical score.\nRiding the coattails of \"Star Wars\", \"Superman\", and \"\", \"Flash Gordon\" was not a critical success on release. Melody Anderson co-starred with Jones as Dale Arden, alongside Chaim Topol as Dr. Hans Zarkov, Max von Sydow as Ming, Timothy Dalton as Prince Barin, Brian Blessed as Prince Vultan, Peter Wyngarde as Klytus, and Ornella Muti as Princess Aura. Produced by Dino De Laurentiis, with ornate production designs and costumes by Danilo Donati, the bright colors and retro effects were inspired directly by the comic strip and 1930s serials.\nBrian Blessed's performance as the Hawkman leader Prince Vultan lodged the veteran stage and screen actor into the collective consciousness for the utterance of a single line\u00a0\u2013 \"GORDON'S ALIVE?!\"\u00a0\u2013 which, more than 30 years later, remained the most repeated, reused, and recycled quotation from both the film and Blessed's career.\nThe film's cult status led it to feature heavily in the comedy films \"Ted\" (2012) and \"Ted 2\" (2015), causing a resurgence in interest in the film.\nUnofficial films.\nIn 1967, a low-budget Turkish adaptation of the comic was made, called \"Flash Gordon's Battle in Space\" (\"Baytekin \u2013 Fezada \u00c7arpisanlar\" in Turkish). Hasan Demirtag played Flash Gordon.\nRobb Pratt, director of the popular fan film \"Superman Classic\", made \"Flash Gordon Classic\", released in May 2015. The traditionally animated short features the characters Flash Gordon, girlfriend Dale Arden, sidekick Dr. Hans Zarkov, antagonist Ming the Merciless, and Princess Aura.\nPossible future films.\nIn 2010, Breck Eisner expressed interest to direct a three-dimensional film version of Flash Gordon. Since April 2014, 20th Century Fox was developing the \"Flash Gordon\" reboot with J. D. Payne and Patrick McKay writing the film's script. Matthew Vaughn was in talks to direct the film. Mark Protosevich was hired to rewrite the film's script. Julius Avery was later signed to write and direct the film, with Vaughn as producer alongside John Davis. An animated film was under development at Disney/Fox with Taika Waititi writing and directing. In August 2019, the animated film was believed to be cancelled, but in July 2021, producers John Davis and John Fox revealed that Waititi was still working on the film, though it would now be live action instead of animation.\nTelevision.\n\"Flash Gordon\" (1954\u201355 live-action).\nSteve Holland starred in a 1954\u201355 live-action television series which ran for 39 episodes. The first 26 episodes had the distinction of being filmed in West Berlin, Germany, less than a decade after the end of World War II. This is notable, given that some episodes show the real-life destruction still evident in Germany several years after the war. The final 13 episodes were filmed in Marseille, France.\nIn this series, Flash, Dale (Irene Champlin) and Dr. Zarkov (Joseph Nash) worked for the Galactic Bureau of Investigation in the year 3203. The actual timeline was established in one episode, \"Deadline at Noon\", in which Flash, Dale and Dr. Zarkov went back in time to Berlin in the year 1953. The GBI agents traveled in the Skyflash and Skyflash II spaceships.\nThe series was syndicated, appearing on stations affiliated with the long-defunct DuMont Network, and many other independent stations in the United States. It was recut into a movie in 1957.\n\"Flash Gordon\" animated (1979\u201382).\nIn 1979, Filmation produced an animated series, often referred to as \"The New Adventures of Flash Gordon\", though it is actually titled \"Flash Gordon\". The expanded title was used to distinguish it from previous versions. The project was originally designed as a television film but NBC decided to change it into an animated series.\n\"Flash Gordon: The Greatest Adventure of All\" (1981).\nFilmation produced this successful animated television movie, written by \"\" writer Samuel A. Peeples, before they began their Saturday morning series, but the television movie did not actually air until the early 1980s (December 1981 in the UK, and August 1982 in the US). \nThis movie has yet to be commercially released in the United States, although some sources indicate that off-air bootlegs are prevalent. The only known commercial releases were by VAP Video in Japan (catalog #67019-128), in 1983, in both laserdisc and NTSC VHS videotape formats; and in Bulgaria, where it was released on VHS \"Van Chris\" and \"Drakar\". The movie also aired numerous times on \"Diema\" Channel in the late 1990s. In the Japanese release, it is presented uncut with the original English voice track, with Japanese subtitles added for its intended audience. At the movie's ending is a trailer for the De Laurentiis live-action movie, as well as trailers for other titles from the VAP Video library at the time. The covers for both versions feature comic-strip panels, using stills taken from the movie. \nThe movie was also released theatrically in some European Countries, as evidenced by this portuguese lobby card.\n\"Defenders of the Earth\" (1986).\nIn the 1986 cartoon \"Defenders of the Earth\", Flash teamed up with fellow King Features heroes The Phantom and Mandrake the Magician in 65 episodes. This series took extreme liberties with all the characters, revealing that Flash and Dale Arden had conceived a son, Rick Gordon, who is in his mid-teens when the series begins. Dale has her mind torn from her body by Ming in the first episode and is preserved in a crystal, which Rick is able to recover and give to his father. Dale is reborn on Earth as Dynak-X, the strategic super-computer based in the Defenders' Headquarters.\n\"Flash Gordon\" (1996).\nIn 1996, Hearst Entertainment premiered an animated \"Flash Gordon\" television series. In this version, Alex \"Flash\" Gordon and Dale Arden are hoverboarding teenagers, who become trapped on Mongo after stopping Ming's attempt to invade Earth.\n\"Flash Gordon\" (2007\u201308 live-action).\nA live-action series, comprising 22 one-hour episodes, was produced in Canada in early 2007. Under an agreement with King Features Syndicate, the series was produced by Reunion Pictures of Vancouver with Robert Halmi Sr. and Robert Halmi Jr. of RHI Entertainment serving as Executive Producers.\nSci-Fi Channel premiered its new \"Flash Gordon\" series in the United States on August 10, 2007.\nThe traditional primary supporting characters of Ming, Dale Arden, and Dr. Hans Zarkov were drastically altered. Eric Johnson, best known for his earlier work on the WB's \"Smallville\", played the title character of Steven \"Flash\" Gordon. Gina Holden played Dale Arden, Jody Racicot played Dr. Hans Zarkov, and John Ralston portrayed the arch-villain, Ming.\nRadio serials and audio-dramas.\nStarting April 22, 1935, the strip was adapted into \"The Amazing Interplanetary Adventures of Flash Gordon\", a 26-episode weekly radio serial. The series followed the strip very closely, amounting to a week-by-week adaptation of the Sunday strip for most of its run.\nFlash Gordon was played by Gale Gordon, later famous for his television roles in \"Our Miss Brooks\", \"Dennis the Menace\", \"The Lucy Show\", and \"Here's Lucy\" (the latter two with Lucille Ball). The cast also included Maurice Franklin as Dr. Zarkov and Bruno Wick as Ming the Merciless.\nThe radio series broke with the strip continuity in the last two episodes, when Flash, Dale, and Zarkov returned to Earth. They make a crash landing in Malaysia, where they meet Jungle Jim, the star of another of Alex Raymond's comic strips.\nThe series ended on October 26, 1935, with Flash and Dale's marriage. The next week, \"The Adventures of Jungle Jim\" picked up in that Saturday timeslot.\nTwo days later, on October 28, \"The Further Interplanetary Adventures of Flash Gordon\" debuted as a daily show, running four days a week. This series strayed further from Raymond's strip, involving Flash, Dale, and Zarkov in an adventure in Atlantis. The series aired 60 episodes, ending on February 6, 1936.\nTwenty-six years after he had played Flash Gordon in the last of the three Universal film serials (1940), Buster Crabbe again played Flash for two newly recorded audio-dramas released as the 1966 LP, \"The Official Adventures Of Flash Gordon\" (MGM/Leo The Lion Records CH-1028).\nStage.\nIn 1989, Lee Ahlin and Gary Gordon wrote a musical for children, \"Flash Gordon\", based on the comic. The musical premiered in 1989 in Oak Hall Performing Arts Theater in Gainesville, Florida. \"Flash Gordon\" starred Brian LeDuc as Flash, Kim Ehrich as Dale Arden, John Pelkey as Ming, and Julie Hamric as Princess Aura.\nComic books.\nOver the years, several publishers have produced \"Flash Gordon\" comics, either reprints or original stories:\nSeveral issues of the King Comics series were drawn by Al Williamson, who won the 1966 National Cartoonists Society Award for Best Comic Book for his work on the series. Williamson later said: \"I was paying homage to Alex [Raymond], you know. I tried to treat his creation with respect and dignity and tried to do it to the best of my ability. I find that other artists who have done Flash Gordon just don't seem to get the feeling of the strip, you know. Flash is a noble guy and it's kind of nice to have that kind of a hero\". King also released a comic version as a part of their Comics Reading Library in the 1970s.\nWilliamson provided artwork for a Western Publishing adaptation of Dino De Laurentiis' \"Flash Gordon\" film, written by Bruce Jones. It was released by Western Publishing in both hardcover and softcover formats to coincide with the film's release, and was also serialized in three issues of Whitman's \"Flash Gordon\" comic book, #31-33, March\u2013May 1981.\nIn 1988, Dan Jurgens wrote a modernized version of the comic strip as a nine-issue DC Comics miniseries. It features Flash as a washed-up basketball player who finds new purpose in life on Mongo, Dale as an adventurous reporter who is just as capable as Flash, and a gray-skinned Ming who is less of an Asian stereotype. The series ran for the planned nine issues and was left with an open-ended conclusion. Though Mongo is not a threat to Earth in this series, Ming had every intention of conquering Earth once he coerced Dr. Zarkov into designing the needed ships.\nIn 1995, Marvel Comics published a new two-issue series, written by Mark Schultz with art by Al Williamson, in the style of the \"Flash\" comics Williamson had produced for King and others.\nA new comic-book series was released by Ardden Entertainment in August 2008, though with inconsistent release dates for subsequent issues. The series, written by Brendan Deneen and Paul Green, debuted in 2008, with the first arc entitled \"The Mercy Wars\". The initial story arc concluded in mid-2009. These were followed by further storylines. Ardden also published a Flash Gordon anthology entitled \"The Secret History of Mongo\". Ardden's second Flash Gordon arc is titled \"Invasion of the Red Sword\" (2010). Two other arcs were completed.\nA reprint of all of Al Williamson's \"Flash Gordon\" comic books in black and white was printed by Flesk in 2009.\nIn 2010, Dark Horse Comics began an archive reprint series in hardback, starting with the original comics published by Dell. The second volume covers the comics published by King Comics, the third covers the comics published by Charlton Comics, the fourth covers the comics published by Gold Key, and the fifth covers the comics published by Whitman.\nIn 2011, Dynamite Entertainment began a new series called \"Flash Gordon: Zeitgeist\". The series is written by Eric Trautmann (\"Vampirella\", \"Red Sonja\"), from a story and designs by Alex Ross (\"Kingdom Come\", \"Marvels\", \"Project: Superpowers\") and illustrated by Daniel Lindro. The company also produced a spin-off miniseries, \"Merciless: The Rise of Ming\", in 2012, with story and art by Scott Beatty and Ron Adrian. Following a crossover miniseries called \"King's Watch\" (where, much like \"Defenders of the Earth\", Flash Gordon teamed up with Mandrake and the Phantom; albeit, set in the 21st century), Dynamite launched a new Flash Gordon ongoing series in 2014, with story and art by Jeff Parker and Evan \"Doc\" Shaner. In 2015, Dynamite followed this run with another \"Flash Gordon\" miniseries as part of their \"King: Dynamite\" series. This series was written by Ben Acker and Ben Blacker and illustrated by Lee Ferguson.\nIn July 2023, Mad Cave Studios announced that it had obtained the license to publish new stories, graphic novels, and reprints. In 2024, Mad Cave Studios published a new Flash Gordon comic book, a trade paperback of Marvel's \"Defenders of the Earth\" series and launched a new series of the team.\n\"Flash Gordon Strange Adventure Magazine\".\nIn 1936, one issue of \"Flash Gordon Strange Adventure Magazine\" was published by Harold Hersey, featuring a novel about Flash Gordon, entitled \"The Master of Mars\". It was written by little-known author James Edison Northford. The saddle-stitched novel was based (more or less) on the comic strip story lines, and included color illustrations reminiscent of Alex Raymond's artwork. On the back pages a second installment, \"The Sun Men of Saturn\", was promised, but it never saw print. Even though the series did not gain in popularity, the lone issue of \"Flash Gordon Strange Adventure Magazine\" has become a much sought-after item for pulp magazine collectors.\nNovels.\n\"Big Little Books\".\nThe \"Flash Gordon\" strip was adapted for the \"Big Little Books\" series by the Whitman Publishing Company in 1934; the books follow the strip stories very closely and were designed with a captioned illustration opposite each page of text. The series ran for 14 installments from 1934 until 1948. The books were:\n\"Flash Gordon in the Caverns of Mongo\" (1936).\nThe first novel based on the strip, \"Flash Gordon in the Caverns of Mongo\", was published in 1936 by Grosset &amp; Dunlap. The credited author was Alex Raymond, but Doug Murray claims the novel \"was almost certainly ghost-written\". Like the pulp magazine of the same year, it failed to launch a series.\nAvon Books.\nIn 1973, Avon Books launched a six-book series of adult-oriented Flash Gordon novels: \"The Lion Men of Mongo\", \"The Plague of Sound\", \"The Space Circus\", \"The Time Trap of Ming XIII\", \"The Witch Queen of Mongo\" and \"The War of the Cybernauts\". Although the books were credited to Alex Raymond, the first three were written by SF writer Ron Goulart (under the house name \"Con Steffanson\") and the other three novels were by Bruce Cassiday (the first under the \"Steffanson\" name, and the latter two under the pseudonym \"Carson Bingham\").\n1980 film novelization.\nA novelization of the 1980 film was written by Arthur Byron Cover, and published in the United States by Jove Publications and in the United Kingdom by New English Library.\nTempo Books.\nIn 1980, Tempo Books released a series by David Hagberg: \"Massacre in the 22nd Century\", \"War of the Citadels\", \"Crisis on Citadel II\", \"Forces from the Federation\", \"Citadels under Attack\" and \"Citadels on Earth\". Except for the names of the hero and his co-stars of Dale Arden and Dr. Hans Zarkov, this series had little to do with any other version of Flash Gordon.\n1939 World's Fair.\nThe name \"Flash Gordon\" was emblazoned on the proscenium of a ride at the 1939 New York World's Fair. An article in \"Popular Science\" (March 1939) described how 150 people could enter a ride designed to resemble a rocket ship with a motion picture screen and vibrating seats for a simulated trip to another planet. The ride was located \"at the opposite end of the amusement zone from the parachute tower\". Fairgoers walked around a simulation of Venus as a jungle planet, inhabited by mechanical dinosaurs to enter a \"Martian Headquarters\", where \"weirdly costumed Martians and mechanically animated models of giant beasts enact[ed] episodes from the adventures of Flash Gordon\". The ride's Martians did not look like those in the 1938 serial, nor did the rocket ship.\nReprints.\nRaymond's work, particularly his Sunday strips, has been reprinted many times over the years by many different publishers.\nSome of the Austin Briggs dailies were reprinted by Kitchen Sink Press. The King Comics run of \"Flash Gordon\" reprinted one Alex Raymond story and two Mac Raboy ones in 1967. The Mac Raboy Sundays have been reprinted by Dark Horse Comics in black and white, while Kitchen Sink began to collect both the Dan Barry and Austin Briggs daily strips. The Dan Barry dailies have never been entirely reprinted, but the Barry stories written by noted author Harry Harrison were reprinted in \"Comics Revue\" magazine, published by Manuscript Press. Tempo Books published six mass-market paperbacks reprinting Dan Barry strips from the 1970s in the 1980s. Two stories from the Dan Barry dailies, D2-133 \"Baldur Battles Skorpi\" (February 24 to May 10, 1986) and D2-134 \"The Bear\" (May 12 to August 21, 1986), were reprinted in an oblong format, 6.5 by 10.5 paperback edition with two strips per page by Budget Books PTY of Melbourne, Australia in 1987 under the title \"The New Adventures of Flash Gordon\", . A reprint of all of Al Williamson's \"Flash Gordon\" comic strip and comic book work was released in 2009.\nDVD releases.\nFlash Gordon has been released to DVD under a variety of titles and in both edited and non-edited versions. \"Conquers The Universe\" and 1950s television series have no shortage of public domain DVD releases.\n\"The New Adventures of Flash Gordon\" (1979).\nUS \u2013 BCI Eclipse\nUK \u2013 Hollywood DVD LTD\n\"Flash Gordon\" (1980).\nOn May 6, 1998, Image Entertainment released the 1980 film on DVD in North America for DVD Region 1 territories through a contract with Universal, but it quickly went out of print.\nMomentum Pictures later released it in the United Kingdom for DVD Region 2 territories on October 10, 2005. This edition of the film, the \"Silver Anniversary Edition\", features an anamorphic widescreen transfer at the film's 2.4:1 aspect ratio, both Dolby Digital and DTS 5.1 audio, the original Queen theatrical trailer, an audio commentary by director Mike Hodges, a second audio commentary from actor Brian Blessed, an interview with Mike Hodges, a photo slideshow and an original 1940s Serial, episode one of \"Flash Gordon Conquers the Universe\".\nUniversal released the film on August 7, 2007, in North America and Region 1 territories once again. The new disc, entitled the \"Savior of the Universe Edition\", features a 2.35:1 anamorphic widescreen transfer and an English Dolby Digital 5.1 Surround track. Extras include an \"Alex Ross on Flash Gordon\" featurette in which world-renowned comic artist Alex Ross talks about the film and how it has inspired him in his life and work, a \"Writing a Classic\" featurette with screenwriter Lorenzo Semple Jr. and a Flash Gordon 1936 serial episode (chapter one of \"The Planet of Peril\").\n\"Defenders of the Earth\".\nUS \u2013 BCI Eclipse LLC\nUK \u2013 Hollywood DVD LTD\nUK \u2013 Delta Music PLC\nUK \u2013 Fabulous Films Ltd.\n\"Flash Gordon\" (1996).\nLionsgate on September 21, 2004, released three 4-episode DVDs of \"Flash Gordon\" (1996) and \"Phantom 2040\".\nParodies.\n\"Flesh Gordon\" (1974) is an American erotic science fiction adventure comedy film. It is an erotic spoof of the Universal Pictures \"Flash Gordon\" serials from the 1930s. The screenplay was written by Michael Benveniste, who also co-directed the film with Howard Ziehm. The cast includes Jason Williams, Suzanne Fields, and William Dennis Hunt. The film had an MPAA rating of X, but was also re-edited for a reduced rating of R. It has an original runtime of 78 minutes, and the unrated \"collector's edition\" release runs 90 minutes.\nSeveral episodes of the spin-off series \"\" featured a holodeck program called \"The Adventures of Captain Proton\", which features many elements lifted straight from the Flash Gordon serials of the 1930s.\nThe comedy film \"A Christmas Story\" (1983) featured a deleted scene with Ralphie and his Red Ryder BB gun saving Flash (played by Paul Hubbard) from Ming (played by Colin Fox). None of the footage from the scene survived.\nIn the comedy film \"Ted\" (2012), Sam Jones appears in character both as himself and as Flash Gordon. Jones reprised his role for the sequel \"Ted 2\" (2015).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42087", "revid": "7852030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42087", "title": "Aon Center (Chicago)", "text": "Skyscraper in Chicago, Illinois\nThe Aon Center (200 East Randolph Street, formerly Amoco Building) is a modern supertall skyscraper located in the Northeast corner of the Chicago Loop, Chicago, Illinois, United States. It was designed by architect firms Edward Durell Stone and The Perkins and Will partnership, and completed in 1973 as the Standard Oil Building (nicknamed \"Big Stan\"). With 83 floors and a height of 1,136\u00a0feet (346\u00a0m), it is the fourth-tallest building in Chicago, surpassed in height by the Willis Tower, Trump International Hotel and Tower, and St.Regis Chicago.\nThe building is managed by JLL, which is also headquartered in the building. Aon Center houses the headquarters of Aon, Blue Cross Blue Shield Association, and Kraft Heinz (BCBS and Kraft Heinz each have a second headquarters, located in Washington D.C. and Pittsburgh respectively); the building formerly served as the world headquarters of Amoco prior to its merger into BP.\nThe building was briefly the tallest in Chicago, but was soon surpassed by the Sears Tower. It was the fourth-tallest building in the world at the time of its completion.\nHistory.\nConstruction.\nThe Standard Oil Building was constructed as the headquarters of the Standard Oil Company of Indiana. Standard's previous home had been 910 S. Michigan Avenue. This building was constructed in 1911 by the Karpen Brothers Furniture Company and was purchased by Standard in 1927. When the new Standard Oil Building was completed in 1973, it was the tallest completed building in Chicago and the fourth-tallest in the world, earning it the nickname \"Big Stan\". In 1974, the taller Sears Tower (now Willis Tower) in Chicago surpassed it as the tallest completed building in Chicago (the Sears Tower was also the tallest in the world). However, the Sears Tower had already been topped out in May 1973. When the Aon Center opened as the fourth-tallest completed building in the world, it was only exceeded in height by the twin towers of the original World Trade Center and the Empire State Building in New York City. Originally clad in marble, the Aon Center was also the tallest marble-clad building in the world.\nThe building employs a tubular steel-framed structural system with V-shaped perimeter columns to resist earthquakes, reduce sway, minimize column bending, and maximize column-free space. This construction method was also used for the original World Trade Center twin towers in New York City.\nRefacing.\nWhen completed, it was the world's tallest marble-clad building, sheathed entirely with 43,000 slabs of Italian Carrara marble. The marble used was thinner than previously attempted in cladding a building, which soon proved to be a mistake. On December 25, 1973, during construction a 350-pound marble slab detached from the fa\u00e7ade and penetrated the roof of the nearby Prudential Center. In 1985, inspection found numerous cracks and bowing in the marble cladding of the building. To alleviate the problem, stainless steel straps were added to hold the marble in place. Later, from 1990 to 1992, the entire building was refaced with Mount Airy white granite at an estimated cost of over $80 million. Amoco was reluctant to divulge the actual amount, but it was well over half the original price of the building, without adjustment for inflation. Two-thirds of the discarded marble was crushed and used as landscaping decoration at Amoco's refinery in Whiting, Indiana, one-sixth was donated to Governors State University, in University Park, and one-sixth donated to Regalo, a division of Lashcon Inc. Under a grant from the Illinois Department of Rehabilitative Services, Regalo's 25 handicapped workers carved the discarded marble into a variety of specialty items such as corporate gifts and mementos including desk clocks and pen holders.\nDesignation.\nThe Standard Oil Building was renamed the Amoco Building when the company changed names in 1985. In 1998, Amoco sold the building to The Blackstone Group for an undisclosed amount, estimated to be between $430 and $440 million. It was renamed as the Aon Center on December 30, 1999, although Aon would not become the building's primary tenant until September 2001. In May 2003, Wells Real Estate Investment Trust, Inc. acquired the building for between $465 and $475 million. On August 10, 2007, Wells Real Estate Investment Trust, Inc. changed its name to Piedmont Office Realty Trust, Inc.)\nReal estate investors Mark Karasick and Victor Gerstein acquired the building from Piedmont in 2015 for $713 million.\nPlanned observation deck.\nOn May 14, 2018, the building's owners unveiled a $185 million proposal for an observatory featuring a thrill ride on the roof called the Sky Summit, the world's tallest exterior elevator, and new entrance pavilion. The observatory was supposed to be completed in 2022, but the COVID-19 pandemic had been announced to have delayed construction plans by about a year.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42088", "revid": "4246661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42088", "title": "Reification", "text": "Reification may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "42090", "revid": "51058139", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42090", "title": "George S. Patton", "text": "United States Army general (1885\u20131945)\nGeorge Smith Patton Jr. (11 November 1885 \u2013 21 December 1945) was a general in the United States Army who commanded the Seventh Army in the Mediterranean Theater of World War II, then the Third Army in France and Germany after the Allied invasion of Normandy in June 1944.\nBorn in 1885, Patton attended the Virginia Military Institute and the United States Military Academy at West Point. He studied fencing and designed the M1913 Cavalry Saber, more commonly known as the \"Patton Saber.\" He competed in the modern pentathlon at the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm, Sweden, finishing in fifth place. Patton entered combat during the Pancho Villa Expedition of 1916, the United States' first military action using motor vehicles. He fought in World War I as part of the new United States Tank Corps of the American Expeditionary Forces: he commanded the U.S. tank school in France, then led tanks into combat and was wounded near the end of the war. In the interwar period, Patton became a central figure in the development of the army's armored warfare doctrine, serving in numerous staff positions throughout the country. At the United States' entry into World War II, he commanded the 2nd Armored Division.\nPatton led U.S. troops into the Mediterranean theater with an invasion of Casablanca during Operation Torch in 1942, and soon established himself as an effective commander by rapidly rehabilitating the demoralized II Corps. He commanded the U.S. Seventh Army during the Allied invasion of Sicily, where he was the first Allied commander to reach Messina. There he was embroiled in controversy after he slapped two shell-shocked soldiers, and was temporarily removed from battlefield command. He was assigned a key role in Operation Fortitude, the Allies' military deception campaign for Operation Overlord. At the start of the Western Allied invasion of France, Patton was given command of the Third Army, which conducted a highly successful rapid armored drive across France. Under his decisive leadership, the Third Army took the lead in relieving beleaguered American troops at Bastogne during the Battle of the Bulge, after which his forces drove deep into Nazi Germany by the end of the war. During the Allied occupation of Germany, Patton was named military governor of Bavaria, but was relieved for making aggressive statements towards the Soviet Union and questioning denazification. Patton was also a known antisemite. He commanded the United States Fifteenth Army for slightly more than two months. Severely injured in an auto accident, he died in Germany twelve days later, on 21 December 1945. \nPatton's colorful image, hard-driving personality, and success as a commander were at times overshadowed by his controversial public statements. His philosophy of leading from the front, and his ability to inspire troops with attention-getting, vulgarity-laden speeches, such as his famous address to the Third Army, were received favorably by his troops, but much less so by a sharply divided Allied high command. His sending the doomed Task Force Baum to liberate his son-in-law, Lieutenant Colonel John K. Waters, from a prisoner-of-war camp further damaged his standing with his superiors. His emphasis on rapid and aggressive offensive action proved effective, and he was regarded highly by his opponents in the German High Command. The 1970 Oscar-winning biographical film \"Patton\" helped popularize his image.\nEarly life.\nGeorge Smith Patton Jr. was born on 11 November 1885, in the Los Angeles suburb of San Gabriel, California, to George S. Patton and his wife, Ruth Wilson, the daughter of Benjamin Davis Wilson, the second mayor of Los Angeles, and Margaret Hereford, a widow from Virginia. The wealthy Patton family resided at Lake Vineyard, built by Benjamin Wilson, on in present-day San Marino, California. Patton had a younger sister, Anne, nicknamed \"Nita\". Nita became engaged to John J. Pershing, Patton's mentor, in 1917, but the engagement ended because of their separation during Pershing's time in France during World War I. Patton's paternal grandfather was Confederate colonel George S. Patton Sr.\nAs a child, Patton had difficulty learning to read and write, but eventually overcame this and was known in his adult life to be an avid reader. He was tutored from home until the age of eleven, when he was enrolled in Stephen Cutter Clark's Classical School for Boys, a private school in Pasadena, for six years. Patton was described as an intelligent boy and was widely read in classical military history, particularly the exploits of Hannibal, Scipio Africanus, Julius Caesar, Joan of Arc, and Napoleon Bonaparte, as well as those of family friend John Singleton Mosby, who frequently stopped by the Patton family home when George was a child. He was also a devoted horseback rider.\nPatton never seriously considered a career other than the military. At the age of seventeen he sought an appointment to the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York. He also applied to several universities with military corps of cadet programs, and was accepted to Princeton, but eventually decided on the Virginia Military Institute (VMI), which his father and grandfather had attended.&lt;ref name=\"vmi.edu/patton-family\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; He attended the school from 1903 to 1904, and though he struggled with reading and writing, performed exceptionally in uniform and appearance inspection, as well as military drill.\nWhile he was at VMI, Senator Thomas R. Bard nominated him for West Point. He was an initiate of the Beta Commission of Kappa Alpha Order.\nIn his plebe (first) year at West Point, Patton adjusted easily to the routine. However, his academic performance was so poor that he was forced to repeat his first year after failing mathematics. He excelled at military drills, though his academic performance remained average. He was cadet sergeant major during his junior year, and the cadet adjutant his senior year. He also joined the football team, but he injured his arm and stopped playing on several occasions. Instead he tried out for the sword team and track and field and specialized in the modern pentathlon. He competed in this sport in the 1912 Summer Olympics in Stockholm, and he finished in fifth place\u2014right behind four Swedes.\nPatton graduated number 46 out of 103 cadets at West Point on 11 June 1909, and received a commission as a second lieutenant in the Cavalry branch of the United States Army.\nAt age 24, Patton married Beatrice Banning Ayer, the daughter of Boston industrialist Frederick Ayer, on 26 May 1910, in Beverly Farms, Massachusetts. They had three children, Beatrice Smith (born March 1911), Ruth Ellen (born February 1915), and George Patton IV (born December 1923). Patton's wife Beatrice died on 30 September 1953, from a ruptured aneurysm after falling while riding her horse in a hunt with her brother and others at the Myopia Hunt Club in South Hamilton, Massachusetts.\nPatton was an Episcopalian.\nAncestry.\nThe Patton family was of Scottish, Irish, Scots-Irish, French, English and Welsh ancestry. His great-grandmother came from an aristocratic Welsh family, descended from many Welsh lords of Glamorgan, which had an extensive military background. Patton believed he had formerly lived as a soldier and took pride in mystical ties with his ancestors. Though not directly descended from George Washington, Patton traced some of his English colonial roots to George Washington's great-grandfather. He is a 1st cousin six times removed of George Washington.\nHe was also descended from England's King Edward I through Edward's son Edmund of Woodstock, 1st Earl of Kent. Family belief held the Pattons were descended from sixteen barons who had signed Magna Carta. Patton believed in reincarnation, stating that he had fought in previous battles and wars before his time, additionally, his ancestry was very important to him, forming a central part of his personal identity. The first Patton in North America was Robert Patton, born in Ayr, Scotland. He emigrated to Culpeper, Virginia, from Glasgow, in either 1769 or 1770.\nGeorge Patton, Jr.'s paternal grandfather was George Smith Patton, who commanded the 22nd Virginia Infantry under Jubal Early in the Civil War and was killed in the Third Battle of Winchester, while his great-uncle Waller T. Patton was killed in Pickett's Charge leading the 7th Virginia Infantry regiment during the Battle of Gettysburg. Patton also descended from Hugh Mercer, a Scottish Brigadier General, who had been killed in the Battle of Princeton during the American Revolutionary War. Patton's father, who graduated from the Virginia Military Institute (VMI), became a lawyer and later the district attorney of Los Angeles County. Patton's maternal grandfather was Benjamin Davis Wilson, a merchant who had been the second Mayor of Los Angeles.&lt;ref name=\"snac/99166/w6nm5g3z\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHis father was a wealthy rancher and lawyer who owned a ranch near Pasadena, California. Wilson had married into one of the original Southern California settler families by marrying Ramona Yorba, who was the daughter of prominent Californio (Spanish and Mexican settlers in California) Bernardo Yorba, after whom the city of Yorba Linda is named. Patton is also a descendant of French Huguenot Louis DuBois.\nEarly military career.\nPatton's first posting was with the 15th Cavalry at Fort Sheridan, Illinois, where he established himself as a diligent leader who impressed superiors with his dedication. In late 1911, Patton was transferred to Fort Myer, Virginia, where many of the Army's senior leaders were stationed. Befriending Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson, Patton served as his aide at social functions on top of his regular duties as quartermaster for his troop. Patton had a high-pitched voice and worried that this would make it impossible for him to inspire his troops.\n1912 Olympics.\nFor his skill in running and fencing, Patton was selected as the Army's entry for the first modern pentathlon at the 1912 Olympic Games in Stockholm, Sweden. Patton was the only American among the 42 pentathletes, who were all officers. Patton placed twenty-first on the pistol range, seventh in swimming, fourth in fencing, sixth in the equestrian competition, and third in the footrace, finishing fifth overall and first among the non-Swedish competitors.\nThere was some controversy concerning his performance in the pistol shooting competition, in which he used a .38 caliber U.S. Army-issue pistol while most of the other competitors chose .22 caliber firearms. He claimed that the holes in the paper from his early shots were so large that a later bullet passed through them, but the judges decided that one of his bullets missed the target completely. Modern competitions at this level frequently now employ a moving backdrop specifically to track multiple shots through the same hole. If his assertion was correct, Patton would likely have won an Olympic medal in the event. The judges' ruling was upheld. Patton's only comment on the matter was:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The high spirit of sportsmanship and generosity manifested throughout speaks volumes for the character of the officers of the present day. There was not a single incident of a protest or any unsportsmanlike quibbling or fighting for points which I may say, marred some of the other civilian competitions at the Olympic Games. Each man did his best and took what fortune sent them like a true soldier, and at the end we all felt more like good friends and comrades than rivals in a severe competition, yet this spirit of friendship in no manner detracted from the zeal with which all strove for success.\nSword design.\nFollowing the 1912 Olympics, Patton traveled to Saumur, France, where he learned fencing techniques from Adjutant Charles Cl\u00e9ry, a French \"master of arms\" and instructor of fencing at the cavalry school there. Bringing these lessons back to Fort Myer, Patton redesigned saber combat doctrine for the U.S. cavalry, favoring thrusting attacks over the standard slashing maneuver and designing a new sword for such attacks. He was temporarily assigned to the Office of the Army Chief of Staff, and in 1913, the first 20,000 of the Model 1913 Cavalry Saber\u2014popularly known as the \"Patton saber\"\u2014were ordered.\nPatton then returned to Saumur to learn advanced techniques before bringing his skills to the Mounted Service School at Fort Riley, Kansas, where he would be both a student and a fencing instructor. He was the first Army officer to be designated \"Master of the Sword\", a title denoting the school's top instructor in swordsmanship. Arriving in September 1913, he taught fencing to other cavalry officers, many of whom were senior to him in rank.\nPatton graduated from this school in June 1915. He was originally intended to return to the 15th Cavalry, which was bound for the Philippines. Fearing this assignment would dead-end his career, Patton travelled to Washington, D.C., during 11 days of leave and convinced influential friends to arrange a reassignment for him to the 8th Cavalry at Fort Bliss, Texas, anticipating that instability in Mexico might boil over into a full-scale civil war. In the meantime, Patton was selected to participate in the 1916 Summer Olympics, but that Olympiad was cancelled due to World War I.\nPancho Villa Expedition.\nIn 1915, Lieutenant Patton was assigned to border patrol duty with A Troop of the 8th Cavalry, based in Sierra Blanca. During his time in the town, Patton took to wearing his M1911 Colt .45 in his belt rather than a holster. His firearm discharged accidentally one night in a saloon, so he swapped it for an ivory-handled Colt Single Action Army revolver, a weapon that would later become an icon of Patton's image.\nIn March 1916, Mexican forces loyal to Pancho Villa crossed into New Mexico and raided the border town of Columbus. The violence in Columbus killed several Americans. In response, the U.S. launched the Pancho Villa Expedition into Mexico. Chagrined to discover that his unit would not participate, Patton appealed to expedition commander John J. Pershing, and was named his personal aide for the expedition. This meant that Patton would have some role in organizing the effort, and his eagerness and dedication to the task impressed Pershing. Patton modeled much of his leadership style after Pershing, who favored strong, decisive actions and commanding from the front. As an aide, Patton oversaw the logistics of Pershing's transportation and acted as his personal courier.\nIn mid-April, Patton asked Pershing for the opportunity to command troops, and was assigned to Troop C of the 13th Cavalry to assist in the manhunt for Villa and his subordinates. His initial combat experience came on 14 May 1916, in what would become the first motorized attack in the history of U.S. warfare. A force of ten soldiers and two civilian guides, under Patton's command, with the 6th Infantry in three Dodge touring cars surprised three of Villa's men during a foraging expedition, killing Julio C\u00e1rdenas and two of his guards. It was not clear if Patton personally killed any of the men, but he was known to have wounded all three. The incident garnered Patton both Pershing's good favor and widespread media attention as a \"bandit killer\". Shortly after, he was promoted to first lieutenant while a part of the 10th Cavalry on 23 May 1916. Patton remained in Mexico until the end of the year. President Woodrow Wilson forbade the expedition from conducting aggressive patrols deeper into Mexico, so it remained encamped in the Mexican border states for much of that time. In October Patton briefly retired to California after being burned by an exploding gas lamp. He returned from the expedition permanently in February 1917.\nWorld War I.\nAfter the Villa Expedition, Patton was detailed to Front Royal, Virginia, to oversee horse procurement for the army, but Pershing intervened on his behalf. After the United States entered World War I, in April 1917, and Pershing was named commander of the American Expeditionary Forces (AEF) on the Western Front, Patton requested to join his staff. Patton was promoted to captain on 15 May 1917, and left for Europe, among the 180 men of Pershing's advance party which departed 28 May and arrived in Liverpool, England, on 8 June. Taken as Pershing's personal aide, Patton oversaw the training of American troops in Paris until September, then moved to Chaumont and was assigned as a post adjutant, commanding the headquarters company overseeing the base. Patton was dissatisfied with the post and began to take an interest in tanks, as Pershing sought to give him command of an infantry battalion. While in a hospital for jaundice, Patton met Colonel Fox Conner, who encouraged him to work with tanks instead of infantry.\nOn 10 November 1917, Patton was assigned to establish the AEF Light Tank School. He left Paris and reported to the French Army's tank training school at Champlieu near Orrouy, where he drove a Renault FT light tank. On 20 November, the British launched an offensive towards the important rail center of Cambrai, using an unprecedented number of tanks. At the conclusion of his tour on 1 December, Patton went to Albert, from Cambrai, to be briefed on the results of this attack by the chief of staff of the British Tank Corps, Colonel J. F. C. Fuller. On the way back to Paris, he visited the Renault factory to observe French tanks being manufactured. Patton was promoted to major on 26 January 1918. He received the first ten tanks on 23 March 1918, at the tank school at Bourg, a small village close to Langres, Haute-Marne d\u00e9partement. The only US soldier with tank-driving experience, Patton personally backed seven of the tanks off the train. In the post, Patton trained tank crews to operate in support of infantry, and promoted its acceptance among reluctant infantry officers. He was promoted to lieutenant colonel on 3 April 1918, and attended the Command and General Staff College in Langres.\nIn August 1918, he was placed in charge of the U.S. 1st Provisional Tank Brigade (redesignated the 304th Tank Brigade on 6 November 1918). Patton's Light Tank Brigade was part of Colonel Samuel Rockenbach's Tank Corps, part of the American First Army. Personally overseeing the logistics of the tanks in their first combat use by U.S. forces, and reconnoitering the target area for their first attack himself, Patton ordered that no U.S. tank be surrendered. Patton commanded American-crewed Renault FT tanks at the Battle of Saint-Mihiel, leading the tanks from the front for much of their attack, which began on 12 September. He walked in front of the tanks into the German-held village of Essey, and rode on top of a tank during the attack into Pannes, seeking to inspire his men.\nWhile outside the village of Essey he had his first chance meeting with Brigadier General Douglas MacArthur, then commanding a brigade of the 42nd \"Rainbow\" Division, who, at just thirty-eight, was already one of the most highly decorated officers in the AEF, and with whom Patton would serve later in his career.\nPatton's brigade was then moved to support I Corps for the upcoming Meuse\u2013Argonne offensive, which began on 26 September. He personally led a troop of tanks through thick fog as they advanced into German lines. Around 09:00, Patton was wounded while leading six men and a tank in an attack on German machine guns near the town of Cheppy. His orderly, Private First Class Joe Angelo, saved Patton, for which he was later awarded the Distinguished Service Cross (DSC). Patton commanded the battle from a shell hole for another hour before being evacuated. Although the 35th Division (of which Patton's tank troop was a component) eventually captured Varennes, it did so with heavy losses. Trying to move his reserve tanks forward, Patton relates that he might have killed one of his own men, stating: \"Some of my reserve tanks were stuck by some trenches. So I went back and made some Americans hiding in the trenches dig a passage. I think I killed one man here. He would not work so I hit him over the head with a shovel.\"\nPatton stopped at a rear command post to submit his report before heading to a hospital. Sereno E. Brett, commander of the U.S. 326th Tank Battalion, took command of the brigade in Patton's absence. Patton wrote in a letter to his wife: \"The bullet went into the front of my left leg and came out just at the crack of my bottom about two inches to the left of my rectum. It was fired at about so made a hole about the size of a [silver] dollar where it came out.\"\nWhile recuperating from his wound, Patton was promoted to temporary colonel in the Tank Corps of the U.S. National Army on 17 October. He returned to duty on 28 October but saw no further action before hostilities ended on his 33rd birthday with the armistice of 11 November 1918. For his actions in Cheppy, Patton received the Silver Star, later upgraded to the DSC. The citation for the medal read:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFor his leadership of the tank brigade and tank school, he was awarded the Army Distinguished Service Medal, the citation for which reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn addition, he was also awarded the Purple Heart for his combat wounds after the decoration was created in 1932.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;On 11 November 1918, World War I ended. In the months and years that followed Patton was haunted by his experience in the Meuse\u2013Argonne. Although he emerged from the war with honours and acclaim, the year 1918 took its toll and the price was indeed high. Contrary to his image as a tough guy, Patton was deeply affected by the horror of war and suffered from post-traumatic stress. What had been a high on the battlefield turned into the giant letdown that is so common to soldiers who have been in combat.\nInter-war years.\nPatton left France for New York City on 2 March 1919. After the war, he was assigned to Camp Meade, Maryland, and reverted to his permanent rank of captain on 30 June 1920, though he was promoted to major again the next day. Patton was given temporary duty in Washington D.C. that year to serve on a committee writing a manual on tank operations. During this time he developed a belief that tanks should be used not as infantry support, but rather as an independent fighting force. Patton supported the M1919 design created by J. Walter Christie, a project which was shelved due to financial considerations. While on duty in Washington, D.C., in 1919, Patton met Dwight D. Eisenhower, who would play an enormous role in Patton's future career. During and following Patton's assignment in Hawaii, he and Eisenhower corresponded frequently. Patton sent notes and assistance to help Eisenhower graduate from the General Staff College. With Christie, Eisenhower, and a handful of other officers, Patton pushed for more development of armored warfare in the interwar era. These thoughts resonated with Secretary of War Dwight Davis, but the limited military budget and prevalence of already-established Infantry and Cavalry branches meant the U.S. would not develop its armored corps much until 1940.\nOn 30 September 1920, then-Major Patton relinquished command of the 304th Tank Brigade and was reassigned to Fort Myer as commander of 3rd Squadron, 3rd Cavalry. Loathing duty as a peacetime staff officer, he spent much time writing technical papers and giving speeches on his combat experiences at the General Staff College.\nIn July 1921 Patton became a member of the American Legion Tank Corps Post No. 19. Maj. Patton led the rescue effort after the January 1922 blizzard destroyed the Knickerbocker Theatre in D.C. From 1922 to mid-1923 he attended the Field Officer's Course at the Cavalry School at Fort Riley, then he attended the Command and General Staff College from mid-1923 to mid-1924, graduating 25th out of 248. In August 1923, Patton saved several children from drowning when they fell off a yacht during a boating trip off Salem, Massachusetts. He was awarded the Silver Lifesaving Medal for this action. He was temporarily appointed to the General Staff Corps in Boston, Massachusetts, before being reassigned as G-1 and G-2 of the Hawaiian Division at Schofield Barracks in Honolulu in March 1925.\nPatton was made G-3 of the Hawaiian Division for several months, before being transferred in May 1927 to the Office of the Chief of Cavalry in Washington, D.C., where he began to develop the concepts of mechanized warfare. A short-lived experiment to merge infantry, cavalry and artillery into a combined arms force was cancelled after U.S. Congress removed funding. Patton left this office in 1931, returned to Massachusetts and attended the Army War College, becoming a \"Distinguished Graduate\" in June 1932.\nIn July 1932, Patton (still a Major) was executive officer of the 3rd Cavalry, which was ordered to Washington by Army Chief of Staff General Douglas MacArthur. Patton took command of the 600 troops of the 3rd Cavalry, and on 28 July, MacArthur ordered Patton's troops to advance on protesting veterans known as the \"Bonus Army\" with tear gas and bayonets. Patton was dissatisfied with MacArthur's conduct, as he recognized the legitimacy of the veterans' complaints and had himself earlier refused to issue the order to employ armed force to disperse the veterans. Patton later stated that, though he found the duty \"most distasteful\", he also felt that putting the marchers down prevented an insurrection and saved lives and property. He personally led the 3rd Cavalry down Pennsylvania Avenue, dispersing the protesters. Patton also encountered his former orderly, Joe Angelo, as one of the marchers and forcibly ordered him away, fearing such a meeting might make the headlines.\nPatton was promoted to lieutenant colonel in the regular Army on 1 March 1934, and was transferred to the Hawaiian Division in early 1935 to serve as G-2. During this posting, Patton feuded with his commander, Hugh Aloysius Drum, another Pershing prot\u00e9g\u00e9. At a polo match in which Patton was playing, Drum was among the spectators and rebuked Patton for his use of angry profanity during the game. The civilian players, who were members of Hawaii's wealthy elite on friendly terms with the equally wealthy and elite Patton, humiliated Drum by standing up for Patton. Patton followed the growing hostility and conquest aspirations of the militant Japanese leadership. He wrote a plan to intern the Japanese living in the islands in the event of an attack as a result of the atrocities carried out by Japanese soldiers on the Chinese in the Sino-Japanese war. In 1937 he wrote a paper with the title \"Surprise\" which predicted, with what D'Este termed \"chilling accuracy\", a surprise attack by the Japanese on Hawaii. Depressed at the lack of prospects for new conflict, Patton took to drinking heavily and allegedly began a brief affair with his 21-year-old niece by marriage, Jean Gordon. This supposed affair distressed his wife and nearly resulted in their separation. Patton's attempts to win her back were said to be among the few instances in which he willingly showed remorse or submission.\nPatton continued playing polo and sailing in this time. After sailing back to Los Angeles for extended leave in 1937, he was kicked by a horse and fractured his leg. Patton developed phlebitis from the injury, which nearly killed him. The incident almost forced Patton out of active service, but a six-month administrative assignment in the Academic Department at the Cavalry School at Fort Riley helped him to recover. Patton was promoted to colonel on 24 July 1938, and given command of the 5th Cavalry at Fort Clark, Texas, for six months, a post he relished, but he was reassigned to Fort Myer again in December as commander of the 3rd Cavalry. There, he met the Army's Deputy Chief of Staff, George C. Marshall, who was so impressed with him that Marshall considered Patton a prime candidate for promotion to general. In peacetime, though, he would remain a colonel to remain eligible to command a regiment. When Malin Craig retired as Chief of Staff of the United States Army in 1939, Drum was a candidate to succeed him. Drum wanted the position badly enough to set aside his feud with Patton and ask Patton to intercede with the retired but still influential Pershing. Despite these efforts, Drum was passed over in favor of Marshall.\nPatton had a personal schooner named \"When and If\". The schooner was designed by famous naval architect John G. Alden and built in 1939. The schooner's name comes from Patton saying he would sail it \"when and if\" he returned from war.\nWorld War II.\nFollowing the German Army's invasion of Poland and the outbreak of World War II in Europe in September 1939, the U.S. military entered a period of mobilization, and Colonel Patton sought to build up the power of U.S. armored forces. During maneuvers the Third Army conducted in 1940, Patton served as an umpire, where he met Adna R. Chaffee Jr. and the two formulated recommendations to develop an armored force. Chaffee was named commander of this force, and created the 1st and 2nd Armored Divisions as well as the first combined arms doctrine. He named Patton commander of the 2nd Armored Brigade, part of the 2nd Armored Division. The division was one of few organized as a heavy formation with many tanks, and Patton was in charge of its training.\nPatton was promoted to brigadier general on 2 October, made acting division commander in November when Charles L. Scott assumed command of I Armored Corps, and on 4 April 1941, was promoted again to major general as Commanding General (CG) of the 2nd Armored Division. As Chaffee stepped down from command of the I Armored Corps, Patton became the most prominent figure in U.S. armor doctrine. In December 1940, he staged a high-profile mass exercise in which 1,000 tanks and vehicles were driven from Columbus, Georgia, to Panama City, Florida, and back. He repeated the exercise with his entire division of 1,300 vehicles the next month. Patton earned a pilot's license and, during these maneuvers, observed the movements of his vehicles from the air to find ways to deploy them effectively in combat. His exploits earned him a spot on the cover of \"Life\" magazine.\nGeneral Patton led the division during the Tennessee Maneuvers in June 1941, and was lauded for his leadership, executing 48 hours' worth of planned objectives in only nine. During the September Louisiana Maneuvers, his division was part of the losing Red Army in Phase I, but in Phase II was assigned to the Blue Army. His division executed a end run around the Red Army and \"captured\" Shreveport, Louisiana. During the October\u2013November Carolina Maneuvers, Patton's division captured the now Lieutenant General Drum, who served as the commander of the opposing army. The general was greatly embarrassed and became the subject of mockery. After soldiers from Isaac D. White's battalion detained Drum, the exercise umpires ruled that the circumstances would not have transpired in combat, so he was allowed to return to his headquarters, enabling the exercise to continue and for Drum to save face. Despite the umpires' actions, the incident indicated to senior leaders that Hugh Drum might not be prepared to command large bodies of troops under the modern battlefield conditions the Army would face in World War II, thus, he was not considered for field command.\nOn 15 January 1942, a few weeks after the American entry into World War II, he succeeded Scott as commander of I Armored Corps, and the next month established the Desert Training Center in the Coachella Valley region of Riverside County in California, to run training exercises. He commenced these exercises in late 1941 and continued them into the summer of 1942. Patton chose a expanse of desert area about southeast of Palm Springs. From his first days as a commander, Patton strongly emphasized the need for armored forces to stay in constant contact with opposing forces. His instinctive preference for offensive movement was typified by an answer Patton gave to war correspondents in a 1944 press conference. In response to a question on whether the Third Army's rapid offensive across France should be slowed to reduce the number of U.S. casualties, Patton replied, \"Whenever you slow anything down, you waste human lives.\" It was around this time that a reporter, after hearing a speech where Patton said that it took \"blood and brains\" to win in combat, began calling him \"blood and guts\". The nickname would follow him for the rest of his life. Soldiers under his command were known at times to have quipped, \"our blood, his guts\". Nonetheless, he was known to be admired widely by the men under his charge.\nNorth African campaign.\nUnder Lieutenant General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the Supreme Allied Commander, Patton was assigned to help plan the Allied invasion of French North Africa as part of Operation Torch in the summer of 1942. Patton commanded the Western Task Force, consisting of 33,000 men in 100 ships, in landings centered on Casablanca, Morocco. The landings, which took place on 8 November 1942, were opposed by Vichy French forces, but Patton's men quickly gained a beachhead and pushed through fierce resistance. Casablanca fell on 11 November and Patton negotiated an armistice with French General Charles Nogu\u00e8s. The Sultan of Morocco was so impressed that he presented Patton with the Order of Ouissam Alaouite, with the citation \"Les Lions dans leurs tani\u00e8res tremblent en le voyant approcher\" (The lions in their dens tremble at his approach). Patton oversaw the conversion of Casablanca into a military port and hosted the Casablanca Conference in January 1943.\nOn 6 March 1943, following the defeat of the U.S. II Corps by the German Afrika Korps, commanded by \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Erwin Rommel, at the Battle of Kasserine Pass, Patton replaced Major General Lloyd Fredendall as Commanding General of the II Corps and was promoted to lieutenant general. Soon thereafter, he had Major General Omar Bradley reassigned to his corps as its deputy commander. With orders to take the battered and demoralized formation into action in 10 days' time, Patton immediately introduced sweeping changes, ordering all soldiers to wear clean, pressed and complete uniforms, establishing rigorous schedules, and requiring strict adherence to military protocol. He continuously moved throughout the command talking with men, seeking to shape them into effective soldiers. He pushed them hard, and sought to reward them well for their accomplishments. His uncompromising leadership style is evidenced by his orders for an attack on a hill position near Gafsa, in which he ended by reportedly saying, \"I expect to see such casualties among officers, particularly staff officers, as will convince me that a serious effort has been made to capture this objective.\"\nPatton's training was effective, and on 17 March, the U.S. 1st Infantry Division took Gafsa participating in the indecisive Battle of El Guettar, and pushing a German and Italian armored force back twice. In the meantime, on 5 April, he removed Major General Orlando Ward, commanding the 1st Armored Division, after its lackluster performance at Maknassy against numerically inferior German forces. Advancing on Gab\u00e8s, Patton's corps pressured the Mareth Line. During this time, he reported to British General Sir Harold Alexander, commander of the 18th Army Group, and came into conflict with Air Vice Marshal Sir Arthur Coningham about the lack of close air support being provided for his troops. By the time his force reached Gab\u00e8s, the Germans had abandoned it. He then relinquished command of II Corps to Bradley, and returned to the I Armored Corps in Casablanca to help plan Operation Husky, the Allied invasion of Sicily. Fearing U.S. troops would be sidelined, he convinced British commanders to allow them to continue fighting through to the end of the Tunisia Campaign before leaving on this new assignment.\nSicily campaign.\nFor Operation Husky, the invasion of Sicily, Patton was to command the Seventh United States Army, dubbed the Western Task Force, in landings at Gela, Scoglitti and Licata to support landings by General Sir Bernard Montgomery's British Eighth Army. Patton's I Armored Corps was officially redesignated the Seventh Army just before his force of 90,000 landed before dawn on D-Day, 10 July 1943, on beaches near the town of Licata. The armada was hampered by wind and weather, but despite this the three U.S. infantry divisions involved, the 3rd, 1st, and 45th, secured their respective beaches. They then repulsed counterattacks at Gela, where Patton personally led his troops against German reinforcements from the Hermann G\u00f6ring Division.\nInitially ordered to protect the British forces' left flank, Patton was granted permission by Alexander to take Palermo after Montgomery's forces became bogged down on the road to Messina. As part of a provisional corps under Major General Geoffrey Keyes, the 3rd Infantry Division under Major General Lucian Truscott covered in 72 hours, arriving at Palermo on 21 July. Patton then set his sights on Messina. He sought an amphibious assault, but it was delayed by lack of landing craft, and his troops did not land at Santo Stefano until 8 August, by which time the Germans and Italians had already evacuated the bulk of their troops to mainland Italy. He ordered more landings on 10 August by the 3rd Infantry Division, which took heavy casualties but pushed the German forces back, and hastened the advance on Messina. A third landing was completed on 16 August, and by 22:00 that day Messina fell to his forces. By the end of the battle, the 200,000-man Seventh Army had suffered 7,500 casualties, and killed or captured 113,000 Axis troops and destroyed 3,500 vehicles. Still, 40,000 German and 70,000 Italian troops escaped to Italy with 10,000 vehicles.\nPatton's conduct in this campaign met with several controversies. He was also frequently in disagreement with Terry de la Mesa Allen Sr. and Theodore Roosevelt Jr. though often then conceding, to their relief, in line with Bradley's view.\nWhen Alexander sent a transmission on 19 July limiting Patton's attack on Palermo, his chief of staff, Brigadier General Hobart R. Gay, claimed the message was \"lost in transmission\" until Palermo had fallen.\nIn an incident on 22 July, while a U.S. armored column was under attack from German aircraft, he shot and killed a pair of mules that had stopped while pulling a cart across a bridge. The cart was blocking the way of the column. When their Sicilian owner protested, Patton attacked him with a walking stick and had his troops push the two mule carcasses off the bridge.\nWhen informed of the Biscari massacre of prisoners, which was by troops under his command, Patton wrote in his diary, \"I told Bradley that it was probably an exaggeration, but in any case to tell the officer to certify that the dead men were snipers or had attempted to escape or something, as it would make a stink in the press and also would make the civilians mad. Anyhow, they are dead, so nothing can be done about it.\" Bradley refused Patton's suggestions. Patton later changed his mind. After he learned that the 45th Division's Inspector General found \"no provocation on the part of the prisoners\u00a0... They had been slaughtered\" Patton is reported to have said: \"Try the bastards.\"\nTwo soldiers were tried for the Biscari massacre, both of whom claimed in their defense that they were acting under orders from Patton not to take prisoners if enemy combatants continued to resist within two hundred yards of their position. Major General Everett Hughes, an old friend of Patton's, defended him, asserting that Patton had not \"at any time advocated the destruction of prisoners of war under any circumstances\". James J. Weingartner argues that Patton's innocence in inciting violence against prisoners of war is uncertain, stating that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The testimony of multiple witnesses indicated beyond a reasonable doubt that Patton had urged the killing of enemy troops who continued to resist at close quarters, even if they offered to surrender. Patton probably wished his troops to deny quarter or refuse to accept the surrender of enemy combatants who continued to resist at close range, itself a violation of the laws of war (although common practice) by the twentieth century, but it should not be surprising if some Americans concluded that they were authorized to kill resolute enemy soldiers after they had placed themselves under American control.\nNo official action was taken against Patton for any complicity in the massacre.\nSlapping incidents and aftermath.\nTwo high-profile incidents of Patton striking subordinates during the Sicily campaign attracted national controversy following the end of the campaign. On 3 August 1943, Patton slapped and verbally abused Private Charles H. Kuhl at an evacuation hospital in Nicosia after he had been found to suffer from \"battle fatigue\". On 10 August, Patton slapped Private Paul G. Bennett under similar circumstances. Ordering both soldiers back to the front lines, Patton railed against cowardice and issued orders to his commanders to discipline any soldier making similar complaints.\nWord of the incident reached Eisenhower, who privately reprimanded Patton and insisted he apologize. Patton apologized to both soldiers individually, as well as to doctors who witnessed the incidents, and later to all of the soldiers under his command in several speeches. Eisenhower suppressed the incident in the media, but in November journalist Drew Pearson revealed it on his radio program. Criticism of Patton in the United States was harsh, and included members of Congress and former generals, Pershing among them. The views of the general public remained mixed on the matter, and eventually Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson stated that Patton must be retained as a commander because of the need for his \"aggressive, winning leadership in the bitter battles which are to come before final victory.\"\nPatton did not command a force in combat for 11 months. In September, Bradley, who was Patton's junior in both rank and experience, was selected to command the First United States Army forming in England to prepare for Operation Overlord. This decision had been made before the slapping incidents were made public, but Patton blamed them for his being denied the command. Eisenhower felt the invasion of Europe was too important to risk any uncertainty, and that the slapping incidents had been an example of Patton's inability to exercise discipline and self-control. While Eisenhower and Marshall both considered Patton to be a skilled combat commander, they felt Bradley was less impulsive and less prone to making mistakes. On 26 January 1944, Patton was formally given command of the U.S. Third Army in England, a newly formed field Army, and he was assigned to prepare its inexperienced soldiers for combat in Europe. This duty kept Patton busy during the first half of 1944.\nGhost Army.\nThe German High Command had more respect for Patton than for any other Allied commander and considered him to be central to any plan to invade Europe from England. Because of this, Patton was made a prominent figure in the deception scheme Operation Fortitude during the first half of 1944. Through the British network of double-agents, the Allies fed German intelligence a steady stream of false reports about troop sightings and that Patton had been named commander of the First United States Army Group (FUSAG), all designed to convince the Germans that Patton was preparing this massive command for an invasion at Pas de Calais. FUSAG was in reality an intricately constructed fictitious army of decoys, props, and fake radio signal traffic based around Dover to mislead German reconnaissance planes and to make Axis leaders believe that a large force was massing there. This helped to mask the real location of the invasion in Normandy. Patton was ordered to keep a low profile to deceive the Germans into thinking that he was in Dover throughout early 1944, when he was actually training the Third Army. As a result of Operation Fortitude, the German 15th Army remained at the Pas de Calais to defend against Patton's supposed attack. So strong was their conviction that this was the main landing area that the German army held its position there even after the invasion of Normandy on 6 June 1944, believing it to be a diversionary force. Patton flew to France a month later, and then returned to combat command.\nNormandy breakout offensive.\nSailing to Normandy throughout July, Patton's Third Army formed on the extreme right (west) of the Allied land forces, and became operational at noon on 1 August 1944, under Bradley's Twelfth United States Army Group. The Third Army simultaneously attacked west into Brittany, south, east toward the Seine, and north, assisting in trapping several hundred thousand German soldiers in the Falaise Pocket between Falaise and Argentan.\nPatton's strategy with his army favored speed and aggressive offensive action, though his forces saw less opposition than did the other three Allied field armies in the initial weeks of its advance. The Third Army typically employed forward scout units to determine enemy strength and positions. Self-propelled artillery moved with the spearhead units and was sited well forward, ready to engage protected German positions with indirect fire. Light aircraft such as the Piper L-4 Cub served as artillery spotters and provided airborne reconnaissance. Once located, the armored infantry would attack using tanks as infantry support. Other armored units would then break through enemy lines and exploit any subsequent breach, constantly pressuring withdrawing German forces to prevent them from regrouping and reforming a cohesive defensive line. The U.S. armor advanced using reconnaissance by fire, and the .50 caliber M2 Browning heavy machine gun proved effective in this role, often flushing out and killing German panzerfaust teams waiting in ambush as well as breaking up German infantry assaults against the armored infantry.\nThe speed of the advance forced Patton's units to rely heavily on air reconnaissance and tactical air support. The Third Army had by far more military intelligence (G-2) officers at headquarters specifically designated to coordinate air strikes than any other army. Its attached close air support group was XIX Tactical Air Command, commanded by Brigadier General Otto P. Weyland. Developed originally by General Elwood Quesada of IX Tactical Air Command for the First Army in Operation Cobra, the technique of \"armored column cover\", in which close air support was directed by an air traffic controller in one of the attacking tanks, was used extensively by the Third Army. Each column was protected by a standing patrol of three to four P-47 and P-51 fighter-bombers as a combat air patrol (CAP).\nIn its advance from Avranches to Argentan, the Third Army traversed in just two weeks. Patton's force was supplemented by Ultra intelligence for which he was briefed daily by his G-2, Colonel Oscar Koch, who apprised him of German counterattacks, and where to concentrate his forces. Equally important to the advance of Third Army columns in northern France was the rapid advance of the supply echelons. Third Army logistics were overseen by Colonel Walter J. Muller, Patton's G-4, who emphasized flexibility, improvisation, and adaptation for Third Army supply echelons so forward units could rapidly exploit a breakthrough. Patton's rapid drive to Lorraine demonstrated his keen appreciation for the technological advantages of the U.S. Army. The major U.S. and Allied advantages were in mobility and air superiority. The U.S. Army had more trucks, more reliable tanks, and better radio communications, all of which contributed to a superior ability to operate at a rapid offensive pace.\nLorraine campaign.\nPatton's Third Army was sent to Lorraine. Despite its proximity to Germany, Lorraine was not the Allies' preferred invasion route in 1944. Except for its cities of Nancy and Metz the region contained few significant military objectives. Once the Third Army had penetrated Lorraine there would still be no first-rate military objectives on entering Germany. The Saar's industrial region, while significant, was of secondary importance when compared to the great Ruhr industrial complex farther north. Patton's offensive came to a halt on 31 August 1944, as the Third Army ran out of fuel near the Moselle River, just outside Metz. Patton expected that the theater commander would keep fuel and supplies flowing to support his advance, but Eisenhower favored a \"broad front\" approach to the ground-war effort, believing that a single thrust would have to drop off flank protection, and would quickly lose its punch.\nPatton had planned to reach the River Moselle, leap it in one bound, bypass Metz and head straight for the Rhenish cities of Mainz and Mannheim, deep in the Third Reich. But his units were restricted in fuel by the Broad front strategy, on one occasion receiving just 25,390 gallons of fuel; only one-eighteenth of what Patton had asked for. His units were also running short of ammunition. Still within the constraints of a very large effort overall, Eisenhower gave Montgomery and his Twenty First Army Group a higher priority for supplies for Operation Market Garden, although no supplies were diverted from Patton's Third Army. Three British transport companies were lent to American forces on 6 August for eight days not being returned until 4 September. The Third Army exhausted its fuel supplies, however after the Market Garden operation. According to Bradley there was parity of supplies between the three allied armies, Second British, First and Third US, by mid September 1944 and according to the official US Army History as cited on page 52 in Hugh Cole's book, The Lorraine Campaign, \"by 10th September the period of critical [gasoline] shortage had ended\". This was a whole week before Market Garden took place. The gasoline drought was the end of August/beginning of September.\nThe French rail network, which was repaired and quickly put to use, greatly aided the speed of the Third Army's logistical recovery. In eastern France the rail network was relatively undamaged by Allied aircraft and had been abandoned almost intact by the retreating Germans. The Third Army brought its railheads as far forward as Nancy. The French themselves operated the trains providing rolling stock and trained personnel to supplement the Third Army.\nPatton believed his forces were close enough to the Siegfried Line that he remarked to Bradley that with 400,000\u00a0gallons of gasoline he could be in Germany within two days. In late September, a large German Panzer counterattack sent expressly to stop the advance of Patton's Third Army was defeated by the U.S. 4th Armored Division at the Battle of Arracourt. The German commanders believed this was because their counterattack had been successful.\nThe halt of the Third Army during the month of September was enough to allow the Germans to strengthen the fortress of Metz. Patton's forces reached the fortress at Metz on 5 September 1944, forcing a German surrender on 21 November 1944, taking over 10 weeks in the Battle of Metz with both sides suffering heavy casualties. Also an attempt by Patton to seize Fort Driant just south of Metz was defeated.\nPatton's decisions in taking this city were criticized. German commanders interviewed after the war noted he could have bypassed the city and moved north to Luxembourg where he would have been able to cut off the German Seventh Army. The German commander of Metz, General Hermann Balck, also noted that a more direct attack would have resulted in a more decisive Allied victory in the city. Historian Carlo D'Este later wrote that the Lorraine campaign was one of Patton's least successful, faulting him for not deploying his divisions more aggressively and decisively. Patton remained frustrated at the lack of progress of his forces. From 8 November to 15 December, his army advanced no more than .\nIn \"The Lorraine Campaign An Overview, September\u2013December 1944\", on page 36, Dr. Christopher R. Gabel of the Combat Studies Institute stated in February 1985:\nWas the Lorraine campaign an American victory? From September through November, Third Army claimed to have inflicted over 180,000 casualties on the enemy. But to capture the province of Lorraine, a problem which involved an advance of only 40 to 60 air miles, Third Army required over 3 months and suffered 50,000 casualties, approximately one-third of the total number of casualties it sustained in the entire European war.\nBattle of the Bulge.\nIn December 1944, the German army, under the command of German Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt, launched a last-ditch offensive across Belgium, Luxembourg, and northeastern France. On 16 December 1944, it massed 29 divisions totaling 250,000 men at a weak point in the Allied lines, and during the early stages of the ensuing Battle of the Bulge, made significant headway towards the Meuse River during a severe winter. Eisenhower called a meeting of all senior Allied commanders on the Western Front at a headquarters near Verdun on the morning of 19 December to plan strategy and a response to the German assault.\nAt the time, Patton's Third Army was engaged in heavy fighting near Saarbr\u00fccken. Guessing the intent of the Allied command meeting, Patton ordered his staff to make three separate operational contingency orders to disengage elements of the Third Army from its present position and begin offensive operations toward several objectives in the area of the bulge occupied by German forces. At the Supreme Command conference, Eisenhower led the meeting, which was attended by Patton, Bradley, General Jacob Devers, Major General Kenneth Strong, Deputy Supreme Commander Air Chief Marshal Arthur Tedder, and several staff officers. When Eisenhower asked Patton how long it would take him to disengage six divisions of his Third Army and commence a counterattack north to relieve the U.S. 101st Airborne Division which had been trapped at Bastogne, Patton replied, \"As soon as you're through with me.\" Patton then clarified that he had already worked up an operational order for a counterattack by three full divisions on 21 December, then only 48 hours away. Eisenhower was incredulous: \"Don't be fatuous, George. If you try to go that early you won't have all three divisions ready and you'll go piecemeal.\" Patton replied that his staff already had a contingency operations order ready to go. Still unconvinced, Eisenhower ordered Patton to attack the morning of 22 December, using at least three divisions.\nPatton left the conference room, phoned his command, and uttered two words: \"Play ball.\" This code phrase initiated a prearranged operational order with Patton's staff, mobilizing three divisions\u2014the 4th Armored Division, the 80th Infantry Division, and the 26th Infantry Division\u2014from the Third Army and moving them north toward Bastogne. In all, Patton would reposition six full divisions, U.S. III Corps and U.S. XII Corps, from their positions on the Saar River front along a line stretching from Bastogne to Diekirch and to Echternach, the town in Luxembourg that had been at the southern end of the initial \"Bulge\" front line on 16 December. Within a few days, more than 133,000 Third Army vehicles were rerouted into an offensive that covered an average distance of over per vehicle, followed by support echelons carrying of supplies.\nOn 21 December, Patton met with Bradley to review the impending advance, starting the meeting by remarking, \"Brad, this time the Kraut's stuck his head in the meat grinder, and I've got hold of the handle.\" Patton then argued that his Third Army should attack toward Koblenz, cutting off the bulge at the base and trap the entirety of the German armies involved in the offensive. After briefly considering this, Bradley vetoed it, since he was less concerned about killing large numbers of Germans than he was in arranging for the relief of Bastogne before it was overrun. Desiring good weather for his advance, which would permit close ground support by U.S. Army Air Forces tactical aircraft, Patton ordered the Third Army chaplain, Colonel James Hugh O'Neill, to compose a suitable prayer. He responded with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Almighty and most merciful Father, we humbly beseech Thee, of Thy great goodness, to restrain these immoderate rains with which we have had to contend. Grant us fair weather for Battle. Graciously hearken to us as soldiers who call upon Thee that, armed with Thy power, we may advance from victory to victory and crush the oppression and wickedness of our enemies, and establish Thy justice among men and nations. Amen.\nWhen the weather cleared soon after, Patton awarded O'Neill a Bronze Star Medal on the spot.\nOn 26 December 1944, the first spearhead units of the Third Army's 4th Armored Division reached Bastogne, opening a corridor for relief and resupply of the besieged forces. Patton's ability to disengage six divisions from front line combat during the middle of winter, then wheel north to relieve Bastogne was one of his most remarkable achievements during the war. He later wrote that the relief of Bastogne was \"the most brilliant operation we have thus far performed, and it is in my opinion the outstanding achievement of the war. This is my biggest battle.\"\nAdvance into Germany.\nBy February, the Germans were in full retreat. On 23 February 1945, the U.S. 94th Infantry Division crossed the Saar River and established a vital bridgehead at Serrig, through which Patton pushed units into the Saarland. Patton had insisted upon an immediate crossing of the Saar River against the advice of his officers. Historians such as Charles Whiting have criticized this strategy as unnecessarily aggressive.\nOnce again, Patton found other commands given priority on gasoline and supplies. To obtain these, Third Army ordnance units passed themselves off as First Army personnel and in one incident they secured thousands of gallons of gasoline from a First Army dump. Between 29 January and 22 March, the Third Army took Trier, Koblenz, Bingen, Worms, Mainz, Kaiserslautern, and Ludwigshafen, killing or wounding 99,000 and capturing 140,112 German soldiers, which represented virtually all of the remnants of the German First and Seventh Armies. An example of Patton's sarcastic wit was broadcast when he received orders to bypass Trier, as it had been decided that four divisions would be needed to capture it. When the message arrived, Trier had already fallen. Patton rather caustically replied: \"Have taken Trier with two divisions. Do you want me to give it back?\"\nThe Third Army began crossing the Rhine River after constructing a pontoon bridge on 22 March, two weeks after the First Army crossed it at Remagen, and Patton slipped a division across the river that evening. Patton later boasted he had urinated into the river as he crossed.\nOn 26 March 1945, Patton sent Task Force Baum, consisting of 314 men, 16 tanks, and assorted other vehicles, behind German lines to liberate the prisoner of war camp OFLAG XIII-B, near Hammelburg. Patton knew that one of the inmates was his son-in-law, Lieutenant Colonel John K. Waters. The raid was a failure, and only 35 men made it back; the rest were either killed or captured, and all 57 vehicles were lost. Patton reported this attempt to liberate Oflag XIII-B as the only mistake he made during World War II. When Eisenhower learned of the secret mission, he was furious. Patton later said he felt the correct decision would have been to send a Combat Command, which is a force about three times larger.\nBy April, resistance against the Third Army was tapering off, and the forces' main efforts turned to managing some 400,000 German prisoners of war. On 14 April 1945, Patton was promoted to general, a promotion long advocated by Stimson in recognition of Patton's battle accomplishments during 1944. Later that month, Patton, Bradley, and Eisenhower toured the Merkers salt mine as well as the Ohrdruf concentration camp, and seeing the conditions of the camp firsthand caused Patton great disgust. Third Army was ordered toward Bavaria and Czechoslovakia, anticipating a last stand by German forces there. He was reportedly appalled to learn that the Red Army would take Berlin, feeling that the Soviet Union was a threat to the U.S. Army's advance to Pilsen, but was stopped by Eisenhower from reaching Prague, Czechoslovakia, before V-E Day on 8 May and the end of the war in Europe.\nIn its advance from the Rhine to the Elbe, Patton's Third Army, which numbered between 250,000 and 300,000 men at any given time, captured of German territory. Its losses were 2,102 killed, 7,954 wounded, and 1,591 missing. German losses in the fighting against the Third Army totaled 20,100 killed, 47,700 wounded, and 653,140 captured.\nBetween becoming operational in Normandy on 1 August 1944, and the end of hostilities on 9 May 1945, the Third Army was in continuous combat for 281 days. In that time, it crossed 24 major rivers and captured of territory, including more than 12,000 cities and towns. The Third Army claimed to have killed, wounded, or captured 1,811,388 German soldiers, six times its strength in personnel. Fuller's review of Third Army records differs only in the number of enemies killed and wounded, stating that between 1 August 1944 and 9 May 1945, 47,500 of the enemy were killed, 115,700 wounded, and 1,280,688 captured, for a total of 1,443,888.\nPostwar.\nPatton asked for a command in the Pacific Theater of Operations, begging Marshall to bring him to that war in any way possible. Marshall said he would be able to do so only if the Chinese secured a major port for his entry, an unlikely scenario. In mid-May, Patton flew to Paris, then London for rest. On 7 June, he arrived in Bedford, Massachusetts, for extended leave with his family, and was greeted by thousands of spectators. Patton then drove to Hatch Memorial Shell and spoke to some 20,000, including a crowd of 400 wounded Third Army veterans. In this speech he aroused some controversy among the Gold Star Mothers when he stated that a man who dies in battle is \"frequently a fool\", adding that the wounded are heroes. Patton spent time in Boston before visiting and speaking in Denver and visiting Los Angeles, where he spoke to a crowd of 100,000 at the Memorial Coliseum. On 14 June 1945, Secretary of War Henry L. Stimson decided that Patton would not be sent to the Pacific but would return to Europe in an occupation army assignment. Patton made a final stop in Washington, D.C., before returning to Europe in July to serve in the occupation forces.\nPatton was appointed as military governor of Bavaria, where he led the Third Army in denazification efforts. Patton was particularly upset when learning of the end of the war against Japan, writing in his diary, \"Yet another war has come to an end, and with it my usefulness to the world.\" Unhappy with his position and depressed by his belief that he would never fight in another war, Patton's behavior and statements became increasingly erratic. Various explanations beyond his disappointments have been proposed for Patton's behavior at this point. Carlo D'Este wrote that \"it seems virtually inevitable\u00a0... that Patton experienced some type of brain damage from too many head injuries\" from a lifetime of numerous auto- and horse-related accidents, especially one suffered while playing polo in 1936.\nPatton's niece Jean Gordon spent some time together with him in London in 1944, and in Bavaria in 1945. Patton repeatedly boasted of his sexual success with Gordon, and his wife and family plainly believed that the two were lovers. Some of his biographers are skeptical. Hirshson said that the relationship was casual. Showalter believes that Patton, under severe physical and psychological stress, made up claims of sexual conquest to prove his virility. D'Este agrees that Patton's \"behavior suggests that in both 1936 [in Hawaii] and 1944\u201345, the presence of the young and attractive Jean was a means of assuaging the anxieties of a middle-aged man troubled over his virility and a fear of aging.\" Whether or not Gordon was sexually involved with Patton, she also loved a young married captain, who returned to his wife in September 1945, leaving Gordon despondent.\nDenazification controversy and antisemitism.\nPatton attracted controversy as military governor when it was noted that several former Nazi Party members continued to hold political posts in the region. Privately, Patton expressed a soldier's respect for the Germans as adversaries and a resistance to removing Nazi Party members from power. \"I had never heard,\" he wrote to his wife Bea, \"that we fought to de-Nazify Germany\u2014live and learn. What we are doing is to utterly destroy the only semi-modern state in Europe so that Russia can swallow the whole\u00a0... Actually the Germans are the only decent people in Europe.\"\nPatton, in his new role, oversaw the displaced persons camps in Bavaria, which contained a majority of Jews who had survived Germany's concentration camps in the Holocaust. He refused to have Jewish chaplains at his headquarters. Patton decided to keep the Jews detained, according to his diary, because he thought releasing them could lead to violence and re-arrests. He also resisted Eisenhower's orders to evict Germans from their homes in order to house Jews. After Patton accompanied Eisenhower to a Yom Kippur service in one of the camps, he referred to the Jews at the service as a \"stinking mass of humanity\", and complaining about their hygiene, said: \"This happened to be the feast of Yom Kippur, so they were all collected in a large, wooden building, which they called a synagogue. It behooved General Eisenhower to make a speech to them. We entered the synagogue, which was packed with the greatest stinking bunch of humanity I have ever seen. When we got about halfway up, the head rabbi, who was dressed in a fur hat similar to that worn by Henry VIII of England and in a surplice heavily embroidered and very filthy, came down and met the General\u00a0... The smell was so terrible that I almost fainted and actually about three hours later lost my lunch as the result of remembering it\u00a0... Of course, I have seen them since the beginning and marveled that beings alleged to be made in the form of God can look the way they do or act the way they act.\" Patton also claimed that \"There is a very Semitic influence in the press.\" \"The noise against me is only the means by which the Jews and the Communists are attempting and with good success the further dismemberment of Germany.\" Biographer Martin Blumenson, who was Third Army Historian and also edited Patton's papers, sums up this period tersely: \"Clearly, he had become delusional.\"\nPatton continued to make numerous antisemitic comments. He remarked that displaced Jews were \"locusts\", \"lower than animals\", and \"lost to all decency\". In one diary entry, he wrote that Jews were \"a subhuman species without any of the cultural or social refinements of our times.\"\nRelieved of command.\nPatton faced questions from the press about his reluctance to denazify post-war Germany, but he noted that most of the people with experience in infrastructure management had been compelled to join the party in the war. He compared Nazis to Democrats and Republicans, bringing negative press stateside and angering Eisenhower. Eisenhower ordered him to hold a press conference correcting his statements, but Patton instead repeated them.\nOn 28 September 1945, after a heated exchange with Eisenhower over the denazification controversy, Patton was relieved of his military governorship. He was relieved of command of the Third Army on 7 October, and he concluded his farewell remarks by saying, \"All good things must come to an end. The best thing that has ever happened to me thus far is the honor and privilege of having commanded the Third Army.\" According to Anthony Cave Brown in \"Bodyguard of Lies\", \"Patton was relieved of command of the 3rd Army by Eisenhower just after the end of the war for stating publicly that America had been fighting the wrong enemy\u2014Germany instead of Russia.\"\nPatton's final assignment was to command the U.S. 15th Army based in Bad Nauheim. The 15th Army at this point consisted only of a small headquarters staff working to compile a history of the war in Europe. Patton had accepted the post because of his love of history, but he quickly lost interest. He began traveling, visiting Paris, Rennes, Chartres, Brussels, Metz, Reims, Luxembourg, and Verdun. Then he went to Stockholm, where he reunited with other athletes from the 1912 Olympics. Patton decided that he would leave his post at the 15th Army and not return to Europe once he left for Christmas leave on 10 December. He intended to discuss with his wife whether he would continue in a stateside post or retire from the Army.\nEisenhower returned to the United States to become the Chief of Staff of the US Army, and Patton was appointed interim commander of US Army Europe on 11 November 1945. He served in the position until relieved by General Joseph T. McNarney on 26 November.\nAccident and death.\nPatton's chief of staff Major General Hobart Gay invited him on a pheasant hunting trip on 9 December 1945 near Speyer, Germany to lift his spirits. He noted derelict cars along the side of the road and said, \"How awful war is. Think of the waste.\" Moments later, the 1938 Cadillac limousine driven by PFC Horace Woodring collided with an American army truck driven by T/5 Robert L. Thompson. Patton's regular driver was Sgt. Francis \"Jeep\" Sanza, but he had left the Army in November 1945.\nGay and others were only slightly injured, but Patton hit his head on the glass partition that separated the front and back seats. He began bleeding from a gash to the head and complained that he was paralyzed and having trouble breathing. He was taken to a hospital in Heidelberg where he was found to have a compression fracture and dislocation of the cervical third and fourth vertebrae, resulting in a broken neck and cervical spinal cord injury that rendered him paralyzed from the neck down.\nPatton spent most of the next 12 days in spinal traction to decrease the pressure on his spine. All non-medical visitors were forbidden to see him, except for his wife Beatrice. She was flown in from the U.S. Patton was told he had no chance of ever riding a horse or resume normal life again. To this he commented, \"This is a hell of a way to die.\" He died in his sleep of pulmonary edema and congestive heart failure at about 6:00pm on 21 December 1945 at age 60.\nOn 24 December, Patton was buried at the Luxembourg American Cemetery and Memorial in the Hamm district of Luxembourg City, alongside some wartime casualties of the Third Army, in accordance with his request to be buried with his men. He was initially buried in the middle of a plot like every other service member, but the large number of visitors to his grave damaged the cemetery grounds, so his remains were moved to their current location at the front of the grave plots.\nLegacy.\nAccording to Martin Blumenson:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Patton epitomized the fighting soldier in World War II. He exercised unique leadership by his ability to obtain the utmost\u2014some would say more than the maximum\u2014response from American combat troops. Through his charisma, exemplified by a flamboyant and well-publicized image, he stimulated\u00a0... American troops to an aggressive desire to close with and destroy the enemy. He personified the offensive spirit, the ruthless drive, and the will for victory in battle\u00a0... As the outstanding exponent of combat effectiveness, particularly with respect to the employment of armored forces\u2014that is, the combined use of tanks, motorized infantry, and self-propelled artillery, closely supported by tactical aircraft\u2014Patton brought the blitzkrieg concept to perfection.\nPatton's colorful personality, hard-driving leadership style, and success as a commander produced a mixed and often contradictory image when coupled with his frequent political mis-steps. His great oratory skill is seen as integral to his ability to inspire troops under his command. Historian Terry Brighton concluded that Patton was \"arrogant, publicity-seeking and personally flawed, but\u00a0... among the greatest generals of the war\". His impact was substantial on armored warfare and leadership, with the U.S. Army adopting many of his aggressive strategies for its training programs following his death. Many military officers claim inspiration from his legacy. The first American tank designed after the war became the M46 Patton.\nSeveral actors have portrayed Patton on screen, most famously George C. Scott in the 1970 film \"Patton\", for which he won (and refused) the Academy Award for Best Actor. He reprised the role in 1986 in the made-for-television film \"The Last Days of Patton\" which tells the story of his last few months.\nOther actors who have portrayed Patton include:\nImage.\nPatton cultivated a flashy, distinctive image in the belief that it would inspire his troops. He carried an ivory-gripped, engraved, silver-plated Colt Single Action Army .45 caliber revolver on his right hip, and frequently wore an ivory-gripped Smith &amp; Wesson Model 27 .357 Magnum on his left hip. He was usually seen wearing a highly polished helmet, riding pants, and high cavalry boots. Patton also cultivated a stern expression he called his \"war face\". He was known to oversee training maneuvers from atop a tank painted red, white, and blue. His jeep bore oversized rank placards on the front and back, as well as a klaxon horn which would loudly announce his approach from afar. He proposed a new uniform for the emerging Tank Corps featuring polished buttons, a gold helmet, and thick, dark padded suits; the proposal was derided in the media as \"the Green Hornet\", and it was rejected by the Army.\nHistorian Alan Axelrod wrote that \"for Patton, leadership was never simply about making plans and giving orders, it was about transforming oneself into a symbol\". Patton intentionally expressed a conspicuous desire for glory, atypical of the officer corps of the day which emphasized blending in with troops on the battlefield. He was an admirer of Admiral Horatio Nelson for his actions in leading the Battle of Trafalgar in a full-dress uniform. Patton had a preoccupation with bravery, wearing his rank insignia conspicuously in combat, and at one point during World War II he rode atop a tank into a German-controlled village seeking to inspire courage in his men.\nPatton was a staunch fatalist, and he believed in reincarnation. He believed that he might have been a military leader killed in action in Napoleon's army or a Roman legionary in a previous life.\nPatton developed an ability to deliver charismatic speeches. He used profanity heavily in his speech, which generally was enjoyed by troops under his command, but it offended other generals, including Bradley. The most famous of his speeches were a series that he delivered to the Third Army prior to Operation Overlord. He was known for his bluntness and witticism; he once said, \"The two most dangerous weapons the Germans have are our own armored halftrack and jeep. The halftrack because the boys in it go all heroic, thinking they are in a tank. The jeep because we have so many God-awful drivers.\" During the Battle of the Bulge, he famously remarked that the Allies should \"let the sons-of-bitches [Germans] go all the way to Paris, then we'll cut them off and round them up.\" He also suggested facetiously that his Third Army could \"drive the British back into the sea for another Dunkirk.\"\nAs media scrutiny increased on Patton, his bluntness stirred controversy. These began in North Africa when some reporters worried that he was becoming too close to former Vichy officials with Axis sympathies. His public image was more seriously damaged after the slapping incidents. Another controversy occurred prior to Operation Overlord when Patton spoke at a British welcoming club at Knutsford in England: \"Since it is the evident destiny of the British and Americans, and of course, the Russians, to rule the world, the better we know each other, the better job we will do.\" The next day, news accounts misquoted him by leaving off the Russians.\nOn a visit home after the war, he again made headlines when he attempted to honor several wounded veterans in a speech by calling them \"the real heroes\" of the war, unintentionally offending the families of soldiers who had been killed in action. His final media blowup occurred in September 1945 when he said, \"Denazification would be like removing all the Republicans and all the Democrats who were in office, who had held office or were quasi-Democrats or Republicans and that would take some time.\" This caused Eisenhower to relieve him from command of the Third Army.\nAs a leader, Patton was known to be highly critical, correcting subordinates mercilessly for the slightest infractions, but also quick to praise their accomplishments. He garnered a reputation as a general who was both impatient and impulsive and had little tolerance for officers who had failed to succeed. However, he fired only General Orlando Ward, and that after two warnings, whereas Bradley sacked several generals during the war. Patton reportedly had the utmost respect for the men serving in his command, particularly the wounded. Many of his directives showed special trouble to care for the enlisted men under his command, and he was well known for arranging extra supplies for battlefield soldiers, including blankets and extra socks, galoshes, and other items normally in short supply at the front.\nViews on race.\nPatton is known to have held racist attitudes typical for those of his upbringing and family roots in the Confederate South. Privately he wrote of black soldiers:\nIndividually they were good soldiers, but I expressed my belief at the time, and have never found the necessity of changing it, that a colored soldier cannot think fast enough to fight in armor.\nHowever publicly, Patton stated that performance was more important than race or religious affiliation:\nI don't give a damn who the man is. He can be a Nigger or a Jew, but if he has the stuff and does his duty, he can have anything I've got. By God! I love him.\nAddressing the 761st Tank Battalion Patton also said:\nMen, you are the first Negro tankers ever to fight in the American Army. I would never have asked for you if you weren't good. I have nothing but the best in my army. I don't care what color you are, so long as you go up there and kill those Kraut sonsabitches! Everyone has their eyes on you and is expecting great things from you. Most of all, your race is looking forward to you. Don't let them down and, damn you, don't let me down!\nPatton called heavily on the Black troops under his command. Historian Hugh Cole noted Patton was the first in the US to integrate black and white soldiers into the same rifle companies.\nAdditionally, the one man Patton spent the most time with during World War II was his aide and personal valet, Sergeant Major William George Meeks. Meeks was an African American career soldier, and considered a personal confidant by General Patton.\nAnti-Russian sentiment.\nPatton admired Russia as a political entity, but was disdainful of Russians as a people, saying:\nThe difficulty in understanding the Russian is that we do not take cognizance of the fact that he is not a European, but an Asiatic, and therefore thinks deviously. We can no more understand a Russian than a Chinaman or a Japanese, and from what I have seen of them, I have no particular desire to understand them, except to ascertain how much lead or iron it takes to kill them. In addition to his other Asiatic characteristics, the Russian has no regard for human life and is an all out son of a bitch, barbarian, and chronic drunk.\nAs viewed by Allied leaders.\nOn 1 February 1945, Eisenhower wrote a memo ranking the military capabilities of his subordinate American generals in Europe. General Bradley and the Army Air Forces General Carl Spaatz shared the number one position, Walter Bedell Smith was ranked number three, and Patton number four. Eisenhower revealed his reasoning in a 1946 review of the book \"Patton and His Third Army\": \"George Patton was the most brilliant commander of an Army in the open field that our or any other service produced. But his army was part of a whole organization and his operations part of a great campaign.\" Eisenhower believed that other generals should be given the credit for planning the successful Allied campaigns across Europe in which Patton was merely \"a brilliant executor\".\nEisenhower's overall view of Patton's military value is revealed in his refusal to even consider sending him home after the slapping incidents of 1943, after which he privately remarked, \"Patton is indispensable to the war effort\u2014one of the guarantors of our victory.\" Assistant Secretary of War John J. McCloy told Eisenhower: \"Lincoln's remark after they got after Grant comes to mind when I think of Patton\u2014'I can't spare this man, he fights'.\" After Patton's death, Eisenhower wrote:\nHe was one of those men born to be a soldier, an ideal combat leader\u00a0... It is no exaggeration to say that Patton's name struck terror at the hearts of the enemy.\nHistorian Carlo D'Este insisted that Bradley disliked Patton both personally and professionally, but Bradley's biographer Jim DeFelice noted that the evidence indicated otherwise. President Franklin D. Roosevelt appeared to greatly esteem Patton and his abilities, stating \"he is our greatest fighting general, and sheer joy\". On the other hand, Roosevelt's successor Harry S. Truman appears to have taken an instant dislike to Patton, at one point comparing both him and Douglas MacArthur to George Armstrong Custer.\nFor the most part, British commanders did not hold Patton in high regard. General Alan Brooke noted in January 1943:\nI had heard of him, but I must confess that his swashbuckling personality exceeded my expectation. I did not form any high opinion of him, nor had I any reason to alter this view at any later date. A dashing, courageous, wild, and unbalanced leader, good for operations requiring thrust and push, but at a loss in any operation requiring skill and judgment.\nOne exception was Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery who admired Patton's ability to command troops in the field, if not his strategic judgment. Other Allied commanders were more impressed, the Free French in particular. General Henri Giraud was incredulous when he heard of Patton's dismissal by Eisenhower in late 1945 and invited him to Paris to be decorated by French President Charles de Gaulle at a state banquet. At the banquet, President de Gaulle gave a speech placing Patton's achievements alongside those of Napoleon. Soviet leader Joseph Stalin stated that the Red Army could neither have planned nor executed Patton's rapid armored advance across France.\nAs viewed by Axis leaders.\nAllied leaders expressed mixed feelings on Patton's capabilities, but the German High Command was noted to have more respect for him than for any other Allied commander after 1943. Adolf Hitler reportedly called him \"that crazy cowboy general\". Many German field commanders were generous in their praise of Patton's leadership following the war, and many of its highest commanders also held his abilities in high regard. Erwin Rommel credited Patton with executing \"the most astonishing achievement in mobile warfare\". \"Generaloberst\" Alfred Jodl stated that Patton \"was the American Guderian. He was very bold and preferred large movements. He took big risks and won big successes.\" \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Albert Kesselring said:\nPatton had developed tank warfare into an art, and understood how to handle tanks brilliantly in the field. I feel compelled, therefore, to compare him with \"Generalfeldmarschall\" Rommel, who likewise had mastered the art of tank warfare. Both of them had a kind of second sight in regard to this type of warfare.\nFritz Bayerlein said, \"I do not think that General Patton would let us get away so easily,\" referring to the escape of the Afrika Korps after the Battle of El Alamein. Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt told \"Stars and Stripes\" after his capture, \"He is your best.\"\nOrders, decorations and medals.\nPatton's decorations included:\nDates of rank.\nPatton's dates of rank were:\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42091", "revid": "3174456", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42091", "title": "John Dillinger", "text": "American bank robber (1903\u20131934)\nJohn Herbert Dillinger (; June 22, 1903 \u2013 July 22, 1934) was an American gangster during the Great Depression. He commanded the Dillinger Gang, which was accused of robbing twenty-four banks and four police stations. Dillinger was imprisoned several times and escaped twice. He was charged with but not convicted of the murder of East Chicago, Indiana, police officer William O'Malley, who shot Dillinger in his bulletproof vest during a shootout; it was the only time Dillinger was charged with homicide.\nDillinger courted publicity. The media printed exaggerated accounts of his bravado and colorful personality, and described him as a Robin Hood-type figure. In response, J. Edgar Hoover, director of the Bureau of Investigation (BOI), used Dillinger as justification to evolve the BOI into the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), developing more sophisticated investigative techniques as weapons against organized crime.\nAfter evading police in four states for almost a year, Dillinger was wounded in a gunfight and went to his father's home to recover. His Michigan hideout was in Charlevoix, Michigan. He returned to Chicago in July 1934 and sought refuge in a brothel owned by Ana Cump\u0103na\u0219, who later informed authorities of his whereabouts. On July 22, 1934, local and federal law-enforcement officers closed in on the Biograph Theater. When BOI agents moved to arrest Dillinger as he left the theater, he attempted to flee but was fatally shot; the lethal use of force by the agents would eventually be ruled justifiable homicide.\nEarly life.\nFamily and background.\nJohn Dillinger was born on June 22, 1903, at 2053 Cooper Street, Indianapolis, Indiana, the younger of two children born to John Wilson Dillinger (1864\u20131943) and Mary Ellen \"Mollie\" Lancaster (1870\u20131907). His paternal grandfather, Mathias Dillinger, immigrated to the U.S. in 1854 from Gisingen, a village of Wallerfangen in the Saar Region of Prussia due to poverty and fears of conscription.\nDillinger's parents had married on August 23, 1887. His father was a grocer by trade and, reportedly, a harsh man. In an interview with reporters, Dillinger said that his father was firm in his discipline and believed in the adage \"spare the rod and spoil the child\". His mother died in 1907, just before his fourth birthday.\nThat same year, Dillinger's older sister Audrey married Emmett \"Fred\" Hancock, in a marriage that produced seven children. She cared for her brother for several years until their father remarried in 1912 to Elizabeth \"Lizzie\" Fields (1878\u20131933); they had three children.\nFormative years and marriage.\nAs a teenager, Dillinger was frequently in trouble for fighting and petty theft; he was also noted for his \"bewildering personality\" and bullying of smaller children. He quit school to work in an Indianapolis machine shop. Fearing that the city was corrupting his son, Dillinger's father relocated the family to Mooresville, Indiana, in 1921. Despite his new rural life, however, Dillinger's wild and rebellious behavior was unchanged. In 1922 he was arrested for auto theft, and his relationship with his father deteriorated.\nIn 1923, Dillinger's troubles resulted in him enlisting in the United States Navy, where he was a petty officer third class machinery repairman assigned aboard the battleship . He deserted when his ship was docked in Boston a few months into his service, and was eventually dishonorably discharged.\nDillinger returned to Mooresville, where he met Beryl Ethel Hovious. The two married on April 12, 1924. Despite Dillinger's attempts to settle down, he found it difficult finding a job. He subsequently began planning a robbery with his friend, ex-convict Ed Singleton.\nDillinger and Singleton robbed a Mooresville grocery store, stealing $50 (about $917 in 2024). During the robbery, Dillinger struck a victim on the head with a machine bolt wrapped in a cloth, and carried a gun which, although it discharged, hit no one. While leaving the scene, the criminals were seen by a minister who recognized the two men and reported them to the police. They were arrested the next day. Singleton pleaded not guilty, but after Dillinger's father (the local Mooresville deacon) discussed the matter with Morgan County prosecutor Omar O'Harrow, his father convinced Dillinger to confess to the crime and plead guilty without retaining a defense attorney.\nDillinger was convicted of assault and battery with intent to rob, and conspiracy to commit a felony. He expected a lenient sentence of probation as a result of his father's discussion with O'Harrow but was sentenced instead to ten to twenty years in prison. Dillinger's father told reporters he regretted his advice and was appalled by the sentence, pleading with the judge to shorten the sentence without success. En route to Mooresville to testify against Singleton, Dillinger briefly escaped his captors but was apprehended within a few minutes. Singleton had a change of venue and was sentenced to a jail term of two to fourteen years. He was killed on September 2, 1937, when he fell asleep on railroad tracks while drunk.\nPrison time.\nIncarcerated at Indiana Reformatory and Indiana State Prison between 1924 and 1933, Dillinger developed a criminal lifestyle. Upon being admitted to prison, he was quoted as saying, \"I will be the meanest bastard you ever saw when I get out of here.\" His physical examination at the prison showed that he had gonorrhea, treatment of which at the time was painful. He became resentful against society because of his long prison sentence and befriended other criminals, including seasoned bank robbers Harry \"Pete\" Pierpont, Charles Makley, Russell Clark and Homer Van Meter, who taught Dillinger how to be a successful criminal. The men planned heists that they would commit soon after they were released. Dillinger also studied Herman Lamm's meticulous bank-robbing system and used it extensively throughout his criminal career.\nDillinger's father began a public campaign to have him released and was able to obtain 188 signatures on a petition. On May 10, 1933, after serving nine and a half years, Dillinger was paroled. Released at the depths of the Great Depression, Dillinger, with little prospect of finding employment, immediately returned to crime.\nOn June 21, 1933, Dillinger committed his first bank robbery, stealing $10,000 ($241,000 in 2024) from a bank in New Carlisle, Ohio. On August 14 he robbed a bank in Bluffton, Ohio. Tracked by police from Dayton, he was captured and later transferred to Allen County jail in Lima to be indicted in connection to the Bluffton robbery. After searching him before putting him into the prison, the police discovered a document which appeared to be a prison escape plan. They demanded Dillinger tell them what the document meant, but he refused.\nEarlier, Dillinger had helped conceive a plan to enable the escape of Pierpont, Clark and six other prison acquaintances. He had friends smuggle guns into their cells, which they used to escape four days after Dillinger's capture. The group that formed, known as \"the First Dillinger Gang\", consisted of Pierpont, Clark, Makley, Ed Shouse, Harry Copeland and John \"Red\" Hamilton, a member of the Herman Lamm Gang. Pierpont, Clark and Makley arrived in Lima on October 12, 1933, where they impersonated Indiana State Police officers, claiming they had come to extradite Dillinger to Indiana. When the sheriff, Jess Sarber, asked for their credentials, Pierpont shot Sarber dead, then released Dillinger from his house. The four men escaped back to Indiana, where they joined the rest of the gang.\nBank robberies.\nDillinger is known to have participated with the Dillinger Gang in twelve bank robberies, between June 21, 1933, and June 30, 1934.\nEvelyn Frechette.\nEvelyn \"Billie\" Frechette met Dillinger in October 1933, and they began a relationship the following month. After Dillinger's death, Billie was offered money for her story and wrote a memoir for the \"Chicago Herald- Examiner\" in August 1934.\nEscape from Crown Point, Indiana.\nOn January 25, 1934, Dillinger and his gang were captured in Tucson, Arizona. Dillinger was extradited to Indiana and escorted back by Matt Leach, the Chief of the Indiana State Police. He was taken to Lake County jail in Crown Point, Indiana, and jailed for charges for the murder of police officer William O'Malley, who was killed during a Dillinger gang bank robbery in East Chicago on January 15, 1934.\nLocal police boasted to area newspapers that the jail was escape-proof and had posted extra guards as a precaution. However, on Saturday, March 3, 1934, Dillinger was able to escape during morning exercises with fifteen other inmates. Dillinger produced a pistol, catching deputies and guards by surprise, and was able to leave the premises without firing a shot. Almost immediately afterwards conjecture began whether the gun Dillinger displayed was real or not. According to Deputy Ernest Blunk, Dillinger had escaped using a real pistol. FBI files, on the other hand, indicate that Dillinger used a carved fake pistol. Sam Cahoon, a trustee whom Dillinger took hostage in the jail, also believed Dillinger had carved the gun, using a razor and some shelving in his cell. In another version, according to an unpublished interview with Dillinger's attorney, Louis Piquett, investigator Art O'Leary claimed to have snuck the gun in himself.\nOn March 16, Herbert Youngblood, who escaped from Crown Point alongside Dillinger, was shot dead by police in Port Huron, Michigan. Deputy Sheriff Charles Cavanaugh was mortally wounded in the gunfight and later died. Before his death, Youngblood told officers Dillinger was in Port Huron, and officers immediately began a fruitless search for the escaped man. An Indiana newspaper reported that Youngblood later retracted the story and said he did not know where Dillinger was at that time, as he had parted with him soon after their escape.\nDillinger was indicted by a grand jury, and the Bureau of Investigation (a precursor of the Federal Bureau of Investigation) organized a nationwide manhunt for him. Just hours after his escape from Lake County jail, Dillinger reunited with his girlfriend, Billie Frechette.\nAccording to Frechette's trial testimony, Dillinger stayed with her for \"almost two weeks\". However, the two had actually traveled to the Twin Cities and taken lodgings at the Santa Monica Apartments in Minneapolis, Minnesota, where they stayed for fifteen days. Dillinger then met Hamilton, and the two mustered a new gang consisting of Baby Face Nelson's gang, including Nelson, Homer Van Meter, Tommy Carroll and Eddie Green.\nThree days after Dillinger's escape from Crown Point, the second Gang robbed a bank in Sioux Falls, South Dakota. A week later they robbed First National Bank in Mason City, Iowa.\nLincoln Court Apartments shootout.\nSetting.\nOn Tuesday, March 20, 1934, Dillinger and Frechette relocated into the Lincoln Court Apartments in St. Paul, Minnesota, using the aliases \"Mr. &amp; Mrs. Carl T. Hellman\" in Apartment 303. Daisy Coffey, the landlord, testified at Frechette's trial that she spent most evenings during Dillinger's stay observing what was happening. On March 30, Coffey went to the FBI's St. Paul field office to file a report, including information about the couple's new Hudson sedan parked in the garage behind the apartments.\nSurveillance.\nAs a result of Coffey's tip, the building was surveilled by two agents, Rufus Coulter and Rusty Nalls, but they saw nothing unusual because the blinds were drawn. The next morning, at approximately 10:15\u00a0a.m., Nalls circled around the block looking for the Hudson but observed nothing. He parked, first on Lincoln Avenue (the north side of the apartments), then on the west side of Lexington Avenue, at the northwest corner of Lexington and Lincoln, and remained in his car while watching Coulter and St. Paul Police detective Henry Cummings pull up, park and enter the building. Ten minutes later, by Nalls's estimate, Van Meter parked a green Ford coupe on the north side of the apartment building.\nShootout.\nMeanwhile, Coulter and Cummings knocked on the door of Apartment 303. Frechette answered, opening the door two to three inches. She said she was not dressed and to come back. Coulter told her they would wait. After waiting two to three minutes, Coulter went to the basement apartment of the caretakers, Louis and Margaret Meidlinger, and asked to use the telephone to call the Bureau. He quickly returned to Cummings, and the two of them waited for Frechette to open the door. Van Meter then appeared in the hall and asked Coulter if his name was Johnson. Coulter said it was not, and as Van Meter passed on to the landing of the third floor, Coulter asked him for a name. Van Meter replied, \"I am a soap salesman.\" Asked where his samples were, Van Meter said they were in his car. Coulter asked if he had any credentials. Van Meter said \"no\", and continued down the stairs. Coulter waited ten to twenty seconds, then followed Van Meter. As Coulter reached the lobby on the ground floor, Van Meter began shooting at him. Coulter hastily fled outside, chased by Van Meter. Van Meter ran back into the front entrance.\nRecognizing Van Meter, Nalls pointed out the Ford to Coulter and told him to disable it. Coulter shot out the rear left tire. While Coulter stayed with Van Meter's Ford, Nalls went to the corner drugstore and telephoned the local police, then the Bureau's St. Paul office, but could not get through because both lines were busy. Van Meter, meanwhile, escaped by hopping on a passing coal truck.\nFrechette, in her harboring trial testimony, said that she told Dillinger that the police had shown up after speaking to Cummings. Upon hearing Van Meter firing at Coulter, Dillinger began shooting through the door with a Thompson submachine gun, sending Cummings scrambling for cover. Dillinger then stepped out and fired another burst at Cummings. Cummings shot back with a revolver, but quickly ran out of ammunition. He hit Dillinger in the left calf with one of his five shots. He then hastily retreated down the stairs to the front entrance. Once Cummings retreated, Dillinger and Frechette hurried down the stairs, exited through the back door and drove away in the Hudson.\nAftermath.\nAfter the shootout, Dillinger and Frechette drove to Eddie Green's apartment in Minneapolis. Green telephoned his associate Dr. Clayton E. May at his office at 712 Masonic Temple in downtown Minneapolis (still extant). With Green, his wife Beth and Frechette following in Green's car, the doctor drove Dillinger to an apartment belonging to Augusta Salt, who had been providing nursing services and a bed for May's illicit patients, whom he could not risk seeing at his regular office, for several years. May treated Dillinger's wound with antiseptics. Green visited Dillinger on Monday, April 2, just hours before Green was mortally wounded by the Bureau in St. Paul. Dillinger convalesced at May's until Wednesday, April 4. May was promised $500 for his services but received nothing.\nReturn to Mooresville.\nAfter the events in Minneapolis, Dillinger and Frechette traveled to Mooresville to visit Dillinger's father. Friday, April 6, 1934, was spent contacting family members, particularly his half-brother Hubert Dillinger. On April 6, Hubert and Dillinger left Mooresville at about 8:00\u00a0p.m. and proceeded to Leipsic, Ohio (approximately 210 miles away), to see Joseph and Lena Pierpont, parents of Prohibition Era gangster, Harry Pierpont. The Pierponts were not home, so the two headed back to Mooresville around midnight.\nOn April 7 at approximately 3:30\u00a0a.m., they rammed a car driven by Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Manning near Noblesville, Indiana, after Hubert fell asleep behind the wheel. They crashed through a farm fence and about 200 feet into the woods. Both men made it back to the Mooresville farm. Swarms of police showed up at the accident scene within hours. Found in the car were maps, a machine gun magazine, a length of rope, and a bullwhip. According to Hubert, his brother planned to pay a visit with the bullwhip to his former one-armed \"shyster\" lawyer at Crown Point, Joseph Ryan, who had run off with his retainer after being replaced by Louis Piquett. At about 10:30\u00a0a.m. on April 7, Billie, Hubert and Hubert's wife purchased a black four-door Ford V8, registering it in the name of Mrs. Fred Penfield (Billie Frechette). At 2:30\u00a0p.m., Billie and Hubert picked up the V8 and returned to Mooresville.\nOn Sunday, April 8, the Dillingers enjoyed a family picnic while the FBI had the farm under surveillance nearby. Later in the afternoon, suspecting they were being watched (agents J. L. Geraghty and T. J. Donegan were cruising in the vicinity in their car), the group left in separate cars. Billie drove the new Ford V8, with two of Dillinger's nieces, Mary Hancock in the front seat and Alberta Hancock in the back. Dillinger was on the floor of the car. He was later seen, but not recognized, by Donegan and Geraghty. Eventually, Norman, driving the V8, proceeded with Dillinger and Billie to Chicago, where they separated from Norman.\nThe next afternoon, Monday, April 9, Dillinger had an appointment at a tavern at 416 North State Street. Sensing trouble, Billie went in first. She was promptly arrested by agents, but refused to reveal Dillinger's whereabouts. Dillinger was waiting in his car outside the tavern and then drove off unnoticed. The two never saw each other again.\nDillinger reportedly became despondent after Billie was arrested. The other gang members tried to talk him out of rescuing her, but Van Meter encouraged him by saying that he knew where they could find bulletproof vests. That Friday morning, late at night, Dillinger and Van Meter took a hostage, Warsaw, Indiana police officer Judd Pittenger. They marched Pittenger at gunpoint into the police station, where they stole several more guns and bulletproof vests. After separating, Dillinger picked up Hamilton, who was recovering from the Mason City robbery. The two then traveled to the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, where they visited Hamilton's sister Anna Steve.\nEscape at Little Bohemia.\nThe Bureau received a telephone call Sunday morning, April 22 that John Dillinger and several of his confederates were hiding out at a small vacation lodge called Little Bohemia near present-day Manitowish Waters, Wisconsin.\nDillinger and some of the gang were upstairs in the lodge and began shooting out the windows. While the BOI agents ducked for cover, Dillinger and his men fled from the back of the building.\nHiding in Chicago.\nBy July 1934, Dillinger had absconded, and the federal agents did not have any information about his whereabouts. He had, in fact, gone to Chicago where he used the alias of Jimmy Lawrence, a petty criminal from Wisconsin who bore a close resemblance to Dillinger. Working as a clerk, Dillinger found that, in a large metropolis like Chicago, he was able to live an anonymous existence for a while. What he did not realize was that the federal agents' dragnet happened to be based at Chicago. When the authorities found Dillinger's blood-spattered getaway car on a Chicago side street, they were positive that he was in the city.\nPlastic surgery.\nAccording to Art O'Leary, as early as March 1934, Dillinger expressed an interest in plastic surgery and had asked O'Leary to check with Piquett on such matters. At the end of April, Piquett paid a visit to his old friend Dr. Wilhelm Loeser. Loeser had practiced in Chicago for 27 years before being convicted under the \"Harrison Narcotic Act\" in 1931. He was sentenced to three years at Leavenworth, but was paroled early on December 7, 1932, with Piquett's help. He later testified that he performed facial surgery on himself and obliterated the fingerprint impressions on the tips of his fingers by the application of a caustic soda preparation. Piquett said Dillinger would have to pay $5,000 for the plastic surgery: $4,400 split between Piquett, Loeser and O'Leary, and $600 to Dr. Harold Cassidy, who would administer the anaesthetic. The procedure would be done at the home of Piquett's longtime friend, 67-year-old James Probasco, at the end of May.\nOn May 28, Loeser was picked up at his home at 7:30\u00a0p.m. by O'Leary and Cassidy. The three of them then drove to Probasco's place. Dillinger chose to have a general anaesthetic. Loeser later testified:\nI asked him what work he wanted done. He wanted two warts (moles) removed on the right lower forehead between the eyes and one at the left angle, outer angle of the left eye; wanted a depression of the nose filled in; a scar; a large one to the left of the median line of the upper lip excised, wanted his dimples removed and wanted the angle of the mouth drawn up. He didn't say anything about the fingers that day to me.\nCassidy administered an overdose of ether, which caused Dillinger to suffocate. He began to turn blue and stopped breathing. Loeser pulled Dillinger's tongue out of his mouth with a pair of forceps, and at the same time forced both elbows into his ribs. Dillinger gasped and resumed breathing. The procedure continued with only a local anesthetic. Loeser removed several moles on Dillinger's forehead, made an incision in his nose and an incision in his chin and tied back both cheeks.\nLoeser met with Piquett again on Saturday, June 2, with Piquett saying that more work was needed on Dillinger and that Van Meter now wanted the same work done to him. Also, both now wanted work done on their fingertips. The price for the fingerprint procedure would be $500 per hand or $100 a finger. Loeser used a mixture of nitric and hydrochloric acid\u2014known commonly as aqua regia.\nLoeser met O'Leary the next night at Clark and Wright at 8:30, and they once again drove to Probasco's. Present this evening were Dillinger, Van Meter, Probasco, Piquett, Cassidy, and Peggy Doyle, Probasco's girlfriend. Loeser testified that he worked for only about 30 minutes before O'Leary and Piquett left.\nLoeser testified:\nCassidy and I worked on Dillinger and Van Meter simultaneously on June 3. While the work was being done, Dillinger and Van Meter changed off. The work that could be done while the patient was sitting up, that patient was in the sitting-room. The work that had to be done while the man was lying down, that patient was on the couch in the bedroom. They were changed back and forth according to the work to be done. The hands were sterilized, made aseptic with antiseptics, thoroughly washed with soap and water and used sterile gauze afterwards to keep them clean. Next, cutting instrument, knife was used to expose the lower skin ... in other words, take off the epidermis and expose the derma, then alternately the acid and the alkaloid was applied as was necessary to produce the desired results.\nMinor work was done two nights later, Tuesday, June 5. Loeser made some small corrections first on Van Meter, then Dillinger. Loeser stated:\nA man came in before I left, who I found out later was Baby Face Nelson. He came in with a drum of machine gun bullets under his arm, threw them on the bed or the couch in the bedroom, and started to talk to Van Meter. The two then motioned for Dillinger to come over and the three went back into the kitchen.\nPeggy Doyle later told agents:\nDillinger and Van Meter resided at Probasco's home until the last week of June 1934; that on some occasions they would be away for a day or two, sometimes leaving separately, and on other occasions together; that at this time Van Meter usually parked his car in the rear of Probasco's residence outside the back fence; that she gathered that Dillinger was keeping company with a young woman who lived on the north side of Chicago, inasmuch as he would state upon leaving Probasco's home that he was going in the direction of Diversey Boulevard; that Van Meter apparently was not acquainted with Dillinger's friend, and she heard him warning Dillinger to be careful about striking up acquaintances with girls he knew nothing about; that Dillinger and Van Meter usually kept a machine gun in an open case under the piano in the parlor; that they also kept a shotgun under the parlor table.\nO'Leary stated that Dillinger expressed dissatisfaction with the facial work that Loeser had performed on him. O'Leary said that, on another occasion, \"that Probasco told him, 'the son of a bitch has gone out for one of his walks'; that he did not know when he would return; that Probasco raved about the craziness of Dillinger, stating that he was always going for walks and was likely to cause the authorities to locate the place where he was staying; that Probasco stated frankly on this occasion that he was afraid to have the man around\".\nAgents arrested Loeser at 1127 South Harvey, Oak Park, Illinois, on Tuesday, July 24. O'Leary returned from a family fishing trip on July 24, the day of Loeser's arrest, and had read in the newspapers that the Department of Justice was looking for two doctors and another man in connection with some plastic surgery that had been done on Dillinger. O'Leary left Chicago immediately, but returned two weeks later, learned that Loeser and others had been arrested, telephoned Piquett, who assured him everything was all right, then left again. He returned from St. Louis on August 25 and was promptly taken into custody.\nOn Friday, July 27, Probasco fell to his death from the 19th floor of the Bankers' Building in Chicago while in custody. On Thursday, August 23, Homer Van Meter was shot and killed in a dead-end alley in St. Paul by Tom Brown, former St. Paul police chief, and then-current chief Frank Cullen.\nPolly Hamilton.\nRita \"Polly\" Hamilton was a teenage runaway from Fargo, North Dakota. She met Ana Ivanova Akalieva (Ana Cump\u0103na\u0219; a.k.a. Ana Sage or \"The Woman in Red\") in Gary, Indiana, and worked periodically as a prostitute in Ana's brothel until marrying Gary police officer Roy O. Keele in 1929. They divorced in March 1933.\nIn the summer of 1934, the now 26-year-old Hamilton was a waitress in Chicago at the S&amp;S Sandwich Shop located at 1209\u00bd Wilson Avenue. She had remained friends with Sage and was sharing living space with Sage and Sage's 24-year-old son, Steve, at 2858 Clark Street.\nDillinger and Hamilton, a Billie Frechette look-alike, met in June 1934 at the Barrel of Fun night club located at 4541 Wilson Avenue. Dillinger introduced himself as Jimmy Lawrence and said he was a clerk at the Board of Trade. They dated until Dillinger's death at the Biograph Theater in July 1934.\nBetrayal.\nDivision of Investigations chief J. Edgar Hoover created a special task force headquartered in Chicago to locate Dillinger. On July 21, Ana Cump\u0103na\u0219 contacted the FBI, offering agents information on Dillinger in exchange for their help in preventing her deportation to Romania due to Cump\u0103na\u0219' status as an \"alien of low moral character\". The FBI agreed to her terms, but she was later deported nonetheless. Cump\u0103na\u0219 revealed that Dillinger was spending time with another prostitute, Polly Hamilton, and that she and the couple were going to see a movie together on the next day. She agreed to wear an orange dress, so police could easily identify her. She was unsure which of two theaters they would attend, the Biograph or the Marbro.\nOn December 15, 1934, pardons were issued by Indiana Governor Harry G. Leslie for the offenses of which Ana Cump\u0103na\u0219 was convicted.\nCump\u0103na\u0219 stated that on Sunday afternoon, July 22, Dillinger asked her whether she wanted to go to the show with them (Polly and him).\nShe asked him what show was he going to see, and he said he would 'like to see the theater around the corner,' meaning the Biograph Theater. She stated she was unable to leave the house to inform Purvis or Martin about Dillinger's plans to attend the Biograph, but as they were going to have fried chicken for the evening meal, she told Polly she had nothing in which to fry the chicken and was going to the store to get some butter; that while at the store she called Mr. Purvis and informed him of Dillinger's plans to attend the Biograph that evening, at the same time obtaining the butter. She then returned to the house so Polly would not be suspicious that she went out to call anyone.\nA team of federal agents and officers from police forces from outside of Chicago was formed, along with a very small number of Chicago police officers. Among them was East Chicago Police Department Sergeant Martin Zarkovich, the officer to whom Cump\u0103na\u0219 had acted as a criminal informant. At the time, federal officials felt that the Chicago Police Department was thoroughly corrupt and could not be trusted; Hoover and Purvis also wanted more of the credit. Not wanting to take the risk of another embarrassing escape of Dillinger, the police were divided into two groups. On Sunday, one team was sent to the Marbro Theater on the city's west side, while another team surrounded the Biograph Theater at 2433 N. Lincoln Avenue on the north side.\nShooting at the Biograph Theater and death.\nAt approximately 8:30\u00a0p.m., Sage, Hamilton, and Dillinger were observed entering the Biograph Theater, which was showing the crime drama \"Manhattan Melodrama\", featuring Clark Gable, Myrna Loy, and William Powell. During the stakeout, the Biograph's manager thought the agents were criminals preparing for a robbery. He called the Chicago police, who responded but then had to be waved off by the federal agents, who told them that they were on a stakeout for an important target.\nWhen the movie ended, Purvis stood by the front door and signaled Dillinger's exit by lighting a cigar. Both he and the other agents reported that Dillinger turned his head and looked directly at the agent as he walked by, glanced across the street, then moved ahead of his female companions, reached into his pocket but failed to extract his Colt M1903, and ran into a nearby alley. Other accounts stated Dillinger ignored a command to surrender, whipped out his gun, then headed for the alley. Agents already had the alley closed off.\nThree men pursued Dillinger into the alley and fired. Clarence Hurt shot twice, Charles Winstead three times, and Herman Hollis once. Dillinger was hit from behind and fell face first to the ground.\nDillinger was struck four times, with two bullets grazing him and one causing a superficial wound to the right side. The fatal bullet entered through the back of his neck, severed the spinal cord, passed into his brain and exited just under the right eye, severing two sets of veins and arteries. An ambulance was summoned, although it was soon apparent Dillinger had died from the gunshot wounds; he was officially pronounced dead at Alexian Brothers Hospital. According to investigators, Dillinger died without saying a word. Winstead was later thought to have fired the fatal shot, and as a consequence received a personal letter of commendation from J. Edgar Hoover.\nTwo female bystanders, Theresa Paulas and Etta Natalsky, were wounded. Dillinger bumped into Natalsky just as the shooting started. Natalsky was shot and was taken to Columbus Hospital.\nDillinger was shot and killed by the special agents on July 22, 1934, at approximately 10:40 p.m, according to a \"New York Times\" report the next day. Dillinger's death came only two months after the deaths of fellow notorious criminals Bonnie and Clyde. There were reports of people dipping their handkerchiefs and skirts into the pool of blood that had formed, as Dillinger lay in the alley, as keepsakes: \"Souvenir hunters madly dipped newspapers in the blood that stained the pavement. Handkerchiefs were whipped out and used to mop up the blood.\"\nFuneral.\nDillinger's body was available for public display at the Cook County morgue. An estimated 15,000 people viewed the corpse over a day and a half. As many as four death masks were also made.\nDillinger is buried at Crown Hill Cemetery in Indianapolis. Dillinger's gravestone has been replaced several times because of vandalism by people chipping off pieces as souvenirs. Hilton Crouch (1903\u20131976), an associate of Dillinger's on some early heists, is buried only a few yards to the west.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42092", "revid": "1254211597", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42092", "title": "Hypostatization", "text": ""}
{"id": "42093", "revid": "18240388", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42093", "title": "Gentleman's Agreement", "text": "1947 film by Elia Kazan\nGentleman's Agreement is a 1947 American drama film based on Laura Z. Hobson's best-selling 1947 novel of the same title. The film is about a journalist (played by Gregory Peck) who pretends to be Jewish to research an expos\u00e9 on the widespread antisemitism in New York City and the affluent communities of New Canaan and Darien, Connecticut. It was nominated for eight Academy Awards and won three: Best Picture, Best Supporting Actress (Celeste Holm), and Best Director (Elia Kazan).\nThe movie was controversial in its day, as was a similar film on the same subject, \"Crossfire\", which was released the same year (though that film was originally a story about homophobia, later changed to antisemitism).\nIn 2017, the film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being \"culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant\".\nPlot.\nWidowed journalist Philip Schuyler Green moves to New York City with his aging mother and his young son Tommy. Phil meets with magazine publisher John Minify, who asks Green, a gentile, to write an article on antisemitism. At first, he is not enthusiastic about the story.\nAt a lunch party, Phil meets Minify's niece Kathy Lacey, who is actually the person who suggested the story idea. The next day, at home, Phil admits his surprise after learning that the idea came from \"a girl\". His mother mocks him for his anti-female prejudice. Phil then tries to explain anti-Jewish prejudice to his son. Realizing how difficult it is to explain these topics, he decides to write the story.\nPhil and Kathy begin dating and Phil adopts a Jewish identity to write the story from a fresh perspective. They agree to keep it secret that Phil is not Jewish. Despite seeming to have liberal views, Kathy is taken aback after learning of Phil's plan.\nPhil is assigned a secretary, Elaine Wales, who turns out to be Jewish. Being told there were no openings at the magazine after she applied under her true name, she reapplied using an anglicized named and was hired. After learning of Wales' experience from Phil, Minify orders the magazine to adopt hiring policies that are open to Jews. Phil meets fashion editor Anne Dettrey, who becomes a good friend and potentially more, particularly as strains develop between Phil and Kathy.\nAfter completing his service in WWII, Dave Goldman, Phil's childhood friend, moves to New York and lives with the Greens while searching for a job and a home for his family. Being Jewish, Dave also experiences antisemitism. Housing is scarce in the city, but it is particularly difficult for him, since not all landlords will rent to a Jewish family.\nWhile researching his story, Phil experiences several incidents of bigotry. When Phil's mother becomes ill with a heart condition, the doctor discourages him from consulting a specialist with a Jewish name. After hearing Phil is Jewish, the doctor becomes uncomfortable and leaves.\nIn addition, the janitor is shocked that Phil has added a Jewish name (Greenberg), below his name (Green), on the mail box. Furthermore, when Phil wants to celebrate his honeymoon at a swanky hotel, the manager refuses to register Phil, whom he tells to go elsewhere.\nTommy also becomes the target of bullies because of this. Phil is troubled by the way Kathy consoles Tommy, telling him their taunts of \"dirty Jew\" are wrong because he is not Jewish, not that the epithet is wrong in and of itself.\nKathy's attitudes are revealed further when she and Phil announce their engagement. Her sister Jane invites them to a celebration in her home in Darien, which is known to be a community where Jews are not welcome. Fearing an awkward scene, Kathy wants to tell her family and friends that Phil only pretends to be Jewish, but he dissuades her. At the party, everyone is friendly to Phil, though many people cancel at the last minute.\nDave announces he will have to quit his job because he cannot find a residence for his family. Kathy owns a vacant cottage in Darien and Phil sees it as a solution to Dave's problem. Kathy, however, is unwilling to offend her neighbors by renting it to a Jewish family. Phil breaks his engagement to her and announces he will be moving away from New York when his article is published. When it comes out, it is well received by the magazine staff.\nKathy meets with Dave and tells him how sick she felt when a party guest told a bigoted joke. However, she has no answer when Dave asks her what she did about it. She realizes that remaining silent condones the prejudice.\nThe next day, Dave announces that he and his family will be moving into the cottage in Darien and Kathy will be moving in with her sister next door to make sure they are treated well. Moved by this, Phil reconciles with Kathy. His mother, still recovering from her heart condition, tells Phil that his article has given her new hope for the future, a new motivation to get well.\nProduction.\nZanuck decided to make a film version of Hobson's novel after being refused membership in the Los Angeles Country Club, because it was assumed (incorrectly) that he was Jewish. Before filming commenced, Samuel Goldwyn and other Jewish film executives approached Darryl Zanuck and asked him not to make the film, fearing it would \"stir up trouble\". They also warned that Hays Code enforcer Joseph Breen might not allow the film to pass the censors, as he had been known to make disparaging remarks about Jews. There was also concern that Dorothy McGuire's character being divorced would offend the National Legion of Decency.\nThe role of Phillip Green was first offered to Cary Grant, but he turned it down. Peck decided to accept the role, although his agent advised him to refuse, believing Peck would be endangering his career. Jewish actor John Garfield agreed to play a lesser role in the film to be a part of it.\nPortions of the film were shot on location in Darien, Connecticut.\nReception and box-office.\n\"Gentleman's Agreement\" received a generally favorable reception from influential \"New York Times\" critic Bosley Crowther. Crowther said that \"every point about prejudice which Miss Hobson had to make in her book has been made with superior illustration and more graphic demonstration in the film, so that the sweep of her moral indignation is not only widened, but intensified thereby\". However, Crowther also said that the movie shared the novel's failings in that \"explorations are narrowly confined to the upper-class social and professional level to which he is immediately exposed\". He also said the main character's shock at the extent of anti-Semitism was lacking in credibility: \"It is, in a careful analysis, an extraordinarily naive role.\"\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds an aggregate score of 82% based on 83 critic reviews, with an average rating of 7.1/10. The website's consensus reads: \"It occasionally fails to live up to its subject matter\u00a0\u2013 and is perhaps an 'important' film more than a 'great' one\u00a0\u2013 but the performances from Gregory Peck and Dorothy McGuire are superb.\"\n\"The New York Herald Tribune\" described it as a \"brilliant blow against racial and religious intolerance\". \"The Daily Mirror\" assessed it as \"the most explosive picture of the year\" and \"one of the most exciting and punch-laden pictures you've ever seen.\"\nIn addition to winning Academy Awards for Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Supporting Actress (Celeste Holm), \"Gentleman's Agreement\" was one of Fox's highest-grossing movies of 1947. The political nature of the film, however, upset the House Un-American Activities Committee, with Elia Kazan, John Garfield, and Anne Revere all being called to testify before the committee. Revere refused to testify and although Garfield appeared, he refused to \"name names\". Both were placed in the \"Red Channels\" of the Hollywood Blacklist. Garfield remained on the blacklist for a year, was called again to testify against his wife, and died of a heart attack at the age of 39 before his second hearing date.\nIn recognition for producing \"Gentleman's Agreement\", the Hollywood chapter of B'nai B'rith International honored Darryl Zanuck as its \"Man of the Year\" for 1948. On Sunday, December 12, a gala commemoration evening was held in downtown Los Angeles at the Biltmore Hotel before a crowd of over a thousand. Among the tributes to Zanuck, New Mexico Senator Clinton Anderson said, \"He does not storm up and down the streets of a community, urging its citizens to do good. He does not fill the pages of books with words that string together into a sermon. He allows you to be seated comfortably in a theater, to be absorbed in a problem and to walk out into the night with your thoughts clarified and your lips saying, 'This situation ought to be changed'.\" After the formal speeches there was a star-studded variety show, including the debut before the Hollywood film world of the team of Dean Martin and Jerry Lewis.\nThe movie was an unexpected hit at the box office. According to \"Variety\", it earned $3.9\u00a0million in rentals in the US in 1948.\nLeonard Maltin said \"sincere...then-daring approach to the subject matter is tame now.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42096", "revid": "11435369", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42096", "title": "Former Soviet republic of Georgia", "text": ""}
{"id": "42097", "revid": "14419815", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42097", "title": "Saint Valentine's Day Massacre", "text": "1929 gang shooting in Chicago\nThe Saint Valentine's Day Massacre was the murder of seven members and associates of Chicago's North Side Gang on Saint Valentine's Day 1929. The men were gathered at a Lincoln Park, Chicago, garage when between four and six men entered, two of whom were disguised as police officers. The seven men were lined up facing a wall and shot with Thompson machine guns and a shotgun; seventy rounds were fired from the Thompsons, and one cartridge was discharged from the shotgun. Six of the victims died immediately; one lived for a short while but refused to identify the killers.\nThe murders occurred amid the competition for control of organized crime in the city during Prohibition. Police and historians have speculated that the murders were an attempt to kill the head of the North Side Gang, George \"Bugs\" Moran, although he had not arrived by the time the attack started. The North Siders were rivals of the Chicago Outfit, a criminal organization headed by Al Capone, and much of the speculation has focused on whether he was behind the murders.\nThe police, the Illinois Attorney General's office, and the coroner's office all opened investigations into the murders. Calvin Goddard, a pioneer in forensic ballistics set up a lab in Chicago with his team and equipment. Two cars likely to have been involved in the shootings were found; both had been destroyed. Police arrested several gang members in connection with the shootings, but a lack of evidence meant none were charged.\nIn 1935, Byron Bolton, who had been identified as a possible lookout at the crime, was arrested on unrelated charges. He confessed to being a lookout and said the murderers were Fred Goetz, Gus Winkler, Fred Burke, Ray Nugent and Bob Carey. His accusation was supported by the memoirs of Winkler's widow, Georgette. The accusations have been disputed by some historians who have suggested that \"Three Fingered Jack\" White and Tony Accardo were involved.\nThe violence associated with the Thompson machine gun in events like the St. Valentine's Day Massacre and the activities of John Dillinger led to changes in gun control legislation in the US, with the introduction of the National Firearms Act in 1934. The massacre has been discussed or referenced in books, including histories, and depicted on television and in film.\nBackground.\nProhibition and organized crime.\nIn 1920, the ratification of the 18th Amendment banned the manufacture, distribution, importation, and sale of alcoholic beverages in the United States, beginning the Prohibition era. In October 1919, the Volstead Act defined an alcoholic beverage as any that contained more than 0.5 percent alcohol.\nOrganized crime in the US pre-dated Prohibition, with gangs already involved in such activities as widespread brothel and gambling-house control. Prohibition brought about the growth of bootlegging, as the pre-existing gangs involved themselves in the illegal liquor trade. It brought with it \"a previously unknown level of competitive violence\" between rival groups, according to criminologist Robert M. Lombardo. One study calculated that the homicide rate in Chicago, Illinois, for example, rose 21 percent during Prohibition; the Chicago Crime Commission identified 729 gangland-affiliated murders in Cook County, Illinois, between 1919 and 1933\u00a0\u2013 15 percent of all murders in the area.\nBugs Moran and the North Side Gang.\nGeorge \"Bugs\" Moran was the leader of the North Side Gang, a Chicago-based criminal organization during Prohibition. According to historian Rose Keefe, Moran derived his nickname from his \"intense stare, coupled with his sometimes homicidal temper\".\nThe North Side Gang was the second most powerful gang in Chicago in the 1920s, behind the neighboring Chicago Outfit of Johnny Torrio and Al Capone. The North Siders were active in bootlegging, running speakeasies and gambling dens, and labor union racketeering; they also continued their pre-Prohibition activities of looting warehouses, safeblowing, and hijacking. The North Side Gang had been fighting with the Chicago Outfit from the mid-1920s. Hymie Weiss, then the leader of the North Side Gang, attempted to kill the Chicago Outfit's second-in-command, Al Capone, on January 12, 1925: Weiss shot at Capone's car and wounded the driver, but Capone escaped unharmed. After the deaths of Weiss and his successor, Vincent Drucci, Moran rose to become the head of the North Side Gang.\nOn September 20, 1926, Capone was living on two floors of the Hawthorne Hotel in Cicero, Illinois. While he was in the hotel's dining room, a car drove past with a man on the running board firing blanks from a machine gun into the air. Capone wanted to go and see what the commotion was, but his bodyguard, Frank Rio, pushed him to the ground. Ten cars then drove past the hotel, firing machine guns and shotguns into the building and the cars parked in front. Police estimated that over a thousand rounds were fired. There were no deaths, but some injuries, including a woman sitting in a car who suffered glass splinters in her eye. Capone paid all her medical expenses at a cost of $10,000.\nDespite the dislike between the rival gangs, they maintained a business relationship. Capone received shipments of Canadian Old Log Cabin whiskey from the Purple Gang, a criminal group from Detroit, Michigan; he would then sell the alcohol to Moran's speakeasies. After he was offered a supply of cheaper whiskey, Moran terminated the agreement and sold the cheaper product for the same price, increasing his profits. The new whiskey was inferior to the Old Log Cabin brand and was not well received by his customers. Moran went back to Capone and asked him to resume the supply of Old Log Cabin, but Capone refused, saying he had a new buyer. Moran then hijacked as much of the Purple Gang's shipments as he needed to supply his speakeasies.\nAl Capone and the Chicago Outfit.\nThe Chicago Outfit started as a prostitution, gambling, and labor racketeering organization in the early 1900s under the leadership of Big Jim Colosimo; it was the largest and best-organized criminal group in Chicago. When prohibition began, Colosimo was reluctant to move into bootlegging; he was murdered in May 1920, probably at the behest of his second-in-command, Johnny Torrio. The gang grew under Torrio as he moved it into bootlegging. He made deals with smaller gangs in Chicago, creating a cartel for liquor trading across the city. On January 24, 1925, Weiss, Moran and another North Side member ambushed and shot Torrio. Moran's gun then failed to fire \u2013 or was empty \u2013 as he was about to kill Torrio; the North Siders fled, believing Torrio was dying, but he survived. Torrio spent time in the hospital and then nine months in prison on a pre-existing charge. He was so shaken by the attack that, upon his release, he handed over the leadership of the Outfit to Capone and moved to New York.\nThe year Capone took over the Chicago Outfit, the gang's gross income from their racketeering was conservatively estimated by the United States Attorney General's office at $105 million a year. It had a weekly payroll of $300,000 for the thousand men employed and an estimated $15 million per year for bribes. By 1929, Capone's annual income is estimated to have been over $40 million.\nMassacre.\nSources differ about the build-up to the murders. Some \u2013 including those by writer Troy Allen and historian Paul R. Kavieff \u2013 state that on February 13, 1929, Moran received a phone call offering a truckload of highjacked Purple Gang whiskey for sale. He told the caller to deliver it to the garage at 2122 North Clark Street in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago's North Side at 10:30\u00a0am. William J. Helmer and Arthur J. Bilek, in their history of the killings, disagree and point out that the men, except for two, were Moran's trusted inner circle and best killers; all were wearing expensive suits, which makes it unlikely that they were going to unload a truck. Historian Rose Keefe interviewed one of Moran's relatives, who said: \"I can tell you one thing, there was no meeting with out-of-town gangsters or any plans to unload bootleg. They were there to meet George [Moran] because he'd been shot and they were losing their territory to Capone.\"\nOn Saint Valentine's Day, February 14, seven men were in the garage waiting for the truck and for Moran and his fellow gang members Willie Marks and Ted Newberry, who were running late. The seven men in the garage were Albert Kachellek (\"alias\" James Clark), Moran's second in command and brother-in-law; Adam Heyer, the North Side Gang's bookkeeper and business manager; Albert Weinshank, who managed several cleaning and dyeing operations for Moran; and gang enforcers Frank Gusenberg and his brother Peter. Two non-gang members were also present: Reinhardt H. Schwimmer, a former optician turned gambler, who liked to hang around the gang; and John May, an occasional mechanic at the garage, who had brought his dog Highball with him. May was fixing the wheel of a truck.\nBetween 10:30\u201310:35\u00a0am, a black Cadillac pulled up outside the garage. The driver and front-seat passenger wore police uniforms; the three men in the back wore civilian clothes. They exited the car and went into the garage. Shortly afterwards, Moran drove past and saw what he thought was a police car; he went around the corner for a cup of coffee to avoid what he presumed to be a raid in progress on the premises. The seven men inside the garage were forced to line up against the wall, facing it. The assailants then shot them in the back with Thompson submachine guns. The shooting was methodical, with fire directed along the line of men three times: at the level of the head, chest, and the stomach; seventy rounds were fired from the machine guns and one from a sawed-off shotgun in the first volley. The coup de gr\u00e2ce was then applied to Clark and May with the shotgun. The gunmen left by the front door: two in civilian clothes, holding their hands above their heads, were followed by the two wearing police uniforms, holding the Thompson submachine guns as if they had their companions under arrest.\nNeighbors were alerted to the massacre by Highball's barking and called the police. When they arrived, the police found six dead men and one, Frank Gusenberg, still alive; he had crawled from where he had been shot, despite having been hit multiple times. Gusenberg was taken to the Alexian Brothers Hospital in Elk Grove. He was interviewed by Sergeant Clarence Sweeney of the Chicago Police Department, who asked him: \"Who shot you?\" Gusenberg replied \"No one.\u00a0... No one shot me.\" Sweeney then said: \"Frank, Pete's dead and you're in a bad way. Who shot you?\" Gusenberg replied: \"No one.\" He died shortly afterwards.\nReaction.\nNewspapers covered the massacre and investigations, selling millions of copies and \"devot[ing] an unprecedented amount of space to coverage of the mass murder\", according to historian Laurence Bergreen. The Valentine's Day Massacre caused shock among the public. According to Jonathan Eig, Capone's biographer:\nThis crime stirred people in a way they had seldom been stirred before. From coast to coast, people seemed suddenly to be reaching the conclusion that a line had been crossed, that the violence had become too much to bear, that the experiment known as Prohibition had blown up once and for all.\nWhen Moran heard about the murders, he checked into St. Francis Hospital in Evanston, Illinois, for four days under an alias, claiming that he had the flu. He sent a message to John Egan, the head of detectives at Chicago Police Department, that he did not know who was responsible for the killings: \"We don't know what brought it on. We're facing an enemy in the dark.\" A reporter tracked him down at the hospital; Moran told him that \"Only Capone kills like that\".\nA federal grand jury was convened in Chicago on March 12 to hear evidence about bootlegging in the city. Capone was subpoenaed to appear. Instead, he claimed he was sick and provided a note from a Miami, Florida, doctor that said he had been suffering from bronchopneumonia since January. The note also stated that:\nit would be dangerous for him to leave the mild climate of southern Florida and go to the City of Chicago.\u00a0... There would be a very grave risk of a collapse which might result in his death from a recurrent pneumonia.\nThe Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) investigated and gathered affidavits from several people who saw Capone attending events in public. Based on the FBI's evidence, a judge turned down Capone's request for a forty-day postponement and instructed him to turn up on March 19. The testimony was postponed one day to March 20, when Capone was questioned for an hour before the grand jury. He admitted that he had not paid income tax \u2013 he had previously said \"The government can't collect legal taxes from illegal money\" \u2013 but suggested he could make a deal to \"split any difference he had with the government and might pay the salary of several prohibition agents for a year or two\". He was scheduled to make a second appearance at the hearing when George Johnson, the United States Attorney for the Northern District of Illinois, said no further testimony was needed and that he was free to go.\nInvestigation.\nInvestigation begins.\nWithin hours of the shooting, Chicago's district police, the city's detective bureau, the Illinois Attorney General's office, and the coroner's office under Herman Bundesen all opened separate investigations, which operated largely independently from one another. The situation was confused by an announcement, from the Chicago deputy Prohibition administrator Major Frederick D. Silloway, that the police had undertaken the killings. Although he retracted his statement later that day, several newspapers carried headlines that stated the police was involved.\nThe day after the massacre the coroner ordered a reenactment, which was held at the garage. They kept in line with the known events as far as possible, including having Highball the dog present. Instead of a coroner's jury, Bundesen assembled a panel of unimpeachable Chicagoans to assist, headed up by Burt Massee, the president of the Colgate Palmolive Peet Company. Plainclothes police and one of the reporters present played the roles of the victims; other police lined up as the gunmen, each holding a shotgun. Bundesen formally opened his inquest the same day. Massee contacted Calvin Goddard, a pioneer in forensic ballistics, and paid for him to set up a laboratory in Chicago with his team and all his equipment. He soon began examining shell casings and bullets from the scene. He also examined the Thompson machine guns owned by the Chicago police and stated that their weapons had not been used in the shootings.\nPolice began house-to-house questioning of residents and shop-owners. At 2051 North Clark, the rooming house opposite the garage, they spoke with the proprietress, Minnie Arvidson. She described two men who claimed to be taxi drivers that had taken a room at the front of the house, overlooking the garage. These were later identified as Byron Bolton and James \"Jimmy the Swede\" Morand (or possibly Jimmy McCrussen), the lookouts. A second landlady, Mrs. Michael Doody of 2119 North Clark, provided details of what turned out to be another possible lookout. He also claimed to be a taxi driver, who would arrive at the house each day at 9:00\u00a0am and was joined by two other men at around 9:30\u00a0am; they would leave at around 3:30\u00a0pm. She was shown photographs of possible suspects and identified Harry Keywell, a member of the Purple Gang. When he was later questioned, Keywell provided a solid alibi for his activities on the date and time of the shooting. Police also raided many of the city's speakeasies, causing the Chicago Outfit a considerable loss of income.\nOn February 22, 1929, police were called to the scene of a garage fire on Wood Street, where they found a partially disassembled and burnt 1927 Cadillac sedan. Saws, an ax, and an acetylene torch had been used in dismantling the vehicle. A police siren was lying in the corner, and a burned hat and coat were on the floor. They also found a Thompson drum magazine and a Luger pistol. Enquiries turned up a nearby doctor's office where a man with burns had asked for treatment; when he was told to wait, he left.\nThe car had been purchased second-hand in Chicago on December 15, 1928, by James Morton of Los Angeles, California, who paid $350 for it. The Los Angeles Police Department failed to provide any possible leads as to the man's identity. Police established that the garage had been rented by a man calling himself Frank Rogers, who gave his address as 1859 West North Avenue. This was an annex of the Circus Caf\u00e9, which was operated from the neighboring premises by Claude Maddox, a gangster with ties to Capone.\nAfter searching one of Maddox's offices, the police found a connection with activities in St. Louis, Missouri. Their counterparts there told them that criminals had disguised themselves in police uniforms to commit crimes on several occasions. The best-known perpetrator of this was Fred Burke, a member of the city's Egan's Rats crime gang. Burke was described as missing a front tooth and had a partner in crime who went by the name of \"James Ray\", an alias of Gus Winkler. One of the witnesses who saw the fake police car arrive outside the North Clark Street garage was the chauffeur of H. Wallace Caldwell, President of the Chicago Board of Education. He had noticed the police driver was missing a front tooth. Egan's Rats left St. Louis in the mid-1920s and became associated with The Purple Gang of Detroit, which had business connections with Capone. Police soon named Burke as a suspect.\nFurther evidence.\nOn February 27, a second vehicle \u2013 a 1926 Peerless touring car \u2013 was blown up at the junction of 1st Street and Harvard Avenue in Chicago's Maywood suburb. Again, a police siren was found at the scene with shotgun shells of the same brand used in the massacre, license plates bearing the same prefix as used by the Chicago detective squad and a small notebook belonging to Weinshank, one of the massacre victims. Police considered this second car and the items a plant to disrupt their investigation. Keefe considers the discovery of the second vehicle to give credibility to the possibility of two cars having been used in the massacre.\nAs Capone was in Florida at the time of the shooting, William Russell, Chicago's police commissioner, ordered an investigation of the other members of the Chicago Outfit. On the same day the Peerless was blown up, police arrested Jack McGurn at Chicago's Stevens Hotel, where he and his girlfriend were staying under the names Mr. and Mrs. D'Oro. His girlfriend provided his alibi: that they had spent Valentine's Day together in the hotel room. According to Amanda Parr, McGurn's biographer, he was \"one of mob history's most prolific and notorious hit men\". Others arrested were members of Capone's gang John Scalise, Albert Anselmi \u2013 both of whom had previously been acquitted of murdering a police officer \u2013 and Rocco Fanelli, another Outfit gunman. McGurn, Anselmi and Scalise were all charged with the murders, but the charges were dropped because of a lack of evidence.\nCapone soon heard that Scalise and Anselmi had met with Joe Aiello, a long-time rival of Capone's with whom he had a feud. Also present was another of Capone's men, Joe Giunta. Capone heard the men were plotting to assassinate him and take over his territory. Furious at being double-crossed, Capone invited the three to a dinner in their honor at The Planation, a Capone-owned roadhouse. During the evening, Capone used a cut-down baseball bat to murder all three before he and his men shot the corpses. Their bodies were found on May 8.\nOn May 13, Capone attended a meeting of crime lords in Atlantic City, New Jersey. Many of the leaders were concerned by the publicity caused by the massacre and increased level of official interest in their business. There was also some anger about the deaths of the three Sicilian hitmen, Anselmi, Scalise, and Giunta. The bosses put pressure on Capone to lower his profile by spending a short time in prison.\nLeaving Atlantic City, Capone and his bodyguard stopped off in Philadelphia, where they were arrested by two police officers whom Capone knew, James Malone and John Creedon. Within sixteen hours he had been charged, appeared in court, found guilty, and sentenced to a year in prison.\nThe massacre case stagnated until December 1929, when Fred Burke, drunk, drove into another car in St. Joseph, Michigan. Patrolman Charles Skelly intervened; Burke shot him three times and drove off. Skelly died three hours later. Police raided Burke's bungalow and found $310,000 in bonds recently stolen from a Wisconsin bank, two Thompson submachine guns with nine ammunition drums, six tear gas bombs, two rifles, a sawed-off shot gun, and an estimated 5,000 rounds of ammunition. The weapons were forensically examined and were identified as those used in the massacre. Police also discovered that one of them had also been used to murder New York mobster Frankie Yale eighteen months earlier. No further evidence surfaced relating to the massacre. Burke was captured in March 1931. The case against him was strongest in connection to the murder of Skelly, so he was tried in Michigan for that crime and subsequently sentenced to life imprisonment. He died in prison in 1940.\nOn November 17, 1931, Bundesen closed his inquest. He said: \"All who were under suspicion are now dead save one, and he [Burke] has received a life penitentiary sentence.\" In his final report he concluded that \"The killings were by persons unknown.\"\nSubsequent events and other suspects.\nIn January 1935, Byron Bolton \u2013 previously identified as a possible lookout opposite the garage at the time of the massacre \u2013 was arrested on a matter unrelated to the Valentine's Day Massacre. Questioned by the FBI, he provided full details relating to the murders. FBI director J. Edgar Hoover reported the details to Assistant Attorney General Joseph B. Keenan in a memorandum:\nBolton stated that the persons who actually perpetrated this massacre were Fred Goetz, Gus Winkler, Fred Burke, Ray Nugent and Bob Carey. Bolton stated that he personally purchased the Cadillac touring car which was used in this massacre, having been furnished with the money to make this purchase by Louis Lipschultz.\nBolton identified Capone as having given the order to kill Moran to take over his territory. When the killers were in the garage, none of them knew what Moran looked like, so \"rather than risk the possibility of missing Moran, killed all of the persons found in the garage\". Bolton denied taking part in the murders. The list of names matched those provided in the 1934 memoirs of Gus Winkler's widow, Georgette.\nJonathan Eig disputes Bolton's confession and states that two of the people listed had alibis. Eig goes on to say that the plot involved too many people just to kill Moran, when one person could have waited outside the target's house to kill him and that once having missed, it was likely that Capone would not try again. Instead Eig thinks the more likely suspect is \"Three Fingered Jack\" White, a vicious killer who had previously disguised himself as a police officer to commit murder. White's motive was that his cousin had been murdered by the Gusenberg brothers. Accusations of White's possible role in the murders had been contained in a letter sent to Hoover by Frank T. Farrell, a Chicago resident. The criminologists Arthur J. Lurigio and John J. Binder believe the letter from Farrell to be problematic \"and therefore so is the Farrell assertion\"; they observe that many of the names and dates in Farrell's theory are incorrect, including the probable identity of his cousin's murderer. The biggest weakness in the theory of White as one of the murderers is that he was incarcerated in Cook County Jail between March 1926 and July 1929.\nThe criminologist Arthur J. Bilek concludes that Tony Accardo, a member of the Chicago Outfit, was one of the gunmen in a team assembled by Jack McGurn and that the other gunmen were Burke, Winkler, Goetz, and Carey. Bilek considers that this marked the start of Accardo's rise to him eventually leading the Chicago Outfit.\nLegacy.\nConflict between the North Side Gang and the Chicago Outfit continued until 1930\u20131931, when Capone's gang took over their neighbor's territory. In June 1931, Capone was indicted on 22 counts of income tax fraud. His trial took place in October 1931; he was found guilty and sentenced to eleven years in prison.\nThe violence meted out by the Thompson machine gun during the gangster activities of the 1920s, particularly in the St. Valentine's Day Massacre, the machine gun-led activities of John Dillinger, and the death of Chicago mayor Anton Cermak during an assassination attempt on President-elect Franklin D. Roosevelt led Roosevelt, after his inauguration, to propose a bill to regulate the sale of handguns and machine guns. The bill\u00a0\u2013 the National Firearms Act of 1934\u00a0\u2013 was not passed. Eventually Congress removed the handgun restrictions, and the bill became law. It levied a $200 tax on every machine gun, which doubled the cost of the weapons, and created a licensing system for dealers that required an annual fee of $200.\nThe garage at 2122 N. Clark Street was demolished in 1967 and the site later became a lawn. The bricks of the north wall against which the victims were shot were purchased by a Canadian businessman. For many years, they were shown in various crime-related novelty displays. Many of them were later sold individually, and as of 2025[ [update]], the remainder are owned by the Mob Museum in Las Vegas.\nIn addition to news and historical coverage, the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre and its aftermath have been described or referenced in books, including histories of what happened, and on screen.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42098", "revid": "35763168", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42098", "title": "Ayodhya", "text": "City in Uttar Pradesh, India\nAyodhya (, \u00a0) is a city situated on the banks of the Sarayu river in the Indian state of Uttar Pradesh. It is the administrative headquarters of the Ayodhya district as well as the Ayodhya division of Uttar Pradesh, India. Ayodhya became the top tourist destination of Uttar Pradesh with 110 million visitors in the first half of 2024, surpassing Varanasi.\nThe settlement was historically known as S\u0101keta until it was renamed to Ayodhya during the Gupta period. The early Buddhist and Jain canonical texts mention that the religious leaders Gautama Buddha and Mahavira visited and lived in the city. The Jain texts also describe it as the birthplace of five tirthankaras namely, Rishabhanatha, Ajitanatha, Abhinandananatha, Sumatinatha and Anantanatha, and associate it with the legendary Bharata Chakravarti. From the Gupta period onwards, several sources mention Ayodhya and Saketa as the name of the same city.\nThe legendary city of Ayodhya, popularly identified as the present-day Ayodhya, is identified in the epic \"Ramayana\" and its many versions as the birthplace of the Hindu deity Rama of Kosala and is hence regarded as the first of the seven most important pilgrimage sites for Hindus. The Ayodhya dispute was centred on the Babri mosque, built 1528\u201329 under the Mughal emperor Babur and said to have been built on top of a Hindu temple that stood at the birth spot of Rama. In 1992 a Hindu mob demolished the mosque, provoking riots throughout the country. In 2019, the Supreme Court of India announced the final verdict that the land belonged to the government based on tax records; It further ordered the land to be handed over to a trust to build the Ram Mandir; which was consecrated in January 2024. It also ordered the government to give an alternate five acre tract of land to the Uttar Pradesh Sunni Central Waqf Board to build the mosque.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"Ayodhya\" is a regularly formed derivation of the Sanskrit verb \"yudh\", \"to fight, or wage war\". \"Yodhya\" is the future passive participle, meaning \"to be fought\"; the initial \"a\" is the negative prefix; the whole, therefore, means \"not to be fought\" or, more idiomatically in English, \"invincible\". This meaning is attested by the \"Atharvaveda\", which uses it to refer to the unconquerable city of gods. The ninth century Jain poem \"Adi Purana\" also states that Ayodhya \"does not exist by name alone but by the merit\" of being unconquerable by enemies. \"Satyopakhyana\" interprets the word differently, stating that it means \"that which cannot be conquered by sins\" (instead of enemies).\n\"Saketa\" is the older name for the city, attested in Sanskrit, Jain, Buddhist, Greek and Chinese sources. According to Vaman Shivram Apte, the word \"Saketa\" is derived from the Sanskrit words \"Saha\" (with) and \"Aketen\" (houses or buildings). The \"Adi Purana\" states that Ayodhya is called Saketa \"because of its magnificent buildings which had significant banners as their arms\". According to Hans T. Bakker, the word may be derived from the roots \"sa\" and \"ketu\" (\"with banner\"); the variant name \"saketu\" is attested in the \"Vishnu Purana\".\nThe older name in English was \"Oudh\" or \"Oude\", and the princely state it was the capital of until 1856 is still known as Oudh State.\nAyodhya was stated to be the capital of the ancient Kosala kingdom in the \"Ramayana\". Hence it was also referred to as \"Kosala\". The \"Adi Purana\" states that Ayodhya is famous as \"su-ko\u015bala\" \"because of its prosperity and good skill\".\nThe cities of Ayutthaya (Thailand), and Yogyakarta (Indonesia), are named after Ayodhya.\nHistory.\nAncient Indian Sanskrit-language epics, such as the \"Ramayana\" and the \"Mahabharata\" mention a legendary city called Ayodhya, which was the capital of the legendary Ikshvaku kings of Kosala, including Rama. Neither these texts, nor the earlier Sanskrit texts such as the Vedas, mention a city called Saketa. Non-religious, non-legendary ancient Sanskrit texts, such as Panini's \"Ashtadhyayi\" and Patanjali's commentary on it, do mention Saketa. The later Buddhist text \"Mahavastu\" describes Saketa as the seat of the Ikshvaku king Sujata, whose descendants established the Shakya capital Kapilavastu.\nThe earliest of the Buddhist Pali-language texts and the Jain Prakrit-language texts mention a city called Saketa (Sageya or Saeya in Prakrit) as an important city of the Kosala mahajanapada. Topographical indications in both Buddhist and Jain texts suggest that Saketa is the same as the present-day Ayodhya. For example, according to the \"Samyutta Nikaya\" and the \"Vinaya Pitaka\", Saketa was located at a distance of six \"yojana\"s from Shravasti. The \"Vinaya Pitaka\" mentions that a big river was located between the two cities, and the \"Sutta Nipata\" mentions Saketa as the first halting place on the southward road from Shravasti to Pratishthana.\nFourth century onwards, multiple texts, including Kalidasa's \"Raghuvamsha\", mention Ayodhya as another name for Saketa. The later Jain canonical text \"Jambudvipa-Pannati\" describes a city called Viniya (or Vinita) as the birthplace of Lord Rishabhanatha, and associates this city with Bharata Chakravartin; the \"Kalpa-Sutra\" describes Ikkhagabhumi as the birthplace of Rishabhadev. The index on the Jain text \"Paumachariya\" clarifies that Aojjha (Aodhya), Kosala-puri (\"Kosala city\"), Viniya, and Saeya (Saketa) are synonyms. The post-Canonical Jain texts also mention \"Aojjha\"; for example, the \"Avassagacurni\" describes it as the principal city of Kosala, while the \"Avassaganijjutti\" names it as the capital of Sagara Chakravartin. The \"Avassaganijjutti\" implies that Viniya (\"Vinia\"), Kosalapuri (\"Kosalapura\"), and Ikkhagabhumi were distinct cities, naming them as the capitals of Abhinamdana, Sumai, and Usabha respectively. Abhayadeva's commentary on the \"Thana Sutta\", another post-canonical text, identifies Saketa, Ayodhya, and Vinita as one city.\nAccording to one theory, the legendary Ayodhya city is the same as the historical city of Saketa and the present-day Ayodhya. According to another theory, the legendary Ayodhya is a mythical city, and the name \"Ayodhya\" came to be used for the Saketa (present-day Ayodhya) only around the fourth century, when a Gupta emperor (probably Skandagupta) moved his capital to Saketa, and renamed it to Ayodhya after the legendary city. Alternative, but less likely, theories state that Saketa and Ayodhya were two adjoining cities, or that Ayodhya was a locality within the Saketa city.\nAs Saketa.\nArchaeological and literary evidence suggests that the site of present-day Ayodhya had developed into an urban settlement by the fifth or sixth-century BC. The site is identified as the location of the ancient S\u0101keta city, which probably emerged as a marketplace located at the junction of the two important roads, the Shravasti-Pratishthana north\u2013south road, and the Rajagriha-Varanasi-Shravasti-Taxila east\u2013west road. Ancient Buddhist texts, such as \"Samyutta Nikaya\", state that Saketa was located in the Kosala kingdom ruled by Prasenajit (or Pasenadi; c. sixth\u20135th century BC), whose capital was located at Shravasti. The later Buddhist commentary \"Dhammapada-atthakatha\" states that the Saketa town was established by merchant Dhananjaya (the father of Visakha), on the suggestion of king Prasenajit. The \"Digha Nikaya\" describes it as one of the six large cities of India. The early Buddhist canonical texts mention Shravasti as the capital of Kosala, but the later texts, such as the Jain texts \"Nayadhammakahao\" and \"Pannavana Suttam\", and the Buddhist Jatakas, mention Saketa as the capital of Kosala.\nAs a busy town frequented by travellers, it appears to have become important for preachers such as Gautama Buddha and Mahavira. The \"Samyutta Nikaya\" and \"Anguttara Nikaya\" mention that Buddha resided at Saketa at times. The early Jain canonical texts (such as \"Antagada-dasao\", \"Anuttarovavaiya-dasao\", and \"Vivagasuya\") state that Mahavira visited Saketa; \"Nayadhammakahao\" states that Parshvanatha also visited Saketa. The Jain texts, both canonical and post-canonical, describe Ayodhya as the location of various shrines, such as those of snake, yaksha Pasamiya, Muni Suvratasvamin, and Surappia.\nIt is not clear what happened to Saketa after Kosala was conquered by the Magadha emperor Ajatashatru around fifth century BC. There is lack of historical sources about the city's situation for the next few centuries: it is possible that the city remained a commercial centre of secondary importance, but did not grow into a political centre of Magadha, whose capital was located at Pataliputra. Several Buddhist buildings may have been constructed in the town during the rule of the Maurya emperor Ashoka in the third century BC: these buildings were probably located on the present-day human-made mounds in Ayodhya. Excavations at Ayodhya have resulted in the discovery of a large brick wall, identified as a fortification wall by archaeologist B. B. Lal. This wall probably erected in the last quarter of the third-century BC.\nAfter the decline of the Maurya empire, Saketa appears to have come under the rule of Pushyamitra Shunga. The first century BC inscription of Dhanadeva suggests that he appointed a governor there. The \"Yuga Purana\" mentions Saketa as the residence of a governor, and describes it as being attacked by a combined force of Greeks, Mathuras, and Panchalas. Patanjali's commentary on Panini also refers to the Greek siege of Saketa.\nLater, Saketa appears to have become part of a small, independent kingdom. The \"Yuga Purana\" states that Saketa was ruled by seven powerful kings after the retreat of the Greeks. The \"Vayu Purana\" and the \"Brahmanda Purana\" also state that seven powerful kings ruled in the capital of Kosala. The historicity of these kings is attested by the discovery of the coins of the Deva dynasty kings, including Dhanadeva, whose inscription describes him as the king of Kosala (\"Kosaladhipati\"). As the capital of Kosala, Saketa probably eclipsed Shravasti in importance during this period. The east\u2013west route connecting Pataliputra to Taxila, which earlier passed through Saketa and Shravasti, appears to have shifted southwards during this period, now passing through Saketa, Ahichhatra and Kanyakubja.\nAfter the Deva kings, Saketa appears to have been ruled by the Datta, Kushan, and Mitra kings, although the chronological order of their rule is uncertain. Bakker theorises that the Dattas succeeded the Deva kings in the mid-1st century AD, and their kingdom was annexed to the Kushan Empire by Kanishka. The Tibetan text \"Annals of Li Country\" (c. 11th century) mentions that an alliance of king Vijayakirti of Khotan, king Kanika, the king of Gu-zan, and the king of Li, marched to India and captured the So-ked city. During this invasion, Vijayakirti took several Buddhist relics from Saketa, and placed them in the stupa of Phru-no. If Kanika is identified as Kanishka, and So-ked as Saketa, it appears that the invasion of Kushans and their allies led to the destruction of the Buddhist sites at Saketa.\nNevertheless, Saketa appears to have remained a prosperous town during the Kushan rule. The second century geographer Ptolemy mentions a metropolis \"Sageda\" or \"Sagoda\", which has been identified with Saketa. The earliest inscription that mentions Saketa as a place name is dated to the late Kushan period: it was found on the pedestal of a Buddha image in Shravasti, and records the gift of the image by Sihadeva of Saketa. Before or after the Kushans, Saketa appears to have been ruled by a dynasty of kings whose names end in \"-mitra\", and whose coins have been found at Ayodhya. They may have been members of a local dynasty that was distinct from the Mitra dynasty of Mathura. These kings are attested only by their coinage: Sangha-mitra, Vijaya-mitra, Satya-mitra, Deva-mitra, and Arya-mitra; coins of Kumuda-sena and Aja-varman have also been discovered.\nGupta period.\nAround the fourth century, the region came under the control of the Guptas, who revived Brahmanism. The \"Vayu Purana\" and the \"Brahmanda Purana\" attest that the early Gupta kings ruled Saketa. No Gupta-era archaeological layers have been discovered in present-day Ayodhya, although a large number of Gupta coins have been discovered here. It is possible that during the Gupta period, the habitations in the city were located in the areas that have not yet been excavated. The Buddhist sites that had suffered destruction during the Khotanese-Kushan invasion appear to have remained deserted. The fifth-century Chinese traveller Faxian states that the ruins of Buddhist buildings existed at \"Sha-chi\" during his time. One theory identifies Sha-chi with Saketa, although this identification is not undisputed. If Sha-chi is indeed Saketa, it appears that by the fifth century, the town no longer had a flourishing Buddhist community or any important Buddhist building that was still in use.\nAn important development during the Gupta time was the recognition of Saketa as the legendary city of Ayodhya, the capital of the Ikshvaku dynasty. The 436 AD Karamdanda (Karmdand) inscription, issued during the reign of Kumaragupta I, names Ayodhya as the capital of the Kosala province, and records commander Prithvisena's offerings to Brahmins from Ayodhya. Later, the capital of the Gupta Empire was moved from Pataliputra to Ayodhya. Paramartha states that king Vikramaditya moved the royal court to Ayodhya; Xuanzang also corroborates this, stating that this king moved the court to the \"country of Shravasti\", that is, Kosala. A local oral tradition of Ayodhya, first recorded in writing by Robert Montgomery Martin in 1838, mentions that the city was deserted after the death of Rama's descendant Brihadbala. The city remain deserted until King Vikrama of Ujjain came searching for it, and re-established it. He cut down the forests that had covered the ancient ruins, erected the Ramgar fort, and built 360 temples.\nVikramditya was a title of multiple Gupta kings, and the king who moved the capital to Ayodhya is identified as Skandagupta. Bakker theorises that the move to Ayodhya may have been prompted by a flooding of the river Ganges at Pataliputra, the need to check the Huna advance from the west, and Skandagupta's desire to compare himself with Rama (whose Ikshvaku dynasty is associated with the legendary Ayodhya). According to Paramaratha's \"Life of Vasubandhu\", Vikramaditya was a patron of scholars, and awarded 300,000 pieces of gold to Vasubandhu. The text states that Vasubandhu was a native of Saketa (\"Sha-ki-ta\"), and describes Vikramaditya as the king of Ayodhya (\"A-yu-ja\"). This wealth was used to build three monasteries in the country of A-yu-ja (Ayodhya). Paramartha further states that the later king Baladitya (identified with Narasimhagupta) and his mother also awarded large sums of gold to Vasubandhu, and these funds were used to build another Buddhist temple at Ayodhya. These structures may have been seen by the seventh century Chinese traveller Xuanzang, who describes a stupa and a monastery at Ayodhya (\"O-yu-t-o\").\nDecline as a political centre.\nAyodhya probably suffered when the Hunas led by Mihirakula invaded the Gupta empire in the sixth century. After the fall of the Guptas, it may have been ruled by the Maukhari dynasty, whose coins have been found in the nearby areas. It was not devastated, as Xuanzang describes it as a flourishing town and a Buddhist centre. However, it had lost its position as an important political centre to Kanyakubja (Kannauj). At the time of Xuanzang's visit, it was a part of Harsha's empire, and was probably the seat of a vassal or an administrative officer. Xuanzang states that the city measured about 0.6\u00a0km (20 li) in circumference. Another seventh-century source, \"K\u0101\u015bik\u0101v\u1e5btt\u012b\", mentions that the town was surrounded by a moat similar to that around Pataliputra.\nAfter the fall of Harsha's empire, Ayodhya appears to have been variously controlled by local kings and the rulers of Kannauj, including Yashovarman and the Gurjara-Pratiharas. The town is not mentioned in any surviving texts or inscriptions composed during 650\u20131050 AD, although it may be identified with the \"city of Harishchandra\" mentioned in the eighth-century poem \"Gaudavaho\". Archaeological evidence (including images to Vishnu, Jain tirthankaras, Ganesha, the seven Matrikas, and a Buddhist stupa) suggests that the religious activity in the area continued during this period.\nEarly medieval period.\nAccording to Indologist Hans T. Bakker, the only religious significance of Ayodhya in the first millennium AD was related to the \"Gopratara\" tirtha (now called Guptar Ghat), where Rama and his followers are said to have ascended to heaven by entering the waters of Sarayu.\nIn the 11th century, the Gahadavala dynasty came to power in the region, and promoted Vaishnavism. They built several Vishnu temples in Ayodhya, five of which survived till the end of Aurangzeb's reign. Hans Bakker concludes that there might have been a temple at the supposed birth spot of Rama built by the Gahadavalas (see Vishnu Hari inscription). In subsequent years, the cult of Rama developed within Vaishnavism, with Rama being regarded as the foremost avatar of Vishnu. Between the 13th and 18th century, Ayodhya's importance as a pilgrimage centre grew.\nIn 1226 AD, Ayodhya became the capital of the province of Awadh (or \"Oudh\") within the Delhi sultanate. Muslim historians state that the area was little more than wilderness prior to this. Pilgrimage was tolerated, but the tax on pilgrims ensured that the temples did not receive much income.\nMughal period.\nUnder Mughal rule, the Babri mosque was constructed in Ayodhya. The city was the capital of the province of Awadh (pronounced as \"Oudh\" by the British), which is also believed to be a variant of the name \"Ayodhya\".\nAfter the death of Aurangzeb in 1707 AD, the central Muslim rule weakened, and Awadh became virtually independent, with Ayodhya as its capital. However, the rulers became increasingly dependent on the local Hindu nobles, and control over the temples and pilgrimage centres was relaxed.\nBritish period.\nIn the 1850s, a group of Hindus attacked the Babri mosque, on the grounds that it was built over the birthplace of the Hindu deity Rama. To prevent further disputes, British colonial authorities divided the mosque premises between Hindus and Muslims. Ayodhya was annexed in 1856 by the British East India Company (EIC). The rulers of Awadh were Shia, and the Sunni groups had already protested against the permissive attitude of the former government. The EIC intervened and managed to suppress the Sunni agitation. In 1857, the British annexed Oudh (Awadh) and subsequently reorganised it into the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh.\nIndependent India.\nA movement was launched in 1984 by the Vishva Hindu Parishad party to reclaim the Babri mosque site for a Rama temple. In 1992, a right wing Hindu nationalist rally turned into a riot, leading to the demolition of the Babri mosque. A makeshift temple at Ram Janmabhoomi for \"Ram Lalla\", infant Rama was constructed. Under the Indian government orders, no one was permitted near the site within 200 yards, and the gate was locked to the outside. Hindu pilgrims, however, began entering through a side door to offer worship.\nIn 2003, the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) carried out an excavation at the mosque site to determine if it was built over the ruins of a temple. The excavation uncovered pillar bases indicating a temple had been in existence under the mosque. Besides Hindus, the Buddhist and Jain representatives claimed that their temples existed at the excavated site.\nOn 5 July 2005, five terrorists attacked the site of the makeshift Ramlalla temple in Ayodhya. All five were killed in the ensuing gunfight with security forces, and one civilian died in the bomb blast triggered as they attempted to breach the cordon wall.\nOn 30 September 2010, the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court ruled that one-third of the disputed land should be given to the Uttar Pradesh Sunni Central Waqf Board, one-third to the Nirmohi Akhara and one-third to the Hindu party for the shrine of \"Ram Lalla\" (infant Rama). The court further ruled that the area where the idols of Ram are present be given to Hindus in the final decree, while the rest of the land shall be divided equally by metes and bounds among the three parties. The judgement, along with evidences provided by the Archaeological Survey of India, upheld that the Babri Masjid was built after demolishing the Hindu temple, which is the birthplace of Rama, and that the mosque was not constructed according to the principles of Islam. The final verdict by the Supreme Court on the case ruled the disputed land in the favour of Hindus for the construction of Ram Mandir and ordered an alternative piece of land be given to the Muslim community for the construction of a mosque.\nIn a judgement pronounced by a 5 judge bench of the Supreme Court of India on 9 November 2019, the land was handed over to the government to form a trust for the construction of a temple. The court instructed the government to also allot a plot of in Ayodhya to the Uttar Pradesh Sunni Central Waqf Board to construct a mosque/Masjid.\nSome South Koreans have identified the \"Ayuta\" mentioned in their ancient Samgungnyusa legend with Ayodhya. According to this legend, the ancient Korean princess Heo Hwang-ok came from Ayuta. In the 2000s, the local government of Ayodhya and South Korea acknowledged the connection and held a ceremony to raise a statue of the princess.\nRam temple.\nOn 5 August 2020, the prime minister of India, Narendra Modi, laid the ceremonial foundation stone for a new temple at what is believed to be the birthplace of the god, Ram. It was planned to build a new township, Navya Ayodhya, on a site next to the Faizabad-Gorakhpur highway, which will have luxury hotels and apartment complexes.\nThe Ram Mandir (lit.\u2009'Rama Temple') is a Hindu temple complex in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, India. Many Hindus believe that it is located at the site of Ram Janmabhoomi, the mythical birthplace of Rama, a principal deity of Hinduism. The temple was inaugurated on 22 January 2024 after a prana pratishtha (consecration) ceremony.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Pie chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs of the 2011 Census of India, Ayodhya had a population of 55,890. Males constituted 56.7% of the population and females 43.3%. Ayodhya had an average literacy rate of 78.1%. As per the religion data of 2011 Census, the majority population is of Hindu religion with 93.23%, and Muslims comes the second with 6.19%.\nGeography and climate.\nAyodhya has a humid subtropical climate, typical of central India. Summers are long, dry and hot, lasting from late March to mid-June, with average daily temperatures near . They are followed by the monsoon season which lasts till October, with annual precipitation of approximately and average temperatures around . Winter starts in early November and lasts till the end of January, followed by a short spring in February and early March. Average temperatures are mild, near , but nights can be colder.\nPlaces of interest.\nAyodhya is an important place of pilgrimage for the Hindus. A verse in the \"Brahmanda Purana\" names Ayodhya among \"the most sacred and foremost cities\", the others being Mathura, Haridvara, Kashi, Kanchi and Avantika. This verse is also found in the other Puranas with slight variations. In Garuda Purana, Ayodhya is said to be one of seven holiest places for Hindus in India, with Varanasi being the most sacrosanct. In 2023, a Diwali celebration in Ayodhya, broke the Guinness World Record of its previous world record of 1,576,944 for the largest display of oil lamp with 2,223,676 displayed on the eve of Diwali.\nRam Mandir.\nRam Mandir, also known as the Shri Ram Janmabhoomi Mandir, is a Hindu temple complex under construction in Ayodhya. The site is significant to Hindus as it is believed to be the birthplace of their revered deity Rama. Balak Ram or \"the Infant form of Rama\" is the presiding deity of the temple consecrated on 22 January 2024.\nHanuman Garhi Fort.\nHanuman Garhi, a massive four-sided fort with circular bastions at each corner and a temple of Hanuman inside, is the most popular shrine in Ayodhya. Situated in the centre of town, it is approachable by a flight of 76 steps. Its legend is that Hanuman lived here in a cave and guarded the Janambhoomi, or Ramkot. The main temple contains the statue of Maa Anjani with Bal Hanuman seated on her lap. The faithful believe wishes are granted with a visit to the shrine. Kanak Bhawan is a temple said to have been given to Sita and Rama by Rama's stepmother Kaikeyi as a wedding gift, and only contains statues of Sita with her husband.\nRamkot.\nRamkot is the main place of worship in Ayodhya, and the site of the ancient citadel of its namesake, standing on elevated ground in the western city. Although visited by pilgrims throughout the year, it attracts devotees from all over the world on \"Ram Navami\", the day of the birth of Rama. Ram Navami is celebrated with great pomp in the Hindu month of Chaitra, which falls between March and April. Swarg Dwar is believed to be the site of cremation of Rama. Mani Parbat and Sugriv Parbat are ancient earth mounds, the first identified by a stupa built by the emperor Ashoka, and the second is an ancient monastery. Treta ke Thakur is a temple standing at the site of the Ashvamedha Yajnya of Rama. Three centuries prior, the Raja of Kulu built a new temple here, which was improved by Ahilyabai Holkar of Indore in 1784, the same time the adjacent Ghats were built. The initial idols in black sandstone were recovered from Sarayu and placed in the new temple, which was known as Kaleram-ka-Mandir. Chhoti Devkali Mandir is the temple of goddess Ishani, or Durga, Kuldevi of Sita.\nNageshwarnath Temple.\nThe temple of Nageshwarnath was established by Kush, son of Rama. Legend has it that Kush lost his armlet while bathing in the Sarayu, and it was retrieved by a Nag-Kanya who fell in love with him. As she was a devotee of Shiva, Kush built her this temple. It was the only temple to survive when Ayodhya was abandoned until the time of Vikramaditya. While the rest of city was in ruin and covered by dense forest, this temple allowed Vikramaditya to recognise the city. The festival of Shivratri is celebrated here with great splendor.\nShri Valmiki Ramayana Bhawan.\nShri Valmiki Ramayan Bhawan (\u0936\u094d\u0930\u0940 \u0935\u093e\u0932\u094d\u092e\u0940\u0915\u093f \u0930\u093e\u092e\u093e\u092f\u0923 \u092d\u0935\u0928) is a prominent religious and cultural site located in Ayodhya, Uttar Pradesh, India. The Bhawan is dedicated to Maharishi Valmiki, the Adi Kavi (first poet) and author of the Ramayana. The complex serves as a center for the recitation, study, and promotion of the Ramayana. Devotees and scholars gather here regularly to read and listen to the epic, keeping alive the spiritual and cultural heritage of Lord Rama\u2019s life and teachings. The architecture of the building reflects traditional North Indian temple style with marble structures and decorative domes.\nMemorial of Heo Hwang-ok.\nThe legendary princess Heo Hwang-ok, who married king Suro of Geumgwan Gaya of Korea, is believed by some to be a native of Ayodhya. In 2001, a Memorial of Heo Hwang-ok was inaugurated by a Korean delegation, which included over a hundred historians and government representatives. In 2016, a Korean delegation proposed to develop the memorial. The proposal was accepted by the Uttar Pradesh chief minister Akhilesh Yadav.\nTransportation.\nRoad.\nAyodhya is connected by road to several major cities and towns, including Lucknow (), Gorakhpur (), Prayagraj (), Varanasi () and Delhi ().\nA direct bus service has been started between Ayodhya and Janakpur (birthplace of Sita), in Nepal as a part of Ramayana circuit.\nRail.\nThe city is on the broad gauge Northern Railway line on Pandit Din Dayal Upadhyay Junction and Lucknow main route with Ayodhya Junction and Ayodhya Cantt railway stations.\nRamayana Circuit Train : Special Train that runs from Delhi to main sites of the Ramayana Circuit\nFlight.\nThe nearest airports are Maharishi Valmiki International Airport, Ayodhyadham, away, Chaudhary Charan Singh International Airport in Lucknow, away, and Prayagraj Airport, away.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42099", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42099", "title": "Christopher Lambert", "text": "French actor (born 1957)\nChristophe Guy Denis Lambert (; ; born March 29, 1957), often credited as Christopher Lambert, is a French actor, producer, and writer. He started his career playing supporting parts in several French films, and became internationally famous for portraying Tarzan in ' (1984). For his performance in the film \"Subway\" (1985), he received the C\u00e9sar Award for Best Actor. He is known for his role as Connor MacLeod in the adventure-fantasy film \"Highlander\" (1986) and the subsequent television and film franchise of the same name, Raiden in \"Mortal Kombat\" (1995), Methodius in ' (2011), and Arne Seslum in \"Hail, Caesar!\" (2016). He also served as executive producer for \"Nine Months\" (1995).\nEarly life.\nChristophe Guy Denis Lambert was born in Great Neck, New York, on March 29, 1957, the son of Yolande Agn\u00e8s Henriette (n\u00e9e de Caritat de Peruzzis), and Georges Lambert-Lamond, a French diplomat at the United Nations. His father was Jewish. Due to his father's work, Lambert moved with his parents to Switzerland at the age of two, and was raised in Geneva, where he attended the International School of Geneva and the Institut Florimont until his teenage years, when the family moved to France and settled in Paris. Lambert's debut in acting was in a school play age 12.\nCareer.\nDirector Hugh Hudson and Warner Brothers chose Lambert, wanting an unknown actor to play Tarzan, a human raised by apes in the jungle. Lambert got the role beating out Viggo Mortensen and Stellan Skarsgard partly thanks to his myopia, because when he took off his glasses it seemed he was always looking into the distance. Released in 1984, \"\", was nominated for many awards. Also that year, Lambert starred opposite Catherine Deneuve in \"Love Songs\".\nHe played the lead in Luc Besson's stylistic film \"Subway\" (1985), about a man being hunted in the underground subways of Paris. \nIn 1986, Lambert appeared in \"Highlander\" the role for which he would be best known. In the film, Lambert starred as Connor MacLeod, an immortal warrior who could be killed only by decapitation. Lambert was cast in the role after Kurt Russell dropped out of the film and after director Russell Mulcahy saw a picture of him in a magazine. Despite barely speaking English, Lambert spent weeks learning the language before filming with a dialect coach. The film became a cult hit and was an international box-office success, rock group Queen composed and performed the soundtrack, and Lambert also appeared as MacLeod in the music video for Queen's \"Princes of the Universe\". In 1987, Lambert played the leading role of Salvatore Giuliano in \"The Sicilian\", directed by Michael Cimino. In 1988, he starred in Agnieszka Holland's \"To Kill a Priest\", in which he played a character based on Jerzy Popie\u0142uszko and his murder under the Polish communist regime.\nHe was offered the role of Martin Riggs in \"Lethal Weapon\", but he turned the role down. He was John Glen's first choice for the role of James Bond in \"The Living Daylights\", but he was ultimately turned down due to his accent. He was also considered for the lead role of Edward Lewis in \"Pretty Woman\" back when the film was known as \"3000.\" \nIn 1991, ' premiered, reuniting Lambert with director Russell Mulcahy and fellow actor Sean Connery. Shot in Argentina (which was going through a financial crisis) to reduce production costs, much of the script was not filmed and the final result was a patchwork. It was said, Lambert threatened to walk out of the project when it was nearing fruition, However, due to contractual obligations, he reconsidered. In 1992, he appeared in three projects. He appeared in the first episode of the television show ', passing on the lead role to actor Adrian Paul. He also appeared in the French crime thriller \"Max et J\u00e9r\u00e9mie\", co-starring Philippe Noiret and Jean-Pierre Marielle.\nIn 1993, Carl Schenkel's suspense thriller \"Knight Moves\" premiered, in which Lambert was both an executive producer and the lead. Lambert plays a chess grandmaster suspected of murder. Later that year, Stuart Gordon's science fiction film \"Fortress\" premiered, with Lambert playing the lead. The story takes place in a dystopian future where a man and his wife are sent to a maximum-security prison because they are expecting a second child, which is against the strict one-child policy.\n1994 saw the release of two collaborations with actor Mario Van Peebles. They played the side by side leads in the action film \"Gunmen\", and Van Peebles was the main villain in \"\". In this third installment of the franchise, Connor MacLeod is forced to face a new, dangerous enemy, a powerful sorcerer known as Kane who wants to gain world domination. Lambert also starred in the action film \"Roadflower\". In France, he produced his second Patrick Braoud\u00e9 film called \"Neuf mois\", which was nominated for two C\u00e9sars.\nIn 1995, he played the role of the thunder god Raiden in the Paul W. S. Anderson's movie adaptation of the popular video game series \"Mortal Kombat\". The plot of the film follows the warrior monk Liu Kang, the actor Johnny Cage, and the soldier Sonya Blade, all three guided by the god Raiden, on their journey to combat the evil sorcerer Shang Tsung and his forces in a tournament to save Earth. Lambert later reprised the role in the MK Movie Skin Pack in the 2020 game \"Mortal Kombat 11\". Also that year, he also starred in the American-Japanese martial arts action film \"The Hunted\", directed by J. F. Lawton, with a cast that included John Lone, Joan Chen, Yoshio Harada, and Yoko Shimada, and produced Xavier Beauvois's \"Don't Forget You're Going to Die\", which won the Special Jury Award at the Gij\u00f3n International Film Festival, won the Prix Jean Vigo, won the Jury Prize and was nominated for the Palme d'Or at the Cannes Film Festival. Lambert was also an executive producer on Chris Columbus' \"Nine Months\", an English-language remake of \"Neuf mois\".\nIn 1996, Lambert was an executive producer and the lead in Nils Gaup's western film \"North Star\", co-starring James Caan. The same year he was a producer of \"When Saturday Comes\", a football sport drama starring Sean Bean. In 1997, he starred in Gabriele Salvatores' cyberpunk science fiction film \"Nirvana\". The film tells the story of a virtual reality game designer, played by Lambert, who discovers that the main character of his game has achieved sentience due to an attack by a computer virus. The film was screened out of competition at the Cannes Film Festival. The same year, he also co-lead with Ice-T in the action film \"Mean Guns\", and starred in the French film \"Arlette\" by Claude Zidi.\nIn 1998, he produced and starred in \"Operation Splitsville,\" a remake of \"G\u00e9nial, mes parents divorcent\", which he produced several years earlier. The same year, he produced and played a man with a mental disability, who moved into a nursing home, in the film \"Gideon\". In 1999, he produced and starred in Russell Mulcahy's \"Resurrection\", where he plays a detective who is assigned to investigate the savage murder of a man who has bled to death from a severed arm. He also starred in science fantasy-action film \"Beowulf\". In 2000, he played in the fourth installment of the \"Highlander\" franchise, '. The film reunited him with Adrian Paul, and would be last sequel Lambert appeared in. The same year, he was still on the run from authorities in the sequel '.\nHe also starred in John Glen's \"The Point Men\", about a team of Israeli agents being killed off one-by-one after a botched anti-terrorist operation. In 2003, he played in \"Absolon\", a post-apocalyptic science fiction thriller film. He was an executive producer on the film \"The Confessor\" (also known as \"The Good Shepherd\") starring Christian Slater, Molly Parker, and Stephen Rea. In 2006, he was an executive producer and star on the film \"Day of Wrath\". He also played a supporting role in Richard Kelly's \"Southland Tales\".\nIn 2007, he starred in the vampire film \"Metamorphosis\". He starred in the Sophie Marceau directed French film \"Trivial\". In 2009, Lambert was a lead in Claire Denis' \"White Material\"; both the film and Lambert's performance received critical acclaim. The film stars Isabelle Huppert as a struggling French coffee producer in an unnamed French speaking African country, who decides to stay at her coffee plantation in spite of an erupting civil war. The film has appeared on a number of critics' top ten lists of the best films of 2010. That year, he also acted in \"Cartagena\", with Sophie Marceau starring as a beautiful, free-spirited woman who becomes bedridden following a terrible accident. Against her better judgement, she hires a drunk middle-aged former boxer (Lambert) to cook and care for her. Although unqualified for the position, he is desperate for work, and slowly he wins the trust of the woman, who teaches him how to read. The film also won several awards in France.\nIn 2011, Lambert starred as the villainous head monk Methodius in the \"Ghost Rider\" sequel ', starring Nicolas Cage, in 2011. He underwent sword training for three months and shaved his head. The film made $132.6 million worldwide. Shortly afterwards, he got the role of Marcel Janvier (alias \"The Chameleon\"), a recurring villain in award-winning hit police crime TV drama '. His character was in six episodes from 2012 to 2013 \u2013 the two highest-rated seasons of the show.\nIn 2014, he played in the biographical crime drama film \"Electric Slide\", about the Los Angeles-based bank robber Eddie Dodson. In 2015, he co-starred in Claude Lelouch's \"Un plus une\", a French romantic comedy film. He also co-starred in the biographical film \"10 Days in a Madhouse\", about the experiences of undercover journalist Nellie Bly. In 2016 he co-starred in \"Hail, Caesar!\", a comedy film written, produced, edited, and directed by Joel and Ethan Coen. It is a fictional story that follows the real-life \"fixer\" Eddie Mannix (Josh Brolin) working in the Hollywood film industry in the 1950s, trying to discover what happened to a cast member who vanished during the filming of a biblical epic. That year, he cameoed as a French Army Captain in \"La folle histoire de Max et L\u00e9on\", a French World War II comedy film. He also had a recurring role in the Russian-Portuguese biographical television show \"Mata Hari\". That year, he also played the lead villain in the martial arts film \"\".\nLambert plays the role of SS officer Karl Frenzel in the Russian film \"Sobibor\" by director Konstantin Khabensky, which was released in 2018. The film is a World War II drama about the only successful uprising in a Nazi death camp. It was selected as the Russian entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 91st Academy Awards. Lambert received high praise for \"an outstanding and nuanced performance; he is unrecognisable as Frenzel, a demonic, fractured character\".\nLambert was part of the ensemble cast of \"Bel Canto\" from director Paul Weitz, an adaptation of the 2002 novel of the same name, by Ann Patchett. Lambert played the role of a French ambassador who was part of the Japanese embassy hostage crisis (also called the Lima Crisis) of 1996\u20131997 in Lima, Peru. Lambert received praise, along with the rest of the cast, for \"performances [that] are uniformly excellent\".\nOther ventures.\nLambert has written two novels: \"La fille porte-bonheur\" in 2011 and \"Le juge\" in 2015.\nAlong with owning a mineral water business and food processing plant, Lambert produces C\u00f4tes du Rh\u00f4ne wines with his business partner Eric Beaumard at a vineyard in Sainte-C\u00e9cile-les-Vignes. The label, \"Les Garrigues de Beaumard-Lambert\", tops out at 4,000 cases and is sold mostly in Europe. Beaumard has primary creative control of the winery, but Lambert conducts barrel tests and monitors the various stages of the wine's evolution.\nPersonal life.\nLambert was married to American actress Diane Lane from 1988 until their divorce in 1994. Their daughter was born in 1993. Lambert married American actress Jaimyse Haft in 1999, and they divorced in 2000. From 2007 to 2014, he dated French actress Sophie Marceau.\nLambert has severe myopia and cannot see without his glasses. He cannot wear contact lenses and often has to perform while virtually blind, which has led to injuries while performing his own stunts.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42100", "revid": "29463730", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42100", "title": "913", "text": "Calendar year\nCalendar year\nYear 913 (CMXIII) was a common year starting on Friday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nBy topic.\nReligion.\n&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42101", "revid": "70", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42101", "title": "2nd World War", "text": ""}
{"id": "42102", "revid": "70", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42102", "title": "1st World War", "text": ""}
{"id": "42103", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42103", "title": "Austro - Hungary", "text": ""}
{"id": "42104", "revid": "21830698", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42104", "title": "Cameron Diaz", "text": "American actress (born 1972)\nCameron Michelle Diaz (born August 30, 1972) is an American actress. Prolific in both comedy and drama, her films have grossed over $3 billion in the U.S. box-office. Her output of romantic comedies in the late 1990s and early 2000s established her as a prominent sex symbol and one of Hollywood's most bankable stars, and in 2013, Diaz was named the highest-paid actress over 40. She has received various accolades, including nominations for a British Academy Film Award and four Golden Globe Awards.\nBorn in San Diego, California, Diaz was raised in Long Beach. While still in high school, she signed a modeling contract with Elite Model Management. Diaz made her film debut at age 21 in the comedy \"The Mask\" (1994). Following a supporting role in the romantic comedy \"My Best Friend's Wedding\" (1997), she starred as the titular character in the Farrelly brothers' comedy \"There's Something About Mary\" (1998), which brought her increased fame and her first Golden Globe nomination. Diaz's following two projects\u2014the sports drama \"Any Given Sunday\" and Spike Jonze's fantasy film \"Being John Malkovich\" (both 1999)\u2014earned her recognition as a dramatic actress.\nDiaz received praise for her supporting roles in Cameron Crowe's \"Vanilla Sky\" (2001) and Martin Scorsese's \"Gangs of New York\" (2002) and had greater commercial success in the action comedy \"Charlie's Angels\" (2000) and , as well as for voicing Princess Fiona in the \"Shrek\" franchise since 2001. Her subsequent films include the comedies \"In Her Shoes\" (2005), \"The Holiday\" (2006), \"What Happens in Vegas\" (2008), \"Knight and Day\" (2010), \"The Green Hornet\" (2011), and \"Bad Teacher\" (2011). After starring in three successful comedies in 2014\u2014\"The Other Woman\", \"Sex Tape\" and \"Annie\"\u2014Diaz retired from acting to focus on her family, but made a return to the profession with the action comedy \"Back in Action\" (2025).\nDiaz has also written two health books: \"The Body Book\" (2013), a \"New York Times\" bestseller, and \"The Longevity Book\" (2016). Her personal life has drawn media attention throughout the course of her career, mostly regarding her relationships and fashion choices. In 2015, Diaz married Good Charlotte guitarist Benji Madden; they have two children via surrogate.\nEarly life.\nCameron Michelle Diaz was born August 30, 1972, in San Diego, California, to Billie (n\u00e9e Early), an import/export agent, and Emilio Diaz, a foreman of the California oil company Unocal. Diaz has an elder sister, Chimene. Her father's family is Cuban, and Diaz's forebears had emigrated from Spain to Cuba. Diaz stated that her direct Spanish ancestors were originally from C\u00e1diz. Later, they settled in Ybor City, Tampa, Florida, before moving to the Los Angeles area, where her father was born. Her mother has predominantly English and German ancestry.\nDiaz was raised in Long Beach and attended Los Cerritos Elementary School, and then Long Beach Polytechnic High School, where she was a schoolmate of Snoop Dogg. She recalled her upbringing as frugal, stating: \"I had amazing parents, they were awesome. We weren't privileged\u2014very much the opposite. My family would collect [soda] cans to turn in for extra money, because $20 meant something to us. But we were very happy.\"\nWhile still attending high school, Diaz signed a modeling contract with Elite Model Management at age 16 and appeared in advertisements for Calvin Klein and Levi's. The following year, at age 17, she was featured on the cover of the July 1990 issue of \"Seventeen\" magazine. Diaz also modeled for 2 to 3 months in Australia and shot a commercial for Coca-Cola in Sydney in 1991.\nCareer.\n1994\u20131998: Early films and rise to fame.\nAt the age of 21, Diaz auditioned for \"The Mask\", playing a jazz singer named Tina Carlyle, based on the recommendation of an agent for Elite, who met the film's producers while they were searching for the lead actress. Having no previous acting experience, she started acting lessons after being cast. \"The Mask\" became one of the top ten highest-grossing films of 1994 and launched Diaz as a sex symbol. During this period, Diaz dated video producer Carlos de la Torre.\nDiaz subsequently starred in the independent black comedy \"The Last Supper\" (1995), playing one of several liberal graduate students who invite a group of extremist conservatives to a dinner in an attempt to murder them. Roger Ebert deemed the film \"a brave effort in a timid time, a Swiftian attempt to slap us all in the face and get us to admit that our own freedoms depend precisely on those of our neighbors, our opponents and, yes, our enemies.\" She then had a lead role as an ex-stripper in the dramatic comedy \"Feeling Minnesota\" (1996), in which she co-starred opposite Keanu Reeves, Vincent D'Onofrio, and Courtney Love. Emanuel Levy of \"Variety\" noted: \"Sadly, with the notable exception of the attractive Diaz, who's well cast as the sexual aggressor and romantic manipulator, there are no exciting performances in the film.\" The same year, she was cast opposite Jennifer Aniston in the Edward Burns-directed comedy \"She's the One\" (1996), followed by a starring role in \"Head Above Water\" (1996), a crime-comedy in which she played an unfaithful wife implicated in her ex-lover's murder.\nShe was scheduled to perform in the film \"Mortal Kombat\", but had to resign after breaking her hand while training for the role. Besides a starring part in the little-seen \"A Life Less Ordinary\", Diaz returned to mainstream in 1997 with the romantic comedy \"My Best Friend's Wedding\". In it, she starred opposite Julia Roberts, playing the wealthy fianc\u00e9e of a sportswriter who is the long-time friend of Roberts' character. The film was a global box-office hit and is considered one of the best romantic comedy films of all time.\nIn 1998, Diaz starred in \"There's Something About Mary\", as the titular role of a woman living in Miami having several men vying for her affections. It was remarked in \"The Austin Chronicle\": \"As the Mary at the center of it all, Diaz certainly exudes that irresistible 'something' expressed in the title. In films such as \"My Best Friend's Wedding\" and \"A Life Less Ordinary\", Diaz has shown herself to be a good comic sport who is game for just about anything. Here, it's no stretch to understand why, at the end of the movie, some half-dozen suitors have converged in her living room to throw themselves at her feet.\" The sleeper hit was the highest-grossing comedy of 1998 in North America as well as the fourth-highest-grossing film of the year; it made US$176million in the United States and US$369million worldwide. She was nominated for a Golden Globe Award in the category of Best Actress\u00a0\u2013 Musical or Comedy. Diaz also starred in the critically panned comedy \"Very Bad Things\" (1998).\n1999\u20132004: Dramatic roles and critical success.\nShe starred in Spike Jonze's directorial debut \"Being John Malkovich\" (1999), portraying the pet-obsessed wife of an unemployed puppeteer who, through a portal, finds himself in the mind of actor John Malkovich. The film received widespread acclaim and was an arthouse success. Janet Maslin of \"The New York Times\" concluded that Diaz \"does a hilarious turn\" in her \"frumpy wife\" role, and Roger Ebert felt that the actress, \"one of the best-looking women in movies, [...] here looks so dowdy we hardly recognize her [...] Diaz has fun with her talent by taking it incognito to strange places and making it work for a living\". For her role, Diaz earned Best Supporting Actress nominations at the Golden Globe, BAFTA, and SAG Awards, however, she was snubbed for the Oscar, which was met with backlash. Her next film release in 1999 was Oliver Stone's sports drama \"Any Given Sunday\" (1999), in which veteran coach Tony D\u2019Amato (Al Pacino) has fallen out of favor with her character Christina Pagniacci, the young woman who owns the team. While critical response was mixed, the film made US$100million globally.\nIn the film adaptation \"Charlie's Angels\" (2000), Diaz, Drew Barrymore, and Lucy Liu played the trio of investigators in Los Angeles. The film was one of the highest-grossing films of the year, grossing US$264.1million. In 2001, Diaz starred in the Sundance-premiered independent drama \"The Invisible Circus\", as a young woman who commits suicide in Europe in the 1970s, and next in the year, she appeared in \"Vanilla Sky\", as the former lover of a self-indulgent and vain publishing magnate (Tom Cruise). A wide critical response and commercial success greeted \"Vanilla Sky\" upon its release; \"Los Angeles Times\" called her \"compelling as the embodiment of crazed sensuality\" and \"The New York Times\" said she gives a \"ferociously emotional\" performance. \"San Francisco Chronicle\" similarly stated of the film, \"most impressive is Cameron Diaz, whose fatal-attraction stalker is both heartbreaking and terrifying.\" She earned nominations for Best Supporting Actress at the Golden Globe Awards, the SAG Awards, the Critics' Choice Awards, and the American Film Institute Awards for her performance in the film.\nAlso in 2001, she voiced Princess Fiona in the animated film \"Shrek\". In the film, her character is plagued by a curse that transforms her into an ogress each and every sunset. Locked in a dragon-guarded castle for several years, she is rescued by the title character, whom she later comes to love. The film was a major commercial success, grossing US$484.4million worldwide and became the first movie to win the Academy Award for Best Animated Feature. In 2002, Diaz headlined the romantic comedy \"The Sweetest Thing\", playing a single woman educating herself on wooing the opposite sex when she finally meets the man of her dreams. The film was a moderate commercial success with a global gross of US$68.6million.\nAfter completing \"Shrek\", Diaz starred in Martin Scorsese's epic period drama \"Gangs of New York\", set in the mid-19th century in the Five Points district of New York City; she took on the role of a pickpocket-grifter and the love interest of Leonardo DiCaprio's character. The film received positive reviews by critics and was a box office success, grossing a total of US$193million worldwide. A. O. Scott of \"The New York Times\", agreeing with other top critics on co-star Daniel Day-Lewis's presence overshadowing Diaz and DiCaprio, felt that the actress \"ends up with no outlet for her spitfire energies, since her character is more a structural necessity \u2014 the linchpin of male jealousy \u2014 than a fully imagined person. The limitations of her role point to a more serious lapse, which is the movie's lack of curiosity about what women's lives might have been like in Old New York\". Diaz next reprised her roles in the commercially successful sequels \"\" (2003), and \"Shrek 2\" (2004).\n2005\u20132011: Established actress.\nDiaz received substantial defamation damages from suing American Media Incorporated, after the \"National Enquirer\" posted an article and pictures with the headline \"Cameron Caught Cheating\" on their website in May 2005. The photos claimed to show Diaz cheating on her boyfriend at the time, Justin Timberlake, with the married MTV producer of her show \"Trippin\"', Shane Nickerson. After Diaz complained, the article and pictures were removed from the web and the hard copy did not contain any of the content. The magazine apologized to Diaz, Timberlake, Nickerson and his wife for the distress caused and said the story was untrue and the picture showed no more than a goodbye hug between friends.\nIn her following film, Diaz played opposite Toni Collette and Shirley MacLaine in \"In Her Shoes\" (2005), a comedy-drama film based on the novel of the same name by Jennifer Weiner, which focuses on the relationship between two sisters and their grandmother. The film received generally positive reviews from critics, and Diaz garnered acclaim for her performance of a dyslectic wild child engaged in a love-hate struggle with her plain, sensible sister (Collette), with \"USA Today\" calling it \"her best work\" at the time. She followed \"In Her Shoes\" with a role in Nancy Meyers' romantic comedy \"The Holiday\" (2006), also starring Kate Winslet, Jude Law, and Jack Black. In it she played Amanda, an American movie trailer producer who arranges a home exchange with a British woman (Winslet). The film became one of the biggest commercial successes of the year, grossing more than US$205million worldwide.\nDiaz's only film of 2007 was \"Shrek the Third\", the third installment in the \"Shrek\" franchise, which also featured Timberlake in a supporting role. Although the film was met with mixed reviews from critics, it grossed US$798million worldwide. The same year, Diaz also voiced Princess Fiona in a thirty-minute Christmas special, \"Shrek the Halls\", directed by Gary Trousdale. Diaz earned an estimated US$50\u00a0million during the period of a year ending June 2008, for her roles in the \"Shrek\" sequel and her next film \"What Happens in Vegas\" opposite Ashton Kutcher. A romantic comedy by Tom Vaughan, Diaz and Kutcher portrayed two strangers who awaken together to discover they have gotten married following a night in which they won a huge jackpot after playing the other's quarter. Critic reviews were negative but the film still grossed US$219million with a budget of US$35million.\nIn 2009, she starred in \"My Sister's Keeper\" and \"The Box\". Based on Jodi Picoult's novel of the same name, \"My Sister's Keeper\" was released to mixed reviews in June 2009. In the drama, Diaz plays a former lawyer and mother of three, one of whom is dying of leukemia. A moderate commercial success, it grossed US$95million worldwide, mostly from its domestic run. Set in 1976, \"The Box\", written and directed by Richard Kelly, stars Diaz and James Marsden as a couple who receive a box from a mysterious man who offers them one million dollars if they press the button sealed within the dome on top of a box, knowing that someone, somewhere, will die from it. Critical response towards the psychological horror film was mixed, and, though having grossed its budget back, was considered a financial disappointment.\nIn 2010, \"Forbes\" ranked Diaz as the richest female celebrity, ranking her number 60 among the wealthiest 100. Also that year, Diaz reprised her voice role of Princess Fiona in \"Shrek Forever After\", the fourth installment in the \"Shrek\" series. Although the film opened to mixed reviews from critics, it grossed a worldwide total of over US$752million and became the fifth top-grossing film released that year. The same year, she also voiced Princess Fiona in a thirty-minute Halloween special titled \"Scared Shrekless\". Also in 2010, Diaz reunited with her \"Vanilla Sky\" co-star Tom Cruise in the action comedy film \"Knight and Day\". In it, Diaz plays a classic car restorer who unwittingly gets caught up with the eccentric secret agent Roy Miller, played by Cruise, who is on the run from the Secret Service. \"Knight and Day\" received mixed reviews, and while the comedy performed poorly at the box office in its debut, it became a sleeper hit at the box office with a worldwide gross of US$262million.\nIn 2011, Diaz was cast as Lenore Case, a journalist, in the remake of the 1940s film \"The Green Hornet\". Directed by Michel Gondry, Diaz starred alongside Seth Rogen, Jay Chou, and Christoph Waltz in the superhero action comedy film. Released to mixed to negative reviews from critics, who called it an \"overblown, interminable and unfunny update\", the film ended its theatrical run on April 21, 2011, with a worldwide gross total of US$228million. The same year, she played opposite Timberlake and Jason Segel in Jake Kasdan's adult comedy \"Bad Teacher\". In the film, Diaz plays an immoral, gold-digging Chicago-area middle school teacher at the fictional John Adams Middle School who curses at her students, drinks heavily, and smokes marijuana. Again, it received mostly negative reviews from critics who felt that \"in spite of a promising concept and a charmingly brazen performance from Diaz, \"Bad Teacher\" is never as funny as it should be.\" A commercial hit however, the R-rated comedy grossed US$216million worldwide. Also in 2011, Diaz was listed among \"CEOWorld Magazine\"'s Top Accomplished Women Entertainers.\n2012\u20132014: Focus on comedies.\nIn 2012 Diaz was cast in \"What to Expect When You're Expecting\", directed by Kirk Jones and based on the pregnancy guide of the same name. Diaz, who filmed her scenes in a two-week period, portrays Jules Baxter, a contestant on a celebrity dance show and a host to a weight-loss fitness show, who becomes pregnant with her dance partner's baby. Upon release, the ensemble comedy received mostly negative reviews, but became a moderate commercial success with a worldwide gross of US$84.4million. Diaz's other film that year was \"Gambit\", a remake of the 1966 film of the same name directed by Michael Hoffman and scripted by Joel and Ethan Coen. The film received overwhelmingly negative reviews, and performed poorly at the box office, grossing only US$10million internationally. Diaz also voiced Sigmund Freud in \"\" (2012), a British animated comedy film that is a (deliberately) completely inaccurate portrayal of the life of Monty Python alumnus Graham Chapman.\nDiaz's only film project of 2013 was Ridley Scott's \"The Counselor\", co-starring Michael Fassbender, Javier Bardem, Pen\u00e9lope Cruz, and Brad Pitt. In the thriller about greed, death, the primal instincts of humans and their consequences, Diaz plays a pathological liar and a sociopath, an immigrant who is now living the high-life after escaping a sordid past as an exotic dancer. While the film's reception was negative, her performance was praised as one of her best in recent years. In late 2013, she published a health book, \"\", co-written with Sandra Bark. It was no. 2 on \"The New York Times\" Best Seller list in March 2014. \nDiaz's first film of 2014 was the romantic revenge comedy \"The Other Woman\" opposite Nikolaj Coster-Waldau, Leslie Mann, and Kate Upton. While \"The Other Woman\" received mostly negative reviews from critics, who felt that it settled for cheap laughs, it opened atop the US weekend box office with earnings of US$24.7million across the three days; it eventually made US$83.9million in North America and US$196.7million globally. Her next film release in 2014 was the comedy \"Sex Tape\", in which she starred with Segel again as a married couple waking up to discover that a sex tape they had made went missing, leading to a frantic search for its whereabouts. It ultimately became a moderate commercial success with a worldwide gross of US$126million. The role required Diaz to perform multiple scenes of nudity. On her decision to appear nude, Diaz said: \"People have seen my butt. I've shown the top of my butt, the bottom of my butt. I'm not opposed to doing nudity, as long as it's part of the story. I'll do whatever has to get done if it's the right thing.\" \nHer final film that year was the film adaptation \"Annie\", co-starring Quvenzhan\u00e9 Wallis, Jamie Foxx, and Rose Byrne. She took on the role of Miss Colleen Hannigan, the cruel control freak of the foster home where the titular character resides. Upon its December premiere, \"Annie\" made US$133million worldwide, with Diaz's performance garnering polarized reviews; critics praising her effort, but ultimately calling it too \"vampy\", as well as \"strident and obnoxious\". Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" says that she \"overacts the role to the point of hysteria\". \n2015\u2013present: Acting hiatus and return.\nDiaz decided to take a break from acting following the release of \"Annie\", stating in July 2017 that she became tired of traveling for filming, and confirmed her retirement the following March. She released \"The Longevity Book: The Science of Aging, the Biology of Strength, and the Privilege of Time\" in June 2016. She has since invested in health and biotech startups, including Seed Health and Modern Acupuncture. In May 2019, she was a keynote speaker at The Infatuation's annual food festival, EEEEEATSCON. In 2020, Diaz launched an organic wine brand, Avaline, with business partner Katherine Power. In 2022, she appeared as a guest judge in the season opener episode of \"RuPaul's Drag Race All Stars 7\", and stated she was a huge fan of the show.\nIn June 2022, it was announced that Diaz would return to acting by starring alongside Foxx in the Netflix action-comedy \"Back in Action\", which was released on Netflix on January 17, 2025. In March 2024, Diaz was announced to be in talks to star in the Apple Original Film \"Outcome\" alongside Keanu Reeves. Filming started for the project later that month. She will reprise her voice role as Princess Fiona in \"Shrek 5\", scheduled for release in 2027.\nPersonal life.\nRelationships and family.\nFrom 1990 to 1994, Diaz cohabited with video producer Carlos de la Torre, whom she met in Japan while filming an LA Gear ad. From January 1996 to September 1998, Diaz dated her \"There's Something About Mary\" co-star Matt Dillon. She was unofficially engaged to actor/singer Jared Leto between 1999 and 2003. From April 2003 to December 2006, she dated singer Justin Timberlake. From May 2010 to September 2011, Diaz dated former New York Yankees player Alex Rodriguez. Diaz married musician Benji Madden at her home in Beverly Hills, California, on January 5, 2015, in a Jewish ceremony. The couple had been introduced ten months earlier by her close friend Nicole Richie who is married to Madden's twin brother Joel. In December 2019, the couple became parents to their first child via surrogate pregnancy, a daughter. In March 2024, it was announced that the couple had a second child, a son.\nExplicit media and lawsuit.\nIn May 1992, she was photographed and videotaped topless for an S&amp;M leather fashion lingerie editorial by John Rutter, a professional photographer. The photographs and video were never released. Rutter approached Diaz in 2003, ahead of the release of \"\", offering to sell the pictures and video to her for US$million (equivalent to $million in 2024) before attempting to sell them to prospective buyers. He stated that he was offering her first right of refusal to them; she saw it as attempted blackmail and sued him. In July 2004, the 30-minute video of the photo shoot, entitled \"She's No Angel\", was released on a Russian website. Rutter denied releasing it. On September 16, 2005, Rutter was sentenced to more than three years in prison for attempted grand theft, forgery, and perjury.\nOn February 27, 2025, it was confirmed that Diaz had been one of the people who had traveled on Jeffrey Epstein's private plane to his private island in the US Virgin Islands.\nPolitical views.\nDiaz was critical of the George W. Bush administration. She wore a T-shirt that read \"I won't vote for a son of a Bush!\" while making publicity visits for \"Charlie's Angels\". Diaz has been involved with the Iraq and Afghanistan Veterans of America (IAVA), the first and largest non-profit organization for veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, and has spoken as an advocate for military families.\nActing credits and accolades.\nDiaz has received various accolades, including nominations for four Golden Globe Awards, three Screen Actors Guild Awards and a British Academy Film Award. In 2016, \"IndieWire\" named her one of the greatest actors never to have received an Academy Award nomination.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42105", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42105", "title": "Homeland security", "text": "United States notion of safety from terrorism\nIn American national security policy, homeland security is \"the national effort to ensure a homeland that is safe, secure, and resilient against terrorism and other hazards where American interests, aspirations, and ways of life can thrive\" to the \"national effort to prevent terrorist attacks within the United States, reduce the vulnerability of the U.S. to terrorism, and minimize the damage from attacks that do occur.\" According to an official work published by the Congressional Research Service in 2013, the \"Homeland security\" term's definition has varied over time.\nHomeland security is not constrained to terrorist incidents. Terrorism is violent, criminal acts committed by individuals and/or groups to further ideological goals stemming from influences, such as those of a political, religious, social, racial, or environmental nature. Within the US, an all-hazards approach exists regarding homeland security endeavors. In this sense, homeland security encompasses both natural disasters and man-made events. Thus, the domain of homeland security must accommodate a plethora of situations and scenarios, ranging from natural disasters (e.g., Hurricane Katrina, Irma) to acts of terrorism (e.g., Boston Marathon bombing, September 11 attacks).\nThe term came about following enactment of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 and reorganization of many U.S. government civil agencies effective March 1, 2003, to form the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS) after the September 11 attacks, and may refer to the actions of that department, the United States Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, or the United States House of Representatives Committee on Homeland Security.\nThe term \"Homeland security\" is not to be confused with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. In its February 15, 2001 report, the U.S. Commission on National Security/21st Century, said the United States must change how it operates in the area of homeland security. The report recommended the creation of what was ultimately called the Department of Homeland Security.\"\nDHS was formed by the Homeland security Act of 2002. The term, homeland security, is not the same as the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). DHS is an executive branch agency. The Senate Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs and the House Committee on Homeland Security are both legislative bodies, and thus are clearly distinct from the executive agency, DHS. The actions of these two legislative bodies are not the same as actions of DHS.\nHomeland defense (HD) is the military protection of U.S. territory, sovereignty, domestic population, and critical infrastructure against external threats and aggression.\nDefinition.\n\"Despite the [published] definition, mission statement, and vision [all of which have changed since 9/11], there is no consensus among practitioners and the public as to what the term Homeland Security actually means. Different groups view it differently. The extremes of opinion are represented, for the narrow view, by those who feel homeland security is only about terrorism. They believe focusing on anything additional dilutes, distracts, and weakens the homeland security mission.\"\nOthers say its focus is terrorism and natural disasters. Still others claim homeland security is about 'all hazards' (terrorism, man-made disasters, and natural disasters). To some, homeland security is focused on 'jurisdictional hazards' (i.e. homeland security means different things to different jurisdictions depending upon that jurisdiction's particular hazards, risks, and level of preparedness). Examples of some of the jurisdictional hazards include hurricanes, tornados, flooding, and earthquakes. At the other extreme, the broad view of homeland security advocates that homeland security is about everything \u2013 that it implicates almost every sector.\"\nIn the United States.\nFollowing the emergency response to Hurricane Hugo in 1989 and Hurricane Andrew in 1992 policy makers in Washington publicly voiced their frustration. A number of reforms were initiated to improve the effectiveness of the disaster relief system in the United States. In the United States, the concept of \"Homeland Security\" extends and recombines responsibilities of government agencies and entities. According to Homeland security research, the U.S. federal Homeland Security and Homeland Defense includes 187 federal agencies and departments, including the National Guard of the United States, the Federal Emergency Management Agency, the United States Coast Guard, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement, United States Citizenship and Immigration Services, the United States Secret Service, the Transportation Security Administration, the 14 agencies that constitute the U.S. intelligence community and Civil Air Patrol. Although many businesses now operate in the area of homeland security, it is overwhelmingly a government function.\nThe George W. Bush administration consolidated many of these activities under the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS), a new cabinet department established as a result of the Homeland Security Act of 2002. However, much of the nation's homeland security activity remains outside of DHS; for example, the FBI and CIA are not part of the Department, and other executive departments such as the Department of Defense and United States Department of Health and Human Services and they play a significant role in certain aspects of homeland security. Homeland security is coordinated at the White House by the Adviser to the President for National Security and the Adviser to the President for Terrorism and Homeland Security. The staff of the National Security Council manages policy integration of National Security and Homeland Security. Homeland security is officially defined by the National Strategy for Homeland Security as \"a concerted national effort to prevent terrorist attacks within the United States, reduce America's vulnerability to terrorism, and minimize the damage and recover from attacks that do occur\". Because the Department of Homeland Security includes the Federal Emergency Management Agency, it also has responsibility for preparedness, response, and recovery to natural disasters.\nAccording to the U.S. Office of Management and Budget and Homeland Security Research Corporation, DHS Homeland security funding constitutes about 20-21 percent of the consolidated U.S. Homeland Security - Homeland Defense funding, while approximately 40 percent of the DHS budget funds civil, non-security activities, such as the U.S. coast guard search and rescue operations and customs functions. The U.S. Homeland Security is the world's largest Homeland counter terror organization, having 40 percent of the global fiscal year homeland security funding.\nThe term \"Homeland security\" became prominent in the United States following the September 11 attacks. It had been used only in limited policy circles prior to these attacks. The phrase \"security of the American homeland\" appears in the 1998 report \"Catastrophic Terrorism: Elements of a National Policy\" by Ash Carter, John M. Deutch, and Philip D. Zelikow. Homeland security is also usually used to connote the civilian aspect of this effort. While \"homeland defense\" refers to its military component, led chiefly by the United States Northern Command, which is headquartered in Colorado Springs, Colorado.\nThe scope of homeland security includes:\nCriticism.\nConflicts exist between bodies of international law (ratified by the United States or not) and those applied under \"homeland security\". One example is the notion of an unlawful combatant. The United States government has created a new status that addresses prisoners captured by a military force who do not conform with the conditions of the Convention. While the United States has only been a signatory to portions of the Geneva Conventions, much international law is based upon it.\nAs a field of study.\nShortly after the September 11 attacks, Homeland security also took off as an up-and-coming academic field with a number of schools in the United States offering Academic certificate and degree programs in Homeland Security. The field is often studied alongside emergency management due to their similar nature and purposes. With the relatively sudden growth of the field, the quality of the programs vary greatly from one to another along with their respective accreditation statuses (or lack thereof). In a partial effort to combat these variations, the International Association of Emergency Managers offers a scholarship program with the aim of nurturing, promoting and developing disaster preparedness and resistance by furthering the education of students studying the fields of emergency management, disaster management or related programs such as Homeland Security.\nHomeland Security is often thought of as a specifically United States term referring to the role of the United States' reformed national security infrastructure beginning in 2003. However, neither the term nor the concept of Homeland Security are specific to the United States. Though terminology varies, an equivalent might be seen in Israel's Ministry of Public Security. Within Homeland Security as an academic field, Homeland Security is sometimes studied in a comparative context by scholars of comparative politics or criminal justice. For example, the British political scientist Paul Wilkinson edited and contributed to a textbook on Homeland Security policy and practice from a British perspective. The scholar Nadav Morag looks at a global perspective on homeland security management and strategies in the book \"Comparative Homeland Security: Global Lessons\".\nProfessional Certification.\nCertified Homeland Protection Professional is a professional certification established by the National Sheriffs' Association in partnership with the National Domestic Preparedness Coalition, through the Global Center for Threat, Risk, and Vulnerability.\nSee also.\nU.S. specific:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42106", "revid": "6481843", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42106", "title": "Crossfire (film)", "text": "1947 noir drama film directed by Edward Dmytryk\nCrossfire is a 1947 American crime film noir directed by Edward Dmytryk and starring Robert Young, Robert Mitchum, Robert Ryan, Gloria Grahame and Sam Levene. It is based on the 1945 novel \"The Brick Foxhole\" by Richard Brooks. The plot concerns a murder investigation among a group of demobilized military personnel, where antisemitism is a motivating factor.\nThough produced by \"B-movie\" specialists RKO Pictures, the film proved a critical and commercial success and was nominated for five Academy Awards including Best Picture, Best Director, and Best Supporting Actor for Ryan. It was the first B-movie to receive a Best Picture Oscar nomination.\nPlot.\nIn Washington D.C., a former US Army soldier named Joseph Samuels is found dead in a hotel room. Police Captain Finlay suspects that the murderer may be among a group of demobilized servicemen had been with Samuels and his female companion Miss Lewis at a hotel bar the night of his death.\nOne of the soldiers, former police officer Sgt. Montgomery, tells Finlay that he and his friend Floyd Bowers met Samuels at the hotel bar and went up to his apartment to find Samuels talking to Cpl. Arthur \"Mitch\" Mitchell. Soon upon their arrival, a heavily drunk Mitch left Samuels' apartment alone, then Montgomery and Floyd left a minute or so later. Montgomery claims that it was the last time they saw Samuels alive.\nSgt. Peter Keeley, concerned that Mitch may be the prime suspect, investigates the murder himself, hoping to clear his friend's name. After helping Mitch escape from police capture, Keeley meets him in a movie theater, where Mitch recalls Montgomery arguing with Samuels inside his apartment. After Mitch left, he spent part of the night with Ginny Tremaine, a working girl he met in a dance hall. When Mitch woke up the next morning in Ginny's apartment, she was not there. After hearing a knock at the door, Mitch met an odd man, who offered to make him coffee, and claimed he was waiting for Ginny too. While the man looked for some cigarettes, Mitch hastily left the apartment.\nMeanwhile, Montgomery and Floyd meet in an apartment. Montgomery tells Floyd to stay out of sight and to keep their stories straight, that they had no argument with Samuels and left his apartment shortly after Mitch. Keeley knocks on their door and asks Floyd about the killing while Montgomery hides. After Keeley leaves, Montgomery \u2013 the actual killer \u2013 kills Floyd for refusing to stay out of sight, and then stages a hanging suicide.\nEscorted by Captain Finlay, Mitch's wife Mary visits Ginny at her apartment, hoping that Ginny will confess to spending the night with Mitch and prove he is innocent. Mary asks Finlay to wait outside, as a cop might make Ginny clam up. Ginny claims to have no knowledge of meeting Mitch, at which point Finlay enters the apartment to question her. Ginny recants and admits to knowing Mitch, but states that she never met him at her apartment. At this point, the odd man appears from a back room and tells Finlay that he remembers Mitch, thereby providing a partial alibi, but not for the estimated time of the murder.\nBack at the police station, Finlay questions Montgomery a second time, hoping to uncover the motive for Samuels' murder, but sends him on his way. With Keeley in his office, Finlay suspects that antisemitism was the likely motive for Samuels' murder, since Samuels was Jewish and no person involved otherwise knew him personally. Both suspect that Montgomery was responsible for killing both Samuels and Floyd, since he is clearly antisemitic.\nFinlay delivers a personal antiracist message to Keeley and a na\u00efve soldier named Leroy, who was in Montgomery's unit, by recalling the death of his Irish grandfather during earlier historical bigotry. Winning over Leroy, Finlay sets a trap to catch Montgomery. Leroy tells a surprised Montgomery that Floyd wants to meet him and shows him an address he wrote down where he can find Floyd. Montgomery shows up at the apartment where he killed Floyd, presumably to check if he is still alive, and encounters Finlay and another cop. Finlay tells Montgomery he gave himself away as the address on the piece of paper was actually to a different building, nevertheless he came to the right apartment, proving he had been there before when he killed Floyd. Montgomery tries to escape but is shot dead by Finlay.\nAfter Montgomery is killed, Finlay and Keeley say their goodbyes. As Finlay drives away, Keeley offers to buy Leroy a cup of coffee.\nCast.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Robert Young as Capt. Finlay\nProduction.\nThis was a prestige picture during Dore Schary's brief tenure as Head of Production at RKO. The film's screenplay, written by John Paxton, was based on director and screenwriter Richard Brooks' 1945 novel \"The Brick Foxhole\". Brooks wrote his novel while he was a sergeant in the U.S. Marine Corps making training films at Quantico, Virginia, and Camp Pendleton, California. \nIn the novel, the victim Joseph Samuels was a homosexual. As told in the film \"The Celluloid Closet\", and in the documentary included on the DVD edition of the \"Crossfire\" film, the Hollywood Hays Code prohibited any mention of homosexuality because it was seen as a sexual perversion. Hence, the book's theme of homophobia was changed to one about racism and antisemitism. Nevertheless, the fast rapport which develops between the artistic soldier Arthur \"Mitch\" Mitchell (George Cooper) and the sensitive older man Joseph Samuels (Sam Levene) hints at the original subtext. Director Edward Dmytryk later said that the Code \"had a very good effect because it made us think. If we wanted to get something across that was censorable... we had to do it deviously. We had to be clever. And it usually turned out to be much better than if we had done it straight.\"\nThe book was published while Brooks was serving in the Marine Corps. A fellow Marine, the politically-active actor Robert Ryan, met Brooks and told him he was determined to play in a version of the book on screen.\nThe film was shot entirely at the RKO studio backlot in Los Angeles, over 24 days. During filming, the working title was \"Cradle of Fear\".\nRelease.\nThe film premiered at the Rivoli Theatre in New York City on July 22, 1947.\nA few months after its premiere, producer Adrian Scott and director Edward Dmytryk were cited for contempt of Congress for refusing to testify before the House Un-American Activities Committee (HUAC), becoming part of the blacklisted Hollywood Ten.\nThe US Department of Defense was hesitant about screening the film due to its depiction of prejudice and crime among service members. The US Army showed the film only at its US bases. The US Navy would not exhibit the film at all.\nReception.\nBox office.\nThe film made a profit of $1,270,000.\nCritical response.\nWhen first released, \"Variety\" magazine gave the film a positive review, writing, \"\"Crossfire\" is a frank spotlight on antisemitism. Producer Dore Schary, in association with Adrian Scott, has pulled no punches. There is no skirting such relative \"fol-de-rol\" as intermarriage or clubs that exclude Jews. Here is a hard-hitting film [based on Richard Brooks' novel, \"The Brick Foxhole\"] whose whodunit aspects are fundamentally incidental to the overall thesis of bigotry and race prejudice... Director Edward Dmytryk has drawn gripping portraitures. The flashback technique is effective as it shades and colors the sundry attitudes of the heavy, as seen or recalled by the rest of the cast.\"\n\"The New York Times\" film critic, Bosley Crowther, lauded the acting in the drama, and wrote, \"Mr. Dmytryk has handled most excellently a superlative cast which plays the drama. Robert Ryan is frighteningly real as the hard, sinewy, loud-mouthed, intolerant and vicious murderer, and Robert Mitchum, Steve Brodie, and George Cooper are variously revealing as his pals. Robert Young gives a fine taut performance as the patiently questioning police lieutenant, whose mind and sensibilities are revolted\u2014and eloquently expressed\u2014by what he finds. Sam Levene is affectingly gentle in his brief bit as the Jewish victim, and Gloria Grahame is believably brazen and pathetic as a girl of the streets.\" In \"The Nation\" in 1947, James Agee stated, \"... a gruesomely exciting story... excellently written and directed...it is, even as melodramatic entertainment, the best Hollywood movie in a long time... \"Crossfire\" is an unusually good and honest movie and may\u2014I hope, will\u2014prove a very useful one.\" Writing about Dore Schary, RKO-Radio's then vice-president in charge of production, Agee continues: \"I do not question the goodness of his deepest motives, and I certainly wish him well; but it may as well be remembered that, at best, Hollywood's heroism is calculated to land buttered side up.\"\nBritish film critic Leslie Halliwell gave it four of four stars: \"Tense, talky thriller shot entirely at night with pretty full expressionist use of camera technique: notable for style, acting, experimentation, and for being the first Hollywood film to hit out at racial bigotry.\" \nIn an essay published in 1977, Scottish writer Colin McArthur challenged the social reading of \"Crossfire\" by several Anglo-American critics, arguing that thematically and stylistically it was a film noir, and that it reflected that genre in being less concerned with the problems of a particular society, such as antisemitism, than with angst and loneliness as essential elements of the human condition.\nCritic Dennis Schwartz questioned the noir aspects of the film in 2000, and discussed the cinematography in his review. He wrote, \"This is more of a message film than a noir thriller, but has been classified by most cinephiles in the noir category... J. Roy Hunt, the 70-year-old cinematographer, who goes back to the earliest days of Hollywood, shot the film using the style of low-key lighting, providing dark shots of Monty, contrasted with ghost-like shots of Mary Mitchell (Jacqueline White) as she angelically goes to help her troubled husband Arthur.\"\nThe review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 88% of critics gave the film a positive review, based on 24 reviews.\nThe film was one of two major Hollywood films in 1947 dealing with the theme of antisemitism, the other being that year's Academy Award for Best Picture winner \"Gentleman's Agreement.\"\nAwards and nominations.\nWins\nNominations, 20th Academy Awards\nOther nominations\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42107", "revid": "50657107", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42107", "title": "SS Eastland", "text": "Passenger ship that rolled over in Chicago in 1915\nSS \"Eastland\" was a passenger ship based in Chicago and used for tours. On July 24, 1915, the ship capsized while tied to a dock in the Chicago River. In total, 844 passengers and crew were killed in what is the largest loss of life from a single shipwreck on the Great Lakes.\nAfter the disaster, \"Eastland\" was salvaged and sold to the United States Navy. After restorations and modifications, \"Eastland\" was designated a gunboat and renamed USS \"Wilmette\". She was used primarily as a training vessel on the Great Lakes, and was scrapped after World War II.\nConstruction.\nThe ship was ordered during 1902 by the Michigan Steamship Company and built by the Jenks Ship Building Company of Port Huron, Michigan. The ship was named in May 1903, immediately before her inaugural voyage.\nHistory.\nEarly problems.\nOn 27 July of her 1903 inaugural season, the ship struck the laid-up tugboat \"George W. Gardner\", which sank at its dock at the Lake Street Bridge in Chicago. \"Eastland\" received only minor damage.\nMutiny on the \"Eastland\".\nOn 14 August 1903, while on a cruise from Chicago to South Haven, Michigan, six of the ship's firemen refused to stoke the fire for the ship's boiler, claiming that they had not received their potatoes for a meal. When they refused to return to the fire hole, Captain John Pereue arrested the six men at gunpoint. Firemen George Lippen and Benjamin Myers, who were not a part of the group of six, stoked the fires until the ship reached harbor. Upon the ship's arrival in South Haven, the six men were taken to the town jail and charged with mutiny. Shortly thereafter, Captain Pereue was replaced.\nSpeed modifications.\nBecause the ship did not meet a targeted speed of during her inaugural season and had a draft too deep for the Black River in South Haven, Michigan, where she was being loaded, the ship returned in September 1903 to Port Huron for modifications, including the addition of an air-conditioning system, an induced-draft system for the boilers to increase power, and repositioning of the ship's machinery to reduce the draft of the hull. Even though the modifications increased the ship's speed, the reduced hull draft and extra weight mounted up high reduced the metacentric height and inherent stability as originally designed.\nListing incidents.\nUpon her return to South Haven in May 1904, the ship handily won a race to Chicago against the \"City of South Haven\". In the meantime, the \"Eastland\" was experiencing periodic problems with her stability while loading and unloading cargo and passengers, and nearly capsized on 17 July 1904 after leaving South Haven with about 3,000 passengers. Subsequently, her capacity was lowered to 2,800 passengers, cabins were removed, lifeboats were added and the hull was repaired. On 5 August 1906, another listing incident occurred, which resulted in complaints filed against the Chicago-South Haven Line that had purchased the ship earlier that year.\nBefore the 1907 season, the ship was sold to the Lake Shore Navigation Company and moved to Lake Erie. In 1909, the ship was sold again to the Eastland Navigation Company and continued running excursions between Cleveland and Cedar Point. After the 1909 season, the remaining 39 cabins were removed, and prior to the 1912 season, the top smokestack sections were removed to shorten her stack height. On 1 July 1912, another incident occurred when the \"Eastland\" experienced a severe listing of about 25\u00b0 while loading passengers in Cleveland.\nIn June 1914, the \"Eastland\" was sold to the St. Joseph\u2013Chicago Steamship Company and returned to Lake Michigan for St. Joseph, Michigan-to-Chicago service.\nThe \"Eastland\" disaster.\nOn July 24, 1915, \"Eastland\" and four other Great Lakes passenger steamers\u2014\"Theodore Roosevelt\", \"Petoskey\", \"Racine\", and \"Rochester\u2014\"were chartered to take employees from Western Electric Company's Hawthorne Works in Cicero, Illinois to a picnic in Michigan City, Indiana.\nThe federal Seamen's Act had been passed in 1915 following the RMS \"Titanic\" disaster three years earlier. The law required retrofitting of a complete set of lifeboats on \"Eastland\", as on many other passenger vessels. This additional weight may have made \"Eastland\" more dangerous by making her even more top-heavy. Some argued that other Great Lakes ships would suffer from the same problem, but the bill was signed into law by President Woodrow Wilson. \"Eastland\"'s owners could choose to either maintain a reduced capacity or add lifeboats to increase capacity, and they elected to add lifeboats to qualify for a license to increase the ship's capacity to 2,570 passengers. \"Eastland\" was already so top-heavy that she had special restrictions concerning the number of passengers that could be carried. In June 1914, \"Eastland\" had again changed ownership, this time bought by the St. Joseph and Chicago Steamship Company, with captain Harry Pederson appointed the ship's master. In 1914, the company removed the old hardwood flooring of the forward dining room on the cabin level and replaced it with of concrete. It also added a layer of concrete near the aft gangway. This added 15\u201320 tons of weight.\nOn the morning of 24 July, passengers began boarding \"Eastland\" on the south bank of the Chicago River between Clark and LaSalle Streets at about 6:30\u00a0a.m., and by 7:10\u00a0a.m., the ship had reached her capacity of 2,572 passengers. Many passengers were standing on the open upper decks when the ship began to list slightly to the port side (away from the wharf). The crew attempted to stabilize the ship by admitting water into her ballast tanks, but to little avail. At 7:28\u00a0a.m., \"Eastland\" lurched sharply to port and then rolled completely onto her port side, coming to rest on the river bottom, only below the surface; barely half of the vessel was submerged. Many passengers had already moved below decks on the cool and damp morning to warm themselves before the departure. Consequently, hundreds were trapped inside by the water and the sudden rollover, and some were crushed by heavy furniture, including pianos, bookcases, and tables. The ship was only from the wharf. Captain John O'Meara and the crew of the nearby vessel \"Kenosha\" responded quickly by pulling alongside the hull to allow stranded passengers to leap to safety. Other notable heroes of the day included Peter Boyle, a deckhand from the SS Petoskey who drowned while saving passengers, and Helen Repa, a Western Electric nurse who commanded much of the rescue operation. However, 841 passengers and 2 crew members died. Many of the passengers on \"Eastland\" were immigrants, with large numbers from present-day Czech Republic, Poland, Norway, Germany, Ireland, Sweden, Denmark, Italy, Hungary, and Austria. Many of the Czech immigrants had settled in Cicero; of the Czech passengers aboard, 220 perished in the disaster.\nThe bodies were taken to temporary morgues established in the area for identification; by afternoon, the remaining unidentified bodies were consolidated in the armory of the 2nd Regiment.\nIn the aftermath, the Western Electric Company provided $100,000 (equivalent to $ in 2024) to relief and recovery efforts of the family members of the victims.\nAmong those scheduled to be on \"Eastland\" was 20-year-old football player George Halas, later the coach and owner of the Chicago Bears and a founding member of the National Football League, who was delayed leaving for the dock and arrived after the ship had overturned. Halas's name was listed on the list of deceased in newspapers, but he was later revealed to be unharmed. His friend and future Bears executive Ralph Brizzolara and his brother were on the \"Eastland\" when she capsized but escaped through portholes. Despite rumors to the contrary, entertainer Jack Benny was neither aboard \"Eastland\" nor scheduled for the excursion.\nThe first known film footage of the recovery efforts was discovered and released in 2015.\nMarion Eichholz (born July 12, 1912), the last known survivor, died on November 24, 2014 at the age of 102. She was three years old at the time of the disaster.\nMedia reports.\nWriter Jack Woodford witnessed the disaster and offered a first-hand account to the \"Herald and Examiner\". In his autobiography, Woodford wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;And then movement caught my eye. I looked across the river. As I watched in disoriented stupefaction a steamer large as an ocean liner slowly turned over on its side as though it were a whale going to take a nap. I didn't believe a huge steamer had done this before my eyes, lashed to a dock, in perfectly calm water, in excellent weather, with no explosion, no fire, nothing. I thought I had gone crazy.\nCarl Sandburg, then known better as a journalist than as a poet, wrote an angry account for \"The International Socialist Review\", accusing regulators of ignoring safety issues and claiming that many of the workers were aboard following company orders for a mandatory staged picnic. Sandburg also wrote a poem, \"The \"Eastland\"\", which contrasted the disaster with the mistreatment and poor health of the lower classes. Sandburg concluded the poem with a comparison: \"I see a dozen \"Eastlands\"/Every morning on my way to work/And a dozen more going home at night.\" The poem was considered too harsh for publication when written, but was eventually published in a collection of poems in 1993.\nInquiry and indictments.\nA grand jury indicted the president and three other officers of the steamship company for manslaughter, and the ship's captain and engineer for criminal carelessness, and found that the disaster was caused by \"conditions of instability\" caused by overloading of passengers, mishandling of water ballast and the ship's faulty construction.\nDuring hearings regarding the extradition of the men to Illinois for trial, principal witness Sidney Jenks, president of the company that built \"Eastland\", testified that her first owners wanted a fast ship to transport fruit, and he designed one capable of reaching and carrying 500 passengers. Defense counsel Clarence Darrow asked whether Jenks had ever concerned himself with the potential conversion of the ship into a passenger steamer with a capacity of 2,500 or more passengers. Jenks replied, \"I had no way of knowing the quantity of its business after it left our yards ... No, I did not worry about the \"Eastland\".\" Jenks testified that a stability test of the ship was never performed, and stated that after tilting to an angle of 45\u00b0 at launching, \"it righted itself as straight as a church, satisfactorily demonstrating its stability.\"\nThe court refused extradition, holding that the evidence was too weak, with \"barely a scintilla of proof\" to establish probable cause to find the six guilty. The court reasoned that the four company officers were not aboard the ship, and that every act charged against the captain and engineer was performed in the ordinary course of business, \"more consistent with innocence than with guilt.\" The court also reasoned that \"Eastland\" \"was operated for years and carried thousands safely\", and therefore the accused were justified in believing the ship to be seaworthy.\nSecond life as USS \"Wilmette\".\nAfter \"Eastland\" was raised on August 14, 1915, she was sold to the Illinois Naval Reserve and recommissioned as USS \"Wilmette\", stationed at the Naval Station Great Lakes. She was converted to a gunboat, renamed \"Wilmette\" on February 20, 1918, and commissioned on 20 September 1918 under captain William B. Wells. Commissioned late in World War I, \"Wilmette\" did not experience combat. It trained sailors and experienced normal upkeep and repairs until placed in ordinary at Chicago on 9 July 1919, retaining a 10-man caretaker crew aboard. On 29 June 1920, the gunboat was returned to full commission.\nOn June 7, 1921, \"Wilmette\" was tasked with sinking \"UC-97\", a German U-boat surrendered to the United States after World War I. The guns of \"Wilmette\" were manned by gunner's mate J. O. Sabin, who had fired the first American cannon of World War I, and gunner's mate A. F. Anderson, the man who fired the first American torpedo of the war.\nFor the remainder of her 25-year career, the gunboat served as a training ship for naval reservists of the 9th, 10th and 11th Naval Districts. It made voyages along the shores of the Great Lakes carrying trainees assigned to her from the Naval Station Great Lakes. \"Wilmette\" was placed \"out of commission, in service\" on 15 February 1940.\nGiven hull designation IX-29 on February 17, 1941, she resumed training duty at Chicago on 30 March 1942, preparing armed guard crews for duty manning the guns on armed merchantmen. That assignment continued until the end of World War II in Europe obviated measures to protect transatlantic merchant shipping from German U-boats.\nDuring August 1943, \"Wilmette\" transported President Franklin D. Roosevelt, Admiral William D. Leahy, James F. Byrnes and Harry Hopkins on a 10-day fishing vacation in McGregor and Whitefish Bay.\nOn April 9, 1945, she was returned to full commission for a brief interval. \"Wilmette\" was decommissioned on November 28, 1945, and her name was deleted from the Navy list on 19 December 1945. During 1946, \"Wilmette\" was offered for sale. On October 31, 1946, she was sold to the Hyman Michaels Company for scrapping, which was completed in 1947.\nMemorials.\nA marker commemorating the accident was dedicated on 4 June 1989. This marker was reported stolen on April 26, 2000, and a replacement marker was installed and dedicated on 24 July 2003.\nAs of 2016[ [update]], plans exist for a permanent outdoor exhibit with a proposed name of \"At The River's Edge\". This exhibit would be located along the portion of the Chicago Riverwalk adjacent to the site of the disaster and is planned to consist of panels with text and images.\nOn July 12, 2015, 100 years after the disaster, a memorial to the dead was dedicated at Bohemian National Cemetery in Chicago.\nIn popular culture.\nThe disaster was incorporated into the 1999 series premiere of the Disney Channel original series \"So Weird\", in which teenage paranormal enthusiast Fiona Phillips encounters the ghost of a boy who drowned.\nIn 2012, Chicago's Lookingglass Theatre produced a musical entitled \"Eastland: A New Musical\", written by Andy White and scored by Ben Collins-Sussman and Andre Pluess.\nThe \"Eastland\" disaster is also pivotal to the story of one family told in the play/musical \"Failure: A Love Story\", written by Philip Dawkins, which premiered in Chicago in 2012 at Victory Gardens Theater. The play premiered in Los Angeles on 24 July 2015, the 100th anniversary of the tragedy. The play was again staged in Chicago at the Oil Lamp Theater and was nominated for multiple awards.\nIn 2024, Chicago's Neo-Futurists produced a puppetry show based on the disaster entitled \"Switchboard\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42108", "revid": "10097324", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42108", "title": "Kassel", "text": "Kassel (; in Germany, spelled Cassel until 1926) is a city on the Fulda River in northern Hesse, in central Germany. It is the administrative seat of the Regierungsbezirk Kassel and the district of the same name, and had 201,048 inhabitants in December 2020. The former capital of the state of Hesse-Kassel, it has many palaces and parks, including the Bergpark Wilhelmsh\u00f6he, which is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Kassel is also known for the \"documenta\" exhibitions of contemporary art. Kassel has a public university with 25,000 students (2018) and a multicultural population (39% of the citizens in 2017 had a migration background).\nHistory.\nKassel was first mentioned in 913 AD, as the place where two deeds were signed by King Conrad I. The place was called \"Chasella\" or \"Chassalla\" and was a fortification at a bridge crossing the Fulda river. There are several yet unproven assumptions about the origin of the name. It could be derived from the ancient \"Castellum Cattorum\", a castle of the Chatti, a German tribe that had lived in the area since Roman times. Another assumption is a portmanteau from Frankonian \"cas\", meaning \u2018valley\u2019 or \u2018recess\u2019, and \"sali\" meaning \u2018hall\u2019 or \u2018service building\u2019, which can be interpreted as \u2018(town) hall in a valley\u2019.\nA deed from 1189 certifies that Cassel had city rights, but the date when they were granted is not known.\nThe first castle in Kassel was constructed in 1277, later replaced by a Renaissance castle, the Kassel City Palace, which burned down in 1811.\nIn 1567 the Landgraviate of Hesse, until then centered in Marburg, was divided among four sons, with Hesse-Kassel (or Hesse-Cassel) becoming one of its successor states. Kassel was its capital and became a centre of Calvinist Protestantism in Germany. Strong fortifications were built to protect the Protestant stronghold against Catholic enemies. Secret societies, such as Rosicrucianism, came to the rise, with Christian Rosenkreutz's work \"Fama Fraternitatis\" first published in 1617. In 1685 Kassel became a refuge for 1,700 Huguenots, who found shelter in the newly established borough of Oberneustadt. Landgrave Charles, who was responsible for this humanitarian act, also ordered the construction of the \"Oktogon\" (Hercules monument) and of the \"Orangerie\". In the late 18th century, Hesse-Kassel became infamous for selling mercenaries (Hessians) to the British crown to help suppress the American Revolution and to finance the construction of palaces and the Landgrave's opulent lifestyle.\nThe Brothers Grimm lived in Kassel in the early 19th century, where they collected and wrote most of their fairy tales. At that time, around 1803, the Landgraviate was elevated to a Principality and its ruler to \"Prince-elector\". Shortly after, it was annexed by Napoleon and became the capital of the short-lived Kingdom of Westphalia under Napoleon's brother J\u00e9r\u00f4me in 1807. The Electorate was restored in 1813.\nHaving sided with Austria in the Austro-Prussian War to gain supremacy in Germany, the principality was annexed by Prussia in 1866. The Prussian administration united Nassau, Frankfurt and Hesse-Kassel into the new Prussian province of Hesse-Nassau. Kassel ceased to be a princely residence but soon developed into a major industrial centre as well as a major railway junction. Henschel &amp; Son, the largest railway locomotive manufacturer in Germany at the end of the nineteenth century, was based in Kassel.\nIn 1870, after the Battle of Sedan, Napoleon III was sent as a prisoner to the Wilhelmsh\u00f6he Palace above the city. During World War I, the German military headquarters were located in the Wilhelmsh\u00f6he Palace. In the late 1930s, Nazis destroyed Heinrich H\u00fcbsch's Kassel Synagogue.\nDuring World War II, Kassel was the headquarters for Germany's Wehrkreis IX, and a local subcamp of Dachau concentration camp provided forced labour for the Henschel facilities, which included tank production plants. There was also a camp for Sinti and Romani people (see \"Romani Holocaust\"). Allied prisoners of war from the Stalag IX-A POW camp were deployed to forced labour in the local arms industry in violation of the Geneva Conventions. The most severe bombing of Kassel in World War II destroyed 90% of the downtown area, and some 10,000 people were killed and 150,000 were made homeless. Most of the casualties were civilians or wounded soldiers recuperating in local hospitals, whereas factories survived the attack generally undamaged. Karl Gerland replaced the regional Gauleiter, Karl Weinrich, soon after the raid.\nThe Allied ground advance into Germany reached Kassel at the beginning of April 1945. The US 80th Infantry Division captured Kassel in house-to-house fighting during 1\u20134 April 1945, which included numerous German panzer-grenadier counterattacks, and resulted in further damage to bombed and unbombed structures alike.\nPost-war, most of the ancient buildings in the city centre were not restored, and large parts of the inner city area were completely rebuilt in the style of the 1950s. A few historic buildings, however, such as the Museum Fridericianum, were restored.\nIn 1949, the interim parliament (\"Parlamentarischer Rat\") eliminated Kassel in the first round as a city to become the provisional capital of the Federal Republic of Germany, which the western city of Bonn won.\nIn 1964, the town hosted the fourth \"Hessentag\" state festival.\nIn 1970, the Chancellor of West Germany Willy Brandt and the prime minister of the German Democratic Republic Willy Stoph met in Wilhelmsh\u00f6he Palace for negotiations between the two German states. In 1991, the central rail station moved from \"Hauptbahnhof\" (\"main station\") to \"Kassel-Wilhelmsh\u00f6he\", the former now being used exclusively for regional trains. The city had a dynamic economic and social development in the recent years, reducing the unemployment rate by half and attracting new citizens.\nEconomy.\nSeveral international operating companies have factories or headquarters in the city (Volkswagen, Mercedes Benz, SMA, Wintershall, Krauss-Maffei Wegmann, Rheinmetall, Bombardier). The city is home to several hospitals; the public Klinikum Kassel is one of the largest hospitals in the federal state.\nGeography.\nKassel is the largest city in the north of the federated state of Hesse in the south-western part of Germany, about 70 kilometers northwest of the geographic center of Germany.\nIt is located on both sides of the river Fulda. Kassel's deepest point is in the north-eastern Fulda valley at 132.9 m above sea level.\nThe urban area of Kassel is divided into 23 local districts, each of which has a local council with a local mayor as chairman. The local councils are elected every five years by the population of the local districts. The local advisory board can be heard on all important issues affecting the local district. However, the final decision on a measure rests with the Kassel city council.\nNeighboring communities.\nAround Kassel is the administrative district (\"Landkreis\") of Landkreis Kassel. The following cities and municipalities border the city of Kassel (starting clockwise in the north): Ahnatal, Vellmar, Fuldatal, Staufenberg, Niestetal, Kaufungen, Lohfelden, Fuldabr\u00fcck, Baunatal, Schauenburg, Habichtswald. Of these, Vellmar and Fuldatal in the north, Kaufungen in the east, Lohfelden in the southeast and Baunatal in the south are growing closer to the urban area.\nCulture.\nThe first German observatory was built in Kassel in 1558, and a later version from 1714 survives as the Bellevue Palace. The \"Ottoneum\", the first permanent German theatre building, was built in 1606. The old building is today the Natural History Museum, and the now-called Staatstheater Kassel is located in a nearby building that was constructed in the 1950s. \nSince 1927, Kassel has been home to B\u00e4renreiter, a music publishing house distributing compositions of several critically acclaimed classical musicians.\nSince 1955 the \"documenta\", an international exhibition of modern and contemporary art, has been held regularly in Kassel. The \"documenta\" now takes place every five years. As a result of the \"documenta 6\" in 1977, Kassel became the first city in the world to be illuminated by laser beams at night (Laserscape, by artist Horst H. Baumann). This laser installation is nowadays still visible at weekends. Artworks from former editions of the \"documenta\" (mainly sculptures) can be found in multiple places in Kassel; among those are the \"7000 Oaks\", a work of land art by the German artist Joseph Beuys. The latest/current edition of the \"documenta\", known as \"documenta 15\", ran from 18 June until 25 September 2022.\nClimate.\nKassel experiences an oceanic climate (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\") close to marine climates, with a more notable continental influence than Berlin. Using the 1961\u20131990 normal and 0\u00a0\u00b0C isotherm, the city already had a humid continental climate (\"Dfb\").\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nKassel has a population of about 200,000, and is the 3rd largest city in Hesse state and the only large city in the North Hesse region.\nKassel is often called the city that located on the center of Germany due to its position.\nKassel first reached its first population peak of over 100,000 in 1899, and its second in 1943 with about 225,000. Kassel was destroyed during World War II and became an industrial city in 1950s. Today, Kassel is home to multiple companies and universities.\nSights.\nThe bombing raids of 1943 destroyed 90% of the city center. The city center was almost completely rebuilt during the 1950s and is a combination of renovated or reconstructed old buildings and architecture of the 1950s. Outside the city center, the suburbs are dominated by 19th-century architecture. Timber-framed old towns are situated in suburbs like Harleshausen and Bad Wilhelmsh\u00f6he. The oldest monument is the Druselturm; the Br\u00fcderkirche and the Martinskirche are also, in part, of medieval origin. The towers of the Martinskirche are from the 1950s.\nChurches.\nSt. Martin, Kassel.\nThe main Protestant church of Kassel, it was begun in 1364 and finished in 1462. Severely damaged by British bombing in 1943, it was later reconstructed in a more modern style between 1954 and 1958.\nSt. Bonifatius, Kassel.\nSt. Bonifatius was designed and built in 1956 by Josef Bieling.\nBergpark Wilhelmsh\u00f6he.\nThe complex includes Wilhelmsh\u00f6he Palace (with the Antiquities Collection and Old Masters), the Hercules monument, and the Lions Castle.\nWilhelmsh\u00f6he Palace above the city was built in 1786, by landgrave Wilhelm IX of Hesse-Kassel. The palace is now a museum and houses an important collection of Graeco-Roman antiques and a fine gallery of paintings comprising the second largest collection of Rembrandts in Germany. It is surrounded by the beautiful Bergpark Wilhelmsh\u00f6he with many appealing sights. The complex was named a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 2013.\nThe Hercules monument is a huge octagonal stone structure carrying a giant replica of Hercules \"Farnese\" (now at Museo Archeologico Nazionale in Naples, Italy). From its base down to Wilhelmsh\u00f6he Palace runs a long set of artificial cascades. Every Sunday and Wednesday afternoon at 14:30 (from May until October), the famous water features take place, which start at the Oktagon, and during a one-hour walk through the park visitors can follow the water's way until they reach the lake of the Wilhelmsh\u00f6he Palace, where a fountain of about marks the end of the features.\nThe \"L\u00f6wenburg\" (\"Lions Castle\") is a replica of a medieval castle, also built during the reign of Wilhelm IX. After the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371, Napol\u00e9on III was imprisoned in Wilhelmsh\u00f6he. In 1918, Wilhelmsh\u00f6he became the seat of the German Army High Command (OHL); it was there that the military commanders Hindenburg and Ludendorff prepared the German capitulation.\nStaatspark Karlsaue (Karlsaue Park).\nThe Karlsaue is a large park along the Fulda River that is part of the European Garden Heritage Network. Established in the 16th century, it is known for the Orangerie, a palace built in 1710 as a summer residence for the landgraves. Today, the Orangerie contains the Museum of Astronomy and Technology, with a scale model of the Solar System spanning the entire park and beyond. \nIn addition, the Park Sch\u00f6nfeld contains a small, municipal botanical garden, the Botanischer Garten Kassel.\nArt museums.\nEurope's first public museum, the Museum Fridericianum, was founded in 1779. By the end of the 19th century, the museum held one of the largest collections of watches and clocks in the world.\nOther art museums in Kassel include: \nSports.\nHessen Kassel is the football club in the city, who plays in the Hessenliga after being relegated from the Regionalliga S\u00fcdwest in the 2017/2018 season. The city's own football stadium, the Auestadion was built in 1953 and is able to hold 18,737 people. It is located in the south of Kassel at the quarter S\u00fcdstadt, next to the Karlsaue.\nKassel has a long ice hockey tradition, but it was not until 1977 that the Kassel ice rink (Eissporthalle) opened on a private initiative. The Kassel Huskies were founding members of the DEL in 1994, belonging to the league from 1994 to 2006 and again from 2008 to 2010. In 1997, they were runners-up in the championship playoffs, losing to Adler Mannheim, and reached the semi-finals on three more occasions. The Huskies ran into financial difficulties and dissolved in 2010. The \"Young Huskies\", which is a junior and youth hockey club, decided to enter a men's team in the Hessenliga. This is the fifth division and the lowest men's competition in the state of Hesse. The new club was expecting no more than 3,000 supporters for the first home game in the Hessenliga. However, they had over 5,000 supporters come to watch.\nTransport.\nKassel has seven tram lines (1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8), with trams arriving usually every 15 minutes. The city also operates a light rail Stadtbahn network called \"RegioTram\" using Regio Citadis low-floor trams which run on both tram and main line railway tracks with three lines (RT1, RT4, RT5). Moreover, a number of low-floor buses complete the Kassel public transport system. The introduction of low-floor buses led to the development of the Kassel kerb which improves the accessibility at bus stops.\nThe city is connected to the national rail network at two stations, Kassel Central, and Kassel-Wilhelmsh\u00f6he. The traditional central station (Hauptbahnhof) has been reduced to the status of a regional station since the opening of the Hanover-W\u00fcrzburg high-speed rail line in 1991 and its station (Kassel-Wilhelmsh\u00f6he) on the high-speed line at which the InterCityExpress (ICE) and InterCity services call as well as Nightjet and Flixtrain.\nKassel is connected to the motorways A 7, A 49 and A 44.\nThe city is served by Kassel Calden Airport. However, the airport only provides routes to limited destinations. The nearest airports to Kassel are Paderborn Lippstadt Airport, Hannover Airport, Dortmund Airport and Frankfurt Airport.\nPolitics.\nMayor.\nThe current mayor of Kassel is Sven Schoeller of Alliance 90/The Greens, who was elected in March 2023. He succeeded Christian Geselle (SPD), who had been in office since 2017.\nCity council.\nThe Kassel city council (\"Stadtverordnetenversammlung\") governs the city alongside the Mayor. The most recent city council election was held on 14 March 2021, and the results were as follows:\nEducation and research.\nUniversity of Kassel.\nThe University of Kassel is a public higher education institution and was founded in 1971 as a so-called reform university. It is the newest university in the state of Hessen and has an urban inner-city campus between the city center and the Northern city district. There were around 25,000 students enrolled at the university in 2018, 3,359 of them non-Germans. Two hundred and twenty-four students obtained their doctorate from the university in 2017.\nThe university offers a range of study programs, and several English master's programs as well as two short-term international programs, the Summer University and the Winter University. The Kunsthochschule Kassel (University of Fine Arts) is also part of the university with a satellite campus directly at the Karlsaue park in the Southern city district.\nCourts.\nSeveral courts are located in Kassel, including:\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nKassel is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; travel guide from Wikivoyage"}
{"id": "42111", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42111", "title": "PS Lady Elgin", "text": "American sidewheel steamship\nPS \"Lady Elgin\" was a wooden-hulled sidewheel steamship that sank in Lake Michigan off the fledgling town of Port Clinton, Illinois, whose geography is now divided between Highland Park and Highwood, Illinois, after she was rammed in a gale by the schooner \"Augusta\" in the early hours of September 8, 1860. The passenger manifest was lost with the collision, but the sinking of \"Lady Elgin\" resulted in the loss of about 300 lives in what was called \"one of the greatest marine horrors on record\". Four years after the disaster, a new rule required sailing vessels to carry running lights. The \"Lady Elgin\" disaster remains the greatest loss of life on open water in the history of the Great Lakes.\nIn 1994, a process began to list the shipwreck on the National Register of Historic Places. After it was determined to be eligible for listing in 1999, the process ended after an objection by the owner, so the shipwreck is not listed on the Register.\nCareer.\n\"Lady Elgin\" was built in 1851 in Buffalo, New York, at a cost of $95,000. She was named after the wife of Lord Elgin, Canada's Governor General from 1847 to 1854. During her time, the wooden-hulled sidewheeler was one of the most elegantly appointed passenger ships plying the Great Lakes. Rated a first-class steamer, she was a favorite with the traveling public. Early in her career she ran between Buffalo and Chicago, then later between Chicago and Collingwood, Ontario. For many of her later seasons, she plied the route between Chicago and other Lake Michigan ports and Lake Superior.\nDuring \"Lady Elgin\"'s career she was involved in numerous accidents. She sank and was repaired in 1854 after striking a rock at Manitowoc, Wisconsin. In 1855, she was towed to Chicago after an accident to her machinery. In 1857, she was damaged by fire. In June 1858, she struck a reef at Copper Harbor, Michigan. In August 1858, she was stranded on Au Sable Point Reef in Lake Superior. In October 1859, she was towed to Marquette, Michigan after breaking her crossbeam. In November 1859, she was towed again when her crank pin broke near Point Iroquois, Michigan. Her final blow came in 1860 when she was rammed by the wooden schooner \"Augusta\" ten miles from shore. In 1899, Great Lakes historian J.B. Mansfield called \"Lady Elgin\"'s sinking \"one of the greatest marine horrors on record\".\nFinal voyage.\nOn the morning of September 6, 1860 \"Lady Elgin\" left Milwaukee, Wisconsin, from the Dooley, Martin, Dousman, and Company Dock, for Chicago, carrying members of Milwaukee's Union Guard to hear a campaign speech by Stephen A. Douglas, Abraham Lincoln's opponent, although there is no clear historical evidence that Douglas actually appeared. The passengers spent the day of September 7 listening to political speeches followed by an evening of entertainment by a German brass band on board \"Lady Elgin\". On the return trip to Milwaukee that night, the brightly lit \"Lady of Elgin\" was steaming through Lake Michigan against gale force winds when she was rammed by the schooner \"Augusta of Oswego\". \"Augusta\" was sailing using only a single white light, mounted on a five-foot Samson on the bow, and did not attempt, or was unable, to turn to avoid the collision in the gale. On the morning of the collision (September 8) at 2:30 am, \"Augusta\" rammed the port side of \"Lady Elgin\", damaging her own bowsprit and headgear, while holing the latter ship below the waterline.\nConcerned that she was damaged and believing \"Lady Elgin\" had gotten safely away, \"Augusta\" made for Chicago. Aboard \"Lady Elgin\", Captain Wilson ordered that cattle and cargo be thrown overboard to lighten the load and raise the gaping hole in \"Lady Elgin\"'s port side above water level while the steward was down in the coal bunker trying to stop the leak with mattresses. Captain Wilson ordered a lifeboat lowered on the starboard side to check the extent of the damage but it never regained the steamer. Within twenty minutes, \"Lady Elgin\" broke apart, and all but the bow section rapidly sank. The night was lit up at intervals by flashes of lightning showing the scattered wreckage.\nThe life preservers, hardwood planks, long and wide, were never used. Two boats with a total of 18 people reached shore. In addition, fourteen people were saved on a large raft and many others on parts of the wreckage. Over 300 people died and 98 were saved. The drummer of the German band, Charles Beverung, saved himself by using his large bass drum as a life preserver. Survivors reported the heroic efforts of Captain Wilson to save about 300 people collected on a raft. When day broke, between 350 and 400 passengers and crew were drifting in stormy waters, holding on to anything they could, many only to be pulled under by breakers near shore.\nStudents from Northwestern University and Garrett Biblical Institute were watching the shore on the morning of September 8, looking for survivors. One student, Edward Spencer, is credited with rescuing 17 passengers over the course of six hours. He sustained injuries during his rescue efforts that left him an invalid for the rest of his life. A plaque in his honor was first placed in the Northwestern University Gymnasium, and is now housed in the Northwestern University Library.\nAbout 300 people died in the sinking, including Captain Wilson, who was lost trying to save two women when he was caught by the surf and forced into the rocks. Most were from Milwaukee, with the majority of those being from the Irish communities, including nearly all of Milwaukee's Irish Union Guard. So many Irish-American political operatives died that day that the disaster has been credited with transferring the balance of political power in Milwaukee \"from the Irish to the Germans\". It is said that more than 1000 children were orphaned by the tragedy; however, research shows that fewer than 40 children were orphaned. The \"Lady Elgin\" disaster remains the greatest loss of life on open water in the history of the Great Lakes.\nAmong the 300 victims was Herbert Ingram, the founder and owner of the \"Illustrated London News\" and a member of Parliament, who with his son, were the only foreigners on the ship. Ingram was the most wealthy and prominent individual to perish on a shipwreck in the Great Lakes.\nMemorials.\nA Wisconsin historical marker in the historic third ward in Milwaukee commemorates the tragedy. Calvary Cemetery in Milwaukee has a monument dedicated to the \"Lady Elgin\" disaster and the many lost in the tragedy who are buried there. \nA statue of Herbert Ingram, politician and owner of the \"Illustrated London News\", the Lady Elgin's most notable victim, stands in the city center in Boston, Lincolnshire, England, since erected in 1862. The monument honours Boston-born, three-term member of Parliament, who helped bring fresh water, education, and the railroad to the city.\nSongwriter Henry Clay Work wrote the memorial song \"Lost on the 'Lady Elgin'\" in 1861. For many years in central Canada this song was sung at family gatherings and social occasions.\nIn 2009, the Milwaukee Irish Heritage and Cultural Center launched a $200,000 fundraising campaign for a mammoth, two-story bronze memorial statue for the \"Lady Elgin\" disaster.\nMaritime rulings.\nFollowing the sinking, \"Lady Elgin\"'s owner, Gurdon Saltonstall Hubbard, received a $12,000 payment from his insurance company, but neither he nor the insurance company accepted abandonment of the ship. The captain of \"Augusta\", Darius Malott, was arrested and tried in Chicago, but found not guilty of navigational negligence. A coroner's jury declared his second-mate, Mr. Budge, to be incompetent, and his crew to be of principal blame. However, Professor Mason and Lieutenant Bartlett asserted that a principal cause of the collision was the lack of a $15 lantern on the Augusta. Steamboat historian Peter Charlebois noted that, after the investigation, Captain Malott and \"Lady Elgin\"'s crew and owners were absolved of any blame. He reported:\nThe judgement was based on a law that not only gave sail the right of way over steam, but did not require sailing vessels to carry running lights. Apparently \"Augusta\" had sighted the passenger steamer twenty minutes before the collision but in the rain had misjudged the distance between them. Four years after the disaster, in 1864, a new ruling was made requiring sailing vessels to carry running lights. Since there were still nearly 1,900 ships under sail by 1870 the regulations were long overdue. \nWreck.\nThe wreck of \"Lady Elgin\" was discovered in 1989 off Highland Park, Illinois by Harry Zych. Zych claimed ownership of the wreck in a legal action begun in 1989 and provided a list to the court of the 130+/- artifacts that he had recovered. In addition, he testified that he had located the ship's safe lying on the bottom and inside found two gold pocket watches and 70 gold and silver coins that had been entrusted to the purser for safekeeping. He was awarded ownership in 1999 after a protracted legal battle. \nWhile the case was ongoing, the State of Illinois sought the pro-bono services of the Underwater Archaeological Society of Chicago, which under the leadership of archaeological diver Valerie van Heest undertook a reconnaissance survey of the wreck site in 1992. The wreck, consisting of four main debris fields (bow, boilers, paddlewheels, debris field) lying in of water. During their survey, the dive team recorded evidence that other divers had been stripping the wreck of loose artifacts left behind by Zych. Zych never donated his artifacts to any museum/museums. However, in 2023, it became known that he had given another diver permission to recover artifacts; that person donated some 160 artifacts to the Chicago Maritime Museum for an exhibit, designed by Valerie van Heest, based on her book \"Lost on the Lady Elgin\". \nIn 2025, it was learned that a trio of divers had recovered a gold pocket watch from the debris field in 1992. Engraving on the watchcase and a wax seal fob with the initials \"H. I.\" provided evidence that the watch had belonged to Herbert Ingram, the most prominent individual among the victims. Valerie van Heest acquired the watch, chain, and fob from the divers. After unsuccessful attempts to find Ingram's surviving descendants, she donated the watch to the Boston Guildhall Museum, the city-run museum in Ingram's birth city of Boston, England, which maintains a statue of Ingram.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42112", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42112", "title": "Yersinia", "text": "Genus of bacteria\nYersinia is a genus of bacteria in the family Yersiniaceae. \"Yersinia\" species are Gram-negative, coccobacilli bacteria, and are facultative anaerobes. Three members of \"Yersinia\" are pathogenic in humans: \"Y. pestis\" causes the plague and \"Y.\" \"enterocolitica\" and \"Y\". \"pseudotuberculosis\" cause gastrointestinal syndromes. Rodents are the natural reservoirs of \"Yersinia\"; less frequently, other mammals serve as the host. Infection may occur either through blood (in the case of \"Y. pestis\") or in an alimentary fashion, occasionally via consumption of food products (especially vegetables, milk-derived products, and meat) contaminated with infected urine or feces.\nSpeculations exist as to whether or not certain \"Yersinia\" can also be spread by protozoonotic mechanisms, since \"Yersinia\" species are known to be facultative intracellular parasites; currently, there are studies and discussions of the possibility of amoeba-vectored (through the cyst form of the protozoan) \"Yersinia\" propagation and proliferation.\nMicrobial physiology.\nAn interesting feature peculiar to some of the \"Yersinia\" bacteria is the ability to not only survive, but also to actively proliferate at temperatures as low as 1\u20134\u00a0\u00b0C (e.g., on cut salads and other food products in a refrigerator). \"Yersinia\" bacteria are relatively quickly inactivated by oxidizing agents such as hydrogen peroxide and potassium permanganate solutions.\nPathology.\n\"Y. pestis\" is the causative agent of plague. The disease caused by \"Y. enterocolitica\" is called yersiniosis.\n\"Yersinia\" may be associated with Crohn's disease, an inflammatory autoimmune condition of the gut. Iranian people with Crohn's disease were more likely to have had earlier exposure to refrigerators at home, consistent with its unusual ability to thrive at low temperatures.\n\"Yersinia\" is implicated as one of the causes of reactive arthritis worldwide.\nAlso, the genus is associated with pseudoappendicitis, which is an incorrect diagnosis of appendicitis due to a similar presentation.\nPathogenesis.\nEffector proteins.\nAll pathogenic \"Yersinia\" have effector proteins that are injected into host cells using a type-three secretion system (T3SS), including 6 Yop proteins. Pathogenic Y. \"enterocolitica\" has a different effector protein family composed of 8 Ysp proteins. These effector proteins disrupt the cytoskeleton, phagocytosis, and various immune responses.\nHistory.\n\"Y. pestis\", the first known species, was identified in 1894 by A.E.J. Yersin, a Swiss bacteriologist, and Kitasato Shibasabur\u014d, a Japanese bacteriologist. It was formerly described as \"Pasteurella pestis\" (known trivially as the plague-bacillus) by Lehmann and Neumann in 1896. In 1944, van Loghem reclassified the species \"P. pestis\" and \"P. rondentium\" into a new genus, \"Yersinia\". Following the introduction of the bacteriological code, it was accepted as valid in 1980.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42113", "revid": "43912531", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42113", "title": "Chicago flood", "text": "Accidental disaster in 1992\nThe Chicago flood occurred on April 13, 1992, when repair work on a bridge spanning the Chicago River damaged the wall of an abandoned and disused utility tunnel beneath the river. The resulting breach flooded basements, facilities and the underground Chicago Pedway throughout the Chicago Loop with an estimated of water.\nThe remediation lasted for weeks, and cost about $2 billion in 1992 dollars, equivalent to $ in 2024. The legal battles lasted for several years, and disagreement over who was at fault persists to this day.\nCause.\nRehabilitation work on the Kinzie Street Bridge crossing the Chicago River required new pilings. However, when the City of Chicago specified that the old pilings be extracted and replaced by the new ones, the Great Lakes Dredge and Dock Company reported back that the old pilings were too close to the bridge tender's house, preventing proper removal without risking damaging or destroying the house. The City of Chicago then gave permission to install the new pilings south of the old pilings. The crew members who began work at the site did not know that beneath the river was an abandoned Chicago Tunnel Company (CTC) tunnel that had been used in the early 20th century to transport coal and goods. One of the pilings on the east bank was driven into the bottom of the river alongside the north wall of the old tunnel. The pilings did not punch through the tunnel wall, but clay soil displaced by the piling eventually breached the wall, allowing sediment and water to seep into the tunnel. After some weeks, most of the clay between the water and the breach had liquefied, which rapidly increased the rate of flooding in the tunnel. The situation became problematic because the flood doors had been removed from the old tunnels after they fell into disuse.\nDiscovery of the leak.\nA skilled telecommunications worker inspecting a cable running through the tunnel discovered the leak while it was still passing mud and forwarded a videotape to the city, which did not see anything serious and began a bid process to repair the tunnel. The CTC tunnels were never formally a public responsibility, as most of them had been dug clandestinely, many violated private property and the collapse of the operator had failed to resolve ownership and maintenance responsibilities. Meanwhile, the mud continued to push through until the river water was able to pour in unabated, creating an immediate emergency.\nEffects.\nThe water flooded into the basements of several Loop office buildings and retail stores and an underground shopping district. The Loop and financial district were evacuated, and electrical power and gas were interrupted in most of the area as a precaution. Trading at the Chicago Board of Trade Building and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange ended in mid-morning as water seeped into their basements. At its height, some buildings had of water in their lower levels. However, at the street level there was no water to be seen, as it was all underground.\nAt first, the source of the water was unclear. WMAQ radio reporter Larry Langford reported that city crews were in the process of shutting down large water mains to see if the water flow could be stopped.\nMonitoring police scanners, Langford heard security crews from Chicago's Merchandise Mart (near the Kinzie Street Bridge) report that the water in their basement had fish. Langford drove to the Merchandise Mart, then reported over the air that water was swirling near a piling in a manner similar to water going down a bathtub drain. Within minutes emergency services were converging on the bridge.\nRepair and cleanup.\nWorkers attempted to plug the hole, by then about wide, with 65 truckloads of rocks, cement and old mattresses. In an attempt to slow the leak, the level of the Chicago River was lowered by opening the locks downstream of Chicago, and the freight tunnels were drained into the Chicago Deep Tunnel system. The leak was eventually stopped by placing a specialized concrete mixture supplied by Material Service Corporation (MSC) and placed by Kenny Construction. The concrete was designed by Brian Rice of MSC and was to set so quickly that the concrete delivery trucks were provided police escorts. The concrete was placed into drilled shafts into the flooded tunnel near Kinzie Street and formed emergency plugs.\nAftermath.\nIt took three days before the flood was cleaned up enough to allow business to begin to resume and cost the city an estimated $1.95 billion (equivalent to $ in 2024). Some buildings remained closed for a few weeks. Parking was banned downtown during the cleanup and some subway routes were temporarily closed or rerouted. Since it occurred near Tax Day, the IRS granted natural disaster extensions to those affected.\nEventually, the city assumed maintenance responsibility for the tunnels, and watertight hatches were installed at the river crossings. Great Lakes Dredge and Dock Co. sued the City of Chicago arguing that the city had failed to tell it about the existence of the tunnels. \nInsurance battles lasted for years, the central point being the definition of the accident, i.e., whether it was a \"flood\" or a \"leak\". Leaks were covered by insurance, while floods were not. Eventually it was classified as a leak, which is why many residents still call it the \"Great Chicago Leak\".\nCourt cases.\nIn the lawsuits that followed, Great Lakes Dredge and Dock Co. was initially found liable but was later cleared after it was revealed that the city was aware the tunnel was leaking before the flood and the city had also not properly maintained the tunnel.\nIn addition the case went to the United States Supreme Court in \"\", 513 U.S. https:// (1995) which ruled that since the work was being done by a vessel in navigable waters of the Chicago River, admiralty law applied and Great Lakes's liability was greatly limited.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42114", "revid": "90173", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42114", "title": "Salmonella", "text": "Genus of bacteria\nSalmonella is a genus of rod-shaped, (bacillus) Gram-negative bacteria of the family Enterobacteriaceae. The two known species of \"Salmonella\" are \"Salmonella enterica\" and \"Salmonella bongori\". \"S.\u00a0enterica\" is the type species and is further divided into six subspecies that include over 2,650 serotypes. \"Salmonella\" was named after Daniel Elmer Salmon (1850\u20131914), an American veterinary surgeon.\n\"Salmonella\" species are non-spore-forming, predominantly motile enterobacteria with cell diameters between about 0.7 and 1.5\u00a0\u03bcm, lengths from 2 to 5\u00a0\u03bcm, and peritrichous flagella (all around the cell body, allowing them to move). They are chemotrophs, obtaining their energy from oxidation and reduction reactions, using organic sources. They are also facultative anaerobes, capable of generating adenosine triphosphate with oxygen (\"aerobically\") when it is available, or using other electron acceptors or fermentation (\"anaerobically\") when oxygen is not available.\n\"Salmonella\" species are intracellular pathogens, of which certain serotypes cause illness such as salmonellosis. Most infections are due to the ingestion of food contaminated by feces. Typhoidal \"Salmonella\" serotypes can only be transferred between humans and can cause foodborne illness as well as typhoid and paratyphoid fever. Typhoid fever is caused by typhoidal \"Salmonella\" invading the bloodstream, as well as spreading throughout the body, invading organs, and secreting endotoxins (the septic form). This can lead to life-threatening hypovolemic shock and septic shock, and requires intensive care, including antibiotics.\nNontyphoidal \"Salmonella\" serotypes are zoonotic and can be transferred from animals and between humans. They usually invade only the gastrointestinal tract and cause salmonellosis, the symptoms of which can be resolved without antibiotics. However, in sub-Saharan Africa, nontyphoidal \"Salmonella\" can be invasive and cause paratyphoid fever, which requires immediate antibiotic treatment.\nTaxonomy.\nThe genus \"Salmonella\" is part of the family of Enterobacteriaceae. Its taxonomy has been revised and has the potential to confuse. The genus comprises two species, \"S. bongori\" and \"S. enterica\", the latter of which is divided into six subspecies: \"S. e. enterica\", \"S. e. salamae\", \"S. e. arizonae\", \"S. e. diarizonae\", \"S. e. houtenae\", and \"S. e. indica\". The taxonomic group contains more than 2500 serotypes (also serovars) defined on the basis of the somatic O (lipopolysaccharide) and flagellar H antigens (the Kauffman\u2013White classification). The full name of a serotype is given as, for example, \"Salmonella enterica\" subsp. \"enterica\" serotype Typhimurium, but can be abbreviated to \"Salmonella\" Typhimurium. Further differentiation of strains to assist clinical and epidemiological investigation may be achieved by antibiotic sensitivity testing and by other molecular biology techniques such as pulsed-field gel electrophoresis, multilocus sequence typing, and, increasingly, whole genome sequencing. Historically, salmonellae have been clinically categorized as invasive (typhoidal) or non-invasive (nontyphoidal salmonellae) based on host preference and disease manifestations in humans.\nHistory.\n\"Salmonella\" was first visualized in 1880 by Karl Eberth in the Peyer's patches and spleens of typhoid patients. Four years later, Georg Theodor Gaffky was able to grow the pathogen in pure culture. A year after that, medical research scientist Theobald Smith discovered what would be later known as \"Salmonella enterica\" (var. Choleraesuis). At the time, Smith was working as a research laboratory assistant in the Veterinary Division of the United States Department of Agriculture. The division was under the administration of Daniel Elmer Salmon, a veterinary pathologist. Initially, \"Salmonella\" Choleraesuis was thought to be the causative agent of hog cholera, so Salmon and Smith named it \"Hog-cholera bacillus\". The name \"Salmonella\" was not used until 1900, when Joseph Leon Ligni\u00e8res proposed that the pathogen discovered by Salmon's group be called \"Salmonella\" in his honor.\nIn the late 1930s, Australian bacteriologist Nancy Atkinson established a salmonella typing laboratory \u2013 one of only three in the world at the time \u2013 at the Government of South Australia's Laboratory of Pathology and Bacteriology in Adelaide (later the Institute of Medical and Veterinary Science). It was here that Atkinson described multiple new strains of salmonella, including Salmonella Adelaide, which was isolated in 1943. Atkinson published her work on salmonellas in 1957.\nSerotyping.\nSerotyping is done by mixing cells with antibodies for a particular antigen. It can give some idea about risk. A 2014 study showed that \"S.\" Reading is very common among young turkey samples, but it is not a significant contributor to human salmonellosis. Serotyping can assist in identifying the source of contamination by matching serotypes in people with serotypes in the suspected source of infection. Appropriate prophylactic treatment can be identified from the known antibiotic resistance of the serotype.\nNewer methods of \"serotyping\" include xMAP and real-time PCR, two methods based on DNA sequences instead of antibody reactions. These methods can be potentially faster, thanks to advances in sequencing technology. These \"molecular serotyping\" systems actually perform genotyping of the genes that determine surface antigens.\nDetection, culture, and growth conditions.\nMost subspecies of \"Salmonella\" produce hydrogen sulfide, which can readily be detected by growing them on media containing ferrous sulfate, such as is used in the triple sugar iron test. Most isolates exist in two phases, a motile phase and a non-motile phase. Cultures that are nonmotile upon primary culture may be switched to the motile phase using a Craigie tube or ditch plate. RVS broth can be used to enrich for \"Salmonella\" species for detection in a clinical sample.\n\"Salmonella\" can also be detected and subtyped using multiplex or real-time polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) from extracted \"Salmonella\" DNA.\nMathematical models of \"Salmonella\" growth kinetics have been developed for chicken, pork, tomatoes, and melons. \"Salmonella\" reproduce asexually with a cell division interval of 40 minutes.\n\"Salmonella\" species lead predominantly host-associated lifestyles, but the bacteria were found to be able to persist in a bathroom setting for weeks following contamination, and are frequently isolated from water sources, which act as bacterial reservoirs and may help to facilitate transmission between hosts. \"Salmonella\" is notorious for its ability to survive desiccation and can persist for years in dry environments and foods.\nThe bacteria are not destroyed by freezing, but UV light and heat accelerate their destruction. They perish after being heated to for 90 min, or to for 12 min, although if inoculated in high fat, high liquid substances like peanut butter, they gain heat resistance and can survive up to for 30 min. To protect against \"Salmonella\" infection, heating food to an internal temperature of is recommended.\n\"Salmonella\" species can be found in the digestive tracts of humans and animals, especially reptiles. \"Salmonella\" on the skin of reptiles or amphibians can be passed to people who handle the animals. Food and water can also be contaminated with the bacteria if they come in contact with the feces of infected people or animals.\nNomenclature.\nInitially, each \"Salmonella\" \"species\" was named according to clinical consideration, for example \"Salmonella typhi-murium\" (mouse-typhoid), \"S. cholerae-suis\" (pig-cholera). After host specificity was recognized not to exist for many species, new strains received species names according to the location at which the new strain was isolated.\nIn 1987, Le Minor and Popoff used molecular findings to argue that \"Salmonella\" consisted of only one species, \"S. enterica\", turning former \"species\" names into serotypes. In 1989, Reeves \"et al.\" proposed that the serotype V should remain its own species, resurrecting the name \"S. bongori\". The current (by 2005) nomenclature has thus taken shape, with six recognised subspecies under \"S. enterica\": \"enterica\" (serotype I), \"salamae\" (serotype II), \"arizonae\" (IIIa), \"diarizonae\" (IIIb), \"houtenae\" (IV), and \"indica\" (VI). As specialists in infectious disease are not familiar with the new nomenclature, the traditional nomenclature remains common.\nThe serotype or serovar is a classification of \"Salmonella\" based on antigens that the organism presents. The Kauffman\u2013White classification scheme differentiates serological varieties from each other. Serotypes are usually put into subspecies groups after the genus and species, with the serotypes/serovars capitalized, but not italicized: An example is \"Salmonella enterica\" serovar Typhimurium. More modern approaches for typing and subtyping \"Salmonella\" include DNA-based methods such as pulsed field gel electrophoresis, multiple-loci VNTR analysis, multilocus sequence typing, and multiplex-PCR-based methods.\nIn 2005, a third species, \"Salmonella subterranea\", was proposed, but according to the World Health Organization, the bacterium reported does not belong in the genus \"Salmonella\". In 2016, \"S. subterranea\" was proposed to be assigned to \"Atlantibacter subterranea\", but LPSN rejects it as an invalid publication, as it was made outside of IJSB and IJSEM. GTDB and NCBI agree with the 2016 reassignment.\nGTDB RS202 reports that \"S. arizonae\", \"S. diarizonae\", and \"S. houtenae\" should be species of their own.\nPathogenicity.\n\"Salmonella\" species are facultative intracellular pathogens. \"Salmonella\" can invade different cell types, including epithelial cells, M cells, macrophages, and dendritic cells. As facultative anaerobic organism, \"Salmonella\" uses oxygen to make adenosine triphosphate (ATP) in aerobic environments (i.e., when oxygen is available). However, in anaerobic environments (i.e., when oxygen is not available) \"Salmonella\" produces ATP by fermentation\u2014that is, by substituting, instead of oxygen, at least one of four electron acceptors at the end of the electron transport chain: sulfate, nitrate, sulfur, or fumarate (all of which are less efficient than oxygen).\nMost infections are due to ingestion of food contaminated by animal feces, or by human feces (for example, from the hands of a food-service worker at a commercial eatery). \"Salmonella\" serotypes can be divided into two main groups\u2014typhoidal and nontyphoidal. Typhoidal serotypes include \"Salmonella\" Typhi and \"Salmonella\" Paratyphi A, which are adapted to humans and do not occur in other animals. Nontyphoidal serotypes are more common, and usually cause self-limiting gastrointestinal disease. They can infect a range of animals, and are zoonotic, meaning they can be transferred between humans and other animals.\n\"Salmonella\" pathogenicity and host interaction has been studied extensively since the 2010s. Most of the important virulent genes of \"Salmonella\" are encoded in five pathogenicity islands\u2014the so-called \"Salmonella\" pathogenicity islands (SPIs). These are chromosomal encoded and make a significant contribution to bacterial-host interaction. More traits, like plasmids, flagella or biofilm-related proteins, can contribute in the infection. SPIs are regulated by complex and fine-tuned regulatory networks that allow the gene expression only in the presence of the right environmental stresses.\nMolecular modeling and active site analysis of SdiA homolog, a putative quorum sensor for Salmonella typhimurium pathogenicity, reveals the specific binding patterns of AHL transcriptional regulators. It is also known that Salmonella plasmid virulence gene spvB enhances bacterial virulence by inhibiting autophagy.\nTyphoidal \"Salmonella\".\nTyphoid fever is caused by \"Salmonella\" serotypes which are strictly adapted to humans or higher primates\u2014these include \"Salmonella\" Typhi, Paratyphi A, Paratyphi B, and Paratyphi C. In the systemic form of the disease, salmonellae pass through the lymphatic system of the intestine into the blood of the patients (typhoid form) and are carried to various organs (liver, spleen, kidneys) to form secondary foci (septic form). Endotoxins first act on the vascular and nervous apparatus, resulting in increased permeability and decreased tone of the vessels, upset of thermal regulation, and vomiting and diarrhoea. In severe forms of the disease, enough liquid and electrolytes are lost to upset the water-salt metabolism, decrease the circulating blood volume and arterial pressure, and cause hypovolemic shock. Septic shock may also develop. Shock of mixed character (with signs of both hypovolemic and septic shock) is more common in severe salmonellosis. Oliguria and azotemia may develop in severe cases as a result of renal involvement due to hypoxia and toxemia.\nNontyphoidal \"Salmonella\".\nNon-invasive.\nInfection with nontyphoidal serotypes of \"Salmonella\" generally results in food poisoning. Infection usually occurs when a person ingests foods that contain a high concentration of the bacteria. Infants and young children are much more susceptible to infection, easily achieved by ingesting a small number of bacteria. In infants, infection through inhalation of bacteria-laden dust is possible.\nThe organisms enter through the digestive tract and must be ingested in large numbers to cause disease in healthy adults. An infection can only begin after living salmonellae (not merely \"Salmonella\"-produced toxins) reach the gastrointestinal tract. Some of the microorganisms are killed in the stomach, while the surviving ones enter the small intestine and multiply in tissues. Gastric acidity is responsible for the destruction of the majority of ingested bacteria, but \"Salmonella\" has evolved a degree of tolerance to acidic environments that allows a subset of ingested bacteria to survive. Bacterial colonies may also become trapped in mucus produced in the esophagus. By the end of the incubation period, the nearby host cells are poisoned by endotoxins released from the dead salmonellae. The local response to the endotoxins is enteritis and gastrointestinal disorder.\nAbout 2,000 serotypes of nontyphoidal \"Salmonella\" are known, which may be responsible for as many as 1.4\u00a0million illnesses in the United States each year. People who are at risk for severe illness include infants, elderly, organ-transplant recipients, and the immunocompromised.\nInvasive.\nWhile, in developed countries, nontyphoidal serotypes present mostly as gastrointestinal disease, in sub-Saharan Africa, these serotypes can create a major problem in bloodstream infections, and are the most commonly isolated bacteria from the blood of those presenting with fever. Bloodstream infections caused by nontyphoidal salmonellae in Africa were reported in 2012 to have a case fatality rate of 20\u201325%. Most cases of invasive nontyphoidal \"Salmonella\" infection (iNTS) are caused by \"Salmonella enterica\" Typhimurium or \"Salmonella enterica\" Enteritidis. A new form of \"Salmonella\" Typhimurium (ST313) emerged in the southeast of the African continent 75 years ago, followed by a second wave which came out of central Africa 18 years later. This second wave of iNTS possibly originated in the Congo Basin, and early in the event picked up a gene that made it resistant to the antibiotic chloramphenicol. This created the need to use expensive antimicrobial drugs in areas of Africa that were very poor, making treatment difficult. The increased prevalence of iNTS in sub-Saharan Africa compared to other regions is thought to be due to the large proportion of the African population with some degree of immune suppression or impairment due to the burden of HIV, malaria, and malnutrition, especially in children. The genetic makeup of iNTS is evolving into a more typhoid-like bacterium, able to efficiently spread around the human body. Symptoms are reported to be diverse, including fever, hepatosplenomegaly, and respiratory symptoms, often with an absence of gastrointestinal symptoms.\nEpidemiology.\nDue to being considered sporadic, between 60% and 80% of salmonella infections cases go undiagnosed. In March 2010, data analysis was completed to estimate an incidence rate of 1140 per 100,000 person-years. In the same analysis, 93.8\u00a0million cases of gastroenteritis were due to salmonella infections. At the 5th percentile the estimated amount was 61.8\u00a0million cases and at the 95th percentile the estimated amount was 131.6\u00a0million cases. The estimated number of deaths due to salmonella was approximately 155,000 deaths. In 2014, in countries such as Bulgaria and Portugal, children under 4 were 32 and 82 times more likely, respectively, to have a salmonella infection. Those who are most susceptible to infection are: children, pregnant women, elderly people, and those with deficient immune systems.\nRisk factors for Salmonella infections include a variety of foods. Meats such as chicken and pork have the possibility to be contaminated. A variety of vegetables and sprouts may also have salmonella. Lastly, a variety of processed foods such as chicken nuggets and pot pies may also contain this bacteria.\nSuccessful forms of prevention come from existing entities such as the FDA, United States Department of Agriculture, and the Food Safety and Inspection Service. All of these organizations create standards and inspections to ensure public safety in the U.S. For example, the FSIS agency working with the USDA has a Salmonella Action Plan in place. Recently, it received a two-year plan update in February 2016. Their accomplishments and strategies to reduce Salmonella infection are presented in the plans. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention also provides valuable information on preventative care, such has how to safely handle raw foods, and the correct way to store these products. In the European Union, the European Food Safety Authority created preventative measures through risk management and risk assessment. From 2005 to 2009, the EFSA placed an approach to reduce exposure to \"Salmonella\". Their approach included risk assessment and risk management of poultry, which resulted in a reduction of infection cases by one half. In Latin America an orally administered vaccine for Salmonella in poultry developed by Dr. Sherry Layton has been introduced which prevents the bacteria from contaminating the birds.\nA \"Salmonella\" Typhimurium outbreak in 2022 was linked to chocolate produced in Belgium, leading to the country temporarily halting Kinder chocolate production.\nIn Germany, food-borne infections must be reported. From 1990 to 2016, the number of officially recorded cases decreased from about 200,000 to about 13,000 cases. In the United States, about 1,200,000 cases of \"Salmonella\" infection are estimated to occur each year. A World Health Organization study estimated that 21,650,974 cases of typhoid fever occurred in 2000, 216,510 of which resulted in death, along with 5,412,744 cases of paratyphoid fever.\nMolecular mechanisms of infection.\nThe mechanisms of infection differ between typhoidal and nontyphoidal serotypes, owing to their different targets in the body and the different symptoms that they cause. Both groups must enter by crossing the barrier created by the intestinal cell wall, but once they have passed this barrier, they use different strategies to cause infection.\nSwitch to virulence.\nWhile travelling to their target tissue in the gastrointestinal tract, \"Salmonella\" is exposed to stomach acid, to the detergent-like activity of bile in the intestine, to decreasing oxygen supply, to the competing normal gut flora, and finally to antimicrobial peptides present on the surface of the cells lining the intestinal wall. All of these form stresses that \"Salmonella\" can sense and reacts against, and they form virulence factors and as such regulate the switch from their normal growth in the intestine into virulence.\nThe switch to virulence gives access to a replication niche inside the host (such as humans), and can be summarised into several stages:\nMechanisms of entry.\nNontyphoidal serotypes preferentially enter M cells on the intestinal wall by bacterial-mediated endocytosis, a process associated with intestinal inflammation and diarrhoea. They are also able to disrupt tight junctions between the cells of the intestinal wall, impairing the cells' ability to stop the flow of ions, water, and immune cells into and out of the intestine. The combination of the inflammation caused by bacterial-mediated endocytosis and the disruption of tight junctions is thought to contribute significantly to the induction of diarrhoea.\nSalmonellae are also able to breach the intestinal barrier via phagocytosis and trafficking by CD18-positive immune cells, which may be a mechanism key to typhoidal \"Salmonella\" infection. This is thought to be a more stealthy way of passing the intestinal barrier, and may, therefore, contribute to the fact that lower numbers of typhoidal \"Salmonella\" are required for infection than nontyphoidal \"Salmonella\". \"Salmonella\" cells are able to enter macrophages via macropinocytosis. Typhoidal serotypes can use this to achieve dissemination throughout the body via the mononuclear phagocyte system, a network of connective tissue that contains immune cells, and surrounds tissue associated with the immune system throughout the body.\nMuch of the success of \"Salmonella\" in causing infection is attributed to two type III secretion systems (T3SS) which are expressed at different times during the infection. The T3SS-1 enables the injection of bacterial effectors within the host cytosol. These T3SS-1 effectors stimulate the formation of membrane ruffles allowing the uptake of \"Salmonella\" by nonphagocytic cells. \"Salmonella\" further resides within a membrane-bound compartment called the \"Salmonella\"-Containing Vacuole (SCV). The acidification of the SCV leads to the expression of the T3SS-2. The secretion of T3SS-2 effectors by \"Salmonella\" is required for its efficient survival in the host cytosol and establishment of systemic disease. In addition, both T3SS are involved in the colonization of the intestine, induction of intestinal inflammatory responses and diarrhea. These systems contain many genes which must work cooperatively to achieve infection.\nThe AvrA toxin injected by the SPI1 type III secretion system of \"S.\" Typhimurium works to inhibit the innate immune system by virtue of its serine/threonine acetyltransferase activity, and requires binding to eukaryotic target cell phytic acid (IP6). This leaves the host more susceptible to infection.\nClinical symptoms.\nSalmonellosis is known to be able to cause back pain or spondylosis. It can manifest as five clinical patterns: gastrointestinal tract infection, enteric fever, bacteremia, local infection, and the chronic reservoir state. The initial symptoms are nonspecific fever, weakness, and myalgia among others. In the bacteremia state, it can spread to any parts of the body and this induces localized infection or it forms abscesses. The forms of localized \"Salmonella\" infections are arthritis, urinary tract infection, infection of the central nervous system, bone infection, soft tissue infection, etc. Infection may remain as the latent form for a long time, and when the function of reticular endothelial cells is deteriorated, it may become activated and consequently, it may secondarily induce spreading infection in the bone several months or several years after acute salmonellosis.\nA 2018 Imperial College London study also shows how salmonella disrupt specific arms of the immune system (e.g. 3 of 5 NF-kappaB proteins) using a family of zinc metalloproteinase effectors, leaving others untouched. Salmonella thyroid abscess has also been reported.\nResistance to oxidative burst.\nA hallmark of \"Salmonella\" pathogenesis is the ability of the bacterium to survive and proliferate within phagocytes. Phagocytes produce DNA-damaging agents such as nitric oxide and oxygen radicals as a defense against pathogens. Thus, \"Salmonella\" species must face attack by molecules that challenge genome integrity. Buchmeier\" et al.\" showed that mutants of \"S. enterica\" lacking RecA or RecBC protein function are highly sensitive to oxidative compounds synthesized by macrophages, and furthermore these findings indicate that successful systemic infection by \"S. enterica\" requires RecA- and RecBC-mediated recombinational repair of DNA damage.\nHost adaptation.\n\"S. enterica\", through some of its serotypes such as Typhimurium and Enteritidis, shows signs that it has the ability to infect several different mammalian host species, while other serotypes, such as Typhi, seem to be restricted to only a few hosts. Two ways that \"Salmonella\" serotypes have adapted to their hosts are by the loss of genetic material, and mutation. In more complex mammalian species, immune systems, which include pathogen specific immune responses, target serovars of \"Salmonella\" by binding antibodies to structures such as flagella. Thus \"Salmonella\" that has lost the genetic material which codes for a flagellum to form can evade a host's immune system. \"mgtC\" leader RNA from bacteria virulence gene (mgtCBR operon) decreases flagellin production during infection by directly base pairing with mRNAs of the \"fljB\" gene encoding flagellin and promotes degradation. In the study by Kisela \"et al.\", more pathogenic serovars of \"S. enterica\" were found to have certain adhesins in common that have developed out of convergent evolution. This means that, as these strains of \"Salmonella\" have been exposed to similar conditions such as immune systems, similar structures evolved separately to negate these similar, more advanced defenses in hosts. Although many questions remain about how \"Salmonella\" has evolved into so many different types, \"Salmonella\" may have evolved through several phases. For example, as Baumler \"et al.\" have suggested, \"Salmonella\" most likely evolved through horizontal gene transfer, and through the formation of new serovars due to additional pathogenicity islands, and through an approximation of its ancestry. So, \"Salmonella\" could have evolved into its many different serotypes by gaining genetic information from different pathogenic bacteria. The presence of several pathogenicity islands in the genome of different serotypes has lent credence to this theory.\n\"Salmonella\" sv. Newport shows signs of adaptation to a plant-colonization lifestyle, which may play a role in its disproportionate association with food-borne illness linked to produce. A variety of functions selected for during sv. Newport persistence in tomatoes have been reported to be similar to those selected for in sv. Typhimurium from animal hosts. The \"papA\" gene, which is unique to sv. Newport, contributes to the strain's fitness in tomatoes, and has homologs in the genomes of other Enterobacteriaceae that are able to colonize plant and animal hosts.\nResearch.\nIn addition to their importance as pathogens, nontyphoidal Salmonella species such as \"S. enterica\" serovar Typhimurium are commonly used as homologues of typhoid species. Many findings are transferable and it attenuates the danger for the researcher in case of contamination, but is also limited. For example, it is not possible to study specific typhoidal toxins using this model. However, strong research tools such as the commonly used mouse intestine gastroenteritis model build upon the use of \"Salmonella\" Typhimurium.\nFor genetics, \"S.\" Typhimurium has been instrumental in the development of genetic tools that led to an understanding of fundamental bacterial physiology. These developments were enabled by the discovery of the first generalized transducing phage P22 in \"S\". Typhimurium, that allowed quick and easy genetic editing. In turn, this made fine structure genetic analysis possible. The large number of mutants led to a revision of genetic nomenclature for bacteria. Many of the uses of transposons as genetic tools, including transposon delivery, mutagenesis, and construction of chromosome rearrangements, were also developed in \"S\". Typhimurium. These genetic tools also led to a simple test for carcinogens, the Ames test.\nAs a natural alternative to traditional antimicrobials, phages are being recognised as highly effective control agents for Salmonella and other foodborne bacteria.\nAncient DNA.\n\"S. enterica\" genomes have been reconstructed from up to 6,500 year old human remains across Western Eurasia, which provides evidence for geographic widespread infections with systemic \"S. enterica\" during prehistory, and a possible role of the Neolithization process in the evolution of host adaptation. Additional reconstructed genomes from colonial Mexico suggest \"S. enterica\" as the cause of \"cocoliztli\", an epidemic in 16th-century New Spain.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42115", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42115", "title": "Paul Reuter", "text": "Anglo-German entrepreneur and news agency founder (1816\u20131899)\nPaul Julius Reuter (born Israel Beer Josaphat; 21 July 1816 \u2013 25 February 1899), later ennobled as Freiherr von Reuter (Baron von Reuter), was a German-born British entrepreneur who was a pioneer of telegraphy and news reporting. He was a reporter, media owner, and the founder of the Reuters news agency, which became part of the Thomson Reuters conglomerate in 2008.\nLife and career.\nReuter was born in a Jewish family as Israel Beer Josaphat in Kassel, Electorate of Hesse (now part of the Federal Republic of Germany). His father, Samuel Levi Josaphat, was a rabbi. His mother was Betty Sanders. In G\u00f6ttingen, Reuter met Carl Friedrich Gauss, who was experimenting with the transmission of electrical signals via wire.\nOn 16 November 1845, he converted to Christianity in a ceremony at St. George's German Lutheran Chapel in London, and changed his name to Paul Julius Reuter. One week later, in the same chapel, he married Ida Maria Elizabeth Clementine Magnus of Berlin, daughter of a German banker.\nA former bank clerk, in 1847 he founded Reuter and Stargardt, a Berlin book-publishing firm, with Joseph Abraham Stargardt. The distribution of radical pamphlets by the firm at the beginning of the 1848 Revolution may have focused official scrutiny on Reuter. Later that year, he left for Paris and worked in Charles-Louis Havas' news agency, Agence Havas, the future Agence France Presse.\nAs electrical telegraphy evolved, Reuter founded his own news agency in Aachen. Until the entire distance was connected by telegraph, messages were transferred on the leg between Brussels and Aachen using homing pigeons, completing the link to Berlin and Paris. Speedier than the post train, pigeons gave Reuter faster access to financial news from the Paris stock exchange. Eventually the telegraph link was completed and the pigeons were no longer necessary.\nA telegraph line was being laid between Britain and continental Europe, so Reuter moved to London, renting an office near the Stock Exchange. In 1863, he privately erected a telegraph link to Crookhaven, the farthest south-western point of Ireland. On nearing Crookhaven, ships from the U.S. threw canisters containing news into the sea. These were retrieved by Reuters and telegraphed directly to London, arriving long before the ships reached Cork.\nOn 17 March 1857, Reuter was naturalised as a British subject. On 7 September 1871, the Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha granted him the noble title of (baron). In November 1891, Queen Victoria granted him and his male-line successors the right to use that German title (listed as Baron von Reuter) in Britain.\nIn 1872, Nasir al-Din Shah, the Shah of Iran, signed a surprisingly lopsided concession agreement with Reuter. George Curzon wrote that:\n[t]he concession was dated 25 July 1872. When published to the world, it was found to contain the most complete and extraordinary surrender of the entire industrial resources of a kingdom into foreign hands that has probably ever been dreamed of, much less accomplished, in history. Exclusive of the clauses referring to railroads and tramways, which conferred an absolute monopoly of both those undertakings upon Baron de Reuter for the space of seventy years, the concession also handed over to him the exclusive working for the same period of all Persian mines, except those of gold, silver, and precious stones; the monopoly of the government forests, all uncultivated land being embraced under that designation; the exclusive construction of canals, kanats, and irrigation works of every description; the first refusal of a national bank, and of all future enterprises connected with the introduction of roads, telegraphs, mills, factories, workshops, and public works of every description; and a farm of the entire customs of the empire for a period of twenty-five years from 1 March 1874, upon payment to the Shah of a stipulated sum for the first five years, and of an additional sixty per cent of the net revenue for the remaining twenty. With respect to the other profits, twenty per cent of those accruing from railways, and fifteen per cent of those derived from all other sources, were reserved for the Persian Government.\nThe Reuter concession was immediately denounced by all ranks of businessmen, clergy, and nationalists of Persia, and it was quickly forced into cancellation.\nMarriage and children.\nIn 1845, Reuter married Ida Maria Magnus, daughter of Friedrich Martin Magnus, a German banker in Berlin. They had three sons: Herbert, who became the 2nd baron (succeeded by his son Hubert as 3rd baron), George and Alfred. Clementine Maria, one of his daughters, married Count Otto Stenbock, and after Stenbock's death, Sir Herbert Chermside, a governor of Queensland.\nThe 2nd baron's brother George had two sons, Oliver (who became the 4th baron) and Ronald. The last member of the family, Marguerite, Baroness de Reuter, widow of the 4th baron and Paul Julius Reuter's granddaughter-in-law, died on 25 January 2009, at the age of 96.\nDeath and legacy.\nReuter died in 1899 in Nice, France.\nReuter was portrayed by Edward G. Robinson in the Warner Bros. biographical film \"A Dispatch from Reuters\" (1941).\nThe Reuters News Agency commemorated the 100th anniversary of its founder's death by launching a university award (the Paul Julius Reuter Innovation Award) in Germany.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42116", "revid": "34648584", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42116", "title": "Server (computing)", "text": "Computer providing a central resource or service\nA server is a computer that provides information to other computers called \"clients\" on a computer network. This architecture is called the client\u2013server model. Servers can provide various functionalities, often called \"services\", such as sharing data or resources among multiple clients or performing computations for a client. A single server can serve multiple clients, and a single client can use multiple servers. A client process may run on the same device or may connect over a network to a server on a different device. Typical servers are database servers, file servers, mail servers, print servers, web servers, game servers, and application servers.\nClient\u2013server systems are most frequently implemented by (and often identified with) the request\u2013response model: a client sends a request to the server, which performs some action and sends a response back to the client, typically with a result or acknowledgment. Designating a computer as \"server-class hardware\" implies that it is specialized for running servers on it. This often implies that it is more powerful and reliable than standard personal computers, but alternatively, large computing clusters may be composed of many relatively simple, replaceable server components.\nHistory.\nThe use of the word \"server\" in computing comes from queueing theory, where it dates to the mid 20th century, being notably used in (along with \"service\"), the paper that introduced Kendall's notation. In earlier papers, such as the , more concrete terms such as \"[telephone] operators\" are used.\nIn computing, \"server\" dates at least to RFC 5 (1969), one of the earliest documents describing ARPANET (the predecessor of Internet), and is contrasted with \"user\", distinguishing two types of host: \"server-host\" and \"user-host\". The use of \"serving\" also dates to early documents, such as RFC 4, contrasting \"serving-host\" with \"using-host\".\nThe Jargon File defines \"server\" in the common sense of a process performing service for requests, usually remote, with the 1981 version reading:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;SERVER n. A kind of DAEMON which performs a service for the requester, which often runs on a computer other than the one on which the server runs. The average utilization of a server in the early 2000s was 5 to 15%, but with the adoption of virtualization this figure started to increase the number of servers needed.\nOperation.\nStrictly speaking, the term \"server\" refers to a computer program or process (running program). Through metonymy, it refers to a device used for (or a device dedicated to) running one or several server programs. On a network, such a device is called a \"host\". In addition to \"server\", the words \"serve\" and \"service\" (as verb and as noun respectively) are frequently used, though \"servicer\" and \"servant\" are not. The word \"service\" (noun) may refer to the abstract form of functionality, e.g. Web service. Alternatively, it may refer to a computer program that turns a computer into a server, e.g. Windows service. Originally used as \"servers serve users\" (and \"users use servers\"), in the sense of \"obey\", today one often says that \"servers serve data\", in the same sense as \"give\". For instance, web servers \"serve [up] web pages to users\" or \"service their requests\".\nThe server is part of the client\u2013server model; in this model, a server serves data for clients. The nature of communication between a client and server is request and response. This is in contrast with peer-to-peer model in which the relationship is on-demand reciprocation. In principle, any computerized process that can be used or called by another process (particularly remotely, particularly to share a resource) is a server, and the calling process or processes is a client. Thus any general-purpose computer connected to a network can host servers. For example, if files on a device are shared by some process, that process is a file server. Similarly, web server software can \"run\" on any capable computer, and so a laptop or a personal computer can host a web server.\nWhile request\u2013response is the most common client-server design, there are others, such as the publish\u2013subscribe pattern. In the publish-subscribe pattern, clients register with a pub-sub server, subscribing to specified types of messages; this initial registration may be done by request-response. Thereafter, the pub-sub server forwards matching messages to the clients \"without\" any further requests: the server \"pushes\" messages to the client, rather than the client \"pulling\" messages from the server as in request-response.\nPurpose.\nThe role of a server is to share data as well as to share resources and distribute work. A server computer can serve its own computer programs as well; depending on the scenario, this could be part of a \"quid pro quo\" transaction, or simply a technical possibility. The following table shows several scenarios in which a server is used.\nAlmost the entire structure of the Internet is based upon a client\u2013server model. High-level root nameservers, DNS, and routers direct the traffic on the internet. There are millions of servers connected to the Internet, running continuously throughout the world and virtually every action taken by an ordinary Internet user requires one or more interactions with one or more servers. There are exceptions that do not use dedicated servers; for example, peer-to-peer file sharing and some implementations of telephony (e.g. pre-Microsoft Skype).\nHardware.\nHardware requirement for servers vary widely, depending on the server's purpose and its software. Servers often are more powerful and expensive than the clients that connect to them.\nThe name server is used both for the hardware and software pieces. For the hardware servers, it is usually limited to mean the high-end machines although software servers can run on a variety of hardwares.\nSince servers are usually accessed over a network, many run unattended without a computer monitor or input device, audio hardware and USB interfaces. Many servers do not have a graphical user interface (GUI). They are configured and managed remotely. Remote management can be conducted via various methods including Microsoft Management Console (MMC), PowerShell, SSH and browser-based out-of-band management systems such as Dell's iDRAC or HP's iLo.\nLarge servers.\nLarge traditional single servers would need to be run for long periods without interruption. Availability would have to be very high, making hardware reliability and durability extremely important. Mission-critical enterprise servers would be very fault tolerant and use specialized hardware with low failure rates in order to maximize uptime. Uninterruptible power supplies might be incorporated to guard against power failure. Servers typically include hardware redundancy such as dual power supplies, RAID disk systems, and ECC memory, along with extensive pre-boot memory testing and verification. Critical components might be hot swappable, allowing technicians to replace them on the running server without shutting it down, and to guard against overheating, servers might have more powerful fans or use water cooling. They will often be able to be configured, powered up and down, or rebooted remotely, using out-of-band management, typically based on IPMI. Server casings are usually flat and wide, and designed to be rack-mounted, either on 19-inch racks or on Open Racks.\nThese types of servers are often housed in dedicated data centers. These will normally have very stable power and Internet and increased security. Noise is also less of a concern, but power consumption and heat output can be a serious issue. Server rooms are equipped with air conditioning devices.\nClusters.\nA \"server farm\" or \"server cluster\" is a collection of computer servers maintained by an organization to supply server functionality far beyond the capability of a single device. Modern data centers are now often built of very large clusters of much simpler servers, and there is a collaborative effort, Open Compute Project around this concept.\nAppliances.\nA class of small specialist servers called network appliances are generally at the low end of the scale, often being smaller than common desktop computers.\nMobile.\nA mobile server has a portable form factor, e.g. a laptop. In contrast to large data centers or rack servers, the mobile server is designed for on-the-road or \"ad hoc\" deployment into emergency, disaster or temporary environments where traditional servers are not feasible due to their power requirements, size, and deployment time. The main beneficiaries of so-called \"server on the go\" technology include network managers, software or database developers, training centers, military personnel, law enforcement, forensics, emergency relief groups, and service organizations. To facilitate portability, features such as the keyboard, display, battery (uninterruptible power supply, to provide power redundancy in case of failure), and mouse are all integrated into the chassis.\nOperating systems.\nOn the Internet, the dominant operating systems among servers are UNIX-like open-source distributions, such as those based on Linux and FreeBSD, with Windows Server also having a significant share. Proprietary operating systems such as z/OS and macOS Server are also deployed, but in much smaller numbers. Servers that run Linux are commonly used as Webservers or Databanks. Windows Servers are used for Networks that are made out of Windows Clients.\nSpecialist server-oriented operating systems have traditionally had features such as:\nIn practice, today many desktop and server operating systems share similar code bases, differing mostly in configuration.\nEnergy consumption.\nIn 2024, data centers (servers, cooling, and other electrical infrastructure) consumed 415 terawatt-hours of electrical energy, and were responsible for roughly 1.5% of electrical energy consumption worldwide, and for 4.4% in the United States. One estimate is that total energy consumption for information and communications technology saves more than 5 times its carbon footprint in the rest of the economy by increasing efficiency.\nGlobal energy consumption is increasing due to the increasing demand of data and bandwidth.\nEnvironmental groups have placed focus on the carbon emissions of data centers as it accounts to 200 million metric tons of carbon dioxide in a year.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42117", "revid": "15937591", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42117", "title": "Baron von Reuter Paul Julius", "text": ""}
{"id": "42118", "revid": "421426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42118", "title": "Salmonella typhi", "text": ""}
{"id": "42119", "revid": "11952314", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42119", "title": "Ras Tafari", "text": ""}
{"id": "42120", "revid": "44993025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42120", "title": "Haile Selassie", "text": "Emperor of Ethiopia from 1930 to 1974\nHaile Selassie I (born Tafari Makonnen or \"Lij\" Tafari; 23 July 1892\u00a0\u2013 27 August 1975) was Emperor of Ethiopia from 1930 to 1974. He rose to power as the Regent Plenipotentiary of Ethiopia (\"\") under Empress Zewditu between 1916 and 1930.\nWidely considered to be a defining figure in modern Ethiopian history, he is accorded divine importance in Rastafari, an Abrahamic religion that emerged in the 1930s. A few years before he began his reign over the Ethiopian Empire, Selassie defeated Ethiopian army commander Ras Gugsa Welle Bitul, nephew of Empress Taytu Betul, at the Battle of Anchem. He belonged to the Solomonic dynasty, founded by Emperor Yekuno Amlak in 1270.\nSelassie, seeking to modernise Ethiopia, introduced political and social reforms including the 1931 constitution and the abolition of slavery in 1942. He led the empire during the Second Italo-Ethiopian War, and after its defeat was exiled to the United Kingdom. When the Italian occupation of East Africa began, he traveled to Anglo-Egyptian Sudan to coordinate the Ethiopian struggle against Fascist Italy; he returned home after the East African campaign of World War II. He dissolved the Federation of Ethiopia and Eritrea, established by the United Nations General Assembly in 1950, and annexed Eritrea as one of Ethiopia's provinces, while also fighting to prevent Eritrean secession. As an internationalist, Selassie led Ethiopia's accession to the United Nations. In 1963, he presided over the formation of the Organisation of African Unity, the precursor of the African Union, and served as its first chairman. By the early 1960s, prominent African socialists such as Kwame Nkrumah envisioned the creation of a \"United States of Africa\". Their rhetoric was anti-Western; Selassie saw this as a threat to his alliances. He attempted to influence a\u00a0more moderate posture within the group.\nAmidst popular uprisings, Selassie was overthrown by the Derg military junta in the 1974 coup d'\u00e9tat. With support from the Soviet Union, the Derg began governing Ethiopia as a Marxist\u2013Leninist state. In 1994, three years after the fall of the Derg regime, it was revealed to the public that the Derg had assassinated Selassie at the Jubilee Palace in Addis Ababa on 27 August 1975. On 5 November 2000, his excavated remains were buried at the Holy Trinity Cathedral of Addis Ababa.\nAmong adherents of Rastafari, Selassie is called the returned Jesus, although he was an adherent of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church himself. He has been criticised for his suppression of rebellions among the landed aristocracy (\"\"), which consistently opposed his changes. Others have criticised Ethiopia's failure to modernise rapidly enough. During his reign, the Harari people were persecuted and many left their homes. His administration was criticised as autocratic and illiberal by groups such as Human Rights Watch. According to some sources, late into Selassie's administration, the Oromo language was banned from education, public speaking and use in administration, though there was never a law that criminalised any language. His government relocated many Amhara people into southern Ethiopia.\nName.\nHaile Selassie was known as a child as Lij Tafari Makonnen (). \"Lij\" is translated as \"child\" and serves to indicate that a youth is of noble blood. His given name \"Tafari\" means \"one who is respected or feared\". Like most Ethiopians, his personal name \"Tafari\" is followed by that of his father Makonnen and that of his grandfather Woldemikael. His name \"Haile Selassie\" was given to him at his infant baptism and adopted again as part of his regnal name in 1930.\nOn 1 November 1905, at the age of 13, Tafari was appointed by his father as the Dejazmatch of Gara Mulatta (a region some twenty miles southwest of Harar). The literal translation of Dejazmatch is \"keeper of the door\"; it is a title of nobility equivalent to a count. On 27 September 1916, he was proclaimed Crown Prince and heir apparent to the throne (\"Alga Worrach\"), and appointed Regent Plenipotentiary (\"Balemulu Silt'an Enderase\"). On 11 February 1917, he was crowned Le'ul-Ras and became known as Ras Tafari Makonnen . \"Ras\" is translated as \"head\" and is a rank of nobility equivalent to a duke, though it is often rendered in translation as \"prince\". Originally the title \"Le'ul\", which means \"Your Highness\", was only ever used as a form of address; however, in 1916 the title \"Le'ul-Ras\" replaced the senior office of \"Ras Bitwoded\" and so became the equivalent of a royal duke. In 1928, Empress Zewditu planned on granting him the throne of Shewa; however, at the last moment opposition from certain provincial rulers caused a change and his title \"Negus\" or \"King\" was conferred without geographical qualification or definition.\nOn 2 November 1930, after the death of Empress Zewditu, Tafari was crowned \"Negusa Nagast\", literally \"King of Kings\", rendered in English as \"Emperor\". Upon his ascension, he took as his regnal name Haile Selassie I. \"Haile\" means in Ge'ez \"Power of\" and \"Selassie\" means trinity\u00a0\u2013 therefore \"Haile Selassie\" roughly translates to \"Power of the Trinity\". Selassie's full title in office was \"By the Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah, His Imperial Majesty Haile Selassie I, King of Kings of Ethiopia, Lord of Lords, Elect of God\". This title reflects Ethiopian dynastic traditions, which hold that all monarchs must trace their lineage to Menelik I, who is described by the Kebra Nagast (a 14th-century CE national epic) as the son of the tenth-century BCE King Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.\nTo Ethiopians, Selassie has been known by many names, including Janhoy (\"His Majesty\") Talaqu Meri (\"Great Leader\") and Abba Tekel (\"Father of Tekel\", his horse name). Rastafari employs many of these appellations, also referring to him as Jah, Jah Jah, Jah Rastafari, and HIM (the abbreviation of \"His Imperial Majesty\").\nEarly life.\nTafari's royal line (through his paternal grandmother) descended from the Shewan Amhara Solomonic king, Sahle Selassie. He was born on 23 July 1892, in the village of Ejersa Goro, in the Hararghe province of Ethiopia. Tafari's mother, Woizero (\"Lady\") Yeshimebet Ali Abba Jifar, was paternally of Oromo descent and maternally of Silte heritage, while his father, Ras Makonnen Wolde Mikael, was maternally of Amhara descent but his paternal lineage remains disputed. Tafari's paternal grandfather belonged to a noble family from Shewa and was the governor of the districts of Menz and Doba, which are located in Semien Shewa. Tafari's mother was the daughter of a ruling chief from Were Ilu in Wollo province, Dejazmach Ali Abba Jifar. \nRas Makonnen was the grandson of King Sahle Selassie who was once the ruler of Shewa. He served as a general in the First Italo\u2013Ethiopian War, playing a key role at the Battle of Adwa; Selassie was thus able to ascend to the imperial throne through his paternal grandmother, Woizero Tenagnework Sahle Selassie, who was an aunt of Emperor Menelik II and daughter of the Solomonic Amhara King of Shewa, Negus Sahle Selassie. As such, Selassie claimed direct descent from Makeda, the Queen of Sheba, and King Solomon of ancient Israel.\nRas Makonnen arranged for Tafari as well as his first cousin, Imru Haile Selassie, to receive instruction in Harar from Abba Samuel Wolde Kahin, an Ethiopian Capuchin friar, and from Dr. Vitalien, a surgeon from Guadeloupe. Tafari was named Dejazmach (literally \"commander of the gate\", roughly equivalent to \"count\") at the age of 13, on 1 November 1905. Shortly thereafter, his father Makonnen died at Kulibi, in 1906.\nGovernorship.\nTafari assumed the titular governorship of Selale in 1906, a realm of marginal importance, but one that enabled him to continue his studies. In 1907, he was appointed governor over part of the province of Sidamo. It is alleged that during his late teens, Selassie was married to \"Woizero\" Altayech, and that from this union, his daughter Princess Romanework was born.\nFollowing the death of his brother Yelma in 1907, the governorate of Harar was left vacant, and its administration was left to Menelik's loyal general, \"Dejazmach\" Balcha Safo. Balcha Safo's administration of Harar was ineffective, and so during the last illness of Menelik II, and the brief reign of Empress Taytu Betul, Tafari was made governor of Harar in 1910 or 1911.\nMarriage.\nOn 3 August 1911, Tafari married Menen Asfaw of Ambassel, niece of the heir to the throne Lij Iyasu. Menen Asfaw was 22 years old while Tafari was 19 years of age. Menen had already married two previous noblemen, while Tafari had one previous wife and one child. The marriage between Menen Asfaw and Selassie lasted for 50 years. Although possibly a political match designed to create peace between Ethiopian nobles, the couple's family had said they married with mutual consent. Selassie described his spouse as a \"woman without any malice whatsoever\".\nRegency.\nThe extent to which Tafari Makonnen contributed to the movement that would come to depose Lij Iyasu has been discussed extensively, particularly in Selassie's own detailed account of the matter. Iyasu was the designated but uncrowned emperor of Ethiopia from 1913 to 1916. Iyasu's reputation for scandalous behavior and a disrespectful attitude towards the nobles at the court of his grandfather, Menelik II, damaged his reputation. Iyasu's flirtation with Islam was considered treasonous among the Ethiopian Orthodox Christian leadership of the empire. On 27 September 1916, Iyasu was deposed.\nContributing to the movement that deposed Iyasu were conservatives such as \"Fitawrari\" Habte Giyorgis, Menelik II's longtime Minister of War. The movement to depose Iyasu preferred Tafari, as he attracted support from both progressive and conservative factions. Ultimately, Iyasu was deposed on the grounds of conversion to Islam. In his place, the daughter of Menelik II (the aunt of Iyasu) was named Empress Zewditu, while Tafari was elevated to the rank of \"Ras\" and was made heir apparent and Crown Prince. In the power arrangement that followed, Tafari accepted the role of Regent Plenipotentiary (\"Balemulu 'Inderase\") and became the \"de facto\" ruler of the Ethiopian Empire (\"Mangista Ityop'p'ya\"). Zewditu would govern while Tafari would administer.\nWhile Iyasu had been deposed on 27 September 1916, on 8 October he managed to escape into the Ogaden Desert and his father, \"Negus\" Mikael of Wollo, had time to come to his aid. On 27 October, \"Negus\" Mikael and his army met an army under \"Fitawrari\" Habte Giyorgis loyal to Zewditu and Tafari. During the Battle of Segale, Mikael was defeated and captured. Any chance that Iyasu would regain the throne was ended, and he went into hiding. On 11 January 1921, after avoiding capture for about five years, Iyasu was taken into custody by Gugsa Araya Selassie.\nOn 11 February 1917, the coronation for Zewditu took place. She pledged to rule justly through her regent, Tafari. While Tafari was the more visible of the two, Zewditu was not simply an honorary ruler, but she did have some political restraints due to the complicated nature of her position compared to other Ethiopian monarchs, one was that it required that she arbitrate the claims of competing factions. In other words, she had the last word. But unlike other monarchs Tafari carried the burden of daily administration, but, initially because his position was relatively weak, this was often an exercise in futility. His personal army was poorly equipped, his finances were limited, and he had little leverage to withstand the combined influence of the Empress, the Minister of War, or the provincial governors. Nonetheless, her authority weakened while Tafari's power increased, she focused on praying and fasting and much less in her official duties which allowed Tafari to later have greater influence than even the Empress.\nDuring his Regency, the new Crown Prince developed the policy of cautious modernisation initiated by Menelik II. Also, during this time, he survived the 1918 flu pandemic, having come down with the illness as someone fairly \"prone to\" the effects of disease throughout his life. He secured Ethiopia's admission to the League of Nations in 1923 by promising to eradicate slavery; each emperor since Tewodros II had issued proclamations to halt slavery, but without effect: the internationally scorned practice persisted well into Selassie's reign with an estimated 2\u00a0million slaves in Ethiopia in the early 1930s.\nTravel abroad.\nIn 1924, Ras Tafari toured Europe and the Middle East visiting Jerusalem, Alexandria, Paris, Luxembourg, Brussels, Amsterdam, Stockholm, London, Geneva, Gibraltar and Athens. With him on his tour was a group that included Ras Seyum Mangasha of western Tigray Province; Ras Hailu Tekle Haymanot of Gojjam province; Ras Mulugeta Yeggazu of Illubabor Province; Ras Makonnen Endelkachew; and \"Blattengeta\" Heruy Welde Selassie. The primary goal of the trip to Europe was for Ethiopia to gain access to the sea. In Paris, Tafari was to find out from the French Foreign Ministry (\"Quai d'Orsay\") that this goal would not be realised. However, failing this, he and his retinue inspected schools, hospitals, factories, and churches. Although patterning many reforms after European models, Tafari remained wary of European pressure. To guard against economic imperialism, Tafari required that all enterprises have at least partial local ownership. Of his modernisation campaign, he remarked, \"We need European progress only because we are surrounded by it. That is at once a benefit and a misfortune.\"\nThroughout Tafari's travels in Europe, the Levant, and Egypt, he and his entourage were greeted with enthusiasm and fascination. Seyum Mangasha accompanied him and Hailu Tekle Haymanot who, like Tafari, were sons of generals who contributed to the victorious war against Italy a quarter-century earlier at the Battle of Adwa. Another member of his entourage, Mulugeta Yeggazu, actually fought at Adwa as a young man. The \"Oriental Dignity\" of the Ethiopians and their \"rich, picturesque court dress\" were sensationalised in the media; among his entourage he even included a pride of lions, which he distributed as gifts to President Alexandre Millerand and Prime Minister Raymond Poincar\u00e9 of France, to King George V of the United Kingdom, and to the Zoological Garden (\"Jardin Zoologique\") of Paris, France. As one historian noted, \"Rarely can a tour have inspired so many anecdotes\". In return for two lions, the United Kingdom presented Tafari with the imperial crown of Emperor Tewodros II for its safe return to Empress Zewditu. The crown had been taken by General Sir Robert Napier during the 1868 Expedition to Abyssinia.\nIn this period, the Crown Prince visited the Armenian monastery of Jerusalem. There, he adopted 40 Armenian orphans (\u12a0\u122d\u1263 \u120d\u1306\u127d \"Arba Lijoch\", \"forty children\"), who had lost their parents during the Armenian Genocide. Tafari arranged for the musical education of the youths, and they came to form the imperial brass band.\nReign.\nKing and Emperor.\nTafari's authority was challenged in 1928 when \"Dejazmach\" Balcha Safo went to Addis Ababa with a sizeable armed force. When Tafari consolidated his hold over the provinces, many of Menelik's appointees refused to abide by the new regulations. Balcha Safo, the governor (\"Shum\") of coffee-rich Sidamo Province, was particularly troublesome. The revenues he remitted to the central government did not reflect the accrued profits and Tafari recalled him to Addis Ababa. The old man came in high dudgeon and, insultingly, with a large army. The \"Dejazmatch\" paid homage to Empress Zewditu, but snubbed Tafari. On 18 February, while Balcha Safo and his personal bodyguard were in Addis Ababa, Tafari had \"Ras\" Kassa Haile Darge buy off Balcha Safo's army, and arranged to have him replaced as \"Shum\" of Sidamo Province by Birru Wolde Gabriel \u2013 who himself was replaced by Desta Damtew.\nEven so, the gesture of Balcha Safo empowered Empress Zewditu politically and she attempted to have Tafari tried for treason. He was tried for his benevolent dealings with Italy including a 20-year peace accord that was signed on 2 August. In September, a group of palace reactionaries including some courtiers of the Empress made a final bid to get rid of Tafari. The attempted \"coup d'\u00e9tat\" was tragic in its origins and comic in its end. When confronted by Tafari and a company of his troops, the ringleaders of the coup took refuge on the palace grounds in Menelik's mausoleum. Tafari and his men surrounded them, only to be surrounded themselves by the personal guard of Zewditu. More of Tafari's khaki clad soldiers arrived and decided the outcome in his favor with superiority of arms. Popular support, as well as the support of the police, remained with Tafari. Ultimately, the Empress relented, and, on 7 October 1928, she crowned Tafari as \"Negus\" (Amharic: \"King\").\nThe crowning of Tafari as King was controversial. He occupied the same territory as the Empress rather than going off to a regional kingdom of the empire. Two monarchs, even with one being the vassal and the other the emperor (in this case empress), had never ruled from a single location simultaneously in Ethiopian history. Conservatives agitated to redress this perceived insult to the crown's dignity, leading to the \"Ras\" Gugsa Welle's rebellion. Gugsa Welle was the husband of the Empress and the \"Shum\" of Begemder Province. In early 1930, he raised an army and marched it from his governorate at Gondar towards Addis Ababa. On 31 March 1930, Gugsa Welle was met by forces loyal to \"Negus\" Tafari and was defeated at the Battle of Anchem. Gugsa Welle was killed in action. News of Gugsa Welle's defeat and death had hardly spread through Addis Ababa when the Empress died suddenly on 2 April 1930. Although it was long rumored that the Empress was poisoned upon her husband's defeat, or alternately that she died from shock upon hearing of the death of her estranged yet beloved husband, it has since been documented that Zewditu succumbed to paratyphoid fever and complications from diabetes after the Orthodox clergy imposed strict rules concerning her diet during Lent, against her physicians' orders.\nUpon Zewditu's death, Tafari himself rose to emperor and was proclaimed \"Neguse Negest ze-'Ityopp'ya\", \"King of Kings of Ethiopia\". He was crowned on 2 November 1930, at Addis Ababa's Cathedral of St. George. The coronation was by all accounts \"a most splendid affair\", and it was attended by royals and dignitaries from all over the world. Among those in attendance were the Duke of Gloucester (King George V's son), Marshal Louis Franchet d'Esp\u00e8rey of France, and the Prince of Udine representing King Victor Emmanuel III of Italy. Special Ambassador Herman Murray Jacoby attended the coronation as the personal representative of U.S. president Herbert Hoover. Emissaries from Egypt, Turkey, Sweden, Belgium, and Japan were there. British author Evelyn Waugh was also present, penning a contemporary report on the event, and American travel lecturer Burton Holmes made the only known film footage of the event. One American newspaper report suggested that the celebration had incurred a cost in excess of $3,000,000. Many of those in attendance received lavish gifts; in one instance the Emperor, a Christian, even sent a gold-encased Bible to an American bishop who had not attended the coronation, but who had dedicated a prayer for the Emperor on the day of the coronation.\nSelassie introduced Ethiopia's first written constitution on 16 July 1931, providing for a bicameral legislature. The constitution kept power in the hands of the nobility, but it did establish democratic standards among the nobility, envisaging a transition to democratic rule: it would prevail \"until the people are in a position to elect themselves.\" The constitution limited succession to the throne to descendants of Selassie, which had the effect of placing other dynastic princes at the time (including the princes of Tigrai, and even the Emperor's loyal cousin Ras Kassa Haile Darge) outside of the line for the throne.\nIn 1932, the Sultanate of Jimma was formally absorbed into Ethiopia following the death of Sultan Abba Jifar II of Jimma.\nConflict with Italy.\nEthiopia became the target of renewed Italian imperialist designs in the 1930s. Benito Mussolini's Fascist regime was keen to avenge the military defeats Italy had suffered to Ethiopia in the First Italo-Abyssinian War, and to efface the failed attempt by \"liberal\" Italy to conquer the country, as epitomised by the defeat at Adwa. A conquest of Ethiopia could also empower the cause of fascism and embolden its empire's rhetoric. Ethiopia would also provide a bridge between Italy's Eritrean and Italian Somaliland possessions. Ethiopia's position in the League of Nations did not dissuade the Italians from invading in 1935; the \"collective security\" envisaged by the League proved useless, and a scandal erupted when the Hoare\u2013Laval Pact revealed that Ethiopia's League allies were scheming to appease Italy.\nMobilisation.\nFollowing the Welwel Incident of 5 December 1934, Selassie joined his northern armies and set up headquarters at Desse in Wollo province. He issued a generalized mobilization order on 3 October 1935. On 19 October 1935, he gave more precise orders for his army to his Commander-in-Chief, Ras Kassa, instructing the men to choose hidden positions, to conserve ammunition, and to avoid wearing conspicuous clothing for fear of air attack. Compared to the Ethiopians, the Italians had an advanced, modern military that included a large air force. The Italians also came to employ chemical weapons throughout the conflict, even targeting Red Cross field hospitals.\nProgress of the war.\nStarting in early October 1935, the Italians invaded Ethiopia. But, by November, the pace of invasion had slowed appreciably, and Selassie's northern armies were able to launch what was known as the \"Christmas Offensive\". During this offensive, the Italians were forced back in places and put on the defensive. In early 1936, the First Battle of Tembien stopped the progress of the Ethiopian offensive and the Italians were ready to continue their offensive. Following the defeat and destruction of the northern Ethiopian armies at the Battle of Amba Aradam, the Second Battle of Tembien, and the Battle of Shire, Selassie took the field with the last Ethiopian army on the northern front. On 31 March 1936, he launched a counterattack against the Italians himself at the Battle of Maychew in southern Tigray. The Emperor's army was defeated and retreated in disarray. As his army withdrew, the Italians attacked from the air along with rebellious Raya and Azebo tribesmen on the ground, who were armed and paid by the Italians. Many of the Ethiopian military were obsolete compared to the invading Italian forces, being mostly untrained and possessing non-modern rifles and weaponry.\nSelassie made a solitary pilgrimage to the churches at Lalibela, at considerable risk of capture, before returning to his capital. After a stormy session of the council of state, it was agreed that because Addis Ababa could not be defended, the government would relocate to the southern town of Gore, and that in the interest of preserving the imperial house, Empress Menen Asfaw and the rest of the imperial family should immediately depart for French Somaliland, and from there continue on to Jerusalem.\nExile debate.\nAfter further debate as to whether Selassie should go to Gore or accompany his family into exile, it was agreed that he should leave Ethiopia with his family and present the case of Ethiopia to the League of Nations at Geneva. The decision was not unanimous and several participants, including the nobleman Blatta Tekle Wolde Hawariat, strenuously objected to the idea of an Ethiopian monarch fleeing before an invading force. Selassie appointed his cousin Ras Imru Haile Selassie as Prince Regent in his absence, departing with his family for French Somaliland on 2 May 1936.\nOn 5 May, Marshal Pietro Badoglio led Italian troops into Addis Ababa, and Mussolini declared Ethiopia an Italian province. Victor Emanuel III was proclaimed as the new Emperor of Ethiopia. On the previous day, the Ethiopian exiles had left French Somaliland aboard the British cruiser HMS \"Enterprise\". They were bound for Jerusalem in the British Mandate of Palestine, where the Ethiopian imperial family maintained a residence. The family disembarked at Haifa and then went on to Jerusalem. Once there, Selassie and his retinue prepared to make their case at Geneva. The choice of Jerusalem was highly symbolic, since the Solomonic Dynasty claimed descent from the House of David. Leaving the Holy Land, Selassie and his entourage sailed aboard the British cruiser HMS \"Capetown\" for Gibraltar, where he stayed at the Rock Hotel. From Gibraltar, the exiles were transferred to an ordinary liner. By doing this, the United Kingdom government was spared the expense of a state reception.\nCollective security and the League of Nations, 1936.\nOn 12 May 1936, the League of Nations allowed Selassie to address the assembly. In response, Italy withdrew its League delegation. Although fluent in French, Selassie chose to deliver his speech in his native Amharic. He asserted that Italy was employing chemical weapons on military and civilian targets alike.\nAt the beginning of 1936, \"Time\" named Selassie \"Man of the Year\" for 1935, and his June 1936 speech made him an icon for anti-fascists around the world. He failed, however, to get the diplomatic and mat\u00e9riel support he needed. The League agreed to only partial sanctions on Italy, and Selassie was left without much-needed military equipment. Only six nations in 1937 did not recognise Italy's occupation: China, New Zealand, the Soviet Union, the Republic of Spain, Mexico and the United States.\nExile.\nSelassie spent his exile years (1936\u20131941) in Bath, England, in Fairfield House, which he bought. The Emperor and Kassa Haile Darge took morning walks together behind the 14-room Victorian house's high walls. His favorite reading was \"diplomatic history\". It was during his exile in England that he began writing his 90,000-word autobiography.\nPrior to Fairfield House, he briefly stayed at Warne's Hotel in Worthing and in Parkside, Wimbledon. A bust of Haile Selassie by Hilda Seligman stood in nearby Cannizaro Park to commemorate his stay, and was a popular place of pilgrimage for London's Rastafari community, until it was destroyed by protestors on 30 June 2020. Selassie stayed at the Abbey Hotel in Malvern in the 1930s, and his granddaughters and daughters of court officials were educated at Clarendon School for Girls in North Malvern. During his time in Malvern, he attended services at Holy Trinity Church, in Link Top. A blue plaque commemorating his stay in Malvern was unveiled on Saturday, 25 June 2011. As part of the ceremony, a delegation from the Rastafari movement gave a short address and a drum recital.\nSelassie's activity in this period was focused on countering Italian propaganda as to the Ethiopian resistance and the legality of the occupation. He spoke out against the desecration of houses of worship and historical artifacts, including the theft of a 1,600-year-old imperial obelisk, and condemned the atrocities suffered by the Ethiopian civilian population. He continued to plead for League intervention and to voice his certainty that \"God's judgment will eventually visit the weak and the mighty alike\", though his attempts to gain support for the struggle against Italy were largely unsuccessful until Italy entered World War II on the German side in June 1940.\nSelassie's pleas for international support took root in the United States, particularly among African-American organisations sympathetic to the Ethiopian cause. In 1937, Haile Selassie was to give a Christmas Day radio address to the American people to thank his supporters when his taxi was involved in a traffic accident, leaving him with a fractured knee. He delivered the address despite his injury, in which he linked Christianity and goodwill with the Covenant of the League of Nations, and asserted that war can be resolved diplomatically.\nDuring this period, Selassie suffered several personal tragedies. His two sons-in-law, Ras Desta Damtew and Dejazmach Beyene Merid, were both executed by the Italians. The Emperor's daughter, Princess Romanework, wife of Dejazmach Beyene Merid, was taken into captivity with her children, and she died in Italy in 1941. His daughter Tsehai died during childbirth shortly after the restoration in 1942.\nAfter his return to Ethiopia, Selassie donated Fairfield House to the city of Bath as a residence for the aged. In 2019, two blue plaques commemorating his residence at Fairfield and his visits to nearby Weston-super-Mare were unveiled by his grandson.\nRestoration.\nWorld War II and return.\nBritish forces, which consisted primarily of Ethiopian-backed African and South African colonial troops under the \"Gideon Force\" of Colonel Orde Wingate, coordinated the military effort to liberate Ethiopia. Selassie issued several imperial proclamations in this period, demonstrating that British military might and the Emperor's popular appeal could be joined in the concerted effort to liberate Ethiopia.\nOn 18 January 1941, during the East African Campaign, Selassie crossed the border between Sudan and Ethiopia, near the village of Um Iddla. The standard of the Lion of Judah was raised again. Two days later, he and a force of Ethiopian patriots joined with Gideon Force, which was already in Ethiopia and preparing the way.\nItaly was defeated by combined forces of the United Kingdom, the Commonwealth of Nations, Free France, Free Belgium, and Ethiopian partisans. On 5 May 1941, Selassie entered Addis Ababa and personally addressed the Ethiopian people, exactly five years after the fascist forces entered Addis Ababa. He urged them not to reciprocate the atrocities they had been subjected to.\nOn 27 August 1942, Selassie confirmed the legal basis for the abolition of slavery that had been illegally enacted by Italian occupying forces throughout the empire and imposed severe penalties, including capital punishment for slave trading.\nPostwar.\nAfter World War II, Ethiopia became a charter member of the United Nations. In 1948, the Ogaden, a region disputed with both Italian Somaliland and British Somaliland, was granted to Ethiopia. After the war, Italy was stripped of all her overseas possessions. On 2 December 1950, the UN General Assembly adopted Resolution 390 (V), which ceded the former Italian colony known as the federation of Eritrea to the Ethiopian Empire. Eritrea was to have its own constitution, which would provide for ethnic, linguistic, and cultural balance, while Ethiopia was to manage its finances, defense, and foreign policy.\nDespite his centralisation policies that had been made before World War II, Selassie still found himself unable to push for all the programmes he wanted. In 1942, he attempted to institute a progressive tax scheme, but this failed due to opposition from the nobility, and only a flat tax was passed; in 1951, he agreed to reduce this as well. Ethiopia was still \"semi-feudal\", and the Emperor's attempts to alter its social and economic form by reforming its modes of taxation met with resistance from the nobility and clergy, which were eager to resume their privileges in the post-war era. Where Selassie actually did succeed in effecting new land taxes, the burdens were often still passed by the landowners onto the peasants.\nBetween 1941 and 1959, Selassie worked to establish the autocephaly of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. For centuries the Ethiopian Orthodox Church had been headed by the \"Abuna\", a bishop chosen by and answerable to the Pope of the Coptic Orthodox Church of Alexandria. In 1942 and 1945, Selassie applied to the Holy Synod of the Coptic Orthodox Church to establish the independence of Ethiopian bishops, and when his appeals were denied he threatened to sever relations with the Coptic Church of Alexandria. Finally, in 1959, Pope Kyrillos VI elevated the \"Abuna\" to Patriarch-Catholicos. The Ethiopian Church remained affiliated with the Alexandrian Church. In addition to these efforts, Selassie changed the Ethiopian church-state relationship by introducing taxation of church lands, and by restricting the legal privileges of the clergy, who had formerly been tried in their own courts for civil offenses.\nIn 1956, on a state visit to India, he met with Indian leaders who supported Ethiopia against fascist Italy's illegal occupation during the 1935\u20131941 war against the country. Selassie also discussed with Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru relating to Asian and African decolonisation, and cooperation between economic and education sectors.\nIn 1948, Harari and Somali Muslims staged a significant rebellion against the empire in Harar. The state responded with a violent crackdown. Hundreds were arrested and the entire town of Harar was put under martial law. The government also seized many assets and estates belonging to the people. This led to a massive exodus of Hararis from the region. Harari dissatisfaction stemmed from the fact that they had never received autonomy for Harar, which was promised by Menelik II after his conquest of the kingdom. The promise was eroded by successive Amhara governors of Harar and infringed by Selassie himself. According to historians Tim Carmicheal and Roman Loimeier, Selassie was directly involved in the suppression of the Harari movement that formed as a response to the crackdown on Hararis who collaborated with the Italians during their occupation of Ethiopia from 1935 to 1941.\nIn keeping with the principle of collective security, for which he was an outspoken proponent, Selassie sent Ethiopian armed forces to take part in the Korean War to fight in support of the United Nations Command. The elite Kagnew Battalion, under General Mulugueta Bulli, was attached to the American 7th Infantry Division, and fought with distinction in a number of major engagements including the Battle of Pork Chop Hill. In a 1954 speech, Selassie spoke of Ethiopian participation in the Korean War as a redemption of the principles of collective security.\nSecond constitutional period.\nDuring the celebrations of his Silver Jubilee in November 1955, Selassie introduced a revised constitution, whereby he retained effective power, while extending political participation to the people by allowing the lower house of parliament to become an elected body. Party politics were not provided for. Modern educational methods became more widely spread throughout the Empire.\nThe country embarked on a development scheme and plans for modernisation, tempered by Ethiopian traditions, and within the framework of the state's ancient monarchical structure. Selassie compromised, when practical, with the traditionalists in the nobility and church. He also tried to improve relations between the state and ethnic groups, and granted autonomy to Afar lands that were difficult to control. Still, his reforms to end feudalism were slow and weakened by the compromises he made with the entrenched aristocracy. The revised constitution of 1955 has been criticised for reasserting \"the indisputable power of the monarch\" and maintaining the relative powerlessness of the peasants.\nSelassie also maintained cordial relations with the government of the United Kingdom through charitable gestures. He sent aid to the British government in 1947 when Britain was affected by heavy flooding. His letter to Lord Meork, National Distress Fund, London said, \"even though We are busy of helping our people who didn't recover from the crises of the war, We heard that your fertile and beautiful country is devastated by the unusually heavy rain, and your request for aid. Therefore, We are sending a small amount of money, about one thousand pounds through our embassy to show our sympathy and cooperation.\"\n1958 famine of Tigray.\nIn the summer of 1958, a widespread famine in the Tigray province of northern Ethiopia was already two years old yet people in Addis Ababa knew hardly anything about it. When significant reports of death finally reached the Ministry of Interior in September 1959 the central government immediately disclosed the information to the public and began asking for contributions. The Emperor personally donated 2,000 tons of relief grain, the U.S. sent 32,000 tons, which was distributed between Eritrea and Tigray, and money for aid was raised throughout the country but it is estimated that approximately 100,000 people had died before the crisis ended in August 1961. The causes of the famine were attributed to drought, locusts, hailstone and epidemics of small-pox, typhus, measles and malaria.\nAttempted coup and era of decolonization.\nSelassie contributed Ethiopian troops to the United Nations Operation in the Congo peacekeeping force during the 1960 Congo Crisis, per United Nations Security Council Resolution 143.\nOn 13 December 1960, while Selassie was on a state visit to Brazil, the imperial guard staged an unsuccessful coup, briefly proclaiming Selassie's elder son, Asfa Wossen, as emperor. The regular army and police forces crushed the coup d'\u00e9tat. The coup plotters lacked broad popular support, were denounced by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, and was unpopular with the military and police. Nonetheless, the effort had support among students and the educated classes. The attempt has been characterised as a pivotal moment in Ethiopian history, the point at which Ethiopians \"for the first time questioned the power of the king to rule without the people's consent\". Student populations began to empathise with the peasantry and poor and advocate on their behalf. The coup spurred Selassie to accelerate reform, manifested as land grants to military and police officials and political groups.\nSelassie continued to be a staunch ally of the West, while pursuing a firm policy of decolonisation in Africa, which was still largely under European colonial rule. The United Nations conducted a lengthy inquiry regarding Eritrea's status, with the superpowers each vying for a stake in the state's future. Britain, the administrator at the time, suggested Eritrea's partition between Sudan and Ethiopia, separating Christians and Muslims. The idea was instantly rejected by Eritrean political parties, as well as the UN.\nEritrean annexation and uprising.\nA UN plebiscite voted to have Eritrea federated with Ethiopia, later stipulated on 2 December 1950 in resolution 390 (V). Eritrea would have its own parliament and administration and would be represented in what had been the Ethiopian parliament and would become the federal parliament. Selassie rejected European attempts to draft a separate constitution under which Eritrea would be governed, and wanted his own 1955 constitution protecting families to apply in both Ethiopia and Eritrea. In 1961 the 30-year Eritrean War for Independence began, followed by the dissolution of the federation and shutting down of Eritrea's parliament.\nIn September 1961, Selassie attended the Summit Conference of Heads of State or Government of the Non-Aligned Movement in Belgrade, FPR Yugoslavia. This is considered to be the founding conference of the Non-Aligned Movement.\nIn 1961, tensions between independence-minded Eritreans and Ethiopian forces culminated in the Eritrean War of Independence. Eritrea's elected parliament voted to become the fourteenth province of Ethiopia in 1962. The war would continue for 30 years; first Selassie, then the Soviet-backed junta that succeeded him, attempted to retain Eritrea by force.\nIn 1963, Selassie presided over the formation of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), the precursor of the continent-wide African Union (AU). The new organisation would establish its headquarters in Addis Ababa. In May of that year, Selassie was elected as the OAU's first official chairperson, a rotating seat. Along with Modibo Ke\u00efta of Mali, the Ethiopian leader would later help successfully negotiate the Bamako Accords, which brought an end to the border conflict between Morocco and Algeria. In 1964, Selassie would initiate the concept of the United States of Africa, a proposition later taken up by Muammar Gaddafi.\nIn 1963, a revolt in Bale occurred, where peasant rioters whom were discouraged by the Ethiopian taxation headed by Prime Minister Aklilu Habte-Wold later turned into an insurgency. This caused a semi-civil war with terrorist activities carried out by rebels supported by Somalia which later forced the Ethiopian government to declare a state of emergency. The Emperor's armed forces led by Prime Minister Aklilu's cabinet with the support of the United Kingdom and the United States were able to end the revolt after over six years of insurgency. This assured weakened diplomatic ties with Siad Barre's Somalia.\nReform efforts and relations with the West.\nOn 4 October 1963, Selassie addressed the General Assembly of the United Nations.\nOn 25 November 1963, the Emperor traveled to Washington, D.C., and attended the state funeral of assassinated U.S. president John F. Kennedy. He was the only African head of state to attend the funeral. In addition, he was the only one of the three prominent world leaders that would have another meeting with the new president, Lyndon B. Johnson, in Washington during his presidency; he met Johnson again during an informal visit to the United States in 1967.\nIn 1966, Selassie attempted to replace the historical tax system with a single progressive income tax, which would weaken the nobility who had avoided paying most of their taxes. This law led to a revolt in Gojjam, which was repressed although enforcement of the tax was abandoned. Having achieved its design in undermining the tax, the revolt encouraged other landowners to defy Selassie. In October that year, Selassie had a four-day visit to the Kingdom of Jordan hosted by King Hussein. During this trip, Selassie visited Jerusalem and the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.\nWhile he had assured Ethiopia's participation in UN-approved collective security operations, including Korea and Congo, Selassie drew a distinction between it and the intervention in Indochina, deploring it as needless suffering and calling for the Vietnam War to end. At the same time, he remained open toward the United States, commending it for making progress with African Americans' Civil Rights legislation in the 1950s and 1960s and visiting the US several times during these years.\nIn 1967, he visited Montr\u00e9al, Canada, to open the Ethiopian Pavilion at the Expo '67 World's Fair where he received great acclaim among other world leaders there for the occasion.\nLater reign.\nAs the 1970s began, in contrast to most monarchs at the era, Selassie's political influence continued to be of great significance; he was said to utilize as many as four spy agencies, all which concurrently spied on each other as well as civilian and military circles of the nation. He was the only person who knew the 'true' scope of things in Ethiopia.\nStudent unrest became a regular feature of Ethiopian life in the 1960s and 1970s. Communism took root among the Ethiopian intelligentsia, particularly those who had studied abroad and been exposed to radical and left-wing sentiments. Resistance by conservatives at the Imperial Court and Parliament, and by the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, made Selassie's land reform proposals difficult to implement. The standing of the government was damaged, costing Selassie much goodwill and sowing resentment among the peasant population. Efforts to weaken unions also hurt his image.\nIn the last years of his rule, civil liberties and political rights in Ethiopia were low, with Freedom House giving Ethiopia a \"Not Free\" score in both categories. Common human rights abuses included poor prison conditions and the imprisonment and torture of political dissidents. Nonetheless, the Emperor was known for pardoning hundreds of prisoners at a time and there were no more than ten political prisoners during his entire reign.\nThe Imperial Army also carried out a multiple atrocities during the war with Eritrean separatists in the late 1960s and early 1970s.\nForeign relations.\nAs these issues began to pile up, Selassie left much of domestic governance to Aklilu Habte-Wold and concentrated more on foreign affairs. Over the previous two decades, Ethiopia had received over 400 million dollars in aid, 140 million of that being for the Ethiopian military, and 240 million for economic assistance.\nOutside Ethiopia, Selassie continued to enjoy enormous prestige and respect. As the longest-serving head of state in power, he was often given precedence over other leaders at state events, such as the state funerals of John F. Kennedy and Charles de Gaulle, the summits of the Non-Aligned Movement, and the 1971 celebration of the 2,500 years of the Persian Empire.\nIn 1970, Selassie visited Italy as a guest of President Giuseppe Saragat, and in Milan he met Giordano Dell'Amore, President of the Italian Savings Banks Association. He visited China in October 1971, and was the first foreign head of state to meet Mao Zedong following the death of Mao's designated successor Lin Biao in a plane crash in Mongolia.\nSelassie went to meet Pope Paul VI in 1970 at Vatican City, where they discussed issues regarding both their countries and history.\nWollo famine.\nFamine\u00a0\u2013 mostly in Wollo, north-eastern Ethiopia, as well as in some parts of Tigray\u00a0\u2013 is estimated to have killed 40,000 to 80,000 Ethiopians between 1972 and 1974. Some reports suggest that the Emperor was unaware of the famine's extent, while others assert that he was well aware of it. The famine and its image in the media undermined the government's popular support, and his once unassailable popularity declined.\nIn addition to the exposure of attempts by corrupt local officials to cover up the famine from the imperial government, the Kremlin's depiction of Selassie's Ethiopia as backwards and inept (relative to the purported utopia of Marxism\u2013Leninism) contributed to the popular uprising that led to its downfall and the rise of Mengistu Haile Mariam. The crisis was exacerbated by military mutinies and high oil prices. The costs of imported goods, gasoline, and food skyrocketed, while unemployment spiked.\nDeposition and death.\nThe Ethiopian revolution.\nIn February 1974, four days of serious riots in Addis Ababa against sudden economic inflation left five dead. The Emperor responded by announcing on national television a reduction in petrol prices and a freeze on the cost of basic commodities. This calmed the public, but the promised 33% military wage hike was not substantial enough to pacify the army, which then mutinied, beginning in Asmara and spreading throughout the empire. This mutiny led to the resignation of Aklilu Habte-Wold as prime minister on 27 February 1974. Selassie again went on television to agree to the army's demands for still greater pay, and named Endelkachew Makonnen as the new prime minister. Despite Endalkachew's many concessions, discontent continued in March with a four-day general strike that paralyzed the nation. In April, protests by Ethiopian Muslims broke out in response to discrimination perpetrated by the regime, with approximately 100,000 individuals participating.\nImprisonment.\nThe Derg, a clique of junior officers and enlisted men, set up in June to investigate the military's demands, took advantage of the government's disarray to depose the 82-year-old Selassie on General Aman Mikael Andom, a Protestant of Eritrean origin, served briefly as provisional head of state pending the return of Crown Prince Asfa Wossen, who was then receiving medical treatment abroad. Selassie was imprisoned briefly at the 4th Army Division in Addis Ababa before being moved back to the Grand Palace where the Emperor spent the last months of his life under house arrest.\nThough initially most of the imperial family was detained at the late Duke of Harar's residence in the north of the capital, most were later moved into Addis Ababa's Kerchele Prison, also known as \"Alem Bekagn\". On 23 November, 60 former high officials of the imperial government were summarily executed by firing squad, including Selassie's grandson, Rear Admiral Iskinder Desta, General Aman and two former prime ministers. These killings, known to Ethiopians as \"Black Saturday\", were condemned by the Crown Prince; the Derg responded to his rebuke by revoking its acknowledgment of his imperial legitimacy, and announcing the end of the Solomonic dynasty.\nExecution and cover-up.\nOn 27 August 1975, Selassie was murdered on the orders of the Derg regime, a fact that was to remain undiscovered for another twenty years. On 28 August 1975, state media reported that Selassie had died on 27 August of \"respiratory failure\" following complications from a prostate examination followed up by a prostate operation. Asrat Woldeyes denied that complications had occurred and rejected the government version of his death. The prostate operation in question apparently had taken place months before the state media claimed, and Selassie had apparently enjoyed strong health in his last days.\nIn 1994, an Ethiopian court found several former military officers guilty of strangling the Emperor on his bed in 1975. Three years after the Derg regime was overthrown, the court charged them with genocide and murder, claiming that it had obtained documents attesting to a high-level order from the military regime to assassinate Selassie for leading a \"feudal regime\". Documents have been widely circulated online showing the Derg's final assassination order and bearing the military regime's seal and signature. The veracity of these documents has been corroborated by multiple former members of the Derg regime.\nFuneral and veneration.\nThe Soviet-backed People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia, the Derg's successor, fell in 1991. In 1992, Selassie's bones were found under a concrete slab on the palace grounds. Selassie's coffin rested in Bhata Church for nearly a decade, near his great-uncle Menelik II's resting place. On 5 November 2000, the Holy Trinity Cathedral in Addis Ababa gave him a funeral, but the government refused calls to declare the ceremony an official imperial funeral. This may have been due to the government's reluctance to endorse or give even subtle political recognition to Royalists.\nRastafari reaction.\nProminent Rastafari figures such as Rita Marley participated in the funeral, but most Rastafari rejected the event and refused to accept that the bones were Selassie's remains. There is some debate within the Rastafari movement as to whether he actually died in 1975.\nRastafari messiah.\nSelassie is worshipped as God incarnate among some followers of the Rastafari movement (taken from Selassie's pre-imperial name \"Ras\"\u00a0\u2013 meaning \"Head\", a title equivalent to Duke\u00a0\u2013 Tafari Makonnen), which emerged in Jamaica during the 1930s. He is viewed as the messiah who will lead the peoples of Africa and the African diaspora to freedom. His official titles are \"Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah\" and \"King of Kings of Ethiopia, Lord of Lords and Elect of God\", and his lineage is thought to be from Solomon and Sheba. These notions are perceived by Rastafari as confirmation of the return of the messiah in the Book of Revelation. Rastafari faith in the divinity of Selassie began after news reports of his coronation reached Jamaica, particularly via the two \"Time\" magazine articles on the coronation before and after the event. Selassie's own perspectives permeate the philosophy of the movement.\nIn 1961, the Jamaican government sent a delegation of both Rastafari and non-Rastafari leaders to Ethiopia to discuss repatriation with the Emperor. He told the Rastafari delegation \"Tell the Brethren to be not dismayed, I personally will give my assistance in the matter of repatriation.\"\nSelassie visited Jamaica on 21 April 1966, and approximately one hundred thousand Rastafari went to Palisadoes Airport in Kingston to greet him. Spliffs and chalices were openly smoked, causing \"a haze of ganja smoke\" to drift through the air. Selassie arrived at the airport but was unable to come down the airplane's steps, as the crowd rushed the tarmac. He returned into the plane. The Jamaican authorities were obliged to request Ras Mortimer Planno, a well-known Rasta leader, to climb the steps, enter the plane, and negotiate the Emperor's descent. This day is held by scholars to be a turning point for the movement, and it is commemorated by Rastafari as Grounation Day. From then on, the Jamaican authorities were asked to ensure that Rastafari representatives were present at all state functions attended by the Emperor, and Rastafari elders also ensured that they obtained a private audience with the Emperor, where he told them that they should not emigrate to Ethiopia until they had first liberated the people of Jamaica. This dictum came to be known as \"liberation before repatriation\".\nSelassie defied expectations of the Jamaican authorities and never rebuked the Rastafari for their belief in him as God. Instead, he presented the movement's faithful elders with gold medallions. During PNP leader (later Jamaican prime minister) Michael Manley's visit to Ethiopia in October 1969, the Emperor recalled his 1966 reception with amazement, and stated that he felt that he had to be respectful of their beliefs. This was the visit when Manley received the Rod of Correction or Rod of Joshua as a present from the Emperor, thought to have helped him to win the 1972 election in Jamaica.\nRita Marley converted to the Rastafari faith after seeing Selassie on his Jamaican trip. She claimed that she saw a \"stigmata\" print on the palm of Selassie's hand as he waved to the crowd. Rastafari became much better known throughout much of the world due to the popularity of Bob Marley. Marley's posthumously released song \"Iron Lion Zion\" may refer to Selassie.\nSelassie's position.\nIn a 1967 interview with the CBC's Bill McNeil, Selassie denied his alleged divinity. For many Rastafari, the CBC interview is not interpreted as a denial. According to Robert Earl Hood, Selassie neither denied nor affirmed his divinity.\nAfter his return to Ethiopia, Selassie dispatched Archbishop Abuna Yesehaq Mandefro to the Caribbean. According to Yesehaq, this was to help draw Rastafari and other West Indians to the Ethiopian church. Some sources suggest that certain islanders and their leaders were resenting the services of their former colonial churches, and vocalised their interest of establishing the Ethiopian church in the Caribbean.\nIn 1969, Manley visited the Emperor at his palace in Addis Ababa before his election as prime minister of Jamaica in 1972. Selassie spoke about his 1966 visit to Jamaica and told Manley that, though he was confused by the Rastafarians' beliefs, he respected them.\nIn 1948, Selassie donated 500 hectares of land at Shashamane, south of Addis Ababa, to the Ethiopian World Federation Incorporated for the use of people of African descent who supported Ethiopia during the war. Numerous Rastafari families settled there and still live as a community to this day. This was controversial among the locals, as the Rastas settled on traditionally Oromo land.\nResidences and finance.\nIn 1974, Ethiopian media during the revolution claimed the Emperor had a net worth of 11 billion dollars. However, records indicate that Selassie's entire net worth was just \u00a322,000.00 as late as 1959. He was also accused by the Derg to have hoarded millions in Swiss banks, claiming Selassie illegally acquired the money from exploiting the Ethiopian people.\nThe Jubilee Palace, built in 1955, served as the official residence of the head of state of Ethiopian Empire from 1955 to 1974. The Palace sits on in the center of Addis Ababa, the capital of Ethiopia since 1889. The Palace's estimated initial construction cost and its value today are undisclosed, but due to its size, location and historical importance, its value would be in the hundreds of millions of dollars.\nSelassie owned a large fleet of cars including ones gifted to him during overseas visits, which may be worth millions of dollars. In addition, a battle took place over a decade regarding his Patek Phillipe watch, which was initially offered in a Christie's auction with an estimated value of over $1 million. However, after the feud ended, the watch was withdrawn from the auction.\nPersonal life.\nVisual, performing, and literary arts.\nIn his private life, Selassie advocated the growth of Ethiopian art. He believed that arts could 'rebuild' the country. He was interested in a modern outlook towards traditional Ethiopian arts, including those of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church. He addressed Afewerk Tekle, an Ethiopian laureate, when he left for Europe to gain skills to improve Ethiopian art. Later, Tekle created multiple artworks putting Ethiopian life on display. Selassie created an art program which enrolled multiple artists, including Agegnehu Engida. He gave a scholarship to Ale Felege Selam. Selassie travelled regularly to Bishoftu to see displays of paintings by Ethiopian artists such as Lemma Guya. Selassie was impressed by Guya's paintings of Ethiopian military aircraft. Guya later joined the Airforce but continued to paint with Selassie's support.\nSelassie commissioned the opening of Ethiopia's first Hager Fikir Theater House in 1935 and the National Theatre in Addis Ababa in 1955.\nSelassie wrote an autobiography, \"My Life and Ethiopia's Progress\", covering his years as ruler. He began the first volume while in exile during the Second Italo-Ethiopian War. He allegedly wrote the second volume towards the end of the war, though it is widely believed that officials assembled the materials and constructed the book.\nSports.\nDuring his reign, Selassie expanded international Ethiopian sports, including the Ethiopian Football Federation and Ethiopian national basketball team. He awarded Ethiopia the AFCON award when it won its first title. He supported Ethiopia in the 1960 Olympics and gave Olympian Abebe Bikila with multiple national awards such as the Star of Ethiopia and the Order of Menelik II. He supported other Ethiopian athletes, such as Mamo Wolde, by writing personal letters to them.\nReligion.\nSelassie was an adherent of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. He was raised following Ethiopia's traditional Christian background. He was born Tafari Makonnen; after his coronation, he adopted his baptismal name as his official and legal name. He participated in the 1966 Berlin Congress for World Evangelism organised by evangelist Billy Graham.\nHe tried to unify the Oriental Orthodox community extending into Egypt, Armenia, and Syria. Despite this, he did not try to stop the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church from having its own Patriarch when it was granted autocephaly by the Egyptian Coptic Church. He adhered to the intracontinental and overseas relations between the Orthodox churches, and believed that it would be reasonable to try to move unification forward.\nHe maintained a good relationship with Pope Cyril VI of Alexandria, Patriarch of the Coptic Church in Egypt. Pope Cyril was awarded the Star of Solomon by Selassie for his role in nominating Abuna Basilios as the first Ethiopian Patriarch of the Tewahedo Church. Christianity played an official role in the Constitutional Monarchy, but to a limited degree compared to his predecessors. Under Selassie's reign in 1942, Islamic courts were allowed to have judicial power concerning Muslim matters. He also recognized concerns from the Muslim community and gave audiences to its respective leaders.\nFamily.\nSelassie, being the head of the Royal Family, legally had precedent over all matters within his household. He contrasted with the Solomonic dynasty and gave more political powers, dukedoms, and government offices to members of his immediate family, including his grandson Rear Admiral Iskinder Desta. An individual source according to Paulos Milkias, a professor at Montreal, Canada, claimed that Desta threatened his grandfather with death at gunpoint unless he changed the successional line (although this was never definitively confirmed). Selassie only wanted to give him an apolitical position as a commissioned officer in the Ethiopian military, and Iskinder was made deputy commander of the Imperial Ethiopian Navy in 1958.\nIn 1963, Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh is said to have helped Haile Selassie to put his grandson in the elite Gordonstoun school. Selassie was able to put his other grandchildren into top schools throughout the U.S. and Europe, such as Columbia University.\nLegacy.\nPublic opinion and media depiction.\nDuring the early years of his reign, especially in the 1930s and 1940s when Fascist Italy invaded Ethiopia, media coverage of Selassie was predominantly positive. He was portrayed as a hero resisting fascist forces and a symbol of hope for Africa, aligning with the Allies during World War II. In 1935, during the invasion, he was even named \"Time\" magazine's \"Man of the Year\". British Path\u00e9 reported that Selassie's return was \"As an Emperor returns and triumphs to his people.\" During one of his interviews with \"Meet the Press\" during a 1963 state visit to the U.S., a time when the Civil Rights movement was in full swing, Selassie condemned race-based oppression and advocated for Pan-African unity. However, media responses were mixed. NBC News ridiculed the visit months later, prompting \"The New York Times\" to defend the Ethiopian Emperor, questioning NBC's intent and criticizing its insensitivity. The paper remarked that \"NBC News cannot afford to be a handmaiden of the State Department\" and asked what \"civilized purpose\" was served by ridiculing the visit, to the probable embarrassment of Ethiopian diplomats in the U.S.\nDuring the 1950s, when the Silver Jubilee of the Emperor's reign was celebrated, he adopted the 1955 Constitution which legally gave more democratic rights to the public, and legally restricted the monarch's power. Following the end of World War II, Selassie sought to limit the influence of the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church. During the 1950s, he was widely regarded as a modernizing and capable leader in Ethiopia. In the 1970s, due to economic turmoil and a famine, Selassie's reputation suffered. Mass protests broke out against his reign. It was widely believed he should abdicate due to his old age and failed land reform policy. These factors ultimately led to his removal from power.\nSelassie's legacy remains a topic of debate. He played a leading role in founding Addis Ababa University and the Organisation of African Unity, the latter of which would later become the African Union. He was also a prominent anti-colonial leader. \"Time\" magazine listed him among the most important figures in political history, placing him in the \"Top 25 Political Icons\" of all time.In 1997, Selassie was mentioned in the Ween song \"Mutilated Lips\". In 2001, Ethiopian pop star Teddy Afro released a song titled \"Haile Selassie\", depicting its namesake in a nationalistic light.\nSelassie appears as a leader of Ethiopia in \"\".\nIn 2021, a false headline had circulated of Queen Elizabeth II and Prince Philip bowing down to Selassie and his wife during the Queen's state visit to Ethiopia at Jubilee Palace. A documentary titled \"Grandpa Was an Emperor\" was released by Selassie's granddaughter in 2021, showcasing the life of the Ethiopian royal family. In the 2024 biopic \"\", Selassie is depicted in Rastafarian religious lore. There is a part where Selassie, whilst riding a horse, takes alongside him a young Bob Marley.\nSelassie has been depicted by photographers, artists, and sculptors such as Edward Copnall, Beulah Woodard, Jacob Epstein, William H. Johnson, Yevonde Middleton and Alvin Gittins.\nMemorials.\nMultiple memorials were built for Selassie, mainly in Ethiopia. One of these memorials was unveiled in 2019 at the African Union's Headquarters in Addis Ababa. This memorial was made to honor his long efforts of Pan-Africanism and anti-colonialism during his rule. A wax statue of Haile Selassie can be found in Addis Ababa's Unity Park. A high school in Kingston, Jamaica is named after Haile Selassie. In 2020, a bust statue built in 1957 was destroyed by protestors as a response to the assassination of Oromo singer Hachalu Hundessa. One of the three major expressways in Nairobi, Kenya is named after Haile Selassie.\nMilitary ranks.\nSelassie held the following ranks:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "42121", "revid": "949717", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42121", "title": "USS Seawolf", "text": "USS \"Seawolf\" may refer to:\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n List of ships with the same or similar names\nThis article includes a with the same or similar names. If an [ internal link] for a specific ship led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended ship article, if one exists."}
{"id": "42123", "revid": "50955442", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42123", "title": "CATIA", "text": "CAD/CAM/CAE commercial software suite\nCATIA (, an acronym of computer-aided three-dimensional interactive application) is a multi-platform software suite for computer-aided design (CAD), computer-aided manufacturing (CAM), computer-aided engineering (CAE), 3D modeling and product lifecycle management (PLM), developed by the French company Dassault Syst\u00e8mes.\nSince it supports multiple stages of product development from conceptualization, design and engineering to manufacturing, it is considered CAx-software and is sometimes referred to as a 3D product lifecycle management software suite. Like most of its competition, it facilitates collaborative engineering through an integrated cloud service and have support to be used across disciplines including surfacing &amp; shape design, electrical, fluid and electronic systems design, mechanical engineering and systems engineering. CATIA is more popular, among the end users, for its better surface designing characteristics. That's why it is most widely used in automobile and aerospace industries.\nBesides being used in a wide range of industries from aerospace and defence to packaging design, CATIA has been used by architect Frank Gehry to design some of his signature curvilinear buildings and his company Gehry Technologies was developing their Digital Project software based on CATIA.\nThe software has been merged with the company's other software suite 3D XML Player to form the combined Solidworks Composer Player.\nHistory.\nCATIA started as an in-house development in 1977 by French aircraft manufacturer Avions Marcel Dassault to provide 3D surface modeling and numerical control functions for the CADAM software they used at that time to develop the Mirage fighter jet. Initially named CATI (\"conception assist\u00e9e tridimensionnelle interactive\"\u00a0\u2013 French for \"interactive aided three-dimensional design\"), it was renamed CATIA in 1981 when Dassault created the subsidiary Dassault Syst\u00e8mes to develop and sell the software, under the management of its first CEO, Francis Bernard. Dassault Syst\u00e8mes signed a non-exclusive distribution agreement with IBM, that was also selling CADAM for Lockheed since 1978. Version 1 was released in 1982 as an add-on for CADAM.\nDuring the eighties CATIA saw wider adoption in the aviation and military industries with users such as Boeing and General Dynamics Electric Boat Corp.\nDassault Syst\u00e8mes purchased CADAM from IBM in 1992, and the next year CATIA CADAM was released. During the nineties CATIA was ported first in 1996 from one to four Unix operating systems, and was entirely rewritten for version 5 in 1998 to support Windows NT. In the years prior to 2000, this caused problems of incompatibility between versions that led to $6.1B in additional costs due to delays in production of the Airbus A380.\nWith the launch of Dassault Syst\u00e8mes 3DEXPERIENCE Platform in 2014, CATIA became available as a cloud version.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42124", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42124", "title": "Campylobacteraceae", "text": ""}
{"id": "42125", "revid": "39150892", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42125", "title": "Regierungsbezirk", "text": "Type of administrative division in Germany\n&lt;includeonly&gt;&lt;/includeonly&gt;\nA (, literally 'governmental district') is a type of administrative division in Germany. Currently, four of sixteen ' (states of Germany) are split into '. Beneath these are rural and urban districts.\n' (plural, ) serve as regional mid-level local government units in four of Germany's sixteen states: Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, Bavaria, Hesse and North Rhine-Westphalia. Each of the nineteen ' features a non-legislative governing body called a ' (governing presidium) or ' (district government) headed by a \"Regierungspr\u00e4sident\" (governing president), concerned mostly with administrative decisions on a local level for districts within its jurisdiction. Saxony has \" (directorate districts) with more responsibilities shifted from the state parliament.\nTranslations.\n\" is a German term variously translated into English as \"governmental district\", \"administrative district\" or \"province\", with the first two being the closest literal translations.\nHistory.\nThe first ' were established in the Kingdom of Bavaria and the Kingdom of Prussia in 1808. During the course of the Prussian reforms between 1808 and 1816, Prussia subdivided its provinces into 25 ', eventually featuring 37 such districts within 12 provinces. By 1871, at the time of German unification, the concept of ' had been adopted by most States of the German Empire. Similar entities were initially established in other states under different names, including ' (district captainship) in Saxony, ' (district) in Bavaria and W\u00fcrttemberg (not to be confused with the present-day ' or ' districts), and \"province\" in Hesse. The names of these equivalent administrative divisions were standardized to ' in Nazi Germany, but after World War II these naming reforms were reverted.\nThe \" in the state of North Rhine-Westphalia in modern Germany are in direct continuation of those created in the Prussian Rhine and Westphalia provinces in 1816. never existed in Bremen, Hamburg, Schleswig-Holstein, and Saarland.\nIn 1946, Lower Saxony was founded by the merger of the three former Free States of Brunswick, Oldenburg, Schaumburg-Lippe, and the former Prussian province of Hanover. Brunswick and Oldenburg became ' (roughly administrative regions of extended competence) alongside six less autonomous Prussian-style ' comprising the Province of Hanover and Schaumburg-Lippe. These differences in autonomy and size were levelled on 1 January 1978, when four ' replaced the two ' and the six \": Brunswick and Oldenburg, Aurich, Hanover (remaining mostly the same), Hildesheim, L\u00fcneburg, Osnabr\u00fcck and Stade.\nFollowing the reunification of Germany in 1990, the territory of the former East Germany was organized into six re-established new states, including a reunified Berlin. Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt established three \"\" each, while the other new states didn't implement them.\n2000s disbandment and reorganization.\nDuring the 2000s, four German states discontinued the use of '. On 1 January 2000, Rhineland-Palatinate disbanded its three ' of Koblenz, Rheinhessen-Pfalz and Trier. The employees and assets of the three ' () were converted into three public authorities responsible for the whole state, each covering a part of the former responsibilities of the ' ().\nOn 1 January 2004, Saxony-Anhalt disbanded its three ' of Dessau, Halle and Magdeburg. The responsibilities are now covered by a ' (state administration office) with three offices at the former seats of the '. On 1 January 2005, Lower Saxony followed suit, disbanding its remaining four ' of Brunswick, Hanover, L\u00fcneburg, and Weser-Ems.\nOn 1 August 2008, Saxony restructured its ' (), changed the name of its ' to ' (directorate districts), and moved some responsibilities to the districts. The ' were still named \"Chemnitz\", \"Dresden\", and \"Leipzig\", but a border change was necessary because the new district of Mittelsachsen crossed the borders of the old '. On 1 March 2012, the ' were merged into one \"\" (state directorate).\n\"Regierungsbezirke\" by state.\nCurrently, only four German states out of 16 in total are divided into '; all others are directly divided into districts without mid-level agencies. Those four states are divided into a total of 19 ', ranging in population from 5,255,000 (D\u00fcsseldorf) to 1,065,000 (Gie\u00dfen):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42127", "revid": "39286888", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42127", "title": "Christiaan Huygens", "text": "Dutch mathematician and physicist (1629\u20131695)\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChristiaan Huygens, Lord of Zeelhem, ( , ; ; also spelled Huyghens; ; 14 April 1629 \u2013 8 July 1695) was a Dutch mathematician, physicist, engineer, astronomer, and inventor who is regarded as a key figure in the Scientific Revolution. In physics, Huygens made seminal contributions to optics and mechanics, while as an astronomer he studied the rings of Saturn and discovered its largest moon, Titan. As an engineer and inventor, he improved the design of telescopes and invented the pendulum clock, the most accurate timekeeper for almost 300 years. A talented mathematician and physicist, his works contain the first idealization of a physical problem by a set of mathematical parameters, and the first mathematical and mechanistic explanation of an unobservable physical phenomenon.\nHuygens first identified the correct laws of elastic collision in his work \"De Motu Corporum ex Percussione\", completed in 1656 but published posthumously in 1703. In 1659, Huygens derived geometrically the formula in classical mechanics for the centrifugal force in his work \"De vi Centrifuga\", a decade before Isaac Newton. In optics, he is best known for his wave theory of light, which he described in his \"Trait\u00e9 de la Lumi\u00e8re\" (1690). His theory of light was initially rejected in favour of Newton's corpuscular theory of light, until Augustin-Jean Fresnel adapted Huygens's principle to give a complete explanation of the rectilinear propagation and diffraction effects of light in 1821. Today this principle is known as the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle.\nHuygens invented and patented the pendulum clock in 1657, which was manufactured in Paris by Isaac II Thuret. Huygens's horological research led to an extensive analysis of the pendulum in \"Horologium Oscillatorium\" (1673), regarded as one of the most important 17th-century works on mechanics. While it contains descriptions of clock designs, most of the book is an analysis of pendular motion and a theory of curves. In 1655, Huygens began grinding lenses with his brother Constantijn to build refracting telescopes. He discovered Saturn's biggest moon, Titan, and was the first to explain Saturn's strange appearance as due to \"a thin, flat ring, nowhere touching, and inclined to the ecliptic.\" In 1662, he developed what is now called the Huygenian eyepiece, a telescope with two lenses to diminish the amount of dispersion.\nAs a mathematician, Huygens developed his theory of evolutes and wrote on games of chance and the problem of points in \"Van Rekeningh in Spelen van Gluck\", which Frans van Schooten translated and published as \"De Ratiociniis in Ludo Aleae\" (1657). The use of expected values by Huygens and others would later inspire Jacob Bernoulli's work on probability theory.\nBiography.\nChristiaan Huygens was born into a wealthy, influential Dutch family in The Hague on 14 April 1629, the second son of Constantijn Huygens. Christiaan was named after his paternal grandfather. His mother, Suzanna van Baerle, died shortly after giving birth to Huygens's sister. The couple had five children: Constantijn (1628), Christiaan (1629), Lodewijk (1631), Philips (1632) and Suzanna (1637).\nConstantijn Huygens was a diplomat and advisor to the House of Orange, in addition to being a poet and a musician. He corresponded widely with intellectuals across Europe, including Galileo Galilei, Marin Mersenne, and Ren\u00e9 Descartes. Christiaan was educated at home until the age of sixteen, and from a young age liked to play with miniatures of mills and other machines. He received a liberal education from his father, studying languages, music, history, geography, mathematics, logic, and rhetoric, alongside dancing, fencing and horse riding.\nIn 1644, Huygens had as his mathematical tutor Jan Jansz Stampioen, who assigned the 15-year-old a demanding reading list on contemporary science. Descartes was later impressed by his skills in geometry, as was Mersenne, who christened him the \"new Archimedes.\"\nStudent years.\nAt sixteen years of age, Constantijn sent Huygens to study law and mathematics at Leiden University, where he enrolled from May 1645 to March 1647. Frans van Schooten Jr., professor at Leiden's Engineering School, became private tutor to Huygens and his elder brother, Constantijn Jr., replacing Stampioen on the advice of Descartes. Van Schooten brought Huygens's mathematical education up to date, particularly on the work of Vi\u00e8te, Descartes, and Fermat.\nAfter two years, starting in March 1647, Huygens continued his studies at the newly founded Orange College, in Breda, where his father was a curator. Constantijn Huygens was closely involved in the new College, which lasted only to 1669; the rector was Andr\u00e9 Rivet. Christiaan Huygens lived at the home of the jurist Johann Henryk Dauber while attending college, and had mathematics classes with the English lecturer John Pell. His time in Breda ended around the time when his brother Lodewijk, who was enrolled at the school, duelled with another student. Huygens left Breda after completing his studies in August 1649 and had a stint as a diplomat on a mission with Henry, Duke of Nassau. After stays at Bentheim and Flensburg in Germany, he visited Copenhagen and Helsing\u00f8r in Denmark. Huygens hoped to cross the \u00d8resund to see Descartes in Stockholm but Descartes died before he could do that.\nAlthough his father Constantijn had wished his son Christiaan to be a diplomat, circumstances kept him from becoming so. The First Stadtholderless Period that began in 1650 meant that the House of Orange was no longer in power, removing Constantijn's influence. Further, he realized that his son had no interest in such a career.\nEarly correspondence.\nHuygens generally wrote in French or Latin. In 1646, while still a college student at Leiden, he began a correspondence with his father's friend, Marin Mersenne, who died soon afterwards in 1648. Mersenne wrote to Constantijn on his son's talent for mathematics, and flatteringly compared him to Archimedes on 3 January 1647.\nThe letters show Huygens's early interest in mathematics. In October 1646 he wrote about the shape of a suspension bridge, demonstrating that a hanging chain is not a parabola, as Galileo thought. Huygens would later label that curve the \"catenaria\" (catenary) in 1690 while corresponding with Gottfried Leibniz.\nIn the next two years (1647\u201348), Huygens's letters to Mersenne covered various topics, including a mathematical proof of the law of free fall, the claim by Gr\u00e9goire de Saint-Vincent of circle quadrature, which Huygens showed to be wrong, the rectification of the ellipse, projectiles, and the vibrating string. Some of Mersenne's concerns at the time, such as the cycloid (he sent Huygens Torricelli's treatise on the curve), the centre of oscillation, and the gravitational constant, were matters Huygens only took seriously later in the 17th century. Mersenne had also written on musical theory. Huygens preferred meantone temperament; he innovated in 31 equal temperament (which was not itself a new idea but known to Francisco de Salinas), using logarithms to investigate it further and show its close relation to the meantone system.\nIn 1654, Huygens returned to his father's house in The Hague and was able to devote himself entirely to research. The family had another house, not far away at Hofwijck, and he spent time there during the summer. Despite being very active, his scholarly life did not allow him to escape bouts of depression.\nSubsequently, Huygens developed a broad range of correspondents, though with some difficulty after 1648 due to the five-year \"Fronde\" in France. Visiting Paris in 1655, Huygens called on Ismael Boulliau to introduce himself, who took him to see Claude Mylon. The Parisian group of savants that had gathered around Mersenne held together into the 1650s, and Mylon, who had assumed the secretarial role, took some trouble to keep Huygens in touch. Through Pierre de Carcavi Huygens corresponded in 1656 with Pierre de Fermat, whom he admired greatly. The experience was bittersweet and somewhat puzzling since it became clear that Fermat had dropped out of the research mainstream, and his priority claims could probably not be made good in some cases. Besides, Huygens was looking by then to apply mathematics to physics, while Fermat's concerns ran to purer topics.\nScientific debut.\nLike some of his contemporaries, Huygens was often slow to commit his results and discoveries to print, preferring to disseminate his work through letters instead. In his early days, his mentor Frans van Schooten provided technical feedback and was cautious for the sake of his reputation.\nBetween 1651 and 1657, Huygens published a number of works that showed his talent for mathematics and his mastery of classical and analytical geometry, increasing his reach and reputation among mathematicians. Around the same time, Huygens began to question Descartes's laws of collision, which were largely wrong, deriving the correct laws algebraically and later by way of geometry. He showed that, for any system of bodies, the centre of gravity of the system remains the same in velocity and direction, which Huygens called the conservation of \"quantity of movement\". While others at the time were studying impact, Huygens's theory of collisions was more general. These results became the main reference point and the focus for further debates through correspondence and in a short article in \"Journal des S\u00e7avans\" but would remain unknown to a larger audience until the publication of \"De Motu Corporum ex Percussione\" (\"Concerning the motion of colliding bodies\") in 1703.\nIn addition to his mathematical and mechanical works, Huygens made important scientific discoveries: he was the first to identify Titan as one of Saturn's moons in 1655, invented the pendulum clock in 1657, and explained Saturn's strange appearance as due to a ring in 1659; all these discoveries brought him fame across Europe. On 3 May 1661, Huygens, together with astronomer Thomas Streete and Richard Reeve, observed the planet Mercury transit over the Sun using Reeve's telescope in London. Streete then debated the published record of Hevelius, a controversy mediated by Henry Oldenburg. Huygens passed to Hevelius a manuscript of Jeremiah Horrocks on the transit of Venus in 1639, printed for the first time in 1662.\nIn that same year, Sir Robert Moray sent Huygens John Graunt's life table, and shortly after Huygens and his brother Lodewijk dabbled on life expectancy. Huygens eventually created the first graph of a continuous distribution function under the assumption of a uniform death rate, and used it to solve problems in joint annuities. Contemporaneously, Huygens, who played the harpsichord, took an interest in Simon Stevin's theories on music; however, he showed very little concern to publish his theories on consonance, some of which were lost for centuries. For his contributions to science, the Royal Society of London elected Huygens a Fellow in 1663, making him its first foreign member when he was just 34 years old.\nFrance.\nThe Montmor Academy, started in the mid-1650s, was the form the old Mersenne circle took after his death. Huygens took part in its debates and supported those favouring experimental demonstration as a check on amateurish attitudes. He visited Paris a third time in 1663; when the Montmor Academy closed down the next year, Huygens advocated for a more Baconian program in science. Two years later, in 1666, he moved to Paris on an invitation to fill a leadership position at King Louis XIV's new French Acad\u00e9mie des sciences.\nWhile at the Acad\u00e9mie in Paris, Huygens had an important patron and correspondent in Jean-Baptiste Colbert, First Minister to Louis XIV. His relationship with the French Acad\u00e9mie was not always easy, and in 1670 Huygens, seriously ill, chose Francis Vernon to carry out a donation of his papers to the Royal Society in London should he die. However, the aftermath of the Franco-Dutch War (1672\u201378), and particularly England's role in it, may have damaged his later relationship with the Royal Society. Robert Hooke, as a Royal Society representative, lacked the finesse to handle the situation in 1673.\nThe physicist and inventor Denis Papin was an assistant to Huygens from 1671. One of their projects, which did not bear fruit directly, was the gunpowder engine, a precursor of the internal combustion engine that used gunpowder as its fuel. Huygens made further astronomical observations at the Acad\u00e9mie using the observatory recently completed in 1672. He introduced Nicolaas Hartsoeker to French scientists such as Nicolas Malebranche and Giovanni Cassini in 1678.\nThe young diplomat Leibniz met Huygens while visiting Paris in 1672 on a vain mission to meet the French Foreign Minister Arnauld de Pomponne. Leibniz was working on a calculating machine at the time and, after a short visit to London in early 1673, he was tutored in mathematics by Huygens until 1676. An extensive correspondence ensued over the years, in which Huygens showed at first reluctance to accept the advantages of Leibniz's infinitesimal calculus.\nFinal years.\nHuygens moved back to The Hague in 1681 after suffering another bout of serious depressive illness. In 1684, he published \"Astroscopia Compendiaria\" on his new tubeless aerial telescope. He attempted to return to France in 1685 but the revocation of the Edict of Nantes precluded this move. His father died in 1687, and he inherited Hofwijck, which he made his home the following year.\nOn his third visit to England, Huygens met Newton in person on 12 June 1689. They spoke about Iceland spar, and subsequently corresponded about resisted motion.\nHuygens returned to mathematical topics in his last years and observed the acoustical phenomenon now known as flanging in 1693. Two years later, on 8 July 1695, Huygens died in The Hague and was buried, like his father before him, in an unmarked grave at the Grote Kerk.\nHuygens never married.\nMathematics.\nHuygens first became internationally known for his work in mathematics, publishing a number of important results that drew the attention of many European geometers. Huygens's preferred method in his published works was that of Archimedes, though he made use of Descartes's analytic geometry and Fermat's infinitesimal techniques more extensively in his private notebooks.\nPublished works.\n\"Theoremata de Quadratura\".\nHuygens's first publication was \"Theoremata de Quadratura Hyperboles, Ellipsis et Circuli\" (\"Theorems on the quadrature of the hyperbola, ellipse, and circle\"), published by the Elzeviers in Leiden in 1651. The first part of the work contained theorems for computing the areas of hyperbolas, ellipses, and circles that paralleled Archimedes's work on conic sections, particularly his \"Quadrature of the Parabola\". The second part included a refutation to Gr\u00e9goire de Saint-Vincent's claims on circle quadrature, which he had discussed with Mersenne earlier.\nHuygens demonstrated that the centre of gravity of a segment of any hyperbola, ellipse, or circle was directly related to the area of that segment. He was then able to show the relationships between triangles inscribed in conic sections and the centre of gravity for those sections. By generalizing these theorems to cover all conic sections, Huygens extended classical methods to generate new results.\nQuadrature and rectification were live issues in the 1650s and, through Mylon, Huygens participated in the controversy surrounding Thomas Hobbes. Persisting in highlighting his mathematical contributions, he made an international reputation.\n\"De Circuli Magnitudine Inventa\".\nHuygens's next publication was \"De Circuli Magnitudine Inventa\" (\"New findings on the magnitude of the circle\"), published in 1654. In this work, Huygens was able to narrow the gap between the circumscribed and inscribed polygons found in Archimedes's \"Measurement of the Circle\", showing that the ratio of the circumference to its diameter or pi (\u03c0) must lie in the first third of that interval.\nUsing a technique equivalent to Richardson extrapolation, Huygens was able to shorten the inequalities used in Archimedes's method; in this case, by using the centre of the gravity of a segment of a parabola, he was able to approximate the centre of gravity of a segment of a circle, resulting in a faster and accurate approximation of the circle quadrature. From these theorems, Huygens obtained two set of values for \u03c0: the first between 3.1415926 and 3.1415927, and the second between 3.1415926533 and 3.1415926538.\nHuygens also showed that, in the case of the hyperbola, the same approximation with parabolic segments produces a quick and simple method to calculate logarithms. He appended a collection of solutions to classical problems at the end of the work under the title \"Illustrium Quorundam Problematum Constructiones\" (\"Construction of some illustrious problems\").\n\"De Ratiociniis in Ludo Aleae\".\nHuygens became interested in games of chance after he visited Paris in 1655 and encountered the work of Fermat, Blaise Pascal and Girard Desargues years earlier. He eventually published what was, at the time, the most coherent presentation of a mathematical approach to games of chance in \"De Ratiociniis in Ludo Aleae\" (\"On reasoning in games of chance\"). Frans van Schooten translated the original Dutch manuscript into Latin and published it in his \"Exercitationum Mathematicarum\" (1657).\nThe work contains early game-theoretic ideas and deals in particular with the problem of points. Huygens took from Pascal the concepts of a \"fair game\" and equitable contract (i.e., equal division when the chances are equal), and extended the argument to set up a non-standard theory of expected values. His success in applying algebra to the realm of chance, which hitherto seemed inaccessible to mathematicians, demonstrated the power of combining Euclidean synthetic proofs with the symbolic reasoning found in the works of Vi\u00e8te and Descartes.\nHuygens included five challenging problems at the end of the book that became the standard test for anyone wishing to display their mathematical skill in games of chance for the next sixty years. People who worked on these problems included Abraham de Moivre, Jacob Bernoulli, Johannes Hudde, Baruch Spinoza, and Leibniz.\nUnpublished work.\nHuygens had earlier completed a manuscript in the manner of Archimedes's \"On Floating Bodies\" entitled \"De Iis quae Liquido Supernatant\" (\"About parts floating above liquids\"). It was written around 1650 and was made up of three books. Although he sent the completed work to Frans van Schooten for feedback, in the end Huygens chose not to publish it, and at one point suggested it be burned. Some of the results found here were not rediscovered until the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.\nHuygens first re-derives Archimedes's solutions for the stability of the sphere and the paraboloid by a clever application of Torricelli's principle (i.e., that bodies in a system move only if their centre of gravity descends). He then proves the general theorem that, for a floating body in equilibrium, the distance between its centre of gravity and its submerged portion is at a minimum. Huygens uses this theorem to arrive at original solutions for the stability of floating cones, parallelepipeds, and cylinders, in some cases through a full cycle of rotation. His approach was thus equivalent to the principle of virtual work. Huygens was also the first to recognize that, for these homogeneous solids, their specific weight and their aspect ratio are the essentials parameters of hydrostatic stability.\nNatural philosophy.\nHuygens was the leading European natural philosopher between Descartes and Newton. However, unlike many of his contemporaries, Huygens had no taste for grand theoretical or philosophical systems and generally avoided dealing with metaphysical issues (if pressed, he adhered to the Cartesian philosophy of his time). Instead, Huygens excelled in extending the work of his predecessors, such as Galileo, to derive solutions to unsolved physical problems that were amenable to mathematical analysis. In particular, he sought explanations that relied on contact between bodies and avoided action at a distance.\nIn common with Robert Boyle and Jacques Rohault, Huygens advocated an experimentally oriented, mechanical natural philosophy during his Paris years. Already in his first visit to England in 1661, Huygens had learnt about Boyle's air pump experiments during a meeting at Gresham College. Shortly afterwards, he reevaluated Boyle's experimental design and developed a series of experiments meant to test a new hypothesis. It proved a yearslong process that brought to the surface a number of experimental and theoretical issues, and which ended around the time he became a Fellow of the Royal Society. Despite the replication of results of Boyle's experiments trailing off messily, Huygens came to accept Boyle's view of the void against the Cartesian denial of it.\nNewton's influence on John Locke was mediated by Huygens, who assured Locke that Newton's mathematics was sound, leading to Locke's acceptance of a corpuscular-mechanical physics.\nLaws of motion, impact, and gravitation.\nElastic collisions.\nThe general approach of the mechanical philosophers was to postulate theories of the kind now called \"contact action.\" Huygens adopted this method but not without seeing its limitations, while Leibniz, his student in Paris, later abandoned it. Understanding the universe this way made the theory of collisions central to physics, as only explanations that involved matter in motion could be truly intelligible. While Huygens was influenced by the Cartesian approach, he was less doctrinaire. He studied elastic collisions in the 1650s but delayed publication for over a decade.\nHuygens concluded quite early that Descartes's laws for elastic collisions were largely wrong, and he formulated the correct laws, including the conservation of the product of mass times the square of the speed for hard bodies, and the conservation of quantity of motion in one direction for all bodies. An important step was his recognition of the Galilean invariance of the problems. Huygens had worked out the laws of collision from 1652 to 1656 in a manuscript entitled \"De Motu Corporum ex Percussione\", though his results took many years to be circulated. In 1661, he passed them on in person to William Brouncker and Christopher Wren in London. What Spinoza wrote to Henry Oldenburg about them in 1666, during the Second Anglo-Dutch War, was guarded. The war ended in 1667, and Huygens announced his results to the Royal Society in 1668. He later published them in the \"Journal des S\u00e7avans\" in 1669.\nCentrifugal force.\nIn 1659 Huygens found the constant of gravitational acceleration and stated what is now known as the second of Newton's laws of motion in quadratic form. He derived geometrically the now standard formula for the centrifugal force, exerted on an object when viewed in a rotating frame of reference, for instance when driving around a curve. In modern notation:\nformula_1\nwith \"m\" the mass of the object, \"\u03c9\" the angular velocity, and \"r\" the radius. Huygens collected his results in a treatise under the title \"De vi Centrifuga\", unpublished until 1703, where the kinematics of free fall were used to produce the first generalized conception of force prior to Newton. \nGravitation.\nThe general idea for the centrifugal force, however, was published in 1673 and was a significant step in studying orbits in astronomy. It enabled the transition from Kepler's third law of planetary motion to the inverse square law of gravitation. Yet, the interpretation of Newton's work on gravitation by Huygens differed from that of Newtonians such as Roger Cotes: he did not insist on the \"a priori\" attitude of Descartes, but neither would he accept aspects of gravitational attractions that were not attributable in principle to contact between particles.\nThe approach used by Huygens also missed some central notions of mathematical physics, which were not lost on others. In his work on pendulums Huygens came very close to the theory of simple harmonic motion; the topic, however, was covered fully for the first time by Newton in Book II of the \"Principia Mathematica\" (1687). In 1678 Leibniz picked out of Huygens's work on collisions the idea of conservation law that Huygens had left implicit.\nHorology.\nPendulum clock.\nIn 1657, inspired by earlier research into pendulums as regulating mechanisms, Huygens invented the pendulum clock, which was a breakthrough in timekeeping and became the most accurate timekeeper for almost 300 years until the 1930s. The pendulum clock was much more accurate than the existing verge and foliot clocks and was immediately popular, quickly spreading over Europe. Clocks prior to this would lose about 15 minutes per day, whereas Huygens's clock would lose about 15 seconds per day. Although Huygens patented and contracted the construction of his clock designs to Salomon Coster in The Hague, he did not make much money from his invention. Pierre S\u00e9guier refused him any French rights, while Simon Douw in Rotterdam and Ahasuerus Fromanteel in London copied his design in 1658. The oldest known Huygens-style pendulum clock is dated 1657 and can be seen at the Museum Boerhaave in Leiden.\nPart of the incentive for inventing the pendulum clock was to create an accurate marine chronometer that could be used to find longitude by celestial navigation during sea voyages. However, the clock proved unsuccessful as a marine timekeeper because the rocking motion of the ship disturbed the motion of the pendulum. In 1660, Lodewijk Huygens made a trial on a voyage to Spain, and reported that heavy weather made the clock useless. Alexander Bruce entered the field in 1662, and Huygens called in Sir Robert Moray and the Royal Society to mediate and preserve some of his rights. Trials continued into the 1660s, the best news coming from a Royal Navy captain Robert Holmes operating against the Dutch possessions in 1664. Lisa Jardine doubts that Holmes reported the results of the trial accurately, as Samuel Pepys expressed his doubts at the time.\nA trial for the French Academy on an expedition to Cayenne ended badly. Jean Richer suggested correction for the figure of the Earth. By the time of the Dutch East India Company expedition of 1686 to the Cape of Good Hope, Huygens was able to supply the correction retrospectively.\n\"Horologium Oscillatorium\".\nSixteen years after the invention of the pendulum clock, in 1673, Huygens published his major work on horology entitled \"Horologium Oscillatorium: Sive de Motu Pendulorum ad Horologia Aptato Demonstrationes Geometricae (The Pendulum Clock: or Geometrical demonstrations concerning the motion of pendula as applied to clocks\"). It is the first modern work on mechanics where a physical problem is idealized by a set of parameters then analysed mathematically.\nHuygens's motivation came from the observation, made by Mersenne and others, that pendulums are not quite isochronous: their period depends on their width of swing, with wide swings taking slightly longer than narrow swings. He tackled this problem by finding the curve down which a mass will slide under the influence of gravity in the same amount of time, regardless of its starting point; the so-called tautochrone problem. By geometrical methods which anticipated the calculus, Huygens showed it to be a cycloid, rather than the circular arc of a pendulum's bob, and therefore that pendulums needed to move on a cycloid path in order to be isochronous. The mathematics necessary to solve this problem led Huygens to develop his theory of evolutes, which he presented in Part III of his \"Horologium Oscillatorium\".\nHe also solved a problem posed by Mersenne earlier: how to calculate the period of a pendulum made of an arbitrarily-shaped swinging rigid body. This involved discovering the centre of oscillation and its reciprocal relationship with the pivot point. In the same work, he analysed the conical pendulum, consisting of a weight on a cord moving in a circle, using the concept of centrifugal force.\nHuygens was the first to derive the formula for the period of an ideal mathematical pendulum (with mass-less rod or cord and length much longer than its swing), in modern notation:\nformula_2\nwith \"T\" the period, \"l\" the length of the pendulum and \"g\" the gravitational acceleration. By his study of the oscillation period of compound pendulums Huygens made pivotal contributions to the development of the concept of moment of inertia.\nHuygens also observed coupled oscillations: two of his pendulum clocks mounted next to each other on the same support often became synchronized, swinging in opposite directions. He reported the results by letter to the Royal Society, and it is referred to as \"an odd kind of sympathy\" in the Society's minutes. This concept is now known as entrainment.\nBalance spring watch.\nIn 1675, while investigating the oscillating properties of the cycloid, Huygens was able to transform a cycloidal pendulum into a vibrating spring through a combination of geometry and higher mathematics. In the same year, Huygens designed a spiral balance spring and patented a pocket watch. These watches are notable for lacking a fusee for equalizing the mainspring torque. The implication is that Huygens thought his spiral spring would isochronize the balance in the same way that cycloid-shaped suspension curbs on his clocks would isochronize the pendulum.\nHe later used spiral springs in more conventional watches, made for him by Thuret in Paris. Such springs are essential in modern watches with a detached lever escapement because they can be adjusted for isochronism. Watches in Huygens's time, however, employed the very ineffective verge escapement, which interfered with the isochronal properties of any form of balance spring, spiral or otherwise.\nHuygens's design came around the same time as, though independently of, Robert Hooke's. Controversy over the priority of the balance spring persisted for centuries. In February 2006, a long-lost copy of Hooke's handwritten notes from several decades of Royal Society meetings was discovered in a cupboard in Hampshire, England, presumably tipping the evidence in Hooke's favour.\nOptics.\nDioptrics.\nHuygens had a long-term interest in the study of light refraction and lenses or dioptrics. From 1652 date the first drafts of a Latin treatise on the theory of dioptrics, known as the \"Tractatus\", which contained a comprehensive and rigorous theory of the telescope. Huygens was one of the few to raise theoretical questions regarding the properties and working of the telescope, and almost the only one to direct his mathematical proficiency towards the actual instruments used in astronomy.\nHuygens repeatedly announced its publication to his colleagues but ultimately postponed it in favor of a much more comprehensive treatment, now under the name of the \"Dioptrica\". It consisted of three parts. The first part focused on the general principles of refraction, the second dealt with spherical and chromatic aberration, while the third covered all aspects of the construction of telescopes and microscopes. In contrast to Descartes's dioptrics which treated only ideal (elliptical and hyperbolical) lenses, Huygens dealt exclusively with spherical lenses, which were the only kind that could really be made and incorporated in devices such as microscopes and telescopes.\nHuygens also worked out practical ways to minimize the effects of spherical and chromatic aberration, such as long focal distances for the objective of a telescope, internal stops to reduce the aperture, and a new kind of ocular known as the Huygenian eyepiece. The \"Dioptrica\" was never published in Huygens\u2019s lifetime and only appeared in press in 1703, when most of its contents were already familiar to the scientific world.\nLenses.\nTogether with his brother Constantijn, Huygens began grinding his own lenses in 1655 in an effort to improve telescopes. He designed in 1662 what is now called the Huygenian eyepiece, a set of two planoconvex lenses used as a telescope ocular. Huygens's lenses were known to be of superb quality and polished consistently according to his specifications; however, his telescopes did not produce very sharp images, leading some to speculate that he might have suffered from near-sightedness.\nLenses were also a common interest through which Huygens could meet socially in the 1660s with Spinoza, who ground them professionally. They had rather different outlooks on science, Spinoza being the more committed Cartesian, and some of their discussion survives in correspondence. He encountered the work of Antoni van Leeuwenhoek, another lens grinder, in the field of microscopy which interested his father. Huygens also investigated the use of lenses in projectors. He is credited as the inventor of the magic lantern, described in correspondence of 1659. There are others to whom such a lantern device has been attributed, such as Giambattista della Porta and Cornelis Drebbel, though Huygens's design used lens for better projection (Athanasius Kircher has also been credited for that).\n\"Trait\u00e9 de la Lumi\u00e8re\".\nHuygens is especially remembered in optics for his wave theory of light, which he first communicated in 1678 to the Acad\u00e9mie des sciences in Paris. Originally a preliminary chapter of his \"Dioptrica\", Huygens's theory was published in 1690 under the title \"Trait\u00e9 de la Lumi\u00e8re\" (\"Treatise on light\"), and contains the first fully mathematized, mechanistic explanation of an unobservable physical phenomenon (i.e., light propagation). Huygens refers to Ignace-Gaston Pardies, whose manuscript on optics helped him on his wave theory.\nThe challenge at the time was to explain geometrical optics, as most physical optics phenomena (such as diffraction) had not been observed or appreciated as issues. Huygens had experimented in 1672 with double refraction (birefringence) in the Iceland spar (a calcite), a phenomenon discovered in 1669 by Rasmus Bartholin. At first, he could not elucidate what he found but was later able to explain it using his wavefront theory and concept of evolutes. He also developed ideas on caustics. Huygens assumes that the speed of light is finite, based on a report by Ole Christensen R\u00f8mer in 1677 but which Huygens is presumed to have already believed. Huygens's theory posits light as radiating wavefronts, with the common notion of light rays depicting propagation normal to those wavefronts. Propagation of the wavefronts is then explained as the result of spherical waves being emitted at every point along the wave front (known today as the Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle). It assumed an omnipresent ether, with transmission through perfectly elastic particles, a revision of the view of Descartes. The nature of light was therefore a longitudinal wave.\nHis theory of light was not widely accepted, while Newton's rival corpuscular theory of light, as found in his \"Opticks\" (1704), gained more support. One strong objection to Huygens's theory was that longitudinal waves have only a single polarization which cannot explain the observed birefringence. However, Thomas Young's interference experiments in 1801, and Fran\u00e7ois Arago's detection of the Poisson spot in 1819, could not be explained through Newton's or any other particle theory, reviving Huygens's ideas and wave models. Fresnel became aware of Huygens's work and in 1821 was able to explain birefringence as a result of light being not a longitudinal (as had been assumed) but actually a transverse wave. The thus-named Huygens\u2013Fresnel principle was the basis for the advancement of physical optics, explaining all aspects of light propagation until Maxwell's electromagnetic theory culminated in the development of quantum mechanics and the discovery of the photon.\nAstronomy.\n\"Systema Saturnium\".\nIn 1655, Huygens discovered the first of Saturn's moons, Titan, and observed and sketched the Orion Nebula using a refracting telescope with a 43x magnification of his own design. Huygens succeeded in subdividing the nebula into different stars (the brighter interior now bears the name of the \"Huygenian region\" in his honour), and discovered several interstellar nebulae and some double stars. He was also the first to propose that the appearance of Saturn, which had baffled astronomers, was due to \"a thin, flat ring, nowhere touching, and inclined to the ecliptic\u201d.\nMore than three years later, in 1659, Huygens published his theory and findings in \"Systema Saturnium\". It is considered the most important work on telescopic astronomy since Galileo's \"Sidereus Nuncius\" fifty years earlier. Much more than a report on Saturn, Huygens provided measurements for the relative distances of the planets from the Sun, introduced the concept of the micrometer, and showed a method to measure angular diameters of planets, which finally allowed the telescope to be used as an instrument to measure (rather than just sighting) astronomical objects. He was also the first to question the authority of Galileo in telescopic matters, a sentiment that was to be common in the years following its publication.\nIn the same year, Huygens was able to observe Syrtis Major, a volcanic plain on Mars. He used repeated observations of the movement of this feature over the course of a number of days to estimate the length of day on Mars, which he did quite accurately to 24 1/2 hours. This figure is only a few minutes off of the actual length of the Martian day of 24 hours, 37 minutes.\nPlanetarium.\nAt the instigation of Jean-Baptiste Colbert, Huygens undertook the task of constructing a mechanical planetarium that could display all the planets and their moons then known circling around the Sun. Huygens completed his design in 1680 and had his clockmaker Johannes van Ceulen built it the following year. However, Colbert died in the interim and Huygens never got to deliver his planetarium to the French Academy of Sciences as the new minister, Fran\u00e7ois-Michel le Tellier, decided not to renew Huygens's contract.\nIn his design, Huygens made an ingenious use of continued fractions to find the best rational approximations by which he could choose the gears with the correct number of teeth. The ratio between two gears determined the orbital periods of two planets. To move the planets around the Sun, Huygens used a clock-mechanism that could go forwards and backwards in time. Huygens claimed his planetarium was more accurate that a similar device constructed by Ole R\u00f8mer around the same time, but his planetarium design was not published until after his death in the \"Opuscula Posthuma\" (1703).\n\"Cosmotheoros\".\nShortly before his death in 1695, Huygens completed his most speculative work entitled \"Cosmotheoros\". At his direction, it was to be published only posthumously by his brother, which Constantijn Jr. did in 1698. In this work, Huygens speculated on the existence of extraterrestrial life, which he imagined similar to that on Earth. Such speculations were not uncommon at the time, justified by Copernicanism or the plenitude principle, but Huygens went into greater detail, though without acknowledging Newton's laws of gravitation or the fact that planetary atmospheres are composed of different gases. \"Cosmotheoros,\" translated into English as \"The celestial worlds discover\u2019d\", is fundamentally a utopian work that owes some inspiration to the work of Peter Heylin, and it was likely seen by contemporary readers as a piece of fiction in the tradition of Francis Godwin, John Wilkins, and Cyrano de Bergerac.\nHuygens wrote that availability of water in liquid form was essential for life and that the properties of water must vary from planet to planet to suit the temperature range. He took his observations of dark and bright spots on the surfaces of Mars and Jupiter to be evidence of water and ice on those planets. He argued that extraterrestrial life is neither confirmed nor denied by the Bible, and questioned why God would create the other planets if they were not to serve a greater purpose than that of being admired from Earth. Huygens postulated that the great distance between the planets signified that God had not intended for beings on one to know about the beings on the others, and had not foreseen how much humans would advance in scientific knowledge.\nIt was also in this book that Huygens published his estimates for the relative sizes of the Solar System and his method for calculating stellar distances. He made a series of smaller holes in a screen facing the Sun, until he estimated the light was of the same intensity as that of the star Sirius. He then calculated that the angle of this hole was 1/27,664th the diameter of the Sun, and thus it was about 30,000 times as far away, on the (incorrect) assumption that Sirius is as luminous as the Sun. The subject of photometry remained in its infancy until the time of Pierre Bouguer and Johann Heinrich Lambert.\nLegacy.\nHuygens has been called the first theoretical physicist and a founder of modern mathematical physics. Although his influence was considerable during his lifetime, it began to fade shortly after his death. His skills as a geometer and mechanical ingenuity elicited the admiration of many of his contemporaries, including Newton, Leibniz, l'H\u00f4pital, and the Bernoullis. For his work in physics, Huygens has been deemed one of the greatest scientists in the Scientific Revolution, rivaled only by Newton in both depth of insight and the number of results obtained. Huygens also helped develop the institutional frameworks for scientific research on the European continent, making him a leading actor in the establishment of modern science.\nMathematics and physics.\nIn mathematics, Huygens mastered the methods of ancient Greek geometry, particularly the work of Archimedes, and was an adept user of the analytic geometry and infinitesimal techniques of Descartes and Fermat. His mathematical style can be best described as geometrical infinitesimal analysis of curves and of motion. Drawing inspiration and imagery from mechanics, it remained pure mathematics in form. Huygens brought this type of geometrical analysis to a close, as more mathematicians turned away from classical geometry to the calculus for handling infinitesimals, limit processes, and motion.\nHuygens was moreover able to fully employ mathematics to answer questions of physics. Often this entailed introducing a simple model for describing a complicated situation, then analyzing it starting from simple arguments to their logical consequences, developing the necessary mathematics along the way. As he wrote at the end of a draft of \"De vi Centrifuga\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Whatever you will have supposed not impossible either concerning gravity or motion or any other matter, if then you prove something concerning the magnitude of a line, surface, or body, it will be true; as for instance, Archimedes on the quadrature of the parabola, where the tendency of heavy objects has been assumed to act through parallel lines.\nHuygens favoured axiomatic presentations of his results, which require rigorous methods of geometric demonstration: although he allowed levels of uncertainty in the selection of primary axioms and hypotheses, the proofs of theorems derived from these could never be in doubt. Huygens's style of publication exerted an influence in Newton's presentation of his own major works.\nBesides the application of mathematics to physics and physics to mathematics, Huygens relied on mathematics as methodology, specifically its ability to generate new knowledge about the world. Unlike Galileo, who used mathematics primarily as rhetoric or synthesis, Huygens consistently employed mathematics as a way to discover and develop theories covering various phenomena and insisted that the reduction of the physical to the geometrical satisfy exacting standards of fit between the real and the ideal. In demanding such mathematical tractability and precision, Huygens set an example for eighteenth-century scientists such as Johann Bernoulli, Jean le Rond d'Alembert, and Charles-Augustin de Coulomb.\nAlthough never intended for publication, Huygens made use of algebraic expressions to represent physical entities in a handful of his manuscripts on collisions. This would make him one of the first to employ mathematical formulae to describe relationships in physics, as it is done today. Huygens also came close to the modern idea of limit while working on his \"Dioptrica,\" though he never used the notion outside geometrical optics.\nLater influence.\nHuygens's standing as the greatest scientist in Europe was eclipsed by Newton's at the end of the seventeenth century, despite the fact that, as Hugh Aldersey-Williams notes, \"Huygens's achievement exceeds that of Newton in some important respects\". Although his journal publications anticipated the form of the modern scientific article, his persistent classicism and reluctance to publish his work did much to diminish his influence in the aftermath of the Scientific Revolution, as adherents of Leibniz\u2019 calculus and Newton's physics took centre stage.\nHuygens's analyses of curves that satisfy certain physical properties, such as the cycloid, led to later studies of many other such curves like the caustic, the brachistochrone, the sail curve, and the catenary. His application of mathematics to physics, such as in his studies of impact and birefringence, would inspire new developments in mathematical physics and rational mechanics in the following centuries (albeit in the new language of the calculus). Additionally, Huygens developed the oscillating timekeeping mechanisms, the pendulum and the balance spring, that have been used ever since in mechanical watches and clocks. These were the first reliable timekeepers fit for scientific use (e.g., to make accurate measurements of the inequality of the solar day, which was not possible before). His work in this area foreshadowed the union of applied mathematics with mechanical engineering in the centuries that followed.\nPortraits.\nDuring his lifetime, Huygens and his father had a number of portraits commissioned. These included:\nCommemorations.\nThe European Space Agency's probe aboard the Cassini spacecraft that landed on Titan, Saturn's largest moon, in 2005 was named after him.\nA number of monuments to Christiaan Huygens can be found across important cities in the Netherlands, including Rotterdam, Delft, and Leiden.\nWorks.\nSource(s):\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42128", "revid": "37982794", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42128", "title": "Christian Huygens", "text": ""}
{"id": "42129", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42129", "title": "Tape storage", "text": ""}
{"id": "42132", "revid": "237572", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42132", "title": "Rastafari", "text": "Abrahamic religion originating in 1930s Jamaica\nRastafari is an Abrahamic religion that developed in Jamaica during the 1930s. It is classified as both a new religious movement and a social movement by scholars of religion. There is no central authority in control of the movement and much diversity exists among practitioners, who are known as Rastafari, Rastafarians, or Rastas.\nRastafari beliefs are based on an interpretation of the Bible. Central to the religion is a monotheistic belief in a single God, referred to as Jah, who partially resides within each individual. Rastas accord key importance to Haile Selassie, Emperor of Ethiopia between 1930 and 1974, who is regarded variously as the Second Coming of Jesus, Jah incarnate, or a human prophet, though the emperor's own religion was Christianity. Rastafari is Afrocentric and focuses attention on the African diaspora, which it believes is oppressed within Western society, or \"Babylon\". Many Rastas call for this diaspora's resettlement in Africa, a continent they consider the Promised Land, or \"Zion\". Rastas refer to their practices as \"livity\", which includes adhering to Ital dietary requirements, wearing their hair in dreadlocks, and following patriarchal gender roles. Communal meetings are known as \"groundations\", and are typified by music, chanting, discussions, and the smoking of cannabis, the latter regarded as a sacrament with beneficial properties.\nRastafari originated among impoverished and socially disenfranchised Afro-Jamaican communities in 1930s Jamaica. A reaction against Jamaica's then-dominant British colonial culture, it was influenced by both Ethiopianism and the Back-to-Africa movement promoted by black nationalist figures such as Marcus Garvey. The religion developed after several Protestant Christian clergymen, most notably Leonard Howell, proclaimed that Haile Selassie's crowning as Emperor of Ethiopia in 1930 fulfilled a Biblical prophecy. By the 1950s, Rastafari's countercultural stance had brought the movement into conflict with wider Jamaican society, including violent clashes with law enforcement. Early Rastafari often espoused black supremacy as a form of opposition to white supremacy, but this has gradually become less common since the 1970s. In the 1960s and 1970s, it gained increased respectability within Jamaica and greater visibility abroad through the popularity of Rastafari-inspired reggae musicians, most notably Bob Marley. Enthusiasm for Rastafari declined in the 1980s, following the deaths of Haile Selassie and Marley, but the movement survived and has a presence in many parts of the world.\nThe Rastafari movement is decentralised and organised on a largely sectarian basis. There are several denominations, or \"Mansions of Rastafari\", the most prominent of which are the Nyahbinghi, Bobo Ashanti, and the Twelve Tribes of Israel, each offering a different interpretation of Rastafari belief. There are an estimated 700,000 to one million Rastafari across the world. The largest population is in Jamaica, although small communities can be found in most of the world's major population centres. Most Rastafari are of African descent, and some groups accept only black members, but non-black groups have also emerged.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nDefinition.\nRastafari has been described as a religion, meeting many of the proposed definitions for what constitutes a religion, and is legally recognised as such in various countries. Some scholars of religion have labelled it an Abrahamic religion, while other scholars have also classified it as a new religious movement, a sect, a cult, and a revitalisation movement. Having arisen in Jamaica, it has been described as an Afro-Jamaican religion, and more broadly an Afro-Caribbean religion.\nAlthough Rastafari focuses on Africa as a source of identity, it is a product of creolisation processes in the Americas, described by the Hispanic studies scholars Margarite Fern\u00e1ndez Olmos and Lizabeth Paravisini-Gebert as \"a Creole religion, rooted in African, European, and Indian practices and beliefs\". The scholar Ennis B. Edmonds also suggested that Rastafari was \"emerging\" as a world religion, not because of the number of its adherents, but because of its global spread. Many Rastas nevertheless reject descriptions of Rastafari as a religion, instead referring to it as a \"way of life\", a \"philosophy\", or a \"spirituality\".\nEmphasising its political stance, particularly in support of African nationalism and pan-Africanism, some academics have characterised Rastafari as a political movement, a \"politico-religious\" movement, or a protest movement. It has alternatively been labelled a social movement, or more specifically as a new social movement, and a cultural movement. Many Rastas or Rastafarians\u2014as practitioners are known\u2014nevertheless dislike the labelling of Rastafari as a \"movement\". In 1989, a British Industrial Tribunal concluded that, for the purposes of the Race Relations Act 1976, Rastafarians could be considered an ethnic group because they have a long, shared heritage which distinguished them from other groups, their own cultural traditions, a common language, and a common religion.\nRastafari has continuously changed and developed, with significant doctrinal variation existing among practitioners depending on the group to which they belong. It is not a unified movement, and there has never been a single leader followed by all Rastafari. It is thus difficult to make broad generalisations about the movement without obscuring the complexities within it. The scholar of religion Darren J. N. Middleton suggested that it was appropriate to speak of \"a plethora of \"Rasta spiritualities\"\" rather than a single phenomenon.\nThe term \"Rastafari\" derives from \"Ras Tafari Makonnen\", the pre-regnal title of Haile Selassie, the former Ethiopian emperor who occupies a central role in Rasta belief. The term \"Ras\" is a title of nobility equivalent to a duke or prince in the Ethiopian Semitic languages; \"Tafari Makonnen\" was Selassie's personal name. It is unknown why the early Rastas adopted this form of Haile Selassie's name as the basis of the term for their religion. As well as being the religion's name, \"Rastafari\" is also used for the religion's practitioners themselves. Many commentators\u2014including some academic sources and some practitioners\u2014refer to the movement as \"Rastafarianism\". However, the term is disparaged by many Rastafari, who believe that the use of \"-ism\" implies religious doctrine and institutional organisation, things they wish to avoid.\nBeliefs.\nRastas refer to the totality of their religion's ideas and beliefs as \"Rastalogy\". Edmonds described Rastafari as having \"a fairly cohesive worldview\"; however, the scholar Ernest Cashmore thought that its beliefs were \"fluid and open to interpretation\". Within the movement, attempts to summarise Rastafari belief have never been accorded the status of a catechism or creed. Rastas place great emphasis on the idea that personal experience and intuitive understanding should be used to determine the truth or validity of a particular belief or practice. No Rasta, therefore, has the authority to declare which beliefs and practices are orthodox and which are heterodox. The conviction that Rastafari has no dogma \"is so strong that it has itself become something of a dogma\", according to the sociologist of religion Peter B. Clarke.\nSome Rastas consider themselves Christian, and the religion has been deeply influenced by both Christian and Jewish thought; the scholar Michael Barnett called Rastafari \"an Afrocentralized blend of Christianity and Judaism\". Like Christianity, Rastafari treats the Bible as a holy book occupying a central place in its belief system, with Rastas often adopting a literalist interpretation of its contents. Rastas regard the Bible as an authentic account of early black African history and of their place as God's favoured people. They believe the Bible to be key to understanding both the past and the present and for predicting the future, while also regarding it as a source book from which they can form and explain their beliefs and practices. Rastas commonly perceive the final book of the Bible, the Book of Revelation, as the most important part, because they see its contents as having particular significance for the world's present situation.\nRastas commonly believe the Bible was originally written on stone in the Ethiopian language of Amharic, contrary to scholarly understandings of how the Bible was compiled. They also believe that the Bible's true meaning has been warped, both through mistranslation into other languages and by deliberate manipulation by those seeking to deny black Africans their history. They also regard it as cryptographic, meaning that it has many hidden meanings. They believe that its true teachings can be revealed through intuition and meditation on the \"book within\" which allows them to commune with God. Because of what they regard as the corruption of the Bible, Rastas also turn to other sources that they believe shed light on African history, including Leonard Howell's 1935 work \"The Promised Key\", Robert Athlyi Rogers' 1924 book \"Holy Piby\", and Fitz Balintine Pettersburg's 1920s work, the \"Royal Parchment Scroll of Black Supremacy\". Many Rastas also treat the \"Kebra Nagast\", a 14th-century Ethiopian text, as a source through which to interpret the Bible.\nJah and Jesus Christ.\nRastas are monotheists, worshipping a singular God whom they call Jah. The term \"Jah\" is a shortened version of \"Jehovah\", the name of God in English translations of the Old Testament. Rastas believe in the immanence of Jah, who is inherent within each individual. This belief is reflected in the aphorism, often cited by Rastas, that \"God is man and man is God\", and Rastas speak of \"knowing\" Jah, rather than simply \"believing\" in him. In seeking to narrow the distance between humanity and divinity, Rastafari embraces mysticism. This idea of connecting to a singular divine force within differs from the forms of spirit possession found in other African diaspora religions, such as Kumina and Convince, where external spirits are invited into the body.\nJesus is an important figure in Rastafari. However, practitioners reject the traditional Christian view of Jesus, and they also reject the depiction of him as a white European. They believe Jesus was a black African, and that the white Jesus was a false god. Many Rastas regard Christianity as the creation of the white man; they treat it with suspicion out of the view that the oppressors (white Europeans) and the oppressed (black Africans) cannot share the same God. Some Rastas take the view that the God worshipped by most white Christians is actually the Devil, and a recurring claim among Rastas is that the Pope is Satan or the Antichrist. Rastas therefore often view Christian preachers as deceivers and regard Christianity as being guilty of furthering the oppression of the African diaspora, frequently referring to it as having perpetrated \"mental enslavement\".\nHaile Selassie.\nFrom its origins, Rastafari was intrinsically linked with Haile Selassie, the Emperor of Ethiopia from 1930 to 1974. He remains the central figure in Rastafari ideology, and although all Rastas hold him in esteem, precise interpretations of his identity differ. Understandings of how Haile Selassie relates to Jesus vary among Rastas. Many, although not all, believe that the Ethiopian monarch was the Second Coming of Jesus, legitimising this by reference to their interpretation of the nineteenth chapter of the Book of Revelation. By viewing Haile Selassie as Jesus, these Rastas also regard him as the messiah prophesied in the Old Testament, the manifestation of God in human form, and \"the living God\". Some perceive him as part of a Trinity, alongside God as Creator and the Holy Spirit, the latter referred to as \"the Breath within the temple\". Rastas who view Haile Selassie as Jesus argue that both were descendants from the royal line of the Biblical king David, while Rastas also emphasise the fact that the Makonnen dynasty, of which Haile Selassie was a member, claimed descent from the Biblical figures Solomon and the Queen of Sheba.\nOther Rastas see Selassie as embodying Jesus' teachings and essence but reject the idea that he was the literal reincarnation of Jesus. Members of the Twelve Tribes of Israel denomination, for instance, reject the idea that Selassie was the Second Coming, arguing that this event has yet to occur. From this perspective, Selassie is perceived as a messenger or emissary of God rather than a manifestation of God himself. Rastas holding to this view sometimes regard the deification of Haile Selassie as na\u00efve or ignorant, in some cases thinking it as dangerous to worship a human being as God. There are various Rastas who went from believing that Haile Selassie was both God incarnate and the Second Coming of Jesus to seeing him as something distinct.\nOn being crowned, Haile Selassie was given the title of \"King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Conquering Lion of the Tribe of Judah\". Rastas use this title for Haile Selassie alongside others, such as \"Almighty God\", \"Judge and Avenger\", \"King Alpha and Queen Omega\", \"Returned Messiah\", \"Elect of God\", and \"Elect of Himself\". Rastas also view Haile Selassie as a symbol of their positive affirmation of Africa as a source of spiritual and cultural heritage.\nWhile he was emperor, many Jamaican Rastas professed the belief that Haile Selassie would never die. The 1974 overthrow of Haile Selassie by the military Derg and his subsequent death in 1975 resulted in a crisis of faith for many practitioners. Some left the movement altogether. Others remained, and developed new strategies for dealing with the news. Some Rastas believed that Selassie did not really die and that claims to the contrary were Western misinformation. To bolster their argument, they pointed to the fact that no corpse had been produced; in reality, Haile Selassie's body had been buried beneath his palace, remaining undiscovered there until 1992. Another perspective within Rastafari acknowledged that Haile Selassie's body had perished, but claimed that his inner essence survived as a spiritual force. A third response within the Rastafari community was that Selassie's death was inconsequential as he had only been a \"personification\" of Jah rather than Jah himself.\nDuring his life, Selassie described himself as a devout Christian. In a 1967 interview, Selassie was asked about the Rasta belief that he was the Second Coming of Jesus, to which he responded: \"I have heard of this idea. I also met certain Rastafarians. I told them clearly that I am a man, that I am mortal, and that I will be replaced by the oncoming generation, and that they should never make a mistake in assuming or pretending that a human being is emanated from a deity.\" His grandson Ermias Sahle Selassie has said that there is \"no doubt that Haile Selassie did not encourage the Rastafari movement\". Critics of Rastafari have used this as evidence that Rasta theological beliefs are incorrect, although some Rastas take Selassie's denials as evidence that he was indeed the incarnation of God, based on their reading of the Gospel of Luke.\nAfrocentrism and race.\nAccording to Clarke, Rastafari is \"concerned above all else with black consciousness, with rediscovering the identity, personal and racial, of black people\". The movement began among Afro-Jamaicans who wanted to reject the British colonial culture that dominated Jamaica and replace it with a new identity based on a reclamation of their African heritage. Accordingly it decenters Europe and whiteness and emphasises Africa and blackness, seeking to purge from its followers any belief in the inferiority of black people and the superiority of white people. Rastafari is therefore Afrocentric, equating blackness with the African continent, and endorsing Pan-Africanism.\nPractitioners of Rastafari identify themselves with the ancient Israelites\u2014God's chosen people in the Old Testament\u2014and believe that black Africans broadly or Rastas more specifically are either the descendants or the reincarnations of this ancient people. This is similar to beliefs in Judaism, although many Rastas believe that contemporary Jews' status as the descendants of the ancient Israelites is a false claim. Rastas typically believe that black Africans are God's chosen people, meaning that they made a covenant with him and thus have a special responsibility. Rastafari espouses the view that this, the true identity of black Africans, has been lost and needs to be reclaimed.\nThere is no uniform Rasta view on race. Black supremacy was a theme early in the movement, with the belief in a distinctly black African race that was superior to other racial groups. This has opened the religion to accusations of racism. While some Rastas still hold such beliefs, black supremacy has waned in the movement since at least the 1970s, and non-black Rastas are now widely accepted. Some Rastas cite a 1963 speech by Haile Selassie in support of racial acceptance. Some sects maintains that white Europeans can never be legitimate Rastas but others believe an \"African\" identity is not inherently linked to black skin but whether an individual displays an African \"attitude\" or \"spirit\".\nExile in Babylon.\nRastafari teaches that the black African diaspora are exiles living in \"Babylon\", a term which it applies to Western society. For Rastas, European colonialism and global capitalism are regarded as manifestations of Babylon, while police and soldiers are viewed as its agents. The term \"Babylon\" is adopted because of its Biblical associations. In the Old Testament, Babylon is the Mesopotamian city where the Israelites were held captive, exiled from their homeland, between 597 and 538 BCE; Rastas compare the exile of the Israelites in Mesopotamia to the exile of the African diaspora outside Africa. Rastas perceive the exile of the black African diaspora in Babylon as an experience of great suffering, with the term \"suffering\" having a significant place in Rasta discourse.\nRastas view Babylon as being responsible for both the Atlantic slave trade, which removed enslaved Africans from their continent, and ongoing poverty in the African diaspora. Rastas believe Biblical scripture explains the Atlantic slave trade, and that the enslavement, exile, and exploitation of black Africans was punishment for failing to live up to their status as Jah's chosen people. Many Rastas, adopting a Pan-Africanist ethos, have criticised the division of Africa into nation-states, regarding this as a Babylonian development, and are often hostile to capitalist resource extraction from the continent. Rastas seek to delegitimise and destroy Babylon, something often conveyed in the Rasta aphorism \"Chant down Babylon\". Rastas often expect the white-dominated society to dismiss their beliefs as false, and when this happens they see it as confirmation of the correctness of their faith.\nReturn to Zion.\nRastas view Zion as an ideal to which they aspire. As with \"Babylon\", this term comes from the Bible, where it refers to an idealised Jerusalem. Rastas use \"Zion\" either for Ethiopia specifically or for Africa more broadly. Many Rastas use the term \"Ethiopia\" as a synonym for Africa, following its usage in English translations of the Bible. Rastas in Ghana, for instance, describe themselves as already living within \"Ethiopia\". Other Rastas apply the term \"Zion\" to Jamaica or they use it to describe a state of mind. Rastas believe that Africa, as the Promised Land, will allow them to escape the domination and degradation they experience in Babylon.\nDuring the first three decades of the Rastafari movement, it placed strong emphasis on the need for the African diaspora to be repatriated to Africa. To this end, various Rastas lobbied the Jamaican government and United Nations to oversee this resettlement process. Other Rastas organised their own transportation to the African continent. Critics of the movement have argued that the migration of the entire African diaspora to Africa is implausible, particularly as no African country would welcome this.\nBy the movement's fourth decade, the desire for physical repatriation to Africa had declined among Rastas, a change influenced by observation of the 1983\u20131985 famine in Ethiopia. Rather, many Rastas saw the idea of returning to Africa in a metaphorical sense, entailing the restoration of their pride and self-confidence as people of black African descent. The term \"liberation before repatriation\" began to be used within the movement. Some Rastas seek to transform Western society so that they may more comfortably live within it rather than seeking to move to Africa. There are nevertheless many Rastas who continue to emphasise the need for physical resettlement of the African diaspora in Africa.\nSalvation and paradise.\nRastafari is a millenarian movement, espousing the idea that the present age will come to an apocalyptic end. Many practitioners believe that on this Day of Judgment, Babylon will be overthrown, with Rastas being the chosen few who survive the upheaval. With Babylon destroyed, Rastas believe that humanity will enter a \"new age\", a millennium of peace, justice, and happiness in which the righteous shall live in Africa. In the 1980s, many Rastas believed that the Day of Judgment would happen around the year 2000. A view then common in the Rasta community was that the world's white people would wipe themselves out through nuclear war, with black Africans then ruling the world, something that they argued was prophesied in the Book of Daniel.\nDeath and reincarnation.\nRasta views on death vary. Traditionally, many Rastas believed in the possibility of eternal life. In the 1980s, scholar of religion Leonard E. Barrett observed Jamaican Rastas who believed that practitioners who died had not been faithful to Jah. He suggested that this attitude stemmed from the large numbers of young people in the movement, who had thus seen very few Rastas die. Another common Rasta view is that those who are righteous may undergo reincarnation.\nRastas have traditionally avoided death and funerals, meaning that many were given Christian funerals by their relatives. This attitude to death is less common among more recent or moderate strands of Rastafari, with many considering death a natural part of life. Unlike other African diaspora religions, Rastas typically avoid ancestor veneration.\nMorality, ethics, and gender roles.\nMost Rastas share a pair of fundamental moral principles known as the \"two great commandments\": love of God and love of neighbour. Many Rastas believe that to determine whether they should undertake a certain act or not, they should consult the presence of Jah within themselves.\nRastafari emphasises the idea of \"living naturally\". As an extension of this view, Africa is considered the natural abode of black Africans\u2014a continent where they can live according to African culture and tradition, and be themselves on a physical, emotional, and intellectual level. Practitioners believe that Westerners and Babylon have detached themselves from nature through technological development and thus have become debilitated, slothful, and decadent. Some Rastas also believe they should adhere to African laws rather than the laws of Babylon, potentially putting them at odds with the law of the countries in which they currently live. In emphasising this Afrocentric approach, Rastafari expresses overtones of black nationalism.\nThe scholar Maureen Warner-Lewis observed that Rastafari combined a \"radical, even revolutionary\" stance on socio-political issues, particularly regarding race, with a \"profoundly traditional\" approach on other issues. Rastas typically look critically upon modern capitalism, instead favouring small-scale, pre-industrial and agricultural societies. Some Rastas have promoted activism for socio-political reform, while others believe in awaiting change that will be brought about through divine intervention. In Jamaica, Rastas typically do not vote, dismissing politics as \"politricks\", and rarely involve themselves in political parties or unions. The Rasta tendency to believe that socio-political change is inevitable opens the religion up to the criticism from the political left that it discourages attempts to alter the status quo. Other Rastas do engage in political activism; the Ghanaian Rasta singer-songwriter Rocky Dawuni for instance was involved in campaigns promoting democratic elections, while in Grenada, many Rastas joined the People's Revolutionary Government formed in 1979.\nGender roles.\nRasta discourse has traditionally presented women as morally weak, susceptible to deception by evil, and impure while menstruating, citing the Book of Leviticus and the writings of Paul the Apostle. By contrast, Rastafari often espouses the belief that black men in the African diaspora have been emasculated by Babylon and that their manhood must therefore be restored. As a result, Rastafari often affirms patriarchal principles, including the idea that women should submit to male leadership. External observers\u2014including scholars such as Cashmore and Edmonds\u2014have claimed that Rastafari accords women an inferior position to men. Cashmore suggests Rastafari women accept this subordinate position and regard it as their duty to obey their men. The academic Maureen Rowe suggested that women were willing to join the religion despite its restrictions because they valued the life of structure and discipline it provided. Attitudes to women within Rastafari have changed since the 1970s, however, with a growing \"womanist\" movement, and increasing numbers of women in leadership positions at local and international levels.\nRasta women usually wear clothing that covers their head and hides their body contours. Trousers are usually avoided, with long skirts preferred. Women are expected to cover their head while praying, and in some Rasta groups this is expected of them whenever in public. According to traditional Rasta discourse, this dress code is necessary to prevent the sexual objectification of women by men in Babylon. Rasta men do not usually have such a dress code. Some Rasta women have challenged gender norms by wearing their hair uncovered in public and donning trousers.\nAlthough men and women took part alongside each other in early Rasta rituals, from the late 1940s and 1950s the Rasta community increasingly encouraged gender segregation for ceremonies. This was based on the belief that women's menstruation made them impure and that their presence at the ceremonies would distract male participants.\nSexuality.\nAs it existed in Jamaica, Rastafari did not promote monogamy. Though it is not especially common, Rasta men are permitted to engage in polygamy, while women are expected to reserve their sexual activity for one male partner. Common-law marriage is the norm, although many Rastas are legally married. Rasta men refer to their female partners as \"queens\", \"empresses\", or \"lionesses\", while the males in these relationships are known as \"kingmen\". \nRastafari places great importance on family life and the raising of children, with reproduction being encouraged. Traditionally, the religion emphasised the place of men in child-rearing, associating this with the recovery of African manhood. Women would often work, sometimes while the man raised the children at home.\nRastafari regards procreation as the purpose of sex, and thus oral and anal sex are usually forbidden. Both contraception and abortion are usually censured, and a common claim in Rasta discourse is that these were inventions of Babylon to decrease the black African birth-rate. \nRastas typically express hostile attitudes to homosexuality, regarding homosexuals as evil and unnatural; this attitude derives from references to same-sex sexual activity in the Bible. Cashmore reported that Rastas typically saw the growing acceptance of birth control and homosexuality in the 1970s and 1980s as evidence of the degeneration of Babylon and proof of its approaching demise. LGBTQ+ Rastas may conceal their sexual orientation because of these attitudes.\nPractices.\nRastas refer to their cultural and religious practices as \"livity\". Rastafari does not place emphasis on hierarchical structures. It has no professional priesthood, with Rastas believing that there is no need for a priest to act as mediator between the worshipper and Jah. It nevertheless has \"elders\", an honorific title bestowed upon those with a good reputation among the community. Although respected figures, they do not necessarily have administrative functions or responsibilities. When they do oversee ritual meetings, they are often responsible for helping to interpret current events in terms of Biblical scripture. Elders often communicate with each other through a network to plan movement events and form strategies.\nGrounding.\nThe term \"grounding\" is used among Rastas to refer to the establishment of relationships between like-minded practitioners. Groundings often take place in a commune or yard, and are presided over by an elder. The elder is charged with keeping discipline and can ban individuals from attending. The number of participants can range from a handful to several hundred. Activities that take place at groundings include the playing of drums, chanting, the singing of hymns, and the recitation of poetry. Cannabis, known as ganja, is often smoked. Most groundings contain only men, although some Rasta women have established their own all-female grounding circles.\nOne of the central activities at groundings is \"reasoning\". This is a discussion among assembled Rastas about the religion's principles and their relevance to current events. These discussions are supposed to be non-combative, although attendees can point out the fallacies in any arguments presented. Those assembled inform each other about the revelations that they have received through meditation and dream. Each contributor is supposed to push the boundaries of understanding until the entire group has gained greater insight into the topic under discussion. In meeting together with like-minded individuals, reasoning helps Rastas to reassure one another of the correctness of their beliefs. Rastafari meetings are opened and closed with prayers. These involve supplication to Jah for the vulnerable and needy, calls for the destruction of the Rastas' enemies, and closing statements of adoration.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPrinces shall come out of Egypt, Ethiopia shall stretch forth her hand unto God. Oh thou God of Ethiopia, thou God of divine majesty, thy spirit come within our hearts to dwell in the parts of righteousness. That the hungry be fed, the sick nourished, the aged protected, and the infant cared for. Teach us love and loyalty as it is in Zion.\n\u2014 Opening passage of a common Rasta prayer\nThe largest groundings were known as \"groundations\" or \"grounations\" in the 1950s, although they were subsequently re-termed \"Nyabinghi Issemblies\". The term \"Nyabinghi\" is adopted from the name of a mythical African queen. Nyabinghi Issemblies are often held on dates associated with Ethiopia and Haile Selassie. These include Ethiopian Christmas (7 January), the day on which Haile Selassie visited Jamaica (21 April), Selassie's birthday (23 July), Ethiopian New Year (11 September), and Selassie's coronation day (2 November). Some Rastas also organise Nyabinghi Issemblies to mark Jamaica's Emancipation Day (1 August) and Marcus Garvey's birthday (17 August).\nNyabinghi Issemblies typically take place in rural areas, being situated in the open air or in temporary structures\u2014known as \"temples\" or \"tabernacles\"\u2014specifically constructed for the purpose. Any elder seeking to sponsor a Nyabinghi Issembly must have approval from other elders and requires the adequate resources to organise such an event. The assembly usually lasts between three and seven days. During the daytime, attendees engage in food preparation, ganja smoking, and reasoning, while at night they focus on drumming and dancing around bonfires. Nyabinghi Issemblies often attract Rastas from a wide area, including from different countries. They establish and maintain a sense of solidarity among the Rasta community and cultivate a feeling of collective belonging. Unlike in many other religions, rites of passage play no role in Rastafari; on death, various Rastas have been given Christian funerals by their relatives, as there are no established Rasta funeral rites.\nUse of cannabis.\nThe principal ritual of Rastafari is the smoking of ganja, also known as marijuana or cannabis. Among the names that Rastas give to the plant are \"callie\", \"Iley\", \"the herb\", \"the holy herb\", \"the grass\", and \"the weed\". Cannabis is usually smoked during groundings, although some practitioners also smoke it informally in other contexts. Some Rastas smoke cannabis very frequently, something other practitioners regard as excessive. Many practitioners alternatively consume cannabis in a tea, as a spice in cooking, and as an ingredient in medicine. Not all Rastas use cannabis; many abstainers explain that they have already achieved a higher level of consciousness and thus do not require it.\nIn Rastafari, cannabis is considered a sacrament. Rastas argue that the use of ganja is promoted in the Bible, specifically in Genesis, Psalms, and Revelation. They regard it as having healing properties, eulogise it for inducing feelings of \"peace and love\", and claim that it cultivates a form of personal introspection that allows the smokers to discover their inner divinity. Some Rastas believe that cannabis smoke serves as an incense that counteracts immoral practices in society.\nRastas typically smoke cannabis in the form of a large, hand-rolled cigarette known as a spliff. This is often rolled together while a prayer is offered to Jah; the spliff is lit and smoked only when the prayer is completed. At other times, cannabis is smoked in a water pipe referred to as a chalice: styles include kutchies, chillums, and steamers. The pipe is passed in a counter-clockwise direction around the assembled circle of Rastas.\nThere are various options that might explain how cannabis smoking came to be part of Rastafari. By the 8th century, Arab traders had introduced cannabis to Central and Southern Africa. In the 19th century, enslaved Bakongo people arrived in Jamaica, where they established the religion of Kumina. In Kumina, cannabis was smoked during religious ceremonies in the belief that it facilitated possession by ancestral spirits. The religion was largely practiced in south-east Jamaica's Saint Thomas Parish, where a prominent early Rasta, Leonard Howell, lived while he was developing many of Rastafari's beliefs and practices; it may have been through Kumina that cannabis became part of Rastafari. A second possible source was the use of cannabis in Hindu rituals. Hindu migrants arrived in Jamaica as indentured servants from British India between 1834 and 1917, and brought cannabis with them. A Jamaican Hindu priest, Laloo, was one of Howell's spiritual advisors, and may have influenced his adoption of ganja. The adoption of cannabis may also have been influenced by the widespread medicinal and recreational use of cannabis among Afro-Jamaicans in the early 20th century. Early Rastafarians may have taken an element of Jamaican culture which they associated with their peasant past and the rejection of capitalism and sanctified it by according it Biblical correlates.\nIn many countries\u2014including Jamaica\u2014cannabis is illegal and by using it, Rastas protest the rules and regulations of Babylon. In the United States, for example, thousands of practitioners have been arrested because of their possession of the drug. Rastas have also advocated for the legalisation of cannabis in those jurisdictions where it is illegal; in 2015, Jamaica decriminalized personal possession of marijuana up to two ounces and legalized it for medicinal and scientific purposes. In 2019, Barbados legalised Rastafari use of cannabis within religious settings and pledged of land for Rastafari to grow it.\nMusic.\nRastafari music developed at reasoning sessions, where drumming, chanting, and dancing are all present. Rasta music is performed to praise and commune with Jah, and to reaffirm the rejection of Babylon. Rastas believe that their music has healing properties, with the ability to cure colds, fevers, and headaches. Many of these songs are sung to the tune of older Christian hymns, but others are original Rasta creations.\nThe bass-line of Rasta music is provided by the akete, a three-drum set, which is accompanied by percussion instruments like rattles and tambourines. A syncopated rhythm is then provided by the fundeh drum. In addition, a bat\u00e1 drum improvises over the rhythm. The different components of the music are regarded as displaying different symbolism; the bassline symbolises blows against Babylon, while the lighter beats denote hope for the future.\nAs Rastafari developed, popular music became its chief communicative medium. During the 1960s, ska was a popular musical style in Jamaica, and although its protests against social and political conditions were mild, it gave early expression to Rasta socio-political ideology. Particularly prominent in the connection between Rastafari and ska were the musicians Count Ossie and Don Drummond. Ossie was a drummer who believed that black people needed to develop their own style of music; he was heavily influenced by Burru, an Afro-Jamaican drumming style. Ossie subsequently popularised this new Rastafari ritual music by playing at various groundings and groundations around Jamaica, with songs like \"Another Moses\" and \"Babylon Gone\" reflecting Rasta influence. Rasta themes also appeared in Drummond's work, with songs such as \"Reincarnation\" and \"Tribute to Marcus Garvey\".\n1968 saw the development of reggae in Jamaica, a musical style typified by slower, heavier rhythms than ska and the increased use of Jamaican Patois. Like calypso, reggae was a medium for social commentary, although it demonstrated a wider use of radical political and Rasta themes than were previously present in Jamaican popular music. Reggae artists incorporated Rasta ritual rhythms, and also adopted Rasta chants, language, motifs, and social critiques. Songs like The Wailers' \"African Herbsman\" and Peter Tosh's \"Legalize It\" referenced cannabis use, while tracks like The Melodians' \"Rivers of Babylon\" and Junior Byles' \"Beat Down Babylon\" referenced Rasta beliefs in Babylon. Reggae gained widespread international popularity during the mid-1970s, coming to be viewed by black people in many different countries as music of the oppressed. Many Rastas grew critical of reggae, believing that it had commercialised their religion. Although reggae contains much Rastafari symbolism, and the two are widely associated, the connection is often exaggerated by non-Rastas. Most Rastas do not listen to reggae music, and reggae has also been utilised by other religious groups, such as Protestant Evangelicals. Out of reggae came dub music; dub artists often employ Rastafari terminology, even when not Rastas themselves.\nLanguage and symbolism.\nRastas typically regard words as having an intrinsic power, seeking to avoid language that contributes to servility, self-degradation, and the objectification of the person. Practitioners therefore often use their own form of language, known commonly as \"dread talk\", \"Iyaric\", and \"Rasta talk\". Developed in Jamaica during the 1940s, this use of language fosters group identity and cultivates particular values. Adherents believe that by formulating their own language they are launching an ideological attack on the integrity of the English language, which they view as a tool of Babylon. The use of this language helps Rastas distinguish and separate themselves from non-Rastas, for whom\u2014according to Barrett\u2014Rasta rhetoric can be \"meaningless babbling\". However, Rasta terms have also filtered into wider Jamaican speech patterns.\nRastas make wide use of the pronoun \"I\". This denotes the Rasta view that the self is divine, and reminds each Rasta that they are not a slave and have value, worth, and dignity as a human being. For instance, Rastas use \"I\" in place of \"me\", \"I and I\" in place of \"we\", \"I-ceive\" in place of \"receive\", \"I-sire\" in place of \"desire\", \"I-rate\" in place of \"create\", and \"I-men\" in place of \"Amen\". Rastas refer to this process as \"InI Consciousness\" or \"Isciousness\". Rastas typically refer to Haile Selassie as \"Haile Selassie I\", thus indicating their belief in his divinity. Rastas also typically believe that the phonetics of a word should be linked to its meaning. For instance, Rastas often use the word \"downpression\" in place of \"oppression\" because oppression bears \"down\" on people rather than lifting them \"up\", with \"up\" being phonetically akin to \"opp-\". Similarly, they often favour \"livicate\" over \"dedicate\" because \"ded-\" is phonetically akin to the word \"dead\". In the early decades of the religion's development, Rastas often said \"Peace and Love\" as a greeting, although the use of this declined as Rastafari matured.\nRastas often make use of the colours red, black, green, and gold. Red, gold, and green were used in the Ethiopian flag, while, prior to the development of Rastafari, the Jamaican black nationalist activist Marcus Garvey had used red, green, and black as the colours for the Pan-African flag representing his United Negro Improvement Association. According to Garvey, the red symbolised the blood of martyrs, the black symbolised the skin of Africans, and the green represented the vegetation of the land, an interpretation endorsed by some Rastas. The colour gold is often included alongside Garvey's three colours; it has been adopted from the Jamaican flag, and is often interpreted as symbolising the minerals and raw materials which constitute Africa's wealth. Rastas often paint these colours onto their buildings, vehicles, kiosks, and other items, or display them on their clothing, helping to distinguish Rastas from non-Rastas and allowing adherents to recognise their co-religionists. As well as being used by Rastas, the colour set has also been adopted by Pan-Africanists more broadly, who use it to display their identification with Afrocentricity; for this reason it was adopted on the flags of many post-independence African states. Rastas often accompany the use of these three or four colours with the image of the Lion of Judah, also adopted from the Ethiopian flag and symbolizing Haile Selassie.\nDiet.\nRastas seek to produce food \"naturally\", eating what they call ital, or \"natural\" food. This is often grown organically, and locally. Most Rastas adhere to the dietary laws outlined in the Book of Leviticus, and thus avoid eating pork or crustaceans. Other Rastas remain vegetarian, or vegan, a practice stemming from their interpretation of Leviticus. Many also avoid the addition of additives, including sugar and salt, to their food. Rasta dietary practices may be denigrated by non-Rastas; in Ghana for example, where food traditionally includes a high meat content, the Rastas' emphasis on vegetable produce has led to the saying that they \"eat like sheep and goats\". In Jamaica, Rasta practitioners have commercialised ital food, for instance by selling fruit juices prepared according to Rasta custom.\nRastafarians typically avoid food produced by non-Rastas or from unknown sources. Rasta men refuse to eat food prepared by a woman while she is menstruating, and some will avoid food prepared by a woman at any time. Rastas also generally avoid alcohol, cigarettes, and hard drugs such as heroin and cocaine, presenting these substances as unnatural and dirty and contrasting them with cannabis. Rastas also often avoid mainstream scientific medicine and will reject surgery, injections, or blood transfusions. Instead they utilise herbal medicine for healing, especially teas and poultices, with cannabis often used as an ingredient.\nAppearance.\nRastas use their physical appearance as a means of visually demarcating themselves from non-Rastas. Male practitioners will often grow long beards, and many Rastas prefer to wear African styles of clothing, such as dashikis, rather than styles that originated in Western countries. However, it is the formation of hair into dreadlocks that is one of the most recognisable Rasta symbols. Rastas believe that dreadlocks are promoted in the Bible, specifically in the Book of Numbers, and regard them as a symbol of strength linked to the hair of the Biblical figure of Samson. They argue that their dreadlocks mark a covenant that they have made with Jah, and reflect their commitment to the idea of 'naturalness'. They also perceive the wearing of dreads as a symbolic rejection of Babylon and a refusal to conform to its norms regarding grooming aesthetics. Rastas are often critical of black people who straighten their hair, believing that it is an attempt to imitate white European hair and thus reflects alienation from a person's African identity. Sometimes this dreadlocked hair is then shaped and styled, often inspired by a lion's mane symbolising Haile Selassie, who is regarded as \"the Conquering Lion of Judah\".\nRastas differ on whether they regard dreadlocks as compulsory for practicing the religion. Some Rastas do not wear their hair in dreadlocks; within the religion they are often termed \"cleanface\" Rastas, with those wearing dreadlocked hair often called \"locksmen\". Some Rastas have also joined the Ethiopian Orthodox Tewahedo Church, the Christian organisation to which Haile Selassie belonged, and these individuals are forbidden from putting their hair in dreadlocks by the Church. In reference to Rasta hairstyles, Rastas often refer to non-Rastas as \"baldheads\", or \"combsome\", while those who are new to Rastafari and who have only just started to grow their hair into dreads are termed \"nubbies\". Members of the Bobo Ashanti sect of Rastas conceal their dreadlocks within turbans, while some Rastas tuck their dreads under a rastacap or tam headdress, usually coloured green, red, black, and yellow. Dreadlocks and Rastafari-inspired clothing have also been worn for aesthetic reasons by non-Rastas. For instance, many reggae musicians who do not adhere to the Rastafari religion wear their hair in dreads.\nFrom the beginning of the Rastafari movement in the 1930s, adherents typically grew beards and tall hair, perhaps in imitation of Haile Selassie. The wearing of hair as dreadlocks then emerged as a Rasta practice in the 1940s; there were debates within the movement as to whether dreadlocks should be worn or not, with proponents of the style becoming dominant. There are various claims as to how this practice was adopted. One claim is that it was adopted in imitation of certain African nations, such as the Maasai, Somalis, or Oromo, or that it was inspired by the hairstyles worn by some of those involved in the anti-colonialist Mau Mau Uprising in Kenya. An alternative explanation is that it was inspired by the hairstyles of the Hindu sadhus.\nThe wearing of dreadlocks has contributed to negative views of Rastafari among non-Rastas, many of whom regard it as wild and unattractive. Dreadlocks remain socially stigmatised in many societies; in Ghana for example, they are often associated with the homeless and mentally ill, with such associations of marginality extending onto Ghanaian Rastas. In Jamaica during the mid-20th century, teachers and police officers used to forcibly cut off the dreads of Rastas. In various countries, Rastas have since won legal battles ensuring their right to wear dreadlocks: in 2020, for instance, the High Court of Malawi ruled that all public schools must allow their students to wear dreadlocks. The decision is to be enforced before the 30th of June 2023 or schools will be in breach of the country's constitution.\nHistory.\nRastafari developed out of the legacy of the Atlantic slave trade, in which over ten million enslaved Africans were transported to the Americas between the 16th and 19th centuries. Under 700,000 of these slaves were settled in the British colony of Jamaica. The British government abolished slavery in the Caribbean island in 1834, although racial prejudice remained prevalent across Jamaican society.\nEthiopianism, Back to Africa, and Marcus Garvey.\nRastafari owed much to intellectual frameworks arising in the 19th and early 20th centuries. One key influence on Rastafari was Christian Revivalism, with the Great Revival of 1860\u201361 drawing many Afro-Jamaicans to join churches. Increasing numbers of Pentecostal missionaries from the United States arrived in Jamaica during the early 20th century, climaxing in the 1920s.\nFurther contributing significantly to Rastafari's development were Ethiopianism and the Back to Africa ethos, both traditions with 18th-century roots. In the 19th century, there were growing calls for the African diaspora located in Western Europe and the Americas to be resettled in Africa, with some of this diaspora establishing colonies in Sierra Leone and Liberia. Based in Liberia, the black Christian preacher Edward Wilmot Blyden began promoting African pride and the preservation of African tradition, customs, and institutions. Also spreading throughout Africa was Ethiopianism, a movement that accorded special status to the east African nation of Ethiopia because it was mentioned in various Biblical passages. For adherents of Ethiopianism, \"Ethiopia\" was regarded as a synonym of Africa as a whole.\nOf significant influence on Rastafari was the Jamaican activist Marcus Garvey, who spent much of his adult life in the US and Britain. Garvey supported the idea of global racial separatism and called for part of the African diaspora to relocate to Africa. His ideas faced opposition from civil rights activists like W. E. B. Du Bois who supported racial integration, and as a mass movement, Garveyism declined in the Great Depression of the 1930s. A rumour later spread that in 1916, Garvey had called on his supporters to \"look to Africa\" for the crowning of a black king; this quote was never verified. However, in August 1930, Garvey's play, \"Coronation of an African King\", was performed in Kingston. Its plot revolved around the crowning of the fictional Prince Cudjoe of Sudan, although it anticipated the crowning of Haile Selassie later that year. Rastas hold Garvey in great esteem, with many regarding him as a prophet. Garvey knew of Rastafari, but took a largely negative view of the religion; he also became a critic of Haile Selassie, calling him \"a great coward\" who rules a \"country where black men are chained and flogged\".\nHaile Selassie and the early Rastas: 1930\u20131949.\nHaile Selassie was crowned Emperor of Ethiopia in 1930, becoming the first sovereign monarch crowned in Sub-Saharan Africa since 1891 and first Christian one since 1889. A number of Jamaica's Christian clergymen claimed that Selassie's coronation was evidence that he was the black messiah that they believed was prophesied in the Book of Revelation, the Book of Daniel, and Psalms. Over the following years, several street preachers\u2014most notably Leonard Howell, Archibald Dunkley, Robert Hinds, and Joseph Hibbert\u2014began claiming that Haile Selassie was the returned Jesus. They first did so in Kingston, and soon the message spread throughout 1930s Jamaica, especially among poor communities who were hit particularly hard by the Great Depression. Clarke stated that \"to all intents and purposes this was the beginning\" of the Rastafari movement.\nHowell was the early movement's \"leading figure\". He preached that black Africans were superior to white Europeans and that Afro-Jamaicans should owe their allegiance to Haile Selassie rather than to King George V. The island's colonial authorities arrested him and charged him with sedition in 1934, resulting in a two-year imprisonment. Following his release, Howell established the Ethiopian Salvation Society and in 1939 formed a Rasta community, known as Pinnacle, in Saint Catherine Parish. Jamaica's police feared that Howell was plotting an armed rebellion and raided Pinnacle repeatedly. Pinnacle ultimately closed in 1954 and Howell was committed to a mental hospital.\nIn 1936, Italy invaded and occupied Ethiopia, and Haile Selassie went into exile. The invasion brought international condemnation and led to growing sympathy for the Ethiopian cause. In 1937, Selassie created the Ethiopian World Federation, which established a branch in Jamaica later that decade. In 1941, Allied forces drove the Italians out of Ethiopia and Selassie returned to reclaim his throne. Many Rastas interpreted this as the fulfilment of a prophecy made in the Book of Revelation.\nGrowing visibility: 1950\u20131969.\nRastafari's main appeal was among Jamaica's lower classes. For its first thirty years, Rastafari was in a conflictual relationship with the Jamaican authorities. Jamaica's Rastas expressed contempt for many aspects of the island's society, viewing the government, police, bureaucracy, professional classes, and established churches as instruments of Babylon. Relations between practitioners and the police were strained, with Rastas often being arrested for cannabis possession. During the 1950s the movement grew rapidly in Jamaica and also spread to other Caribbean islands, the United States, and the United Kingdom.\nIn the 1940s and 1950s, a more militant brand of Rastafari emerged. The vanguard of this was the House of Youth Black Faith, a group largely based in West Kingston. Backlash against the Rastas grew after a practitioner allegedly killed a woman in 1957. In March 1958, the first Rastafarian Universal Convention was held in Back-o-Wall, Kingston. Following the event, militant Rastas unsuccessfully tried to capture the city in the name of Haile Selassie. Later that year they tried again in Spanish Town. The increasing militancy of some Rastas resulted in growing alarm; according to Cashmore, the Rastas became \"folk devils\" in Jamaican society.\nIn 1959, the self-declared prophet and founder of the African Reform Church, Claudius Henry, sold thousands of tickets to Afro-Jamaicans, including many Rastas, for passage on a ship that he claimed would take them to Africa. The ship never arrived and Henry was charged with fraud. In 1960 he was sentenced to six years imprisonment for conspiring to overthrow the government. Henry's son was accused of being part of a paramilitary cell and executed, confirming public fears about Rasta violence. One of the most prominent clashes between Rastas and law enforcement was the Coral Gardens incident of 1963, in which an initial skirmish between police and Rastas resulted in several deaths and led to a larger roundup of practitioners. Clamping down on the Rasta movement, in 1964 the island's government implemented tougher laws surrounding cannabis use.\nAt the invitation of its government, Haile Selassie visited Jamaica for the first time on 21 April 1966, with thousands of Rastas assembled to meet him at the airport. Over the course of the 1960s, Jamaica's Rasta community underwent a process of routinisation, with the late 1960s witnessing the launch of the first official Rastafarian newspaper, the Rastafarian Movement Association's \"Rasta Voice\". The decade also saw Rastafari develop in increasingly complex ways, as it did when some Rastas began to reinterpret the idea that salvation required a physical return to Africa, instead interpreting salvation as coming through a process of mental decolonisation that embraced African approaches to life.\nWhereas its membership had previously derived predominantly from poorer sectors of society, in the 1960s Rastafari began attracting support from more privileged groups like students and professional musicians. The foremost group emphasising this approach was the Twelve Tribes of Israel, whose members came to be known as \"Uptown Rastas\". Many Rastas came under the influence of the Guyanese black nationalist academic Walter Rodney, who lectured to their community in 1968 before publishing his thoughts as the pamphlet \"Groundings\". Like Rodney, many Jamaican Rastas were influenced by the U.S.-based Black Power movement, and after that movement declined, Rastafari filled the vacuum it left for many black youth.\nInternational spread and decline: 1970\u2013present.\nIn the mid-1970s, reggae's international popularity exploded. The most successful reggae artist, Bob Marley, played a major role in introducing Rastafari themes to audiences across the world. Reggae's popularity led to a growth in \"pseudo-Rastafarians\", individuals who listened to reggae and wore Rasta clothing but did not share its belief system. Many Rastas were angered by this, believing it commercialised their religion.\nThrough reggae, Rasta musicians became increasingly important in Jamaica's political life during the 1970s. To bolster his popularity with the electorate, Jamaican Prime Minister Michael Manley employed Rasta imagery and courted support from Marley and other reggae musicians. Manley described Rastas as a \"beautiful and remarkable people\" and carried a cane which he claimed was a gift from Haile Selassie. Following Manley's example, Jamaican political parties increasingly employed Rasta language, symbols, and reggae references in their campaigns, while Rasta symbols became increasingly mainstream in Jamaican society. This helped to confer greater legitimacy on Rastafari, with reggae and Rasta imagery being increasingly presented as a core part of Jamaica's cultural heritage for the growing tourist industry. In the 1980s, a Rasta, Barbara Makeda Blake Hannah, became a senator in the Jamaican Parliament.\nEnthusiasm for Rastafari was likely dampened by the death of Haile Selassie in 1975 and that of Marley in 1981. During the 1980s, the number of Rastas in Jamaica declined, with Pentecostal and other Charismatic Christian groups proving more successful at attracting young recruits. Several prominent Rastas converted to Christianity, and two of those who did so\u2014Judy Mowatt and Tommy Cowan\u2014maintained that Marley had converted to Christianity, in the form of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church, during his final days. The significance of Rastafari messages in reggae also declined with the growing popularity of dancehall, a Jamaican musical genre that typically foregrounded lyrical themes of hyper-masculinity, violence, and sexual activity rather than religious symbolism.\nThe mid-1990s saw a revival of Rastafari-focused reggae associated with musicians like Anthony B, Buju Banton, Luciano, Sizzla, and Capleton. From the 1990s, Jamaica also witnessed the growth of organised political activity within the Rasta community, seen for instance through campaigns for the legalisation of cannabis and the creation of political parties like the Jamaican Alliance Movement and the Imperial Ethiopian World Federation Incorporated Political Party, none of which attained more than minimal electoral support. In 1995, the Rastafari Centralization Organization was established in Jamaica as an attempt to organise the Rastafari community.\nOrganisation.\nRastafari is not a homogeneous movement and has no single administrative structure, nor any single leader. A majority of Rastas avoid centralised and hierarchical structures because they do not want to replicate the structures of Babylon and because their religion's ultra-individualistic ethos places emphasis on inner divinity. The structure of most Rastafari groups is less like that of Christian denominations and is instead akin to the cellular structure of other African diasporic traditions like Haitian Vodou, Cuban Santer\u00eda, and Jamaica's Revival Zion. Since the 1970s, there have been attempts to unify all Rastas, namely through the establishment of the Rastafari Movement Association, which sought political mobilisation. In 1982, the first international assembly of Rastafari groups took place in Toronto, Canada. This and subsequent international conferences, assemblies, and workshops have helped to cement global networks and cultivate an international community of Rastas.\nMansions of Rastafari.\nSub-divisions of Rastafari are often referred to as \"houses\" or \"mansions\", in keeping with a passage from the Gospel of John (14:2): as translated in the King James Bible, Jesus states, \"In my father's house are many mansions\". The three most prominent branches are the House of Nyabinghi, the Bobo Ashanti, and the Twelve Tribes of Israel, although other important groups include the Church of Haile Selassie I, Inc., and the Fulfilled Rastafari. By fragmenting into different houses without any single leader, Rastafari became more resilient amid opposition from Jamaica's government during the early decades of the movement.\nProbably the largest Rastafari group, the House of Nyabinghi is an aggregate of more traditional and militant Rastas who seek to keep the movement close to the way in which it existed during the 1940s. They stress the idea that Haile Selassie was Jah and the reincarnation of Jesus. The wearing of dreadlocks is regarded as indispensable and patriarchal gender roles are strongly emphasised. According to Cashmore, writing in 1983, they are \"vehemently anti-white\". Nyabinghi Rastas refuse to compromise with Babylon and are often critical of reggae musicians like Marley for collaborating with the commercial music industry.\nThe Bobo Ashanti sect was founded in Jamaica by Emanuel Charles Edwards through the establishment of his Ethiopia Africa Black International Congress (EABIC) in 1958. The group established a commune in Bull Bay, where they were led by Edwards until his death in 1994. The group hold to a highly rigid ethos, and are influenced by Mosaic Law. Edwards advocated the idea of a new trinity, with Haile Selassie as the living God, himself as the Christ, and Garvey as the prophet. Male members are divided into two categories: the \"priests\" who conduct religious services and the \"prophets\" who take part in reasoning sessions. It places greater restrictions on women than most other forms of Rastafari; women are regarded as impure because of menstruation and childbirth and so are not permitted to cook for men. The group teaches that black Africans are God's chosen people and are superior to white Europeans, with members often refusing to associate with white people. By the opening decades of the twenty-first century, the Bobo Ashanti have become more welcoming of outsiders, even those who are menstruating. Bobo Ashanti Rastas are recognisable by their long, flowing robes and turbans.\nThe Twelve Tribes of Israel group was founded in 1968 in Kingston by Vernon Carrington. He proclaimed himself the reincarnation of the Old Testament prophet Gad and his followers call him \"Prophet Gad\", \"Brother Gad\", or \"Gadman\". It is commonly regarded as the most liberal form of Rastafari and the closest to Christianity. Practitioners are often dubbed \"Christian Rastas\" because they believe Jesus is the only saviour; Haile Selassie is accorded importance, but is not viewed as the second coming of Jesus. The group divides its members into twelve groups according to which Hebrew calendar month they were born in; each month is associated with a particular colour, body part, and mental function. Maintaining dreadlocks and an Ital diet are considered commendable but not essential, while adherents are called upon to read a chapter of the Bible each day. Membership is open to individuals of any racial background.\nThe Twelve Tribes peaked in popularity during the 1970s, when it attracted artists, musicians, and many middle-class followers\u2014Marley among them\u2014resulting in the terms \"middle-class Rastas\" and \"uptown Rastas\" being applied to members of the group. Carrington died in 2005, since which time the Twelve Tribes of Israel have been led by an executive council. The council includes an equal number of men and women. As of 2010, it was recorded as being the largest of the centralised Rasta groups. It remains headquartered in Kingston, although it has followers outside Jamaica; the group was responsible for establishing the Rasta community in Shashamane, Ethiopia.\nThe Church of Haile Selassie, Inc., was founded by Abuna Foxe and operated much like a mainstream Christian church, with a hierarchy of functionaries, weekly services, and Sunday schools. In adopting this broad approach, the Church seeks to develop Rastafari's respectability in wider society. Fulfilled Rastafari is a multi-ethnic movement that has spread in popularity during the 21st century, in large part through the Internet. The Fulfilled Rastafari group accepts Haile Selassie's statements that he was a man and that he was a devout Christian, and so places emphasis on worshipping Jesus through the example set forth by Haile Selassie. The wearing of dreadlocks and the adherence to an ital diet are considered issues up to the individual.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBorn in the ghettos of Kingston, Jamaica, the Rastafarian movement has captured the imagination of thousands of black youth, and some white youth, throughout Jamaica, the Caribbean, Britain, France, and other countries in Western Europe and North America. It is also to be found in smaller numbers in parts of Africa\u2014for example, in Ethiopia, Ghana, and Senegal\u2014and in Australia and New Zealand, particularly among the Maori.\n\u2014 Sociologist of religion Peter B. Clarke, 1986 \nAs of 2012, there were an estimated 700,000 to 1,000,000 Rastas worldwide. They can be found in many different regions, including most of the world's major population centres. Rastafari's influence on wider society has been more substantial than its numerical size, particularly in fostering a racial, political, and cultural consciousness among the African diaspora and Africans themselves. Men dominate Rastafari. In its early years, most of its followers were men, and the women who did adhere to it tended to remain in the background. This picture of Rastafari's demographics has been confirmed by ethnographic studies conducted in the late 20th and early 21st centuries.\nThe Rasta message resonates with many people who feel marginalised and alienated by the values and institutions of their society. Internationally, it has proved most popular among the poor and among marginalised youth. In valorising Africa and blackness, Rastafari provides a positive identity for youth in the African diaspora by allowing them to psychologically reject their social stigmatisation. It then provides these disaffected people with the discursive stance from which they can challenge capitalism and consumerism, providing them with symbols of resistance and defiance. Cashmore expressed the view that \"whenever there are black people who sense an injust disparity between their own material conditions and those of the whites who surround them and tend to control major social institutions, the Rasta messages have relevance.\"\nConversion and deconversion.\nRastafari is a non-missionary religion. However, elders from Jamaica often go \"trodding\" to instruct new converts in the fundamentals of the religion. On researching English Rastas during the 1970s, Cashmore noted that they had not converted instantaneously, but rather had undergone \"a process of drift\" through which they gradually adopted Rasta beliefs and practices, resulting in their ultimate acceptance of Haile Selassie's central importance. Based on his research in West Africa, Neil J. Savishinsky found that many of those who converted to Rastafari came to the religion through their pre-existing use of marijuana as a recreational drug.\nRastas often claim that\u2014rather than converting to the religion\u2014they were actually always a Rasta and that their embrace of its beliefs was merely the realisation of this. There is no formal ritual carried out to mark an individual's entry into the Rastafari movement, although once they do join an individual often changes their name, with many including the prefix \"Ras\". Rastas regard themselves as an exclusive and elite community, membership of which is restricted to those who have the \"insight\" to recognise Haile Selassie's importance. Practitioners thus often regard themselves as the \"enlightened ones\" who have \"seen the light\". Many of them see no point in establishing good relations with non-Rastas, believing that the latter will never accept Rastafari doctrine as truth.\nSome Rastas have left the religion. Clarke noted that among British Rastas, some returned to Pentecostalism and other forms of Christianity, while others embraced Islam or no religion. Some English ex-Rastas described disillusionment when the societal transformation promised by Rastafari failed to appear, while others felt that while Rastafari would be appropriate for agrarian communities in Africa and the Caribbean, it was not suited to industrialised British society. Others experienced disillusionment after developing the view that Haile Selassie had been an oppressive leader of the Ethiopian people. Cashmore found that some British Rastas who had more militant views left the religion after finding its focus on reasoning and music insufficient for the struggle against white domination and racism.\nRegional spread.\nAlthough it remains most concentrated in the Caribbean, Rastafari has spread to many areas of the world and adapted into many localised variants. It has spread primarily in Anglophone regions and countries, largely because reggae music has primarily been produced in the English language. It is thus most commonly found in the Anglophone Caribbean, United States, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand, and Anglophone parts of Africa.\nJamaica and the Americas.\nBarrett described Rastafari as \"the largest, most identifiable, indigenous movement in Jamaica.\" In the mid-1980s, there were approximately 70,000 members and sympathisers of Rastafari in Jamaica. The majority were male, working-class, former Christians aged between 18 and 40. In the 2011 Jamaican census, 29,026 individuals identified as Rastas. Jamaica's Rastas were initially entirely from the Afro-Jamaican majority, and although Afro-Jamaicans are still the majority, Rastafari has also gained members from the island's Chinese, Indian, Afro-Chinese, Afro-Jewish, mulatto, and white minorities. Until 1965, the vast majority were from the lower classes, although it has since attracted many middle-class members; by the 1980s, there were Jamaican Rastas working as lawyers and university professors. Jamaica is often valorised by Rastas as the fountain-head of their faith, and many Rastas living elsewhere travel to the island on pilgrimage.\nBoth through travel between the islands, and through reggae's popularity, Rastafari spread across the eastern Caribbean during the 1970s. Here, its ideas complemented the anti-colonial and Afrocentric views prevalent in countries like Trinidad, Grenada, Dominica, and St Vincent. In these countries, the early Rastas often engaged in cultural and political movements to a greater extent than their Jamaican counterparts had. Various Rastas were involved in Grenada's 1979 New Jewel Movement and were given positions in the Grenadine government until it was overthrown and replaced following the U.S. invasion of 1983. Although Fidel Castro's Marxist\u2013Leninist government generally discouraged foreign influences, Rastafari was introduced to Cuba alongside reggae in the 1970s. Foreign Rastas studying in Cuba during the 1990s connected with its reggae scene and helped to further ground it in Rasta beliefs. In Cuba, most Rastas have been male and from the Afro-Cuban population.\nRastafari was introduced to the United States and Canada with the migration of Jamaicans to continental North America in the 1960s and 1970s. American police were often suspicious of Rastas and regarded Rastafari as a criminal sub-culture. Rastafari also attracted converts from within several Native American communities and picked up some support from white members of the hippie subculture, which was then in decline. In Latin America, small communities of Rastas have also established in Brazil, Panama, and Nicaragua.\nAfrica.\nSome Rastas in the African diaspora have followed through with their beliefs about resettlement in Africa, with Ghana and Nigeria being particularly favoured. In West Africa, Rastafari has spread largely through the popularity of reggae, gaining a larger presence in Anglophone areas than their Francophone counterparts.\nCaribbean Rastas arrived in Ghana during the 1960s, encouraged by its first post-independence president, Kwame Nkrumah, while some native Ghanaians also converted to the religion. The largest congregation of Rastas has been in southern parts of Ghana, around Accra, Tema, and the Cape Coast, although Rasta communities also exist in the Muslim-majority area of northern Ghana. Middleton suggests that Rasta migrants' dreadlocks resembled the hairstyles of the native fetish priests, which may have assisted the presentation of these Rastas as having authentic African roots in Ghanaian society. However, Alhassan has noted that prejudice against people wearing dreadlocks was present among at least some Ghanaians in 2008. Ghanaian Rastas have also complained of social ostracism and prosecution for cannabis possession, while non-Rastas in Ghana often consider them to be \"drop-outs\", \"too Western\", and \"not African enough\". Conversely, Alhassan noted an increased acceptance of dreadlocks by 2017, with notable Ghanaians such as Lordina Mahama and Ursula Owusu-Ekuful wearing their hair in this style. This has reportedly coincided with increased interest in Rastafari in Ghana. Alhassan suggests Ghanaians \"trod the path\" to Rastafari to \"affirm their African identity\" and engage in Pan-African anti-colonial politics, \"despite adverse social consequences\".\nA smaller number of Rastas are found in Muslim-majority countries of West Africa, such as Gambia and Senegal. One West African group that wear dreadlocks are the Baye Faal, a Mouride sect in Senegambia, some of whose practitioners have started calling themselves \"Rastas\" in reference to their visual similarity to Rastafari. The popularity of dreadlocks and marijuana among the Baye Faal may have been spread in large part through access to Rasta-influenced reggae in the 1970s. A small community of Rastas also appeared in Burkina Faso.\nIn the 1960s, a Rasta settlement was established in Shashamane, Ethiopia, on land made available by Haile Selassie's Ethiopian World Federation. The community faced many problems; 500 acres were confiscated by the Marxist government of Mengistu Haile Mariam. There were also conflicts with local Ethiopians, who largely regarded the incoming Rastas, and their Ethiopian-born children, as foreigners. The Shashamane community peaked at a population of 2,000, although subsequently declined to around 200.\nBy the early 1990s, a Rasta community existed in Nairobi, Kenya, whose approach to the religion was informed both by reggae and by traditional Kikuyu religion. Rastafari groups have also appeared in Zimbabwe, Malawi and in South Africa; in 2008, there were at least 12,000 Rastas in the country. At an African Union/Caribbean Diaspora conference in South Africa in 2005, a statement was released characterising Rastafari as a force for integration of Africa and the African diaspora.\nEurope.\nDuring the 1950s and 1960s, Rastas were among the thousands of Caribbean migrants who settled in the United Kingdom, leading to small groups appearing in areas of London such as Brixton and Notting Hill in the 1950s. By the late 1960s, Rastafari had attracted converts from the second generation of British Caribbean people, spreading beyond London to cities like Birmingham, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, and Bristol. Its spread was aided by the gang structures that had been cultivated among black British youth by the rudeboy subculture, and gained increasing attention in the 1970s through reggae's popularity. According to the 2001 United Kingdom Census there are about 5000 Rastafari living in England and Wales. Clarke described Rastafari as a small but \"extremely influential\" component of black British life.\nRastafari also established itself in various continental European countries, among them the Netherlands, Germany, Portugal, Ukraine, and France, gaining a particular foothold among black migrant populations but also attracting white converts. In France for instance it established a presence in two cities with substantial black populations, Paris and Bordeaux, while in the Netherlands, it attracted converts within the Surinamese migrant community.\nAustralasia and Asia.\nRastafari attracted membership from within the Maori population of New Zealand, and the Aboriginal population of Australia. Rastafari has also established a presence in Japan, including a small rural community of Rasta musicians in Yoshino. Japanese Rastafari emerged from the 1960s counterculture and focuses on issues such as rural communities, colonialism, imperialism, capitalism and the environment. Rastafari is also established in Israel, primarily among those highlighting similarities between Judaism and Rastafari.\nReferences.\nBiblical citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42136", "revid": "26002535", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42136", "title": "Johann Eck", "text": "German Catholic theologian (1486\u20131543)\nJohann Eck (13 November 1486 \u2013 10 February 1543), also known as Johann Maier von Eck and often anglicized as John Eck, was a German Roman Catholic theologian, scholastic, prelate, and opponent of Martin Luther.\nLife.\nJohann Eck was born Johann Maier at Eck (later Egg, near Memmingen, Swabia) and derived his additional surname from his birthplace, which he himself, after 1523, always modified into Eckius or Eccius, i.e. \"of Eck\". His father, Michael Maier, was a peasant and bailiff, or \"Amtmann\", of the village. The boy's education was undertaken by his uncle, Martin Maier, parish priest at Rottenburg on the river Neckar.\nAt the age of 12 he entered the University of Heidelberg, which he left in the following year for T\u00fcbingen. After taking his master's degree in 1501, he began the study of theology under Johann Jakob Lempp, and studied the elements of Hebrew and political economy with Konrad Summenhart.\nJohann Eck left T\u00fcbingen in 1501 on account of the plague and after a year at Cologne finally settled at Freiburg University, at first as a student of theology and law and later as a successful teacher where he was mentor to the prominent Anabaptist leader of Waldshut and Nikolsburg, Balthasar Hubmaier, and later retaining this relationship during their move to the University of Ingolstadt. In 1508, he entered the priesthood in Strasbourg and two years later obtained his doctorate in theology.\nAt Freiburg in 1506 he published his first work, \"Ludicra logices exercitamenta\". At odds with his colleagues, he accepted a call to a theological chair at Ingolstadt in November 1510, also receiving a canonry at Eichstadt. In 1512, he became prochancellor at the university and made the institution a bulwark of Catholicism. In the theological field he produced his \"Chrysopassus\" (Augsburg, 1514), in which he developed a theory of predestination, and also commented on the \"Summulae\" of Peter of Spain and on Aristotle's \"De caelo\" and \"De anima\".\nAs a political economist he defended the lawfulness of putting out capital at interest, arguing his view at disputations at Augsburg (1514), Bologna (1515), and Vienna in 1516 where he also disputed about predestination. Through these successes he gained the patronage of the Fuggers.\nBetween 1516 and 1520, in addition to all his other duties, he published commentaries on the \"Summulae\" of Petrus Hispanus, and on the \"Dialectics\", \"Physics\" and lesser scientific works of Aristotle. During these early years, Eck was considered a modern theologian, and his commentaries were informed by the New Learning. His aim, however, had been to find a \"via media\" between old and new.\nHe championed the cause of the papacy, writing \"De primatu Petri\" in 1519, and his \"Enchiridion locorum communium adversus Lutherum\" ran through 46 editions between 1525 and 1576. From 1530 to 1535 he published a collection of his writings against Luther, \"Opera contra Ludderum\", in 4 vols. He verbally assailed his friend, humanist and jurist Ulrich Zasius, for a doctrine proclaimed ten years before, and Erasmus's \"Annotationes in Novum Testamentum\". Eck died at Ingolstadt on 10 February 1543.\nDisputations with Luther and Karlstadt.\nAs early as the spring of 1517 Eck had entered into friendly relations with Martin Luther, who had regarded him as in harmony with his own views, but this relationship was short-lived. In his \"Obelisci\", Eck attacked Luther's theses, which had been sent to him by Christoph von Scheurl, and accused him of promoting the \"heresy of the Bohemian Brethren\", fostering anarchy within the Church and branded him a Hussite. Luther replied in his \"Asterisci adversus obeliscos Eccii\", while Andreas Karlstadt defended Luther's views of indulgences and engaged in a violent controversy with Eck.\nA mutual desire for a public disputation led to a compact between Eck and Luther by which the former pledged himself to meet Karlstadt in debate at Erfurt or Leipzig, on condition that Luther abstain from all participation in the discussion. In December 1518, Eck published the twelve theses which he was prepared to uphold against Karlstadt, but since they were aimed at Luther rather than at the ostensible opponent, Luther addressed an open letter to Karlstadt, in which he declared himself ready to meet Eck in debate.\nThe disputation between Eck and Karlstadt began at Leipzig on 27 June 1519. In the first four sessions Eck maintained the thesis that free will is the active agent in the creation of good works, but he was compelled by his opponent to modify his position so as to concede that the grace of God and free will work in harmony toward the common end. Karlstadt then proceeded to argue that good works are to be ascribed to the agency of God alone, whereupon Eck yielded so far as to admit that free will is passive in the beginning of conversion, although he maintained that in the course of time it enters into its rights; so that while the entirety of good works originates in God, their accomplishment is not entirely the work of God.\nDespite the fact that Eck was thus virtually forced to abandon his position, he succeeded in confusing Karlstadt and carried off the victory. He was less successful against Luther, who, according to Eck, was his superior in memory, acumen, and learning. After a disputation on the supremacy of the papacy, purgatory, penance, etc., lasting twenty-three days (4 July\u201327 July), the arbitrators declined to give a verdict. Eck did succeed in making Luther admit that there was some truth in the Hussite opinions and declare himself against the Pope, but this success only embittered his animosity against his opponents. Eck also forced Luther to declare that Ecumenical Councils were sometimes errant, as in the case when Constance (1414\u20131418) condemned Jan Hus in 1415. Luther effectively denied the authority of both pope and council. Eck was greeted as victor by the theologians of the University of Leipzig.\nAttacks on Luther and Melanchthon.\nSoon after his return to Ingolstadt, Eck attempted to persuade Elector Frederick of Saxony to have Luther's works burned in public, and, in 1519, he published eight writings against the new movement. He failed, however, to obtain a condemnatory decision from the universities appointed to pronounce on the outcome of the Leipzig disputation. Erfurt returned the proceedings of the meeting to the Saxon duke without signifying its approval, while Paris, after repeated urging, gave an ambiguous decision limited to \"the doctrine of Luther so far as investigated\".\nEck's only followers were the aged heretic-hunter Hoogstraten and Emser of Leipzig, together with the allied authorities of the universities of Cologne and Leuven. Luther returned Eck's assaults with more than equal vehemence and about this time Philipp Melanchthon wrote to \u0152colampadius that at Leipzig he had first become distinctly aware of the difference between what he considered to be true Christian theology and the scholasticism of the Aristotelian doctors. In his \"Excusatio\", Eck retorted that Melanchthon knew nothing of theology, a claim Melanchthon responded to in his reply.\nEck fared even worse in October 1519 when he sought to aid Emser with a strongly worded tirade against Luther. Two satires, one by \u0152colampadius and the other by Willibald Pirckheimer, angered Eck who pushed for the public burning of the entire literature in the market-place at Ingolstadt, an act from which he was restrained by his colleague Reuchlin.\nPapal emissary and inquisitor.\nJohann Eck was more highly esteemed in Rome than in Germany, where he induced the universities of Cologne and Louvain to condemn Luther's writings, but failed to enlist the German princes. In January 1520, he visited Italy at the invitation of Pope Leo X, to whom he presented his latest work \"De primate Petri adversus Ludderum\" (Ingolstadt, 1520) for which he was rewarded with the nomination to the office of papal protonotary, although his efforts to urge the Curia to decisive action against Luther were unsuccessful for some time.\nIn July he returned to Germany with the bull \"Exsurge Domine\" directed against Luther's writings, in which forty-one propositions of Luther were condemned as heretical or erroneous. He now believed himself in a position to crush not only the \"Lutheran heretics\", but also his humanist critics. The effect of the publication of the bull, however, made this difficult. Universities and humanists were at one in denunciation of the outrage; and, due the attitude of the people, Eck was barely able to escape from Saxony alive.\nAt Meissen, Brandenburg, and Merseburg, he succeeded in giving the papal measure due official publicity, but at Leipzig he was the object of the ridicule of the student body and was compelled to flee by night to Freiberg, where he was again prevented from proclaiming the bull. At Erfurt the students tore the bull down and threw it into the water, while in other places the papal decree was subjected to still greater insults.\nIn his anger he appealed to force, and his \"Epistola ad Carolum V\" (18 February 1521) called on the emperor to take measures against Luther, an appeal soon answered by the Edict of Worms (May 1521). In 1521 and 1522 Eck was again in Rome, reporting on the results of his nunciature. On his return from his second visit he was the prime mover in the promulgation of the Bavarian religious edict of 1522, which practically established the senate of the University of Ingolstadt as a tribunal of the Inquisition. In return for this action of the duke, who had at first been opposed to the policy of repression, Eck obtained for him, during a third visit to Rome in 1523, valuable ecclesiastical concessions. He continued unabated in his zeal against the reformers, publishing eight major works from 1522 to 1526.\nWealth and power were included in the aspirations of Eck. He appropriated the revenues of his parish of G\u00fcnzburg, while he relegated its duties to a vicar. Twice he visited Rome as a diplomatic representative of the Bavarian court to obtain sanction for the establishment of a court of inquisition against the Lutheran teachings at Ingolstadt. The first of these journeys, late in the autumn of 1521, was fruitless on account of the death of Leo X, but his second journey two years later, in 1523, was successful. Eck was the prime mover in many heresy trials, including that of Leonhard Kaiser, whose history was published by Luther.\nZwingli and his followers.\nIn addition to his inquisitorial duties, every year witnessed the publication of one or more writings against iconoclasm and in defense of the doctrines of the Mass, purgatory, and auricular confession. His \"Enchiridion locorum communium adversus Lutherum et alios hostes ecclesiae\" (Landshut, 1525) went through forty-six editions before 1576. As its title indicates, it was directed primarily against Melanchthon's \"Loci Communes\", although it also concerned itself to some extent with the teachings of Huldrych Zwingli.\nAt Baden-in-Aargau from 21 May until 18 June 1526 a public disputation on the doctrine of transubstantiation was held, in which Eck and Thomas Murner were pitted against Johann Oecolampadius. The affair ended decidedly in favor of Eck, who induced the authorities to enter on a course of active persecution of Zwingli and his followers (Conference of Baden).\nThe effect of his victory at Baden was dissipated, however, at the Bern Disputation (January 1528), where the propositions advanced by the Reformers were debated in the absence of Eck, and Bern, Basel, and other places were definitely won for the Reformation. At the Diet of Augsburg (1530), Eck played the leading part among the Roman Catholic theologians.\nPeace overtures.\nFor the Diet of Augsburg, while still at Ingolstadt, Eck compiled what he considered to be 404 heretical propositions from the writings of the reformers as an aid to Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor.\nAt Augsburg he was charged by the Emperor to draw up, in concert with twenty other theologians, a refutation of the Lutheran Augsburg Confession, which had been delivered to the emperor on 25 June 1530, but he had to rewrite it five times before it suited the emperor. It was known as the \"Confutatio pontificia\", embodying the Catholic reaction to the reformers. He also was involved in the fruitless negotiations with the Protestant theologians, including Philipp Melanchthon, that took place at Augsburg; Eck with Wimpina and Cochl\u00e6us met the Lutherans in August.\nHe was at the Colloquy of Worms in 1540 where he showed some signs of a willingness to compromise. In January 1541 he renewed these efforts and succeeded in impressing Melanchthon as being prepared to give his assent to the main principles of the reformers, e.g. justification by faith; but at the diet of Regensburg in the spring and summer of 1541, he reasserted his opposition. Afterwards Eck clashed with Martin Bucer over the latter's published report of the diet.\nEck's German New Testament.\nEck produced a German translation of the Bible (the New Testament, a revision of H. Emser's rendering) which was first published at Ingolstadt in 1537.\nEck and the genealogy of Christ.\nEck made a sermon on the genealogy of Christ, naming Mary's mother's parents as Emerentia and Stollanus: \"The renowned Father John of Eck of Ingolstadt, in a sermon on St. Anne (published at Paris in 1579), pretends to know even the names of the parents St. Anne. He calls them Stollanus and Emerentia. He says that St. Anne was born after Stollanus and Emerentia had been childless for twenty years\".\nEck and the Jews.\nIn 1541 Eck published his \"Against the Defense of the Jews\" (German: \"Ains Juden-b\u00fcechlins Verlegung\"). In it he opposes the position of the Nuremberg reformer Andreas Osiander, who in the pamphlet \"Whether It Be True and Credible That the Jews Secretly Strangulate Christian Children and Make Use of Their Blood\" wanted to quash medieval suspicion that Jews were responsible for killing Christian children, desecrating the eucharistic Host, and poisoning wells. Eck accused Osiander of being a \"Jew-protector\" and \"Jew-father\", and no fewer than nineteen times reviled the Jews, and called them \"a blasphemous race\".\nFurther reading.\nEck at post reformation digital library: https://www.prdl.org/author_view.php?a_id=726"}
{"id": "42137", "revid": "19169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42137", "title": "The Greatest Show on Earth (film)", "text": "1952 film by Cecil B. DeMille\nThe Greatest Show on Earth is a 1952 American drama film produced and directed by Cecil B. DeMille, shot in Technicolor and released by Paramount Pictures. Set in the Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, the film stars Betty Hutton and Cornel Wilde as trapeze artists competing for the center ring and Charlton Heston as the circus manager. James Stewart also stars as a mysterious clown who never removes his makeup, and Dorothy Lamour and Gloria Grahame also play supporting roles.\nIn addition to the actors, the real Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey's Circus' 1951 troupe appears in the film with its complement of 1,400 people, hundreds of animals and 60 railroad cars of equipment and tents. The actors learned their circus roles and participated in the acts. The film's storyline is supported by lavish production values, actual circus acts and documentary-style views into the complex logistics behind big-top circuses.\nThe film won two Academy Awards for Best Picture and Best Story, and was nominated for Best Costume Design, Best Director and Best Film Editing. It also won Golden Globe Awards for Best Cinematography, Best Director and Best Motion Picture \u2013 Drama.\nPlot.\nBrad Braden is the no-nonsense general manager of the world's largest railroad circus. The show's board of directors want a short 10-week season rather than risk losing money in a postwar economy. Brad bargains to keep the circus on the road as long as it is profitable, thus keeping the 1,400 performers and staff employed.\nBrad tells Holly, his aerialist girlfriend, that she is no longer the starring act with top billing. World-famous aerialist (and notorious ladies man) \"The Great Sebastian\" has been hired as the main star to increase attendance. Heartbroken Holly claims Brad has no feelings. Meanwhile, beloved Buttons the Clown, who never appears without his makeup, seems to possess medical knowledge. Holly later reads a newspaper article about a mercy killer, but does not immediately connect the doctor who killed his wife to Buttons.\nSebastian arrives and is coldly greeted by two former lovers: Angel, who performs in the elephant act with the pathologically jealous Klaus, and Phyllis, another circus performer who does both an iron jaw and vocal performance act. Sebastian, attracted to Holly, offers her the center ring, knowing Brad will never allow the change. Disappointed, Holly vows her ring will become the main focus.\nButtons' mother attends a performance, warning him the police are on his trail. Meanwhile, the competition between the two aerialists becomes increasingly dangerous. The aerial duel ends when Sebastian removes his safety net, then suffers a serious fall when a stunt goes wrong. Buttons tends to him before the ambulance arrives, impressing the circus' doctor. Holly regains the center ring and star billing, but is devastated by how she attained it. Brad is unable to comfort her because she has romantic feelings for Sebastian.\nBrad catches and fires crooked midway concessionaire Harry for cheating customers. Harry hangs about the show's periphery sowing disaffection, particularly with the jealous Klaus. Sebastian eventually rejoins the show, but with his right arm paralyzed, can only do menial work. A guilt-ridden Holly professes she loves Sebastian, believing Brad has no feelings for her. When Angel starts a relationship with Brad, Klaus threatens to kill Angel during a performance with one of the elephants. Brad intervenes and fires Klaus.\nAn FBI special agent hunting the mercy killer accompanies the circus train, believing the doctor might be hiding in the show. Brad, never having seen Buttons out of makeup, does not recognize the doctor's photo. Meanwhile, Buttons tells Brad that Sebastian has regained some feeling in his hand. Brad, having made the connection, casually mentions that the FBI man will be taking fingerprints at the next stop, allowing Buttons to escape or lie low.\nDuring a jump to a new venue, Harry and Klaus stop the first train to rob the pay wagon. Klaus sees the second section coming, and realizes that Angel is aboard. He turns his car's headlights down the track to warn the oncoming train. Unable to brake in time, the second train smashes the car, killing Klaus and Harry, then collides with the first section, causing destruction and mayhem.\nBrad is pinned in the wreckage and severely bleeding. Holly stops Buttons from slipping away and begs him to help Brad. Buttons gives Brad a direct blood transfusion from Sebastian. Special Agent Gregory assists him and afterwards reluctantly arrests Buttons.\nHolly takes command, mounting a parade and an open-air performance. Brad realizes he loves Holly, and Sebastian proposes to Angel. Holly leads the performers in an improvised \"spec\" around the three rings \u2013 a recovery from the disaster that insures the circus will continue its national tour.\nCast.\nThe film features about 85 Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus acts, including clowns Emmett Kelly and Lou Jacobs, midget Cucciola, bandmaster Merle Evans, foot juggler Miss Loni and aerialist Antoinette Concello. John Ringling North plays himself as the owner of the circus.\nThe film includes several unbilled cameo appearances (mostly in the circus audiences) including Bob Hope and Bing Crosby, Lamour's costars in the \"Road to ...\" films. William Boyd appears in his usual guise of Hopalong Cassidy. Danny Thomas, Van Heflin, character actor Oliver Blake and Noel Neill are seen as circus patrons. Leon Ames is seen and heard in the train wreck sequence. A barker, kept anonymous until the film's end, is seen in the closing moments of the film. The voice is finally revealed to be that of Edmond O'Brien.\nProduction.\nThe film was shot in Sarasota, Florida, where locals were paid 75 cents per hour as extras.\nOne story concerning the movie says that Lucille Ball was offered Gloria Grahame's role but withdrew when she discovered that she was pregnant with her first child, Lucie Arnaz. However, this account has been disputed because when DeMille was filming with Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, Ball was preparing \"I Love Lucy\" for its launch on CBS.\nArt Concello, who was the general manager of Ringling Bros. at the time DeMille was traveling with the show, figured out how to execute the stunt and doubled for Cornel Wilde in the Great Sebastian's fall scene. He had been a headlining aerialist when he was a performer.\nBetty Hutton and Wilde had to learn how to fly on the trapeze for their scenes. Wilde may have faced difficulty because of his acrophobia. Hutton became quite proficient with the single bar. Film footage exists showing Hutton rehearsing in the air, talking to DeMille who had ridden to her height on a camera crane. Hutton's stunt double was La Norma Fox, also from Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus.\nThe music for the song \"Lovely Luawana Lady\" was written by John Ringling North, who appears briefly as himself during the discussion about whether the show would play the road rather than have a short ten-week season. North was a nephew of the five Ringling brothers who founded Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus, and was its owner at the time.\nRelease.\nThe film premiered at Radio City Music Hall January 10, 1952. The film made its \"Road Premiere\" at the Florida Theater (now the Sarasota Opera House) in Sarasota, Florida.\nThe film earned $12.8 million at the box office in the United States and Canada, making it the highest-grossing film of 1952, as well as Paramount's most successful film to that time. It was also the most popular film in Britain in 1952 and the most popular film of the year in France in 1953.\nThe film played for 11 weeks at New York's Radio City Music Hall, a record duration that it shared with \"Random Harvest\" in 1942 and that would last until at least the 1960s.\nReception and legacy.\nContemporary.\nOn the film's release, Bosley Crowther in \"The New York Times\" called \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" a \"lusty triumph of circus showmanship and movie skill\" and a \"piece of entertainment that will delight movie audiences for years\":\nSprawling across a mammoth canvas, crammed with the real-life acts and thrills, as well as the vast backstage minutiae, that make the circus the glamorous thing it is and glittering in marvelous Technicolor\u2014truly marvelous color, we repeat\u2014this huge motion picture of the big-top is the dandiest ever put upon the screen.\n\"Time\" magazine called the film a \"mammoth merger of two masters of malarkey for the masses: P. T. Barnum and Cecil B. DeMille\" that \"fills the screen with pageants and parades [and] finds a spot for 60-odd circus acts,\" but its plot \"does not quite hold all this pageantry together.\" \"Variety\" wrote that the film \"effectively serve[s] the purpose of a framework for all the atmosphere and excitement of the circus on both sides of the big canvas.\"\nRetrospective.\nIn 1977, Joe Walders wrote in \"TV Guide\" that a film's box-office success does not necessarily translate to continued popularity on television, and cited \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" as a primary example: \"[It] was not only the top moneymaker of the year, but it also won the Academy Award for Best Picture. Yet it has rarely done well on television.\"\nCritic Leonard Maltin opined that \"like most of DeMille's movies, this may not be art, but it's hugely enjoyable.\"\nIn 2005, \"The Official Razzie Movie Guide: Enjoying the Best of Hollywood's Worst\" included \"The Greatest Show on Earth\".\nOn review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a score of 50% from 44 reviews, with an average rating of 5.9/10. The website's critics consensus reads, \"\"The Greatest Show on Earth\" is melodramatic, short on plot, excessively lengthy and bogged down with cliches, but not without a certain innocent charm.\" On Metacritic, the film holds a weighted average score of 76 out of 100 based on 12 reviews, indicating \"generally favorable reviews\".\nIn 2025, \"The Hollywood Reporter\" listed \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" as having the best stunts of 1952.\nAccolades.\nAt the 25th Academy Awards, the movie was nominated for five Academy Awards, winning two (for Best Picture and Best Motion Picture Story). It was the last Best Picture winner to win fewer than three Academy Awards until \"Spotlight\" (2015).\nOscar controversy.\nSome reviewers consider \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" among the weakest selections for the Academy Award for Best Picture, as it defeated highly rated films such as \"High Noon\", \"The Quiet Man\", \"Ivanhoe\", \"Moulin Rouge,\" and the unnominated \"Singin' in the Rain\". In 2005, \"Empire\" listed it as the third-worst Best Picture winner. MSNBC's Erik Lundegaard called \"Crash\" the \"worst Best Picture winner since the 'dull, bloated' film \"The Greatest Show on Earth.\"\" In 2013, the selection of \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" rather than \"High Noon\" was listed by \"Time\" among the 10 most controversial Best Picture races. \"Premiere\" placed the film on its list of the 10 worst Oscar winners. It holds the second-lowest spot on Rotten Tomatoes' 2011 list of the 90 films to win Best Picture (ahead of only 1929's \"The Broadway Melody\").\nStanley Kramer alleged that the film's Best Picture Oscar was the result of the political climate in Hollywood in 1952. Senator Joseph McCarthy was pursuing communists at the time, and DeMille was a conservative Republican involved with the National Committee for a Free Europe. Another Best Picture nominee, \"High Noon\", was produced by Carl Foreman, who would soon appear on the Hollywood blacklist, and one of the scriptwriters of \"Ivanhoe\", Marguerite Roberts, was also blacklisted.\nHowever, it is also possible that \"The Greatest Show On Earth\" won Best Picture because it was seen as a last chance for DeMille to win a competitive Oscar. A Hollywood legend, DeMille's best work had been done during the silent film era, before the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences was established. It is possible that the members of the academy who were veterans of the silent era felt that he, as an elder statesman of Hollywood and one of the founders of the academy, deserved the honor even if the other nominees for Best Picture were in some ways better than \"The Greatest Show On Earth\".\nInfluence.\nA television series with the same title was inspired by the film, with Jack Palance in the role of Charlton Heston's character. The program ran on Tuesday evenings for 30 episodes on ABC during the 1963\u20131964 season.\nThe self-titled theme song later served as the theme for WGN-TV's long-running \"The Bozo Show\".\n\"The Greatest Show on Earth\" was the first film that director Steven Spielberg saw, and he credits it as one of the major inspirations that led him into a film career. He identifies the film's train crash scene as a major influence, reflected in the science-fiction film \"Super 8\" (2011), which he produced. In an early scene in Spielberg's 2005 remake of \"War of the Worlds\", the train-wreck sequence from \"The Greatest Show on Earth\" is briefly shown on a television. The opening scene of Spielberg's 2022 semi-autobiographical film \"The Fabelmans\" dramatizes his seeing the film on the big screen, in which Sammy Fabelman (the fictional version of young Spielberg) watches it with his parents in a cinema and is mesmerized by the train-wreck sequence.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42139", "revid": "134766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42139", "title": "Garden", "text": "Planned space for displaying plants and other forms of nature\nA garden is a planned space, usually outdoors, set aside for the cultivation, display, and enjoyment of plants and other forms of nature. The single feature identifying even the wildest wild garden is \"control\". The garden can incorporate both natural and artificial materials.\nGardens often have design features including statuary, follies, pergolas, trellises, stumperies, dry creek beds, and water features such as fountains, ponds (with or without fish), waterfalls or creeks. Some gardens are for ornamental purposes only, while others also produce food crops, sometimes in separate areas, or sometimes intermixed with the ornamental plants. Food-producing gardens are distinguished from farms by their smaller scale, more labor-intensive methods, and their purpose (enjoyment of a pastime or self-sustenance rather than producing for sale, as in a market garden). Flower gardens combine plants of different heights, colors, textures, and fragrances to create interest and delight the senses.\nThe most common form today is a residential or public garden, but the term \"garden\" has traditionally been a more general one. Zoos, which display wild animals in simulated natural habitats, were formerly called zoological gardens. Western gardens are almost universally based on plants, with \"garden\", which etymologically implies \"enclosure\", often signifying a shortened form of botanical garden. Some traditional types of eastern gardens, such as Zen gardens, however, use plants sparsely or not at all. Landscape gardens, on the other hand, such as the English landscape gardens first developed in the 18th century, may decide to omit flowers altogether.\nLandscape architecture is a related professional activity with landscape architects tending to engage in design at many scales and working on both public and private projects.\nEtymology.\nThe etymology of the word \"gardening\" refers to enclosure: it is from Middle English \"gardin\", from Anglo-French \"gardin\", \"jardin\", of Germanic origin; akin to Old High German \"gard\", \"gart\", an enclosure or compound, as in Stuttgart. See Grad (Slavic settlement) for more complete etymology. The words \"yard\", \"court\", and Latin \"hortus\" (meaning \"garden\", hence horticulture and orchard), are cognates\u2014all referring to a defined enclosed space.\nThe term \"garden\" in British English refers to a small enclosed area of land, usually adjoining a building. This would be referred to as a yard in American English.\nUses.\nA garden can have aesthetic, functional, and recreational uses:\nHistory.\nAsia.\nChina.\nThe earliest recorded Chinese gardens were created in the valley of the Yellow River, during the Shang dynasty (1600\u20131046 BC). These gardens were large, enclosed parks where the kings and nobles hunted game, or where fruit and vegetables were grown. Early inscriptions from this period, carved on tortoise shells, have three Chinese characters for garden, \"you\", \"pu\" and \"yuan\".\"You\" was a royal garden where birds and animals were kept, while \"pu\" was a garden for plants. During the Qin dynasty (221\u2013206 BC), \"yuan\" became the character for all gardens. The old character for \"yuan\" is a small picture of a garden; it is enclosed in a square which can represent a wall, and has symbols which can represent the plan of a structure, a small square which can represent a pond, and a symbol for a plantation or a pomegranate tree.\nA famous royal garden of the late Shang dynasty was the \"Terrace, Pond and Park\" of the Spirit (\"Lingtai, Lingzhao Lingyou\") built by King Wenwang west of his capital city, Yin. The park was described in the \"Classic of Poetry\" this way:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnother early royal garden was \"Shaqui\", or the \"Dunes of Sand\", built by the last Shang ruler, King Zhou (1675\u20131029 BC). It was composed of an earth terrace, or \"tai\", which served as an observation platform in the center of a large square park. It was described in one of the early classics of Chinese literature, the \"Records of the Grand Historian\" (\"Shiji\"). According to the \"Shiji\", one of the most famous features of this garden was the \"Wine Pool and Meat Forest\" (\u9152\u6c60\u8089\u6797). A large pool, big enough for several small boats, was constructed on the palace grounds, with inner linings of polished oval shaped stones from the seashore. The pool was then subsequently filled with wine. A small island was constructed in the middle of the pool, where trees were planted, which had skewers of roasted meat hanging from their branches. King Zhou and his friends and concubines drifted in their boats, drinking the wine with their hands and eating the roasted meat from the trees. Later Chinese philosophers and historians cited this garden as an example of decadence and bad taste.\nDuring the Spring and Autumn period (722\u2013481 BC), in 535 BC, the \"Terrace of Shanghua\", with lavishly decorated palaces, was built by King Jing of the Zhou dynasty. In 505 BC, an even more elaborate garden, the \"Terrace of Gusu\", was begun. It was located on the side of a mountain, and included a series of terraces connected by galleries, along with a lake where boats in the form of blue dragons navigated. From the highest terrace, a view extended as far as Lake Tai, the Great Lake.\nIndia.\n\"Manasollasa\" is a twelfth century Sanskrit text that offers details on garden design and a variety of other subjects. Both public parks and woodland gardens are described, with about 40 types of trees recommended for the park in the \"Vana-krida\" chapter. \"Shilparatna\", a text from the sixteenth century, states that flower gardens or public parks should be located in the northern portion of a town.\nJapan.\nThe earliest recorded Japanese gardens were the pleasure gardens of the Emperors and nobles. They were mentioned in several brief passages of the , the first chronicle of Japanese history, published in 720 CE. In spring 74 CE, the chronicle recorded: \"The Emperor Keik\u014d put a few carp into a pond, and rejoiced to see them morning and evening\". The following year, \"The Emperor launched a double-hulled boat in the pond of Ijishi at Ihare, and went aboard with his imperial concubine, and they feasted sumptuously together\". In 486, the chronicle recorded that \"The Emperor Kenz\u014d went into the garden and feasted at the edge of a winding stream\".\nKorea.\nKorean gardens are a type of garden described as being natural, informal, simple and unforced, seeking to merge with the natural world. They have a history that goes back more than two thousand years, but are little known in the west. The oldest records date to the Three Kingdoms period (57 BC \u2013 668 AD) when architecture and palace gardens showed a development noted in the Korean \"History of the Three Kingdoms\".\nEurope.\nGardening was not recognized as an art form in Europe until the mid 16th century when it entered the political discourse, as a symbol of the concept of the \"ideal republic\". Evoking utopian imagery of the Garden of Eden, a time of abundance and plenty where humans didn't know hunger or the conflicts that arose from property disputes. John Evelyn wrote in the early 17th century, \"there is not a more laborious life then is that of a good Gard'ners; but a labour full of tranquility and satisfaction; Natural and Instructive, and such as (if any) contributes to Piety and Contemplation.\" During the era of Enclosures, the agrarian collectivism of the feudal age was idealized in literary \"fantasies of liberating regression to garden and wilderness\".\nFrance.\nFollowing his campaign in Italy in 1495, where he saw the gardens and castles of Naples, King Charles VIII brought Italian craftsmen and garden designers, such as Pacello da Mercogliano, from Naples and ordered the construction of Italian-style gardens at his residence at the Ch\u00e2teau d'Amboise and at Ch\u00e2teau Gaillard, another private r\u00e9sidence in Amboise. His successor Henry II, who had also travelled to Italy and had met Leonardo da Vinci, created an Italian garden nearby at the Ch\u00e2teau de Blois. Beginning in 1528, King Francis I created new gardens at the Ch\u00e2teau de Fontainebleau, which featured fountains, parterres, a forest of pine trees brought from Provence, and the first artificial grotto in France. The Ch\u00e2teau de Chenonceau had two gardens in the new style, one created for Diane de Poitiers in 1551, and a second for Catherine de' Medici in 1560. In 1536, the architect Philibert de l'Orme, upon his return from Rome, created the gardens of the Ch\u00e2teau d'Anet following the Italian rules of proportion. The carefully prepared harmony of Anet, with its parterres and surfaces of water integrated with sections of greenery, became one of the earliest and most influential examples of the classic French garden.\nThe French formal garden () contrasted with the design principles of the English landscape garden () namely, to \"force nature\" instead of leaving it undisturbed. Typical French formal gardens had \"parterres, geometrical shapes and neatly clipped topiary\", in contrast to the English style of garden in which \"plants and shrubs seem to grow naturally without artifice.\" By the mid-17th century axial symmetry had ascended to prominence in the French gardening traditions of Andre Mollet and Jacques Boyceau, from which the latter wrote: \"All things, however beautiful they may be chosen, will be defective if they are not ordered and placed in proper symmetry.\" A good example of the French formal style are the Tuileries gardens in Paris which were originally designed during the reign of King Henry II in the mid-sixteenth century. The gardens were redesigned into the formal French style for the Sun King Louis XIV. The gardens were ordered into symmetrical lines: long rows of elm or chestnut trees, clipped hedgerows, along with parterres, \"reflect[ing] the orderly triumph of man's will over nature.\"\nThe French landscape garden was influenced by the English landscape garden and gained prominence in the late eighteenth century.\nUnited Kingdom.\nBefore the Grand Manner era, a few significant gardens were found in Britain which were developed under the influence of the continent. Britain's homegrown domestic gardening traditions were mostly practical in purpose, rather than aesthetic, unlike the grand gardens found mostly on castle grounds and less commonly in universities. Tudor Gardens emphasized contrast rather than transitions, distinguished by color and illusion. They were not intended as a complement to home or architecture, but conceived as independent spaces, arranged to grow and display flowers and ornamental plants. Gardeners demonstrated their artistry in knot gardens, with complex arrangements most commonly included interwoven box hedges, and less commonly fragrant herbs like rosemary. Sanded paths run between the hedgings of open knots whereas closed knots were filled with single-colored flowers. The knot and parterre gardens were always placed on level ground, and elevated areas reserved for terraces from which the intricacy of the gardens could be viewed.\nJacobean gardens were described as \"a delightful confusion\" by Henry Wotton in 1624. Under the influence of the Italian Renaissance, Caroline gardens began to shed some of the chaos of earlier designs, marking the beginning of a trends towards symmetrical unified designs that took the building architecture into account, and featuring an elevated terrace from which home and garden could be viewed. The only surviving Caroline garden is located at Bolsover Castle in Derbyshire, but is too simple to attract much interest. During the reign of Charles II, many new Baroque style country houses were built; while in England Oliver Cromwell sought to destroy many Tudor, Jacobean and Caroline style gardens.\nDesign.\nGarden design is the process of creating plans for the layout and planting of gardens and landscapes. Gardens may be designed by garden owners themselves, or by professionals. Professional garden designers tend to be trained in principles of design and horticulture, and have a knowledge and experience of using plants. Some professional garden designers are also landscape architects, a more formal level of training that usually requires an advanced degree and often an occupational license.\nElements of garden design include the layout of hard landscape, such as paths, rockeries, walls, water features, sitting areas and decking, as well as the plants themselves, with consideration for their horticultural requirements, their season-to-season appearance, lifespan, growth habit, size, speed of growth, and combinations with other plants and landscape features. Most gardens consist of a mixture of natural and constructed elements, although even very 'natural' gardens are always an inherently artificial creation. Natural elements present in a garden principally comprise flora (such as trees and weeds), fauna (such as arthropods and birds), soil, water, air and light. Constructed elements include not only paths, patios, decking, sculptures, drainage systems, lights and buildings (such as sheds, gazebos, pergolas and follies), but also living constructions such as flower beds, ponds and lawns.\nGarden needs of maintenance are also taken into consideration. Including the time or funds available for regular maintenance, (this can affect the choices of plants regarding speed of growth) spreading or self-seeding of the plants (annual or perennial), bloom-time, and many other characteristics. Garden design can be roughly divided into two groups, formal and naturalistic gardens. The most important consideration in any garden design is how the garden will be utilized, followed closely by the desired stylistic genres, and the way the garden space will connect to the home or other structures in the surrounding areas. All of these considerations are subject to the budget limitations. Budget limitations can be addressed by a simpler garden style with fewer plants and less costly hard landscape materials, seeds rather than sod for lawns, and plants that grow quickly; alternatively, garden owners may choose to create their garden over time, area by area.\nEnvironmental impact.\nGardeners may cause environmental damage by the way they garden, or they may enhance their local environment.\nDamage by gardeners can include direct destruction of natural habitats when houses and gardens are created; indirect habitat destruction and damage to provide garden materials such as peat, rock for rock gardens, and by the use of tap water to irrigate gardens; the death of living beings in the garden itself, such as the killing not only of slugs and snails but also their predators such as hedgehogs and song thrushes by metaldehyde slug killer; the death of living beings outside the garden, such as local species extinction by indiscriminate plant collectors; and climate change caused by greenhouse gases produced by gardening.\nClimate change.\nGardeners can help to prevent climate change in many ways, including the use of trees, shrubs, ground cover plants and other perennial plants in their gardens, turning garden waste into soil organic matter instead of burning it, keeping soil and compost heaps aerated, avoiding peat, switching from power tools to hand tools or changing their garden design so that power tools are not needed, and using nitrogen-fixing plants instead of nitrogen fertilizer.\nClimate change will have many impacts on gardens; some studies suggest most of them will be negative. Gardens also contribute to climate change. Greenhouse gases can be produced by gardeners in many ways. The three main greenhouse gases are carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide. Gardeners produce carbon dioxide directly by over-cultivating soil and destroying soil carbon, by burning garden waste on bonfires, by using power tools which burn fossil fuel or use electricity generated by fossil fuels, and by using peat. Gardeners produce methane by compacting the soil and making it anaerobic, and by allowing their compost heaps to become compacted and anaerobic. Gardeners produce nitrous oxide by applying excess nitrogen fertilizer when plants are not actively growing so that the nitrogen in the fertilizer is converted by soil bacteria to nitrous oxide.\nIrrigation.\nSome gardeners manage their gardens without using any water from outside the garden. Examples in Britain include Ventnor Botanic Garden on the Isle of Wight, and parts of Beth Chatto's garden in Essex, Sticky Wicket garden in Dorset, and the Royal Horticultural Society's gardens at Harlow Carr and Hyde Hall.\nRain gardens absorb rainfall falling onto nearby hard surfaces, rather than sending it into stormwater drains.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "42140", "revid": "42070973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=42140", "title": "Pot", "text": "Pot may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
