{"id": "36860", "revid": "41840956", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36860", "title": "Zooarchaeology", "text": "Analysis of animal remains found in archaeological sites\nZooarchaeology or archaeozoology merges the disciplines of zoology and archaeology, focusing on the analysis of animal remains within archaeological sites. This field, managed by specialists known as zooarchaeologists or faunal analysts, examines remnants such as bones, shells, hair, chitin, scales, hides, proteins, and DNA, to derive insights into historical human-animal interactions and environmental conditions. While bones and shells tend to be relatively more preserved in archaeological contexts, the survival of faunal remains is generally infrequent. The degradation or fragmentation of faunal remains presents challenges in the accurate analysis and interpretation of data.\nCharacterized by its interdisciplinary nature, zooarchaeology bridges the studies of ancient human societies and the animal kingdom. Practitioners, from various scientific backgrounds including anthropology, paleontology, and ecology, aim primarily to identify and understand human interactions with animals and their environments. Through the analysis of faunal remains, zooarchaeologists can gain insight into past diets, domestication practices, tool usage, and ritualistic behaviors, thus contributing to a comprehensive view of human-environment interactions and the sub-field of environmental archaeology.\nDevelopment.\nThe development of zooarchaeology in eastern North America can be broken up into three different periods. The first being the Formative period starting around the 1860s, the second being the Systematization period beginning in the early 1950s, and lastly the Integration period which began about 1969. \nFull-time zooarchaeologists came to be during the Systematization period. Prior to the Systemization period, it was just a technique that was applied but not specifically studied.\nZooarchaeological specialists started to come about partly because of a new approach to archaeology known as processual archaeology. This approach puts more emphasis on explaining why things happened, not just what happened. Archaeologists began to specialize in zooarchaeology, and their numbers increased.\nUses.\nOne important aspect of zooarchaeology is using morphological and genetic evidence to answer questions zooarchaeologists have about the relationship between animals and humans. These questions include:\nAnother important aspect of zooarchaeology is its application to the migration patterns of humans. In areas where people are either closely tied to animal as companions or regularly follow the migrations of herds, the data collected from these animals can help give context to human movement as well. Studying animal remains can also give context to other remains and artifacts found in association with them.\nFaunal remains.\nFaunal remains are parts of animals that have been left in the material record, which archaeologists study. These remains are important to the record because they can show cultural practices, such as what food they were eating, based on the remains left behind. Zooarcheologists can find out information like the species the animal is, the age the animal was when it died, and what its sex was.\nSome common faunal remains found at sites include, as stated above, bones, shells, hair, chitin, scales, hides, proteins and DNA. These are often found in piles of waste left behind. This means zooarchaeology is part of the general study of waste or garbology. Archaeologists may have to sort through and identify the species and body region of faunal remains. The types of fauna that leave behind these remains will depend on where the archaeological site is located. These animals can be domesticated or wild, and sometimes they find both types of remains at sites.\nIn addition to helping us understand the past, zooarchaeology can also help us to improve the present and the future. Studying how people dealt with animals, and their effects can help avoid many potential ecological problems. This specifically includes problems involving wildlife management. For example, one of the questions that wildlife preservationists ask is whether they should keep animals facing extinction in several smaller areas, or in one larger area. Based on zooarchaeological evidence, they found that animals that are split up into several smaller areas are more likely to go extinct.\nTechniques.\nTaphonomy.\nOne of the issues to which zooarchaeologists pay close attention is taphonomy. Techniques used in the study of taphonomy include researching how items are buried and deposited at an archaeological site, what the conditions are that aid in the preservation of these items, and how these items get destroyed, all a part of what is referred to by archaeologist Michael Brian Schiffer as behavioral archaeology. One important aspect of taphonomy is assessing how a specimen became damaged; understanding the taphonomy of a faunal assemblage can explain how and why bones were damaged. One source of damage to animal bones is humans. Cut marks on animal bones provide evidence for butchering or bone working. Fractures, such as by percussion impact and spiral fracture on a bone can suggest that it was processed by humans for its marrow, minerals, and nutrients. Other human processes that affect bones include burning and damage from archaeological excavations. Non-human damage to bones includes interspecies damage, damage from raptors and scavengers, damage from rodents, damage from fungi and root etching, environmental weathering, and polishing. Distinguishing different types of damage to animal bones is a tedious and complex process that requires background in multiple scientific fields. Some of the physical damage on bones can be seen with the naked eye, but a lens with 10x magnification and good lighting is necessary for seeing most damage.\nIdentification and taxonomy.\nIdentification is integral to the archaeological analysis of animal remains. Identification of animal remains requires a combination of anatomy, taxonomy, and studies of archaeological context. The ability to identify a piece of bone requires knowing what element (bone in the body) it is, and to what animal the bone belongs. The latter is referred to as taxonomy, which is used to sort animals into different groups. Zooarchaeology uses Linnean nomenclature, which includes varying degrees of specificity in regards to the species. Linnaean nomenclature (Linnaean taxonomy) is used because it allows archaeologists to identify and show the genetic and morphological relationships between species. These relationships are based on species evolution, which can often be subject to interpretation. While more specific identification is preferable, it is better to be less specific in the identification rather than identify a specimen incorrectly. When examining animal remains, it is common that there are bones that are too small or too damaged to be able to accurately identify it. Archaeological context can be used to help with assumptions about species identification. Skeletal classification is the other half of properly identifying animal remains. Zoological osteology is useful to zooarchaeology because certain morphological aspects of a bone are associated with particular periods of growth, which can help narrow down the age the specimen was at death. The analysis of teeth require a slightly different approach than bone, but retain the same level of importance when it comes to analysis. The wear pattern and tooth morphology provides information about a species diet and age; the enamel also has biochemical remains of what the animal ate. While animal remains can include more than just bones and teeth, the nature of things like hair and muscle cause it to deteriorate quickly after death, leaving the skeleton behind; this is why most of zooarchaeology revolves around skeletal morphology. Laboratory analysis can include comparing the skeletons found on site with previously identified lab specimens. This not only helps to identify what the animal is, but also whether the animal was domesticated or not.\nGenetic analysis.\nGenetic analysis using ancient DNA is an important tool used by zooarchaeologists. Genetic history of an animal can give information on population movement over time and environmental adaptations necessary to live in an area. It can also give context to how animals may or may not have been domesticated over time by a group of people. Ancient DNA is critical to the genetic analysis of animals remains. Whereas modern DNA has very long fragments in samples, ancient DNA has very short fragments, making it very easily contaminated. The extraction and sampling of ancient DNA requires highly specialized training, as well as intensive protocol to prevent it from being contaminated by modern DNA. The paper :Ancient DNA Analysis of the Oldest Canid Species from the Siberian Arctic and Genetic Contribution to the Domestic Dog\" by Lee et al. gives a description of claws and teeth were sampled for ancient DNA. In a facility specially designed for ancient DNA extraction, with the use of personal protective equipment and regular bleaching of surfaces and tools, the claws and teeth were wiped with bleach to destroy all modern DNA on the surface, and were then drilled into a powder. The DNA fragments were extracted from the bone powder using an ancient DNA extraction protocol. After using several processes to replicate the DNA fragments and verify the results (PCR and gel electrophoresis), the ancient DNA from the bone powder was sequenced and then analyzed.\nZooMS.\nWith ZooMS analysis (Zooarchaeology by Mass Spectrometry), the animal species behind a bone fragment or bone artifact can be determined even when no morphological traits survive. The method makes use of interspecies differences in the structure of collagen.\nQuantification.\nYet another technique zooarchaeologists use is quantification. They make interpretations based on the number and size of the faunal remains. These interpretations include how important different animals might have been to the diet. NISP (Number of Identified Specimens) is the most widely used quantification method. It is defined as a simple count that shows taxonomic abundance. It is favored for being standardized and easily replicable. However, NISP can run into issues with differential preservation and identifiability of some animals. For example, bones more prone to fragmentation will be overrepresented in an assemblage counted with NISP. Some studies will use MNI (Minimum Number of Individuals) or MNE (Minimum Number of Elements) to mitigate these issues.\nExamples from prehistory.\nHuman-animal relationships and interactions were diverse during prehistory from being a food source to playing a more intimate role in society. Animals have been used in non-economical ways such as being part of a human burial. However, the majority of zooarchaeology has focused on who was eating what by looking at various remains such as bones, teeth, and fish scales. In the twenty-first century researchers have begun to interpret animals in prehistory in wider cultural and social patterns, focusing on how the animals have affected humans and possible animal agency. There is evidence of animals such as the mountain lion or the jaguar being used for ritualistic purposes, but not being eaten as a food source.\nAnalyses of faunal remains are important to show how prehistoric and hunter-gatherer civilizations interacted with the animals in their environment. This information can be used to help reconstruct Paleolithic environments. Faunal remains with cut marks, teeth marks, burns, or butchering can signify human interaction which can be important to archaeological data. Sometimes these analyses can be difficult due to decomposition and weathering, which can cause damage to the remains. Not only do faunal remains help reconstruct environments from the past they can show other cultural practices as well. These remains are not always from food, but can be found in jewelry, tools, spiritual practices, and more. This information can show the fauna located in the area of analyses, as well as cultural significance.\nAnimal burials date back to prehistory with examples emerging from the Mesolithic period. In Sweden at the site of Skateholm I, dogs were found buried with children under eight years old or were found buried by themselves. Some of the dogs who were buried alone have grave goods similar to their human contemporaries such as flint weapons and deer antlers. Meanwhile, during the same time period Skateholm II emerged and was very different from Skateholm I, as dogs were buried along on the North and West boundaries of the grave area. Another burial site in Siberia near Lake Baikal known as the \"Lokomotiv\" cemetery had a wolf burial among human graves. Buried together with, but slightly beneath the wolf was a male human skull. The wolf breed was not native to this area as it was warm and other research for the area shows no other wolf habitation. Bazaliiskiy and Savelyev suggests that the presence and significance of the wolf could possibly reflect human interaction. Another example occurred in 300 B.C. in Pazyryk known as the Pazyryk burials where ten horses were buried alongside a human male, the horses were fully adorned with saddles, pendants, among other valuables. The oldest horse as also the horse with the grandest attachments. Erica Hill, a professor in archaeology, suggests that the burials of prehistory animals can shed light on human-animal relationships.\nRelated fields.\nZooarchaeology overlaps significantly with other areas of study. These include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWider areas of study.\nSuch analyses provide the basis by which further interpretations can be made. Topics that have been addressed by zooarchaeologists include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36862", "revid": "145855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36862", "title": "Hepburn Romaji", "text": ""}
{"id": "36863", "revid": "49250551", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36863", "title": "Lung", "text": "Primary organ of the respiratory system\nThe lungs are the primary organs of the respiratory system in many animals, including humans. In mammals and most other tetrapods, two lungs are located near the backbone on either side of the heart. Their function in the respiratory system is to extract oxygen from the atmosphere and transfer it into the bloodstream, and to release carbon dioxide from the bloodstream into the atmosphere, in a process of gas exchange. Respiration is driven by different muscular systems in different species. Mammals, reptiles and birds use their musculoskeletal systems to support and foster breathing. In early tetrapods, air was driven into the lungs by the pharyngeal muscles via buccal pumping, a mechanism still seen in amphibians. In humans, the primary muscle that drives breathing is the diaphragm. The lungs also provide airflow that makes vocalisation including speech possible.\nHumans have two lungs, a right lung and a left lung. They are situated within the thoracic cavity of the chest. The right lung is bigger than the left, and the left lung shares space in the chest with the heart. The lungs together weigh approximately 1.3 kilograms (2.9 lb), and the right is heavier. The lungs are part of the lower respiratory tract that begins at the trachea and branches into the bronchi and bronchioles, which receive air breathed in via the conducting zone. These divide until air reaches microscopic alveoli, where gas exchange takes place. Together, the lungs contain approximately 2,400 kilometers (1,500 mi) of airways and 300 to 500 million alveoli. Each lung is enclosed within a pleural sac of two pleurae which allows the inner and outer walls to slide over each other whilst breathing takes place, without much friction. The inner visceral pleura divides each lung as fissures into sections called lobes. The right lung has three lobes and the left has two. The lobes are further divided into bronchopulmonary segments and lobules. The lungs have a unique blood supply, receiving deoxygenated blood sent from the heart to receive oxygen (the pulmonary circulation) and a separate supply of oxygenated blood (the bronchial circulation).\nThe tissue of the lungs can be affected by several respiratory diseases including pneumonia and lung cancer. Chronic diseases such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and emphysema can be related to smoking or exposure to harmful substances. Diseases such as bronchitis can also affect the respiratory tract. Medical terms related to the lung often begin with pulmo-, from the Latin pulmonarius (of the lungs) as in pulmonology, or with pneumo- (from Greek \u03c0\u03bd\u03b5\u03cd\u03bc\u03c9\u03bd \"lung\") as in pneumonia.\nIn embryonic development, the lungs begin to develop as an outpouching of the foregut, a tube which goes on to form the upper part of the digestive system. When the lungs are formed the fetus is held in the fluid-filled amniotic sac and so they do not function to breathe. Blood is also diverted from the lungs through the ductus arteriosus. At birth however, air begins to pass through the lungs, and the diversionary duct closes so that the lungs can begin to respire. The lungs only fully develop in early childhood.\nStructure.\nAnatomy.\nIn humans, the lungs are located in the chest on either side of the heart in the rib cage. They are conical in shape with a narrow rounded apex at the top, and a broad concave base that rests on the convex surface of the diaphragm. The apex of the lung extends into the root of the neck, reaching shortly above the level of the sternal end of the first rib. The lungs stretch from close to the backbone in the rib cage to the front of the chest and downwards from the lower part of the trachea to the diaphragm. \nThe left lung shares space with the heart, and has an indentation in its border called the cardiac notch of the left lung to accommodate this. The front and outer sides of the lungs face the ribs, which make light indentations on their surfaces. The medial surfaces of the lungs face towards the centre of the chest, and lie against the heart, great vessels, and the carina where the trachea divides into the two main bronchi. The cardiac impression is an indentation formed on the surfaces of the lungs where they rest against the heart.\nBoth lungs have a central recession called the hilum, where the blood vessels and airways pass into the lungs making up the root of the lung. There are also bronchopulmonary lymph nodes on the hilum.\nThe lungs are surrounded by the pulmonary pleurae. The pleurae are two serous membranes; the outer parietal pleura lines the inner wall of the rib cage and the inner visceral pleura directly lines the surface of the lungs. Between the pleurae is a potential space called the pleural cavity containing a thin layer of lubricating pleural fluid.\nLobes.\nEach lung is divided into sections called lobes by the reflections (infoldings) of the visceral pleura as fissures. Lobes are divided into segments, and segments have further divisions as lobules. There are three lobes in the right lung and two lobes in the left lung.\nFissures.\nThe fissures are formed in early prenatal development by invaginations of the visceral pleura that divide the lobar bronchi, and section the lungs into lobes that helps in their expansion. The right lung is divided into three lobes by a horizontal fissure, and an oblique fissure. The left lung is divided into two lobes by an oblique fissure which is closely aligned with the oblique fissure in the right lung. In the right lung the upper horizontal fissure, separates the upper (superior) lobe from the middle lobe. The lower, oblique fissure separates the lower lobe from the middle and upper lobes.\nVariations in the fissures are fairly common being either incompletely formed or present as an extra fissure as in the azygos fissure, or absent. Incomplete fissures are responsible for interlobar collateral ventilation, airflow between lobes which is unwanted in some lung volume reduction procedures.\nSegments.\nThe primary bronchi enter the lungs at the hilum and initially branch into secondary bronchi also known as lobar bronchi that supply air to each lobe of the lung. The lobar bronchi branch into tertiary bronchi also known as segmental bronchi and these supply air to the further divisions of the lobes known as bronchopulmonary segments. Each bronchopulmonary segment has its own (segmental) bronchus and arterial supply. Segments for the left and right lung are shown in the table. The segmental anatomy is useful clinically for localising disease processes in the lungs. A segment is a discrete unit that can be surgically removed without seriously affecting surrounding tissue.\nRight lung.\nThe right lung has both more lobes and segments than the left. It is divided into three lobes, an upper, middle, and a lower lobe by two fissures, one oblique and one horizontal. The upper, horizontal fissure, separates the upper from the middle lobe. It begins in the lower oblique fissure near the posterior border of the lung, and, running horizontally forward, cuts the anterior border on a level with the sternal end of the fourth costal cartilage; on the mediastinal surface it may be traced back to the hilum. The lower, oblique fissure, separates the lower from the middle and upper lobes and is closely aligned with the oblique fissure in the left lung.\nThe mediastinal surface of the right lung is indented by a number of nearby structures. The heart sits in an impression called the cardiac impression. Above the hilum of the lung is an arched groove for the azygos vein, and above this is a wide groove for the superior vena cava and right brachiocephalic vein; behind this, and close to the top of the lung is a groove for the brachiocephalic artery. There is a groove for the oesophagus behind the hilum and the pulmonary ligament, and near the lower part of the oesophageal groove is a deeper groove for the inferior vena cava before it enters the heart.\nThe weight of the right lung varies between individuals, with a standard reference range in men of and in women of .\nLeft lung.\nThe left lung is divided into two lobes, an upper and a lower lobe, by the oblique fissure, which extends from the costal to the mediastinal surface of the lung both above and below the hilum. The left lung, unlike the right, does not have a middle lobe, though it does have a homologous feature, a projection of the upper lobe termed the lingula. Its name means \"little tongue\". The lingula on the left lung serves as an anatomic parallel to the middle lobe on the right lung, with both areas being predisposed to similar infections and anatomic complications. There are two bronchopulmonary segments of the lingula: superior and inferior.\nThe mediastinal surface of the left lung has a large \"cardiac impression\" where the heart sits. This is deeper and larger than that on the right lung, at which level the heart projects to the left.\nOn the same surface, immediately above the hilum, is a well-marked curved groove for the aortic arch, and a groove below it for the descending aorta. The left subclavian artery, a branch off the aortic arch, sits in a groove from the arch to near the apex of the lung. A shallower groove in front of the artery and near the edge of the lung, lodges the left brachiocephalic vein. The oesophagus may sit in a wider shallow impression at the base of the lung.\nBy standard reference range, the weight of the left lung is in men and in women.\nMicroanatomy.\nThe lungs are part of the lower respiratory tract, and accommodate the bronchial airways when they branch from the trachea. The bronchial airways terminate in alveoli which make up the functional tissue (parenchyma) of the lung, and veins, arteries, nerves, and lymphatic vessels. The trachea and bronchi have plexuses of lymph capillaries in their mucosa and submucosa. The smaller bronchi have a single layer of lymph capillaries, and they are absent in the alveoli. The lungs are supplied with the largest lymphatic drainage system of any other organ in the body. Each lung is surrounded by a serous membrane of visceral pleura, which has an underlying layer of loose connective tissue attached to the substance of the lung.\nConnective tissue.\nThe connective tissue of the lungs is made up of elastic and collagen fibres that are interspersed between the capillaries and the alveolar walls. Elastin is the key protein of the extracellular matrix and is the main component of the elastic fibres. Elastin gives the necessary elasticity and resilience required for the persistent stretching involved in breathing, known as lung compliance. It is also responsible for the elastic recoil needed. Elastin is more concentrated in areas of high stress such as the openings of the alveoli, and alveolar junctions. The connective tissue links all the alveoli to form the lung parenchyma which has a sponge-like appearance. The alveoli have interconnecting air passages in their walls known as the pores of Kohn.\nRespiratory epithelium.\nAll of the lower respiratory tract including the trachea, bronchi, and bronchioles is lined with respiratory epithelium. This is a ciliated epithelium interspersed with goblet cells which produce mucin the main component of mucus, ciliated cells, basal cells, and in the terminal bronchioles\u2013club cells with actions similar to basal cells, and macrophages. The epithelial cells, and the submucosal glands throughout the respiratory tract secrete airway surface liquid (ASL), the composition of which is tightly regulated and determines how well mucociliary clearance works.\nPulmonary neuroendocrine cells are found throughout the respiratory epithelium including the alveolar epithelium, though they only account for around 0.5 percent of the total epithelial population. PNECs are innervated airway epithelial cells that are particularly focused at airway junction points. These cells can produce serotonin, dopamine, and norepinephrine, as well as polypeptide products. Cytoplasmic processes from the pulmonary neuroendocrine cells extend into the airway lumen where they may sense the composition of inspired gas.\nBronchial airways.\nIn the bronchi there are incomplete tracheal rings of cartilage and smaller plates of cartilage that keep them open. Bronchioles are too narrow to support cartilage and their walls are of smooth muscle, and this is largely absent in the narrower respiratory bronchioles which are mainly just of epithelium. The absence of cartilage in the terminal bronchioles gives them an alternative name of \"membranous bronchioles\".\nRespiratory zone.\nThe conducting zone of the respiratory tract ends at the terminal bronchioles when they branch into the respiratory bronchioles. This marks the beginning of the terminal respiratory unit called the acinus which includes the respiratory bronchioles, the alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs, and alveoli. An acinus measures up to 10\u00a0mm in diameter. A primary pulmonary lobule is the part of the lung distal to the respiratory bronchiole. Thus, it includes the alveolar ducts, sacs, and alveoli but not the respiratory bronchioles. \nThe unit described as the secondary pulmonary lobule is the lobule most referred to as the pulmonary lobule or respiratory lobule. This lobule is a discrete unit that is the smallest component of the lung that can be seen without aid. The secondary pulmonary lobule is likely to be made up of between 30 and 50 primary lobules. The lobule is supplied by a terminal bronchiole that branches into respiratory bronchioles. The respiratory bronchioles supply the alveoli in each acinus and is accompanied by a pulmonary artery branch. Each lobule is enclosed by an interlobular septum. Each acinus is incompletely separated by an intralobular septum.\nThe respiratory bronchiole gives rise to the alveolar ducts that lead to the alveolar sacs, which contain two or more alveoli. The walls of the alveoli are extremely thin allowing a fast rate of diffusion. The alveoli have interconnecting small air passages in their walls known as the pores of Kohn.\nAlveoli.\nAlveoli consist of two types of alveolar cell and an alveolar macrophage. The two types of cell are known as type I and type II cells (also known as pneumocytes). Types I and II make up the walls and alveolar septa. Type I cells provide 95% of the surface area of each alveoli and are flat (\"squamous\"), and Type II cells generally cluster in the corners of the alveoli and have a cuboidal shape. Despite this, cells occur in a roughly equal ratio of 1:1 or 6:4.\nType I are squamous epithelial cells that make up the alveolar wall structure. They have extremely thin walls that enable an easy gas exchange. These type I cells also make up the alveolar septa which separate each alveolus. The septa consist of an epithelial lining and associated basement membranes. Type I cells are not able to divide, and consequently rely on differentiation from Type II cells.\nType II are larger and they line the alveoli and produce and secrete epithelial lining fluid, and lung surfactant. Type II cells are able to divide and differentiate to Type I cells.\nThe alveolar macrophages have an important role in the immune system. They remove substances which deposit in the alveoli including loose red blood cells that have been forced out from blood vessels.\nMicrobiota.\nThere is a large presence of microorganisms in the lungs known as the lung microbiota that interacts with the airway epithelial cells; an interaction of probable importance in maintaining homeostasis. The microbiota is complex and dynamic in healthy people, and altered in diseases such as asthma and COPD. For example significant changes can take place in COPD following infection with rhinovirus. Fungal genera that are commonly found as mycobiota in the microbiota include \"Candida\", \"Malassezia\", \"Saccharomyces\", and \"Aspergillus\".\nRespiratory tract.\nThe lower respiratory tract is part of the respiratory system, and consists of the trachea and the structures below this including the lungs. The trachea receives air from the pharynx and travels down to a place where it splits (the carina) into a right and left primary bronchus. These supply air to the right and left lungs, splitting progressively into the secondary and tertiary bronchi for the lobes of the lungs, and into smaller and smaller bronchioles until they become the respiratory bronchioles. These in turn supply air through alveolar ducts into the alveoli, where the exchange of gases take place. Oxygen breathed in, diffuses through the walls of the alveoli into the enveloping capillaries and into the circulation, and carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood into the lungs to be breathed out.\nEstimates of the total surface area of lungs vary from ; although this is often quoted in textbooks and the media being \"the size of a tennis court\", it is actually less than half the size of a singles court.\nThe bronchi in the conducting zone are reinforced with hyaline cartilage in order to hold open the airways. The bronchioles have no cartilage and are surrounded instead by smooth muscle. Air is warmed to , humidified and cleansed by the conducting zone. Particles from the air being removed by the cilia on the respiratory epithelium lining the passageways, in a process called mucociliary clearance.\nPulmonary stretch receptors in the smooth muscle of the airways initiate a reflex known as the Hering\u2013Breuer reflex that prevents the lungs from over-inflation, during forceful inspiration.\nBlood supply.\nThe lungs have a dual blood supply provided by a bronchial and a pulmonary circulation. The bronchial circulation supplies oxygenated blood to the airways of the lungs, through the bronchial arteries that leave the aorta. There are usually three arteries, two to the left lung and one to the right, and they branch alongside the bronchi and bronchioles. The pulmonary circulation carries deoxygenated blood from the heart to the lungs and returns the oxygenated blood to the heart to supply the rest of the body.\nThe blood volume of the lungs is about 450 millilitres on average, about 9% of the total blood volume of the entire circulatory system. This quantity can easily fluctuate from between one-half and twice the normal volume. Also, in the event of blood loss through hemorrhage, blood from the lungs can partially compensate by automatically transferring to the systemic circulation.\nNerve supply.\nThe lungs are supplied by nerves of the autonomic nervous system. Input from the parasympathetic nervous system occurs via the vagus nerve. When stimulated by acetylcholine, this causes constriction of the smooth muscle lining the bronchus and bronchioles, and increases the secretions from glands. The lungs also have a sympathetic tone from norepinephrine acting on the beta 2 adrenoceptors in the respiratory tract, which causes bronchodilation.\nThe action of breathing takes place because of nerve signals sent by the respiratory center in the brainstem, along the phrenic nerve from the cervical plexus to the diaphragm.\nVariation.\nThe lobes of the lung are subject to anatomical variations. A horizontal interlobar fissure was found to be incomplete in 25% of right lungs, or even absent in 11% of all cases. An accessory fissure was also found in 14% and 22% of left and right lungs, respectively. An oblique fissure was found to be incomplete in 21% to 47% of left lungs. In some cases a fissure is absent, or extra, resulting in a right lung with only two lobes, or a left lung with three lobes.\nA variation in the airway branching structure has been found specifically in the central airway\nbranching. This variation is associated with the development of COPD in adulthood.\nDevelopment.\nThe development of the human lungs arise from the laryngotracheal groove and develop to maturity over several weeks in the foetus and for several years following birth.\nThe larynx, trachea, bronchi and lungs that make up the respiratory tract, begin to form during the fourth week of embryogenesis from the lung bud which appears ventrally to the caudal portion of the foregut.\nThe respiratory tract has a branching structure, and is also known as the respiratory tree. In the embryo this structure is developed in the process of branching morphogenesis, and is generated by the repeated splitting of the tip of the branch. In the development of the lungs (as in some other organs) the epithelium forms branching tubes. The lung has a left-right symmetry and each bud known as a bronchial bud grows out as a tubular epithelium that becomes a bronchus. Each bronchus branches into bronchioles. The branching is a result of the tip of each tube bifurcating. The branching process forms the bronchi, bronchioles, and ultimately the alveoli. The four genes mostly associated with branching morphogenesis in the lung are the intercellular signalling protein \u2013 sonic hedgehog (SHH), fibroblast growth factors FGF10 and FGFR2b, and bone morphogenetic protein BMP4. FGF10 is seen to have the most prominent role. FGF10 is a paracrine signalling molecule needed for epithelial branching, and SHH inhibits FGF10. The development of the alveoli is influenced by a different mechanism whereby continued bifurcation is stopped and the distal tips become dilated to form the alveoli.\nAt the end of the fourth week, the lung bud divides into two, the right and left primary bronchial buds on each side of the trachea. During the fifth week, the right bud branches into three secondary bronchial buds and the left branches into two secondary bronchial buds. These give rise to the lobes of the lungs, three on the right and two on the left. Over the following week, the secondary buds branch into tertiary buds, about ten on each side. From the sixth week to the sixteenth week, the major elements of the lungs appear except the alveoli. From week 16 to week 26, the bronchi enlarge and lung tissue becomes highly vascularised. Bronchioles and alveolar ducts also develop. By week 26, the terminal bronchioles have formed which branch into two respiratory bronchioles. During the period covering the 26th week until birth the important blood\u2013air barrier is established. Specialised type I alveolar cells where gas exchange will take place, together with the type II alveolar cells that secrete pulmonary surfactant, appear. The surfactant reduces the surface tension at the air-alveolar surface which allows expansion of the alveolar sacs. The alveolar sacs contain the primitive alveoli that form at the end of the alveolar ducts,\nand their appearance around the seventh month marks the point at which limited respiration would be possible, and the premature baby could survive.\nVitamin A deficiency.\nThe developing lung is particularly vulnerable to changes in the levels of vitamin A. Vitamin A deficiency has been linked to changes in the epithelial lining of the lung and in the lung parenchyma. This can disrupt the normal physiology of the lung and predispose to respiratory diseases. Severe nutritional deficiency in vitamin A results in a reduction in the formation of the alveolar walls (septa) and to notable changes in the respiratory epithelium; alterations are noted in the extracellular matrix and in the protein content of the basement membrane. The extracellular matrix maintains lung elasticity; the basement membrane is associated with alveolar epithelium and is important in the blood-air barrier. The deficiency is associated with functional defects and disease states. Vitamin A is crucial in the development of the alveoli which continues for several years after birth.\nAfter birth.\nAt birth, the baby's lungs are filled with fluid secreted by the lungs and are not inflated. After birth the infant's central nervous system reacts to the sudden change in temperature and environment. This triggers the first breath, within about ten seconds after delivery. Before birth, the lungs are filled with fetal lung fluid. After the first breath, the fluid is quickly absorbed into the body or exhaled. The resistance in the lung's blood vessels decreases giving an increased surface area for gas exchange, and the lungs begin to breathe spontaneously. This accompanies other changes which result in an increased amount of blood entering the lung tissues.\nAt birth, the lungs are very undeveloped with only around one sixth of the alveoli of the adult lung present. The alveoli continue to form into early adulthood, and their ability to form when necessary is seen in the regeneration of the lung. Alveolar septa have a double capillary network instead of the single network of the developed lung. Only after the maturation of the capillary network can the lung enter a normal phase of growth. Following the early growth in numbers of alveoli there is another stage of the alveoli being enlarged.\nFunction.\nGas exchange.\nThe major function of the lungs is gas exchange between the lungs and the blood. The alveolar and pulmonary capillary gases equilibrate across the thin blood\u2013air barrier. This thin membrane (about 0.5 \u20132\u00a0\u03bcm thick) is folded into about 300 million alveoli, providing an extremely large surface area (estimates varying between 70 and 145\u00a0m2) for gas exchange to occur.\nThe lungs are not capable of expanding to breathe on their own, and will only do so when there is an increase in the volume of the thoracic cavity. This is achieved by the muscles of respiration, through the contraction of the diaphragm, and the intercostal muscles which pull the rib cage upwards as shown in the diagram. During breathing out the muscles relax, returning the lungs to their resting position. At this point the lungs contain the functional residual capacity (FRC) of air, which, in the adult human, has a volume of about 2.5\u20133.0 litres.\nDuring heavy breathing as in exertion, a large number of accessory muscles in the neck and abdomen are recruited, that during exhalation pull the ribcage down, decreasing the volume of the thoracic cavity. The FRC is now decreased, but since the lungs cannot be emptied completely there is still about a litre of residual air left. Lung function testing is carried out to evaluate lung volumes and capacities.\nProtection.\nThe lungs possess several characteristics which protect against infection. The respiratory tract is lined by respiratory epithelium or respiratory mucosa, with hair-like projections called cilia that beat rhythmically and carry mucus. This mucociliary clearance is an important defence system against air-borne infection. The dust particles and bacteria in the inhaled air are caught in the mucosal surface of the airways, and are moved up towards the pharynx by the rhythmic upward beating action of the cilia. \nThe lining of the lung also secretes immunoglobulin A which protects against respiratory infections; goblet cells secrete mucus which also contains several antimicrobial compounds such as defensins, antiproteases, and antioxidants. The size of the respiratory tract and the flow of air also protect the lungs from larger particles. Smaller particles deposit in the mouth and behind the mouth in the oropharynx, and larger particles are trapped in nasal hair after inhalation.\nOther.\nIn addition to their function in respiration, the lungs have a number of other functions. They are involved in maintaining homeostasis, helping in the regulation of blood pressure as part of the renin\u2013angiotensin system. The inner lining of the blood vessels secretes angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) an enzyme that catalyses the conversion of angiotensin I to angiotensin II. The lungs are involved in the blood's acid\u2013base homeostasis by expelling carbon dioxide when breathing.\nThe lungs also serve a protective role. Several blood-borne substances, such as a few types of prostaglandins, leukotrienes, serotonin and bradykinin, are excreted through the lungs. Drugs and other substances can be absorbed, modified or excreted in the lungs. The lungs filter out small blood clots from veins and prevent them from entering arteries and causing strokes.\nThe lungs also play a pivotal role in speech by providing air and airflow for the creation of vocal sounds, and other paralanguage communications such as sighs and gasps.\nResearch suggests a role of the lungs in the production of blood platelets.\nGene and protein expression.\nAbout 20,000 protein coding genes are expressed in human cells and almost 75% of these genes are expressed in the normal lung. A little less than 200 of these genes are more specifically expressed in the lung with less than 20 genes being highly lung specific. The highest expression of lung specific proteins are different surfactant proteins, such as SFTPA1, SFTPB and SFTPC, and napsin, expressed in type II pneumocytes. Other proteins with elevated expression in the lung are the dynein protein DNAH5 in ciliated cells, and the secreted SCGB1A1 protein in mucus-secreting goblet cells of the airway mucosa.\nClinical significance.\nLungs can be affected by a number of diseases and disorders. Pulmonology is the medical speciality that deals with respiratory diseases involving the lungs and respiratory system. Cardiothoracic surgery deals with surgery of the lungs including lung volume reduction surgery, lobectomy, pneumectomy and lung transplantation.\nInflammation and infection.\nInflammatory conditions of the lung tissue are pneumonia, of the respiratory tract are bronchitis and bronchiolitis, and of the pleurae surrounding the lungs pleurisy. Inflammation is usually caused by infections due to bacteria or viruses. When the lung tissue is inflamed due to other causes it is called pneumonitis. One major cause of bacterial pneumonia is tuberculosis. Chronic infections often occur in those with immunodeficiency and can include a fungal infection by \"Aspergillus fumigatus\" that can lead to an aspergilloma forming in the lung. In the US certain species of rat can transmit a hantavirus to humans that can cause untreatable hantavirus pulmonary syndrome with a similar presentation to that of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS).\nAlcohol affects the lungs and can cause inflammatory alcoholic lung disease. Acute exposure to alcohol stimulates the beating of cilia in the respiratory epithelium. However, chronic exposure has the effect of desensitising the ciliary response which reduces mucociliary clearance (MCC). MCC is an innate defense system protecting against pollutants and pathogens, and when this is disrupted the numbers of alveolar macrophages are decreased. A subsequent inflammatory response is the release of cytokines. Another consequence is the susceptibility to infection.\nBlood-supply changes.\nA pulmonary embolism is a blood clot that becomes lodged in the pulmonary arteries. The majority of emboli arise because of deep vein thrombosis in the legs. Pulmonary emboli may be investigated using a ventilation/perfusion scan, a CT scan of the arteries of the lung, or blood tests such as the D-dimer. Pulmonary hypertension describes an increased pressure at the beginning of the pulmonary artery that has a large number of differing causes. Other rarer conditions may also affect the blood supply of the lung, such as granulomatosis with polyangiitis, which causes inflammation of the small blood vessels of the lungs and kidneys.\nA lung contusion is a bruise caused by chest trauma. It results in hemorrhage of the alveoli causing a build-up of fluid which can impair breathing, and this can be either mild or severe.\nThe function of the lungs can also be affected by compression from fluid in the pleural cavity pleural effusion, or other substances such as air (pneumothorax), blood (hemothorax), or rarer causes. These may be investigated using a chest X-ray or CT scan, and may require the insertion of a surgical drain until the underlying cause is identified and treated.\nObstructive lung diseases.\nAsthma, bronchiectasis, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) that includes chronic bronchitis, and emphysema, are all obstructive lung diseases characterised by airway obstruction. This limits the amount of air that is able to enter alveoli because of constriction of the bronchial tree, due to inflammation. Obstructive lung diseases are often identified because of symptoms and diagnosed with pulmonary function tests such as spirometry. \nMany obstructive lung diseases are managed by avoiding triggers (such as dust mites or smoking), with symptom control such as bronchodilators, and with suppression of inflammation (such as through corticosteroids) in severe cases. A common cause of chronic bronchitis, and emphysema, is smoking; and common causes of bronchiectasis include severe infections and cystic fibrosis. The definitive cause of asthma is not yet known, but it has been linked to other atopic diseases.\nThe breakdown of alveolar tissue, often as a result of tobacco-smoking leads to emphysema, which can become severe enough to develop into COPD. Elastase breaks down the elastin in the lung's connective tissue that can also result in emphysema. Elastase is inhibited by the acute-phase protein, alpha-1 antitrypsin, and when there is a deficiency in this, emphysema can develop. With persistent stress from smoking, the airway basal cells become disarranged and lose their regenerative ability needed to repair the epithelial barrier. The disorganised basal cells are seen to be responsible for the major airway changes that are characteristic of COPD, and with continued stress can undergo a malignant transformation. Studies have shown that the initial development of emphysema is centred on the early changes in the airway epithelium of the small airways. Basal cells become further deranged in a smoker's transition to clinically defined COPD.\nRestrictive lung diseases.\nSome types of chronic lung diseases are classified as restrictive lung disease, because of a restriction in the amount of lung tissue involved in respiration. These include pulmonary fibrosis which can occur when the lung is inflamed for a long period of time. Fibrosis in the lung replaces functioning lung tissue with fibrous connective tissue. This can be due to a large variety of occupational lung diseases such as Coalworker's pneumoconiosis, autoimmune diseases or more rarely to a reaction to medication. Severe respiratory disorders, where spontaneous breathing is not enough to maintain life, may need the use of mechanical ventilation to ensure an adequate supply of air.\nCancers.\nLung cancer can either arise directly from lung tissue or as a result of metastasis from another part of the body. There are two main types of primary tumour described as either small-cell or non-small-cell lung carcinomas. The major risk factor for cancer is smoking. Once a cancer is identified it is staged using scans such as a CT scan and a sample of tissue from a biopsy is taken. Cancers may be treated surgically by removing the tumour, the use of radiotherapy, chemotherapy or a combination, or with the aim of symptom control. Lung cancer screening is being recommended in the United States for high-risk populations.\nCongenital disorders.\nCongenital disorders include cystic fibrosis, pulmonary hypoplasia (an incomplete development of the lungs)congenital diaphragmatic hernia, and infant respiratory distress syndrome caused by a deficiency in lung surfactant. An azygos lobe is a congenital anatomical variation which though usually without effect can cause problems in thoracoscopic procedures.\nPleural space pressure.\nA pneumothorax (collapsed lung) is an abnormal collection of air in the pleural space that causes an uncoupling of the lung from the chest wall. The lung cannot expand against the air pressure inside the pleural space. An easy to understand example is a traumatic pneumothorax, where air enters the pleural space from outside the body, as occurs with puncture to the chest wall. Similarly, scuba divers ascending while holding their breath with their lungs fully inflated can cause air sacs (alveoli) to burst and leak high pressure air into the pleural space.\nExamination.\nAs part of a physical examination in response to respiratory symptoms of shortness of breath, and cough, a lung examination may be carried out. This exam includes palpation and auscultation. The areas of the lungs that can be listened to using a stethoscope are called the lung fields, and these are the posterior, lateral, and anterior lung fields. The posterior fields can be listened to from the back and include: the lower lobes (taking up three quarters of the posterior fields); the anterior fields taking up the other quarter; and the lateral fields under the axillae, the left axilla for the lingual, the right axilla for the middle right lobe. The anterior fields can also be auscultated from the front. An area known as the triangle of auscultation is an area of thinner musculature on the back which allows improved listening. Abnormal breathing sounds heard during a lung exam can indicate the presence of a lung condition; wheezing for example is commonly associated with asthma and COPD.\nFunction testing.\nLung function testing is carried out by evaluating a person's capacity to inhale and exhale in different circumstances. The volume of air inhaled and exhaled by a person at rest is the tidal volume (normally 500\u2013750\u00a0mL); the inspiratory reserve volume and expiratory reserve volume are the additional amounts a person is able to forcibly inhale and exhale respectively. The summed total of forced inspiration and expiration is a person's vital capacity. Not all air is expelled from the lungs even after a forced breath out; the remainder of the air is called the residual volume. Together these terms are referred to as lung volumes.\nPulmonary plethysmographs are used to measure functional residual capacity. Functional residual capacity cannot be measured by tests that rely on breathing out, as a person is only able to breathe a maximum of 80% of their total functional capacity. The total lung capacity depends on the person's age, height, weight, and sex, and normally ranges between four and six litres. Females tend to have a 20\u201325% lower capacity than males. Tall people tend to have a larger total lung capacity than shorter people. Smokers have a lower capacity than nonsmokers. Thinner persons tend to have a larger capacity. Lung capacity can be increased by physical training as much as 40% but the effect may be modified by exposure to air pollution.\nOther lung function tests include spirometry, measuring the amount (volume) and flow of air that can be inhaled and exhaled. The maximum volume of breath that can be exhaled is called the vital capacity. In particular, how much a person is able to exhale in one second (called forced expiratory volume (FEV1)) as a proportion of how much they are able to exhale in total (FEV). This ratio, the FEV1/FEV ratio, is important to distinguish whether a lung disease is restrictive or obstructive. Another test is that of the lung's diffusing capacity \u2013 this is a measure of the transfer of gas from air to the blood in the lung capillaries.\nCulinary uses.\nMammal lung is one of the main types of offal, or pluck, alongside the heart and trachea, and is consumed as a foodstuff around the world in dishes such as Scottish haggis. The United States Food and Drug Administration legally prohibits the sale of animal lungs due to concerns such as fungal spores or cross-contamination with other organs, although this has been criticised as unfounded.\nOther animals.\nBirds.\nThe lungs of birds are relatively small, but are connected to eight or nine air sacs that extend through much of the body, and are in turn connected to air spaces within the bones. On inhalation, air travels through the trachea of a bird into the air sacs. Air then travels continuously from the air sacs at the back, through the lungs, which are relatively fixed in size, to the air sacs at the front. From here, the air is exhaled. These fixed size lungs are called \"circulatory lungs\", as distinct from the \"bellows-type lungs\" found in most other animals.\nThe lungs of birds contain millions of tiny parallel passages called parabronchi. Small sacs called \"atria\" radiate from the walls of the tiny passages; these, like the alveoli in other lungs, are the site of gas exchange by simple diffusion. The blood flow around the parabronchi and their atria forms a cross-current process of gas exchange (see diagram on the right).\nThe air sacs, which hold air, do not contribute much to gas exchange, despite being thin-walled, as they are poorly vascularised. The air sacs expand and contract due to changes in the volume in the thorax and abdomen. This volume change is caused by the movement of the sternum and ribs and this movement is often synchronised with movement of the flight muscles.\nParabronchi in which the air flow is unidirectional are called \"paleopulmonic parabronchi\" and are found in all birds. Some birds, however, have, in addition, a lung structure where the air flow in the parabronchi is bidirectional. These are termed \"neopulmonic parabronchi\".\nReptiles.\nThe lungs of most reptiles have a single bronchus running down the centre, from which numerous branches reach out to individual pockets throughout the lungs. These pockets are similar to alveoli in mammals, but much larger and fewer in number. These give the lung a sponge-like texture. In tuataras, snakes, and some lizards, the lungs are simpler in structure, similar to that of typical amphibians.\nSnakes and limbless lizards typically possess only the right lung as a major respiratory organ; the left lung is greatly reduced, or even absent. Amphisbaenians, however, have the opposite arrangement, with a major left lung, and a reduced or absent right lung.\nBoth crocodilians and monitor lizards have lungs similar to those of birds, providing a unidirectional airflow and even possessing air sacs. The now extinct pterosaurs have seemingly even further refined this type of lung, extending the airsacs into the wing membranes and, in the case of lonchodectids, \"Tupuxuara\", and azhdarchoids, the hindlimbs.\nReptilian lungs typically receive air via expansion and contraction of the ribs driven by axial muscles and buccal pumping. Crocodilians also rely on the hepatic piston method, in which the liver is pulled back by a muscle anchored to the pubic bone (part of the pelvis) called the diaphragmaticus, which in turn creates negative pressure in the crocodile's thoracic cavity, allowing air to be moved into the lungs by Boyle's law. Turtles, which are unable to move their ribs, instead use their forelimbs and pectoral girdle to force air in and out of the lungs.\nAmphibians.\nThe lungs of most frogs and other amphibians are simple and balloon-like, with gas exchange limited to the outer surface of the lung. This is not very efficient, but amphibians have low metabolic demands and can also quickly dispose of carbon dioxide by diffusion across their skin in water, and supplement their oxygen supply by the same method. Amphibians employ a positive pressure system to get air to their lungs, forcing air down into the lungs by buccal pumping. This is distinct from most higher vertebrates, who use a breathing system driven by negative pressure where the lungs are inflated by expanding the rib cage. In buccal pumping, the floor of the mouth is lowered, filling the mouth cavity with air. The throat muscles then presses the throat against the underside of the skull, forcing the air into the lungs.\nDue to the possibility of respiration across the skin combined with small size, all known lungless tetrapods are amphibians. The majority of salamander species are lungless salamanders, which respirate through their skin and tissues lining their mouth. This necessarily restricts their size: all are small and rather thread-like in appearance, maximising skin surface relative to body volume. Other known lungless tetrapods are the Bornean flat-headed frog and \"Atretochoana eiselti\", a caecilian.\nThe lungs of amphibians typically have a few narrow internal walls (septa) of soft tissue around the outer walls, increasing the respiratory surface area and giving the lung a honeycomb appearance. In some salamanders, even these are lacking, and the lung has a smooth wall. In caecilians, as in snakes, only the right lung attains any size or development.\nFish.\nLungs are found in three groups of fish; the coelacanths, the bichirs and the lungfish. Like in tetrapods, but unlike fish with swim bladder, the opening is at the ventral side of the oesophagus. The coelacanth has a nonfunctional and unpaired vestigial lung surrounded by a fatty organ. Bichirs, the only group of ray-finned fish with lungs, have a pair which are hollow unchambered sacs, where the gas-exchange occurs on very flat folds that increase their inner surface area. The lungs of lungfish show more resemblance to tetrapod lungs. There is an elaborate network of parenchymal septa, dividing them into numerous respiration chambers. In the Australian lungfish, there is only a single lung, albeit divided into two lobes. Other lungfish, however, have traditionally been considered having two lungs, but newer research defines paired lungs as bilateral lung buds that arise simultaneously and are both connected directly to the foregut, which is only seen in tetrapods. In all lungfish, including the Australian, the lungs are located in the upper dorsal part of the body, with the connecting duct curving around and above the oesophagus. The blood supply also twists around the oesophagus, suggesting that the lungs originally evolved in the ventral part of the body, as in other vertebrates.\nInvertebrates.\nA number of invertebrates have lung-like structures that serve a similar respiratory purpose to true vertebrate lungs, but are not evolutionarily related and only arise out of convergent evolution. Some arachnids, such as spiders and scorpions, have structures called book lungs used for atmospheric gas exchange. Some species of spider have four pairs of book lungs but most have two pairs. Scorpions have spiracles on their body for the entrance of air to the book lungs.\nThe coconut crab is terrestrial and uses structures called branchiostegal lungs to breathe air. Juveniles are released into the ocean, however adults cannot swim and possess an only rudimentary set of gills. The adult crabs can breathe on land and hold their breath underwater. The branchiostegal lungs are seen as a developmental adaptive stage from water-living to enable land-living, or from fish to amphibian.\nPulmonates are mostly land snails and slugs that have developed a simple lung from the mantle cavity. An externally located opening called the pneumostome allows air to be taken into the mantle cavity lung.\nEvolutionary origins.\nThe lungs of today's terrestrial vertebrates and the gas bladders of today's fish are believed to have evolved from simple sacs, as outpocketings of the oesophagus, that allowed early fish to gulp air under oxygen-poor conditions. These outpocketings first arose in the bony fish. In most of the ray-finned fish, the sacs evolved into closed off gas bladders, while a number of carp, trout, herring, catfish, and eels have retained the physostome condition with the sac being open to the oesophagus. In more basal bony fish, such as the gar, bichir, bowfin and the lobe-finned fish, the sacs have evolved to primarily function as lungs. The lobe-finned fish gave rise to the land-based tetrapods. Thus, the lungs of vertebrates are homologous to the gas bladders of fish (but not to their gills).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36865", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36865", "title": "Hepburn romanization", "text": "Japanese language romanization system\nHepburn (, lit.\u2009'Hepburn-style Roman letters') is the main system of romanization for the Japanese language. The system was originally published in 1867 by American Christian missionary and physician James Curtis Hepburn as the standard in the first edition of his Japanese\u2013English dictionary. The system is distinct from other romanization methods in its use of English orthography to phonetically transcribe sounds: for example, the syllable () is written as ' and () is written as ', reflecting their spellings in English (compare to ' and ' in the more systematic \"Nihon-shiki\" and \"Kunrei-shiki\" systems).\nIn 1886, Hepburn published the third edition of his dictionary, codifying a revised version of the system that is known today as \"traditional Hepburn\". A version with additional revisions, known as \"modified Hepburn\", was published in 1908.\nAlthough \"Kunrei-shiki\" is the style favored by the Japanese government, Hepburn remains the most popular method of Japanese romanization. It is learned by most foreign students of the language, and is used within Japan for romanizing personal names, locations, and other information, such as train tables and road signs. Because the system's orthography is based on English phonology instead of a systematic transcription of the Japanese syllabary, individuals who do not speak Japanese and know English phonology will generally be more accurate when pronouncing unfamiliar words romanized in the Hepburn style compared to other systems.\nHistory.\nIn 1867, American Presbyterian missionary doctor James Curtis Hepburn published the first Japanese\u2013English dictionary, in which he introduced a new system for the romanization of Japanese into Latin script. He published a second edition in 1872 and a third edition in 1886, which introduced minor changes. The third edition's system had been adopted in the previous year by the , a group of Japanese and foreign scholars who promoted a replacement of the Japanese script with a romanized system.\nHepburn romanization, loosely based on the conventions of English orthography (spelling), stood in opposition to \"Nihon-shiki\", which had been developed in Japan in 1881 as a script replacement. Compared to Hepburn, \"Nihon-shiki\" is more systematic in its representation of the Japanese syllabary (\"kana\"), as each symbol corresponds to a phoneme. However, the notation requires further explanation for accurate pronunciation by non-Japanese speakers: for example, the syllables and , which are written as ' and ' in Hepburn, are rendered\u00a0as ' and ' in \"Nihon-shiki\". After \"Nihon-shiki\" was presented to the in 1886, a dispute began between the supporters of the two systems, which resulted in a standstill and an eventual halt to the organization's activities in 1892.\nAfter the Russo-Japanese War of 1904\u20131905, the two factions resurfaced as the , which supported Hepburn's style, and the , which supported \"Nihon-shiki\". In 1908, Hepburn was revised by educator Kan\u014d Jigor\u014d and others of the , which began calling it the or .\nIn 1930, a Special Romanization Study Commission, headed by the Minister of Education, was appointed by the government to devise a standardized form of romanization. The Commission eventually decided on a slightly modified \"compromise\" version of \"Nihon-shiki\", which was chosen for official use by cabinet ordinance on September 21, 1937; this system is known today as \"Kunrei-shiki\". On September 3, 1945, at the beginning of the occupation of Japan after World War II, Supreme Commander for the Allied Powers Douglas MacArthur issued a directive mandating the use of modified Hepburn by occupation forces. The directive had no legal force, however, and a revised version of \"Kunrei-shiki\" was reissued by cabinet ordinance on December 9, 1954, after the end of occupation.\nAlthough it lacks \"de jure\" status, Hepburn remains the \"de facto\" standard for multiple applications in Japan. As of 1977, many government organizations used Hepburn, including the Ministry of International Trade and Industry; the Ministry of Foreign Affairs requires the use of Hepburn on passports, and the Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport requires its use on transport signs, including road signs and railway station signs. According to a survey by the Japanese Agency for Cultural Affairs in 2022, the Japanese primarily use Hepburn to spell place names.\nHepburn is also used by private organizations, including \"The Japan Times\" and the Japan Travel Bureau.\n\"American National Standard System for the Romanization of Japanese\" (ANSI Z39.11-1972), based on modified Hepburn, was approved in 1971 and published in 1972 by the American National Standards Institute. In 1989, it was proposed for International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standard 3602, but was rejected in favor of \"Kunrei-shiki\". ANSI Z39.11-1972 was deprecated as a standard in 1994.\nIn January 2024, the Cultural Affairs Agency proposed revising the 1954 Cabinet ordinance to make Hepburn the standard romanization system of Japan.\nVariants.\nThere are many variants of the Hepburn romanization. The two most common styles are as follows:\nIn Japan itself, there are some variants officially mandated for various uses:\nDetails of the variants can be found below.\nObsolete variants.\nThe romanizations set out in the first and second versions of Hepburn's dictionary are primarily of historical interest. Notable differences from the third and later versions include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFeatures.\nThe main feature of Hepburn is that its orthography is based on English phonology. More technically, when syllables that are constructed systematically according to the Japanese syllabary contain an \"unstable\" consonant in the modern spoken language, the orthography is changed to something that better matches the real sound as an English-speaker would pronounce it. For example, is written not . This transcription is thus only partly phonological.\nSome linguists such as Harold E. Palmer, Daniel Jones and Otto Jespersen object to Hepburn, contending that the pronunciation-based spellings can obscure the systematic origins of Japanese phonetic structures, inflections, and conjugations. Since the vowel sounds in Hepburn are similar to the vowel sounds in Italian, and the consonants similar to those of many other languages, in particular English, speakers unfamiliar with Japanese will generally be more accurate when pronouncing unfamiliar words romanized in the Hepburn style compared to other systems.\nLong vowels.\nIn Hepburn, vowel combinations that form a long sound are usually indicated with a macron (\u25cc\u0304). Other adjacent vowels, such as those separated by a morpheme boundary, are written separately:\nAll other vowel combinations are always written separately:\nLoanwords.\nIn foreign loanwords, long vowels followed by a \"ch\u014donpu\" (\u30fc) are indicated with macrons:\nAdjacent vowels in loanwords are written separately:\nVariations.\nThere are many variations on the Hepburn system for indicating long vowels with a macron. For example, () is properly romanized as \"T\u014dky\u014d\", but can also be written as:\nParticles.\nIn traditional and modified:\nIn traditional Hepburn:\nIn modified Hepburn:\nSyllabic \"n\".\nIn traditional Hepburn:\nSyllabic () is written as before consonants, but as before labial consonants: \"b\", \"m\", and \"p\". It is sometimes written as \"n-\" (with a hyphen) before vowels and \"y\" (to avoid confusion between, for example, \"n + a\" and , and \"n + ya\" and ), but its hyphen usage is not clear. \nIn modified Hepburn:\nThe rendering \"m\" before labial consonants is not used and is replaced with . It is written \"n\"' (with an apostrophe) before vowels and \"y\".\nLong consonants.\nElongated (or \"geminate\") consonant sounds are marked by doubling the consonant following a sokuon, ; for consonants that are digraphs in Hepburn (\"sh\", \"ch\", \"ts\"), only the first consonant of the set is doubled, except for \"ch\", which is replaced by \"tch\".\nRomanization charts.\nExtended katakana.\nThese combinations are used mainly to represent the sounds in words in other languages.\nDigraphs with orange backgrounds are the general ones used for loanwords or foreign places or names, and those with blue backgrounds are used for more accurate transliterations of foreign sounds, suggested by the Cabinet of Japan's Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. Katakana combinations with beige backgrounds are suggested by the American National Standards Institute and the British Standards Institution as possible uses. Ones with purple backgrounds appear on the 1974 version of the Hy\u014djun-shiki formatting.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36867", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36867", "title": "Soldier of Fortune (video game)", "text": "2000 video game\nSoldier of Fortune is a first-person shooter video game developed by Raven Software and published by Activision in 2000 for Microsoft Windows. It was later released for the PlayStation 2 (as Soldier of Fortune: Gold Edition), as well as the Dreamcast, while Loki Software also made a port for Linux. It was digitally re-released on GOG.com on October 2, 2018, along with its two successors. The player takes on the role of a U.S. mercenary as he trots around the globe hoping to halt a terrorist nuclear weapons plot.\nThe game, which was built with the \"Quake II\" engine, is notable for its realistic depictions of violence, made possible by the GHOUL engine, including the dismemberment of human bodies. This was the game's stylistic attraction and it caused considerable controversy, especially in Canada and Germany, where it was classified as a restricted-rated film and listed on the Federal Agency for Media Harmful to Young People, respectively. The technology creates 26 different zones on the bodies of enemies, allowing for vastly different reactions depending upon which one is targeted.\nThe game sold well initially and critical reception was positive. Two sequels were released: ' (2002) and ' (2007). \"Soldier of Fortune Online\", a massively multiplayer online first-person shooter, was published in Korea in 2010, but its servers were shut down shortly after its release.\nGameplay.\n\"Soldier of Fortune\" is best known for its graphic depictions of firearms dismembering the human body. This graphic violence is the game's main stylistic attraction, much like the destructible environments of \"Red Faction\" or bullet time of \"Max Payne\" (both 2001). The GHOUL engine enables depiction of extreme graphic violence, in which character models are based on body parts that can each independently sustain damage (gore zones). There are 26 zones in total: a shot to the head with a powerful gun will often make the target's head explode, leaving nothing but the bloody stump of the neck remaining; a close-range shot to the stomach with a shotgun will leave an enemy's bowels in a bloody mess, and a shot to the nether regions will cause the victims to clutch their groin in agony for a few seconds before kneeling over dead. It is possible to shoot off an enemy's limbs (head, arms, legs) leaving nothing left but a bloody torso. In the final mission, players gain access to a fictional microwave weapon that causes enemies to either fry or explode, depending on the firing mode. However, nonviolence is a possibility, if the player is a good shot it is possible to shoot an enemy's weapon out of their hand, causing them to cower on the floor to surrender. The game also came with password-protected options to disable all gore and there is even a version of the game with the extreme violence permanently locked-out, titled \"Soldier of Fortune: Tactical Low-Violence Version\".\nMultiplayer.\nIn multiplayer mode, there are seven gametypes: Arsenal, Assassination, Capture the Flag, Conquer the Bunker, Control, Deathmatch and Realistic Deathmatch.\nPlot.\nThe story involves the theft of nuclear weapons, and the main enemy turns out to be an Afrikaner neo-fascist group based in Germany, led by South African exile Sergei Dekker. At the beginning of the game, terrorists steal four nuclear weapons from a storage facility in Russia, and proceed to sell them to various nations. This is a prelude to the acquisition of advanced weapons of mass destruction by this terrorist group. John Mullins, working for a U.S.-based mercenary (\"soldier of fortune\") organization known only as \"The Shop\", and his partner, Aaron \"Hawk\" Parsons, are assigned to prevent the nukes from falling into the wrong hands, and stop the terrorists in their plans. His missions take him to New York City, Sudan, Siberia, Tokyo, Kosovo, Iraq, Uganda and finally Germany.\nDevelopment.\nRaven Software acquired a license from the monthly U.S. periodical magazine \"Soldier of Fortune (SOF)\" to produce a video game based on the publication. The game was built around a modified version of the \"Quake II\" engine. It was the first game to utilize the GHOUL damage model engine developed by Raven Software. This introduced the ability to dismember enemies in combat, adding to the realism of the game. Upgraded versions of the GHOUL system were later used in other Raven titles, such as ' and ' (both 2002).\nThe game was originally supposed to be much more realistic, featuring mostly real weapons, and the players taking damage would impede their movement and dexterity, depending on where and how many times they were hit. In 1998 (prior to the Kosovo War) the game was also supposed to be partially based in Bosnia and Herzegovina instead of Kosovo.\nThe game is AMD Eyefinity validated. The game also made use of the Aureal Semiconductor A3D and Creative Labs EAX technology.\nRerelease.\nGOG.com re-released \"Soldier of Fortune\" alongside its two successors digitally on October 1, 2018.\nReception.\nThe PC's original release received \"generally positive reviews\" according to the review aggregation website GameRankings. Robert Howarth of \"GameFan\" gave the PC version 91% and wrote, \"for those adults looking for extreme action, \"Soldier of Fortune\" could be just what the doctor ordered.\" Howarth considered its story to be \"on par\" with many action movies; he also commented that the GHOUL damage model rendering system was \"an amazing technology\".\nChris Kramer of \"NextGen\"'s June 2000 issue wrote of the PC original, \"Sure, it's not for kids, but it's as good an FPS as you could ever ask for.\" 15 issues later, Jim Preston called the Dreamcast version \"An OK port of an OK game.\"\nRobert Mayer of \"Computer Games Strategy Plus\" gave the PC version four stars out of five, saying, \"Raven Software set out to make a shooter, and they've made a damn fine one. Just be sure you're up to it before you dive in. It gets mighty bloody in there.\" \"Edge\" gave the same PC version seven out of ten, calling it \"an above-average firstperson shooter. It doesn't bring much to the genre, save for its gory depiction of violence.\"\nCal Nguyen of AllGame gave the PC version four-and-a-half stars out of five, saying, \"If you're bent on eliminating terrorist threats by skinheads, Saddam Hussein's army, Russian mafias or even New York mobsters, then take a lesson from the \"Soldier of Fortune\" [\"sic\"] and tear open a new one.\" Later, J.C. Barnes gave the Dreamcast version three-and-a-half stars out of five, calling it \"a solid shooter that doesn't break new ground in graphics, sound or artificial intelligence, but it's a solid shooter worth some attention. Aside from the tricky controls and lighting issues, FPS fans shouldn't be too disappointed with this single-player adventure.\"\nNash Werner of \"GamePro\" said of the PC version, \"With its well-written storyline and thought-provoking missions, \"SoF\"'s singleplayer will keep you thrilled for hours, and you'll probably be playing the Assassin mode for months. Despite ridiculously long load times, \"Soldier of Fortune\" is recommended for everyone who appreciates a good FPS.\" Jake the Snake said of the Dreamcast version, \"If you're longing for some over-the-top shooting with real weapons, \"Soldier of Fortune\" hits its mark with extreme prejudice, but less gonzo gamers should steer clear.\" However, The D-Pad Destroyer said of the PlayStation 2 version, \"with all its faults, \"Fortune\" is fairly fun for hardcore soldier types, but everyone else will just want to keep their membership in \"Red Faction\".\" Nick Valentino of \"GameZone\" gave the same console version 6 out of 10, saying that it was \"just another FPS trying to jump on the bandwagon of other successful titles and sorely misses the mark. With very little to offer in terms of design or new features, it fails to capture the right FPS feel which other games have effectively achieved. In other words, look someplace else.\"\nAccording to PC Data, a firm that tracked sales in the U.S., the PC version sold 100,919 units by November 2000. NPD Techworld, which also covered the U.S., reported 298,563 units sold for said PC version by December 2002.\nViolence controversy.\nIn 2000, after receiving a complaint from a member of the public about the explicit content of the game, the British Columbia Film Classification Office (BCFCO) investigated and decided the violence, gore and acts of torture were not suitable for persons under 18 years of age. In a controversial decision, the game was labeled an \"adult motion picture\" and was rated as a pornographic film. In Germany, the game was placed on the Index List of the Federal Agency for Media Harmful to Young People.\nSequels.\nBased on its success, Raven Software and Activision later published \"\" in 2002, based on the \"Quake III: Team Arena\" engine. Initially released for Windows, the sequel was later ported to the Xbox.\nA third game in the series, \"\" was made by Cauldron HQ and released on November 14, 2007.\nAn MMOFPS based on the series, \"Soldier of Fortune Online\", was published in South Korea by Dragonfly and went in Closed Beta on August 12, 2010 and ended on August 16, 2010.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36868", "revid": "84755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36868", "title": "CIS", "text": "CIS may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36869", "revid": "18174831", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36869", "title": "Cell division", "text": "Biological process\nCell division is the process by which a parent cell divides into two daughter cells. Cell division usually occurs as part of a larger cell cycle in which the cell grows and replicates its chromosome(s) before dividing. In eukaryotes, there are two distinct types of cell division: a vegetative division (mitosis), producing daughter cells genetically identical to the parent cell, and a cell division that produces haploid gametes for sexual reproduction (meiosis), reducing the number of chromosomes from two of each type in the diploid parent cell to one of each type in the daughter cells. Mitosis is a part of the cell cycle, in which, replicated chromosomes are separated into two new nuclei. Cell division gives rise to genetically identical cells in which the total number of chromosomes is maintained. In general, mitosis (division of the nucleus) is preceded by the S stage of interphase (during which the DNA replication occurs) and is followed by telophase and cytokinesis; which divides the cytoplasm, organelles, and cell membrane of one cell into two new cells containing roughly equal shares of these cellular components. The different stages of mitosis all together define the M phase of an animal cell cycle\u2014the division of the mother cell into two genetically identical daughter cells. \nTo ensure proper progression through the cell cycle, DNA damage is detected and repaired at various cell cycle checkpoints. These checkpoints can halt progression through the cell cycle by inhibiting certain cyclin-CDK complexes. Meiosis undergoes two divisions resulting in four haploid daughter cells. Homologous chromosomes are separated in the first division of meiosis, such that each daughter cell has one copy of each chromosome. These chromosomes have already been replicated and have two sister chromatids which are then separated during the second division of meiosis. Both of these cell division cycles are used in the process of sexual reproduction at some point in their life cycle. Both are believed to be present in the last eukaryotic common ancestor.\nProkaryotes (bacteria and archaea) usually undergo a vegetative cell division known as binary fission, where their genetic material is segregated equally into two daughter cells, but there are alternative manners of division, such as budding, that have been observed. All cell divisions, regardless of organism, are preceded by a single round of DNA replication.\nFor simple unicellular microorganisms such as the amoeba, one cell division is equivalent to reproduction \u2013 an entire new organism is created. On a larger scale, mitotic cell division can create progeny from multicellular organisms, such as plants that grow from cuttings. Mitotic cell division enables sexually reproducing organisms to develop from the one-celled zygote, which itself is produced by fusion of two gametes, each having been produced by meiotic cell division. After growth from the zygote to the adult, cell division by mitosis allows for continual construction and repair of the organism. The human body experiences about 10 quadrillion cell divisions in a lifetime.\nThe primary concern of cell division is the maintenance of the original cell's genome. Before division can occur, the genomic information that is stored in chromosomes must be replicated, and the duplicated genome must be cleanly divided between progeny cells. A great deal of cellular infrastructure is involved in ensuring consistency of genomic information among generations.\nIn bacteria.\nBacterial cell division happens through binary fission or through budding. The divisome is a protein complex in bacteria that is responsible for cell division, constriction of inner and outer membranes during division, and remodeling of the peptidoglycan cell wall at the division site. A tubulin-like protein, FtsZ plays a critical role in formation of a contractile ring for the cell division.\nIn eukaryotes.\nCell division in eukaryotes is more complicated than in prokaryotes. If the chromosomal number is reduced, eukaryotic cell division is classified as meiosis (reductional division). If the chromosomal number is not reduced, eukaryotic cell division is classified as mitosis (equational division). A primitive form of cell division, called amitosis, also exists. The amitotic or mitotic cell divisions are more atypical and diverse among the various groups of organisms, such as protists (namely diatoms, dinoflagellates, etc.) and fungi.\nIn the mitotic metaphase (see below), typically the chromosomes (each containing 2 sister chromatids that developed during replication in the S phase of interphase) align themselves on the metaphase plate. Then, the sister chromatids split and are distributed between two daughter cells.\nIn meiosis I, the homologous chromosomes are paired before being separated and distributed between two daughter cells. On the other hand, meiosis II is similar to mitosis. The chromatids are separated and distributed in the same way. In humans, other higher animals, and many other organisms, the process of meiosis is called gametic meiosis, during which meiosis produces four gametes. Whereas, in several other groups of organisms, especially in plants (observable during meiosis in lower plants, but during the vestigial stage in higher plants), meiosis gives rise to spores that germinate into the haploid vegetative phase (gametophyte). This kind of meiosis is called \"sporic meiosis.\"\nPhases of eukaryotic cell division.\nInterphase.\nInterphase is the process through which a cell must go before mitosis, meiosis, and cytokinesis. Interphase consists of three main phases: G1, S, and G2. G1 is a time of growth for the cell where specialized cellular functions occur in order to prepare the cell for DNA replication. There are checkpoints during interphase that allow the cell to either advance or halt further development. One of the checkpoint is between G1 and S, the purpose for this checkpoint is to check for appropriate cell size and any DNA damage . The second check point is in the G2 phase, this checkpoint also checks for cell size but also the DNA replication. The last check point is located at the site of metaphase, where it checks that the chromosomes are correctly connected to the mitotic spindles. In S phase, the chromosomes are replicated in order for the genetic content to be maintained. During G2, the cell undergoes the final stages of growth before it enters the M phase, where spindles are synthesized. The M phase can be either mitosis or meiosis depending on the type of cell. Germ cells, or gametes, undergo meiosis, while somatic cells will undergo mitosis. After the cell proceeds successfully through the M phase, it may then undergo cell division through cytokinesis. The control of each checkpoint is controlled by cyclin and cyclin-dependent kinases. The progression of interphase is the result of the increased amount of cyclin. As the amount of cyclin increases, more and more cyclin dependent kinases attach to cyclin signaling the cell further into interphase. At the peak of the cyclin, attached to the cyclin dependent kinases this system pushes the cell out of interphase and into the M phase, where mitosis, meiosis, and cytokinesis occur. There are three transition checkpoints the cell has to go through before entering the M phase. The most important being the G1-S transition checkpoint. If the cell does not pass this checkpoint, it results in the cell exiting the cell cycle.\nProphase.\nProphase is the first stage of division. The nuclear envelope begins to be broken down in this stage, long strands of chromatin condense to form shorter more visible strands called chromosomes, the nucleolus disappears, and the mitotic spindle begins to assemble from the two centrosomes. Microtubules associated with the alignment and separation of chromosomes are referred to as the spindle and spindle fibers. Chromosomes will also be visible under a microscope and will be connected at the centromere. During this condensation and alignment period in meiosis, the homologous chromosomes undergo a break in their double-stranded DNA at the same locations, followed by a recombination of the now fragmented parental DNA strands into non-parental combinations, known as crossing over. This process is evidenced to be caused in a large part by the highly conserved Spo11 protein through a mechanism similar to that seen with topoisomerase in DNA replication and transcription.\nPrometaphase.\nPrometaphase is the second stage of cell division. This stage begins with the complete breakdown of the nuclear envelope which exposes various structures to the cytoplasm. This breakdown then allows the spindle apparatus growing from the centrosome to attach to the kinetochores on the sister chromatids. Stable attachment of the spindle apparatus to the kinetochores on the sister chromatids will ensure error-free chromosome segregation during anaphase. Prometaphase follows prophase and precedes metaphase.\nMetaphase.\nIn metaphase, the centromeres of the chromosomes align themselves on the \"metaphase plate\" (or \"equatorial plate\"), an imaginary line that is at equal distances from the two centrosome poles and held together by complexes known as cohesins. Chromosomes line up in the middle of the cell by microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs) pushing and pulling on centromeres of both chromatids thereby causing the chromosome to move to the center. At this point the chromosomes are still condensing and are currently one step away from being the most coiled and condensed they will be, and the spindle fibers have already connected to the kinetochores. During this phase all the microtubules, with the exception of the kinetochores, are in a state of instability promoting their progression toward anaphase. At this point, the chromosomes are ready to split into opposite poles of the cell toward the spindle to which they are connected.\nAnaphase.\nAnaphase is a very short stage of the cell cycle and it occurs after the chromosomes align at the mitotic plate. Kinetochores emit anaphase-inhibition signals until their attachment to the mitotic spindle. Once the final chromosome is properly aligned and attached the final signal dissipates and triggers the abrupt shift to anaphase. This abrupt shift is caused by the activation of the anaphase-promoting complex and its function of tagging degradation of proteins important toward the metaphase-anaphase transition. One of these proteins that is broken down is securin which through its breakdown releases the enzyme separase that cleaves the cohesin rings holding together the sister chromatids thereby leading to the chromosomes separating. After the chromosomes line up in the middle of the cell, the spindle fibers will pull them apart. The chromosomes are split apart while the sister chromatids move to opposite sides of the cell. As the sister chromatids are being pulled apart, the cell and plasma are elongated by non-kinetochore microtubules. Additionally, in this phase, the activation of the anaphase promoting complex through the association with Cdh-1 begins the degradation of mitotic cyclins.\nTelophase.\nTelophase is the last stage of the cell cycle in which a cleavage furrow splits the cells cytoplasm (cytokinesis) and chromatin. This occurs through the synthesis of a new nuclear envelope that forms around the chromatin gathered at each pole. The nucleolus reforms as the chromatin reverts back to the loose state it possessed during interphase. The division of the cellular contents is not always equal and can vary by cell type as seen with oocyte formation where one of the four daughter cells possess the majority of the duckling.\nCytokinesis.\nThe last stage of the cell division process is cytokinesis. In this stage there is a cytoplasmic division that occurs at the end of either mitosis or meiosis. At this stage there is a resulting irreversible separation leading to two daughter cells. Cell division plays an important role in determining the fate of the cell. This is due to there being the possibility of an asymmetric division. This as a result leads to cytokinesis producing unequal daughter cells containing completely different amounts or concentrations of fate-determining molecules.\nIn animals the cytokinesis ends with formation of a contractile ring and thereafter a cleavage. But in plants it happen differently. At first a cell plate is formed and then a cell wall develops between the two daughter cells.\nIn Fission yeast (\"S. pombe\") the cytokinesis happens in G1 phase.\nVariants.\nCells are broadly classified into two main categories: simple non-nucleated prokaryotic cells and complex nucleated eukaryotic cells. Due to their structural differences, eukaryotic and prokaryotic cells do not divide in the same way. Also, the pattern of cell division that transforms eukaryotic stem cells into gametes (sperm cells in males or egg cells in females), termed meiosis, is different from that of the division of somatic cells in the body.\nIn 2022, scientists discovered a new type of cell division called asynthetic fission found in the squamous epithelial cells in the epidermis of juvenile zebrafish. When juvenile zebrafish are growing, skin cells must quickly cover the rapidly increasing surface area of the zebrafish. These skin cells divide without duplicating their DNA (the S phase of mitosis) causing up to 50% of the cells to have a reduced genome size. These cells are later replaced by cells with a standard amount of DNA. Scientists expect to find this type of division in other vertebrates.\nDNA damage repair in the cell cycle.\nDNA damage is detected and repaired at various points in the cell cycle. The G1/S checkpoint, G2/M checkpoint, and the checkpoint between metaphase and anaphase all monitor for DNA damage and halt cell division by inhibiting different cyclin-CDK complexes. The p53 tumor-suppressor protein plays a crucial role at the G1/S checkpoint and the G2/M checkpoint. Activated p53 proteins result in the expression of many proteins that are important in cell cycle arrest, repair, and apoptosis. At the G1/S checkpoint, p53 acts to ensure that the cell is ready for DNA replication, while at the G2/M checkpoint p53 acts to ensure that the cells have properly duplicated their content before entering mitosis.\nSpecifically, when DNA damage is present, ATM and ATR kinases are activated, activating various checkpoint kinases. These checkpoint kinases phosphorylate p53, which stimulates the production of different enzymes associated with DNA repair. Activated p53 also upregulates p21, which inhibits various cyclin-cdk complexes. These cyclin-cdk complexes phosphorylate the Retinoblastoma (Rb) protein, a tumor suppressor bound with the E2F family of transcription factors. The binding of this Rb protein ensures that cells do not enter the S phase prematurely; however, if it is not able to be phosphorylated by these cyclin-cdk complexes, the protein will remain, and the cell will be halted in the G1 phase of the cell cycle.\nIf DNA is damaged, the cell can also alter the Akt pathway in which BAD is phosphorylated and dissociated from Bcl2, thus inhibiting apoptosis. If this pathway is altered by a loss of function mutation in Akt or Bcl2, then the cell with damaged DNA will be forced to undergo apoptosis. If the DNA damage cannot be repaired, activated p53 can induce cell death by apoptosis. It can do so by activating the p53 upregulated modulator of apoptosis (PUMA). PUMA is a pro-apoptotic protein that rapidly induces apoptosis by inhibiting the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family members.\nDegradation.\nMulticellular organisms replace worn-out cells through cell division. In some animals, however, cell division eventually halts. In humans this occurs, on average, after 52 divisions, known as the Hayflick limit. The cell is then referred to as senescent. With each division the cells telomeres, protective sequences of DNA on the end of a chromosome that prevent degradation of the chromosomal DNA, shorten. This shortening has been correlated to negative effects such as age-related diseases and shortened lifespans in humans. Cancer cells, on the other hand, are not thought to degrade in this way, if at all. An enzyme complex called telomerase, present in large quantities in cancerous cells, rebuilds the telomeres through synthesis of telomeric DNA repeats, allowing division to continue indefinitely.\nHistory.\nAt the beginning of the 19th century, various hypotheses circulated about cell proliferation, which became observable in plant and animal organisms as a result of advances in microscopy. While the proliferation of cells on the inner side of old cells, the attachment of vesicles to existing cells, or crystallization in the intercellular space were postulated as mechanisms of cell proliferation, proponents of cell division itself had to fight for its acceptance for decades.\nThe Belgian botanist Barth\u00e9lemy Charles Joseph Dumortier must be regarded as the first discoverer of cell division. In 1832, he described cell division in simple aquatic plants (French 'conferve') as follows (translated from French to English):\n\"The development of the conferve is as simple as its structure; it takes place by the attachment of new cells to the old, and this attachment always takes place from the end. The terminal cell elongates more than the deeper cells; then the production of a lateral bisector takes place in the inner fluid, which tends to divide the cell into two parts, of which the deeper one remains stationary, while the terminal part elongates again, forms a new inner partition, and so on. Is the production of the middle partition originally double or single? It is impossible to determine this, but it is always true that it later appears double when united, and that when two cells naturally separate, each of them is closed at both ends.\"\nIn 1835, the German botanist and physician Hugo von Mohl described plant cell division in much greater detail in his dissertation on freshwater and seawater algae for his PhD thesis in medicine and surgery:\n\"Among the most obscure phenomena of plant life is the manner in which the newly developing cells are formed. [...] and so there is no lack of manifold descriptions and explanations of this process. [...] and that gaps that were found in the observations were filled in by overly bold conclusions and assumptions.\" (translated from German to English)\nIn 1838, the German physician and botanist Franz Julius Ferdinand Meyen confirmed the mechanism of cell division at the root tips of plants.\nThe German-Polish physician Robert Remak suspected that he had already discovered animal cell division in the blood of chicken embryos in 1841, but it was not until 1852 that he was able to confirm animal cell division for the first time in bird embryos, frog larvae and mammals.\nIn 1943, cell division was filmed for the first time by Kurt Michel using a phase-contrast microscope.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36870", "revid": "40934158", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36870", "title": "Commonwealth of Independent States", "text": "Eurasian intergovernmental organisation\nThe Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) is a regional intergovernmental organisation in Eurasia. It was formed following the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991. It covers an area of and has an estimated population of 246,200,194. The CIS encourages cooperation in economic, political, and military affairs and has certain powers related to the coordination of trade, finance, lawmaking, and security, including the prevention of cross-border crime.\nAs the Soviet Union disintegrated, Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine signed the Belovezha Accords on 8 December 1991, declaring that the Union had effectively ceased to exist and proclaiming the CIS in its place. On 21 December, the Alma-Ata Protocol was signed, but Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania chose not to participate. Georgia withdrew its membership in 2008 following a war with Russia. Ukraine formally ended its participation in CIS statutory bodies in 2018, although it had stopped participating in the organisation in 2014 following the Russian annexation and occupation of Crimea. In the aftermath of the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, Moldova voiced its intention to progressively withdraw from the CIS institutional framework.\nEight of the nine CIS member states participate in the CIS Free Trade Area. Three organisations originated from the CIS, namely the Collective Security Treaty Organization, the Eurasian Economic Union (alongside subdivisions, the Eurasian Customs Union and the Eurasian Economic Space); and the Union State. While the first and the second are military and economic alliances, the third aims to reach a supranational union of Russia and Belarus with a common government and currency.\nHistory and structure.\nBackground.\nThe CIS, as a shared Russophone social, cultural, and economic space, has its origins in the Russian Empire, which was replaced in 1917 by the Russian Republic after the February Revolution earlier that year. Following the October Revolution, the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic became the leading republic in the Soviet Union (USSR) upon its creation with the 1922 Treaty and Declaration of the Creation of the USSR, along with the Byelorussian SSR, the Ukrainian SSR, and the Transcaucasian SFSR.\nIn March 1991, amidst Perestroika and a rising political crisis in the country, Mikhail Gorbachev, the president of the Soviet Union, proposed a federation by holding a referendum to preserve the Union as a union of sovereign republics. The new treaty signing never happened as the Communist Party hardliners staged an attempted coup in Moscow in August that year.\nFounding.\nFollowing the events of the failed 1991 coup, many republics of the USSR declared their independence, fearing another coup. A week after the Ukrainian independence referendum was held, which kept the chances of the Soviet Union staying together low, the Commonwealth of Independent States was founded in its place on 8 December 1991 by the Byelorussian SSR, the Russian SFSR, and the Ukrainian SSR, when the leaders of the three republics met at the Belovezhskaya Pushcha Natural Reserve, about north of Brest in Belarus, and signed the \"Agreement Establishing the Commonwealth of Independent States\", known as the Belovezha Accords.\nThe CIS announced that the new organisation would be open to all republics of the former Soviet Union and to other nations sharing the same goals. The CIS charter stated that all the members were sovereign and independent nations and thereby effectively abolished the Soviet Union. On 21 December 1991, the leaders of eight additional former Soviet Republics (Armenia, Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan) signed the Alma-Ata Protocol which can either be interpreted as expanding the CIS to these states or the proper foundation or foundation date of the CIS, thus bringing the number of participating countries to 11. Georgia joined two years later, in December 1993. At this point, 12 of the 15 former Soviet Republics participated in the CIS, the three non-participants being the Baltic states. The CIS and the Soviet Union also legally co-existed briefly with each other until 26 December 1991, when the Soviet of the Republics formally dissolved the Soviet Union. This was followed by Ivan Korotchenya becoming Executive Secretary of the CIS on the same day.\nAfter the end of the dissolution process of the Soviet Union, Russia and the Central Asian republics were weakened economically and faced declines in GDP. Post-Soviet states underwent economic reforms and privatisation. The process of Eurasian integration began immediately after the breakup of the Soviet Union to salvage economic ties with post-Soviet republics.\nCIS Charter.\nOn 22 January 1993, the Charter (Statutes) of the CIS was signed, setting up the different institutions of the CIS, their functions, and the rules and statutes of the CIS. The Charter also defined that all countries that have ratified the Agreement on the Establishment of the CIS and its relevant (Alma-Ata) Protocol would be considered to be founding states of the CIS, with only those countries ratifying the Charter being considered to be member states of the CIS (art. 7). Other states can participate as associate members or observers if accepted as such by a decision of the Council of Heads of State to the CIS (art. 8).\nAll the founding states, apart from Ukraine and Turkmenistan, ratified the Charter of the CIS and became member states of it. Nevertheless, Ukraine and Turkmenistan kept participating in the CIS, without being member states of it. Turkmenistan became an associate member of the CIS in August 2005. Georgia left the CIS altogether in 2009 and Ukraine stopped participating in 2018.\nGeneral secretary.\nThe work of CIS is coordinated by the general secretary.\nInterparliamentary Assembly.\nThe Interparliamentary Assembly was established on 27 March 1992 in Kazakhstan. On 26 May 1995, the CIS leaders signed the Convention on the Interparliamentary Assembly of Member Nations of the Commonwealth of Independent States eventually ratified by nine parliaments; the only CIS member not signing was Georgia. Under the terms of the convention, the InterParliamentary Assembly (IPA) was invested with international legitimacy.\nIt is housed in the Tauride Palace in St Petersburg and acts as the consultative parliamentary wing of the CIS, created to discuss problems of parliamentary cooperation, review draft documents of common interest, and pass model laws to the national legislatures in the CIS (as well as recommendations) for their use in the preparation of new laws and amendments to existing legislation. More than 130 documents have been adopted that ensure the convergence of laws in the CIS at the level of national legislation. The Assembly is actively involved in the development of integration processes in the CIS and also sends observers to the national elections. The Assembly held its 32nd Plenary meeting in Saint Petersburg on 14 May 2009.\nFurther developments.\nBetween 2003 and 2005, three CIS member states experienced a change of government in a series of colour revolutions: Eduard Shevardnadze was overthrown in Georgia; Viktor Yushchenko was elected in Ukraine; and Askar Akayev was toppled in Kyrgyzstan.\nIn February 2006, Georgia withdrew from the Council of Defense Ministers, with the statement that \"Georgia has taken a course to join NATO and it cannot be part of two military structures simultaneously\", but it remained a full member of the CIS until August 2009, one year after officially withdrawing in the immediate aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War.\nIn March 2007, Igor Ivanov, the secretary of the Russian Security Council, expressed his doubts concerning the usefulness of the CIS, emphasising that the Eurasian Economic Community was becoming a more competent organisation to unify the largest countries of the CIS. Following the withdrawal of Georgia, the presidents of Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, and Turkmenistan skipped the October 2009 meeting of the CIS, each having their own issues and disagreements with the Russian Federation.\nIn May 2009, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine joined the Eastern Partnership (EaP), a project that was initiated by the European Union (EU). The EaP framework governs the EU's relationship with the post-Soviet states of Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Moldova, and Ukraine.\nMembership.\nThere are nine full member states of the Commonwealth of Independent States.\nThe Creation Agreement remained the main constituent document of the CIS until January 1993, when the CIS Charter () was adopted. The charter formalised the concept of membership: a member country is defined as a country that ratifies the CIS Charter (sec. 2, art. 7). Additional members can join with the consent of all current members. Parties that ratified the Creation Agreement before the adoption of the Charter are considered to be \"Founding states\", but not members.\nMember states.\nMoldova.\nIn light of Russia's support for the independence of occupied regions within Moldova, Georgia, and Ukraine as well as its violation of the Istanbul Agreement, legislative initiatives to denounce the agreement on the creation of CIS were tabled in Moldova's parliament on 25 March 2014, though they were not approved. A similar bill was proposed in January 2018.\nOn 14 June 2022, Moldovan Minister of Foreign Affairs Nicu Popescu said the Moldovan government was considering the prospect of leaving the CIS, although at the end of May President Maia Sandu had said the country would not leave for the time being. An August 2021 poll conducted in Moldova (prior to the start of Russia's invasion of Ukraine) found that 48.1% of respondents supported Moldova's withdrawal from the CIS.\nOn 30 November 2022, Popescu stated that Moldova would suspend its participation in CIS meetings, and on 23 February 2023 stated that Moldova had started withdrawing from multiple treaties that the country had signed with the CIS, as his country aimed to join the European Union. On 15 May 2023, the President of the Parliament of Moldova, Igor Grosu, stated the country would withdraw from the agreement establishing the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly; he argued that being in the CIS \"did not protect the Republic of Moldova from energy blackmail in the middle of winter, from threats and official statements hostile to the independence and sovereignty of the Republic of Moldova\".\nAs part of the process of severing connections with the CIS, in July 2023 Moldova passed a law denouncing the agreement on Moldova's membership in the Inter-Parliamentary Assembly of the CIS countries. 70 agreements were denounced by October 2023, from the total of around 282 signed by Moldova.\nIn December 2023, Moldova announced its intention to withdraw from the CIS entirely by the end of 2024. It was later stated that Moldova would pull out of everything except for economic, social protection, and healthcare agreements.\nA 22\u201327 May 2024 poll showed that 40.5% of Moldovans were in favour of leaving the CIS and 35.5% were against, with 41.9% in favour and 32% against in a 16\u201328 April 2025 poll.\nAssociate member.\nA country can become an associate member under the CIS Charter (sec. 2, art. 8) if approved by the Council of Heads of States. Participation of associate members and of the observers in the work of the Commonwealth organs shall be governed by their rules of procedures.\nTwo states, Ukraine and Turkmenistan ratified the CIS Creation Agreement before the adoption of the CIS Charter in January 1993, making them \"founding states of the CIS\", but did not ratify the Charter itself that would make them full members. These states, while not being formal members of the CIS, were allowed to participate in CIS. They were also allowed to participate in various CIS initiatives, e.g. the Free Trade Area, which were, however, formulated mostly as independent multilateral agreements, and not as internal CIS agreements.\nTurkmenistan has not ratified the Charter and therefore is not formally a member of the CIS. Nevertheless, it has consistently participated in the CIS as if it were a member state.\nTurkmenistan changed its CIS standing to associate member as of 26 August 2005. The cited reason was to be consistent with its 1995-proclaimed, UN-recognised, international neutrality status, but experts have cited the country no longer needing Russia to provide natural gas access, as well as the country's declining faith in the confederation's ability to maintain internal stability in light of the Colour Revolutions.\nFounding state.\nThe Verkhovna Rada never ratified the agreement on membership of the CIS in accordance with the CIS Charter so Ukraine never became a member.\nUkraine did not apply to become an Associate member, nor was it granted by the Council of Heads of States, accordingly Ukraine remained just a Founding state.\nUkraine did participate in the CIS and became an associate member of the CIS Economic Union in 1994, and signed the Commonwealth of Independent States Free Trade Area in 2011.\nUkraine withdrew its representatives from the CIS in May 2018 and stopped actively participating in the CIS. However, the country remained a party to a number of agreements, such as the free trade area.\nAlthough Ukraine was one of the states that ratified the Creation Agreement in December 1991, making it a Founding State of the CIS, it chose not to ratify the CIS Charter as it disagrees with Russia being the only legal successor state to the Soviet Union. Thus, it has never been a full member of the CIS. However, Ukraine had kept participating in the CIS, with the consent of the Council of Heads of States, even though it was not a member. Ukraine has never applied for, or been granted, Associate member status.\nFollowing the start of the Russo-Ukrainian war in February 2014, relations between Ukraine and Russia deteriorated, leading Ukraine to consider ending its participation in the CIS. As Ukraine never ratified the Charter, it could cease its informal participation in the CIS. However, to fully terminate its relationship with the CIS, it would need to legally withdraw from the Creation Agreement, as Georgia did previously. On 14 March 2014, a bill was introduced to Ukraine's parliament to denounce their ratification of the CIS Creation Agreement, but it was never approved. Following the 2014 parliamentary election, a new bill to denounce the CIS agreement was introduced. In September 2015, the Ukrainian Ministry of Foreign Affairs confirmed Ukraine would continue participating in the CIS \"on a selective basis.\" Since that month, Ukraine has had no representatives in the CIS Executive Committee building.\nIn April 2018, Ukrainian President Petro Poroshenko indicated that Ukraine would formally leave the CIS. On 19 May 2018, Poroshenko signed a decree formally ending Ukraine's participation in CIS statutory bodies.\nAs of 1 June 2018, the CIS secretariat had not received a formal notice from Ukraine of its withdrawal from the CIS, a process that would take one year to complete, following notice being given. The CIS secretariat stated that it will continue inviting Ukraine to participate. Ukraine has stated that it intends to review its participation in all CIS agreements and only continue in those that are in its interests. On 3 May 2023, Ukraine formally withdrew from the 1992 agreement that set up the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly. In 2023 and 2024 Ukraine also withdrew from several agreements, including the 2001 \"Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) agreement on cooperation in the provision of safety of hazardous industrial facilities\", the 1996 \"CIS agreement on cooperation in evacuating nationals from third countries in emergencies\", the 1992 \"Agreement between the State Parties of the Commonwealth of Independent States on social and legal guarantees of the military personnel, persons discharged from military service, and members of their families\", the 1992 \"Agreement on the Establishment of the Council of Commanders of the Border Troops\" and the \"Agreement on the Creation of the Interstate System of Documentary Encrypted Communications of the Commonwealth of Independent States\".\nFormer member states.\nFollowing the overthrow of Eduard Shevardnadze in Georgia, Georgia officially withdrew from the Council of Defense Ministers in February 2006, stating that \"Georgia has taken a course to join NATO and it cannot be part of two military structures simultaneously\". However, it remained a full member of the CIS.\nIn the aftermath of the Russo-Georgian War in 2008, President Saakashvili announced during a public speech in the capital, Tbilisi, that Georgia would leave the CIS and the Georgian Parliament voted unanimously on 14 August 2008 to withdraw from the regional organisation. On 18 August 2008, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Georgia sent a note to the CIS Executive Committee notifying it of the aforesaid resolutions of the Parliament of Georgia and Georgia's withdrawal from CIS. In accordance with the CIS Charter (sec. 1, art. 9), Georgia's withdrawal came into effect 12 months later, on 18 August 2009.\nPolitics.\nHuman rights.\nSince its inception, one of the primary goals of the CIS has been to provide a forum for discussing issues related to the social and economic development of the newly independent states. To achieve this goal, member states have agreed to promote and protect human rights. Initially, efforts to achieve this goal consisted merely of statements of goodwill, but on 26 May 1995, the CIS adopted a Commonwealth of Independent States Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.\nIn 1991, four years before the 1995 human rights treaty, Article 33 of the Charter of the CIS created a Human Rights Commission with its seat in Minsk, Belarus. This was confirmed by the decision of the Council of Heads of States of the CIS in 1993. In 1995, the CIS adopted a human rights treaty that includes civil and political as well as social and economic human rights. This treaty entered into force in 1998. The CIS treaty is modeled on the European Convention on Human Rights, but lacks the strong implementation mechanisms of the latter. Furthermore, in the CIS treaty, the Human Rights Commission has a very vaguely defined authority. The Statute of the Human Rights Commission, however, also adopted by the CIS Member States as a decision, gives the commission the right to receive inter-state as well as individual communications.\nCIS members, especially in Central Asia, continue to have among the world's poorest human rights records. Many activists point to examples such as the 2005 Andijan massacre in Uzbekistan to show that there has been almost no improvement in human rights since the collapse of the Soviet Union in Central Asia. The consolidation of power by President Vladimir Putin has resulted in a steady decline in the modest progress of previous years in Russia. In turn, this has led to little to no scrutiny by Russia when it comes to the situation of human rights in other CIS member states. The Commonwealth of Independent States continues to face serious challenges in meeting even basic international standards.\nMilitary.\nThe CIS Charter establishes the Council of Ministers of Defence, which is vested with the task of coordinating military cooperation of the CIS member states that wish to participate.\nIn May 1992, six post-Soviet states belonging to the CIS signed the Collective Security Treaty (also referred to as the Tashkent Pact or Tashkent Treaty). Three other post-Soviet states signed in 1993 and the treaty took effect in 1994 and lasted 5 years. When the treaty was subsequently renewed, three countries withdrew, leaving Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and Tajikistan as members.\nIn December 1993, the CIS Armed Forces Headquarters was abolished. Instead, \"the CIS Council of Defence Ministers created a CIS Military Cooperation Coordination Headquarters (MCCH) in Moscow, with 50 percent of the funding provided by Russia.\" General Viktor Samsonov was appointed as Chief of Staff. The headquarters has now moved to 101000, \u041c\u043e\u0441\u043a\u0432\u0430 (Moscow), \u0421\u0432\u0435\u0440\u0447\u043a\u043e\u0432 \u043f\u0435\u0440\u0435\u0443\u043b\u043e\u043a, 3/2.\nAn important manifestation of integration processes in the area of military and defence collaboration of the CIS member states is the creation, in 1995, of the joint CIS Air Defense System. Over the years, the military personnel of the joint CIS Air Defense System grew twofold along the western, European border of the CIS, and by 1.5 times on its southern borders.\nIn 2002, the six member states agreed to create the \"Collective Security Treaty Organisation\" (CSTO) as a military alliance.\nIn 2007, CSTO members agreed to create a CSTO peacekeeping force.\nOne of the CST's original objectives was to resolve conflicts between CIS members, however military conflicts such as Russia's open assistance and support to the two secessionist areas in Georgia, Russia seizing Crimea and support to secessionist areas in Ukraine, the conflict between Armenia and Azerbaijan, and Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan border issues have demonstrated how ineffective the CST and later the CSTO, is in this role.\nEconomy.\nCorruption and bureaucracy are serious problems for trade in CIS countries.\nKazakhstan's President Nursultan Nazarbayev proposed that CIS members take up a digitisation agenda to modernise CIS economies.\nEconomic data\nStandards and rules.\nGOST standards were originally developed by the government of the Soviet Union as part of its national standardisation strategy. After the disintegration of the USSR, the GOST standards acquired a new status of the regional standards. They are now administered by the Euro-Asian Council for Standardization, Metrology, and Certification (EASC), a standards organisation chartered by the Commonwealth of Independent States.\nSupranational integration initiatives, trade, and economic cooperation within CIS.\nOn 24 September 1993, an \"Agreement on the Economic Union\" was signed by the heads of a number of CIS states. Its aim was the forming of conditions of stable development of economies of Contracting Parties to benefit from increases in living standards of their population. This led to other specific agreements.\nThe terms of the CIS FTA agreements allow member states to enter into the FTA agreements with other countries, as well as to join/create custom unions. Like other Commonwealth of Independent States agreements, this agreement does not regulate relations with third countries and allows differentiated integration (aka \u00e0 la carte and multi-speed Europe).\n1994 Framework for Bilateral Free Trade Agreements and Freedom of Transit.\nOn 15 April 1994, at a meeting of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) Council of Heads of State in Moscow, the presidents of 12 countries, namely Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine signed an \"Agreement\" on the Establishment of a Free Trade Area (\u0421\u043e\u0433\u043b\u0430\u0448\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435 \u043e \u0441\u043e\u0437\u0434\u0430\u043d\u0438\u0438 \u0437\u043e\u043d\u044b \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u043d\u043e\u0439 \u0442\u043e\u0440\u0433\u043e\u0432\u043b\u0438). The Agreement entered into force on 30 December 1994 for those countries that had completed ratification. As of 2023, the Agreement is fully in force for Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine, while Russia and Turkmenistan have notified the application of the Agreement on a provisional basis. According to the executive committee of the Commonwealth of Independent States, no one has ceased participation in the Agreement, made reservations or suspended the application.\nBilateral FTAs concluded on the basis of CIS 1994 as a framework agreement. According to the analytical material of the executive committee of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the 1994 version has not yet provided for multilateral free trade, but the conclusion of many bilateral agreements. Under the 1994 version, the free trade regime enters into force when conditions are met, but, for example, the freedom of transit enters into force immediately between participants. According to the text, transit transportation should not be subject to unreasonable delays or restrictions, and the conditions of transit, including tariffs for transportation by any mode of transport and the provision of services, should not be worse than for domestic shippers, recipients, and owners of goods, as well as no worse than the conditions for any third country.\n1999 Protocol introducing a multilateral free trade among ten countries.\nOn 2 April 1999, in Moscow, the presidents of 11 countries, namely Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine signed a Protocol on Amendments and Additions to the Agreement on the Establishment of a Free Trade Area of 15 April 1994 (\u041f\u0440\u043e\u0442\u043e\u043a\u043e\u043b \u043e \u0432\u043d\u0435\u0441\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0438 \u0438\u0437\u043c\u0435\u043d\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0439 \u0438 \u0434\u043e\u043f\u043e\u043b\u043d\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0439 \u0432 \u0421\u043e\u0433\u043b\u0430\u0448\u0435\u043d\u0438\u0435 \u043e \u0441\u043e\u0437\u0434\u0430\u043d\u0438\u0438 \u0437\u043e\u043d\u044b \u0441\u0432\u043e\u0431\u043e\u0434\u043d\u043e\u0439 \u0442\u043e\u0440\u0433\u043e\u0432\u043b\u0438 \u043e\u0442 15 \u0430\u043f\u0440\u0435\u043b\u044f 1994 \u0433\u043e\u0434\u0430). Turkmenistan did not participate. The Protocol entered into force on 24 November 1999 for those countries that had completed ratification. As of 2023, the Protocol has entered into force for all countries, namely Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, and Ukraine, except Russia, which remains a signatory but has not notified entry into force or provisional application. According to the executive committee of the Commonwealth of Independent States, no one has ceased participation in the Protocol or suspended the application, while one reservation was made by Azerbaijan on non-application in relation to Armenia and two specific opinions were expressed by Georgia and Ukraine.\nAccording to the analytical material of the executive committee of the Commonwealth of Independent States, the 1999 Protocol replaced the existing bilateral free trade regime with a multilateral regime, eliminated all fees, as well as taxes and levies with equivalent effect, and quantitative restrictions on the import and export of goods in mutual trade of the FTA participating states, established a procedure for dispute resolution, etc. The 1999 version refers to the principles of the World Trade Organisation, envisages cooperation in economic policy, payments, customs cooperation, taxes, science, provides for a ratchet effect prohibiting the imposition of new tariffs and restrictions, provides for treatment no worse than that of any third country, and provides for the transit of goods on the basis of the principle of freedom of transit without discrimination.\nThe 2011 CIS FTA Treaty envisages that the 1994 agreement and the 1999 protocol no longer apply among its eight participants (Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Armenia, and Moldova), however, among the rest of the countries, they continue to be applied.\nInternational Trade Centre says the 1994 Agreement on the Establishment of a Free Trade Area signed by 12 CIS countries still continues to be used by Azerbaijan and Georgia in trade with other CIS countries except with Russia and Turkmenistan. Reportedly it is also used bilaterally between Uzbekistan and Tajikistan pending Tajikistan's ratification of Uzbekistan's accession to the 2011 CIS Free Trade Area Treaty.\n2011 multilateral Free Trade Area Treaty among 9 countries.\nIn 2009, a new agreement was begun to create an FTA, the CIS Free Trade Agreement (CISFTA). In October 2011, the new free trade agreement was signed by eight of the eleven CIS prime ministers; Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, and Ukraine at a meeting in St. Petersburg. Initially, the treaty was only ratified by Russia, Belarus, and Ukraine, However, by the end of 2012, Kazakhstan, Armenia, and Moldova had also completed ratification. In December 2013, Uzbekistan, signed and then ratified the treaty, while the remaining two signatories, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan later both ratified the treaty in January 2014 and December 2015 respectively. Azerbaijan is the only full CIS member state not to participate in the free trade area.\nThe free trade agreement eliminates export and import duties on several goods but also contains a number of exemptions that will ultimately be phased out. An agreement was also signed on the basic principles of currency regulation and currency controls in the CIS at the same October 2011 meeting.\n2023 Agreement on Free Trade in Services among 7 countries.\nIn Sochi on 8 June 2023, Armenia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan signed an Agreement on Free Trade in Services, Establishment, Operations, and Investment.\nSocial development of the CIS countries.\nStatistics show that, as of 2011, the CIS countries as a whole represent a zone of social disadvantage.. It should be borne in mind that the subjective level of poverty, determined on the basis of sociological surveys, often turns out to be significantly higher than the official indicator: for example, the subjective level of poverty in Ukraine is 42%, and the official level is 28%; in Russia, the difference is even greater \u2014 42% and 13%, respectively. %.\nAt the end of December 2015, unemployment benefits were received by 1% of registered unemployed in Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan, 5% in Azerbaijan, 8% in Moldova, 45% in Belarus, 81% in Ukraine and 85% in Russia. Its average amount was 262.3 manats ($201) in Azerbaijan, 216,424 white rubles ($12) in Belarus, 1,255.8 lei ($63) in Moldova, 306.9 somoni ($46) in Tajikistan (November 2015), and 1,444 hryvnia ($60) in Ukraine. The minimum unemployment benefit in Russia is set at 850 rubles (in December, $12), and the maximum is 4,900 rubles ($70). In a number of countries in the region, the allowance has not changed for many years with an increase in the cost of living.\nThe average monthly salary in dollars in 2015 was $142 in Tajikistan, $193 in Ukraine, $206 in Kyrgyzstan, $245 in Moldova, $386 in Armenia, $413 in Belarus, $445 in Georgia (Q4 2015), $452 in Azerbaijan, $560 in Russia and $565 in Kazakhstan. It still remains low, insufficient to ensure a full-fledged human life, and is actually completely \"eaten up.\" In a number of countries, the majority of the population spends more than half of their salary on food (56% of the population in Kazakhstan, 61% in Russia, 72% in Belarus, 76% in Azerbaijan and Ukraine). With a low salary level, delays in its payment are increasing.:\nOther activities.\nElection monitoring.\nThe CIS-Election Monitoring Organisation () is an election monitoring body that was formed in October 2002, following a Commonwealth of Independent States heads of states meeting which adopted the \"Convention on the Standards of Democratic Elections, Electoral Rights, and Freedoms in the Member States of the Commonwealth of Independent States\". The CIS-EMO has been sending election observers to member countries of the CIS since this time.\nCIS election monitoring has been characterised by scholars as low-quality, as the CIS tends to validate elections that are obviously flawed.\nControversies\nThe election monitoring body has approved many elections which have been heavily criticised by independent observers.\nRussian language status.\nRussia has urged that the Russian language receive official status in all of the CIS member states. So far Russian is an official language in only four states: Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan. Russian is also considered an official language in the region of Transnistria and the autonomous region of Gagauzia in Moldova. After the Ukrainian 2010 election, President Yanukovych stated \"Ukraine will continue to promote the Ukrainian language as its only state language.\"\nSports events.\nAt the time of the Soviet Union's dissolution in December 1991, had been invited to or qualified for various 1992 sports events. A joint CIS team took its place in some of these. The \"Unified Team\" competed in the 1992 Winter Olympics and 1992 Summer Olympics, and a CIS association football team competed in UEFA Euro 1992. A CIS bandy team played some friendlies in January 1992 and made its last appearance at the 1992 Russian Government Cup, where it also played against the new Russia national bandy team. The Soviet Union bandy championship for 1991\u20131992 was rebranded as a CIS championship, this lasted just one year before it became Russian bandy.\nIn 2017, a festival for national sports and games, known as the Festival of National Sports and Games of the Commonwealth of Independent States () was held in Ulyanovsk. The main sports were sambo, tug of war, mas-wrestling, gorodki, belt wrestling, lapta, bandy (rink), kettlebell lifting, chess and archery. A few demonstration sports were also a part of the programme.\nIn 2021 the first CIS games took place in Kazan with 9 nations and 2,000 athletes. The second games took place in 2023 in Belarus.\nCultural events.\nThe CIS has also been a relevant forum to support cultural relations between former Soviet republics. In 2006, the Council of the Heads of Governments of the CIS launched the Intergovernmental Foundation for Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Cooperation (IFESCCO). IFESSCO has substantially relied on Russia's financial support since its creation and supported several multilateral cultural events, including the \u2018CIS Capital of Culture\u2019 initiative. In 2017, the Armenian city of Goris was declared the CIS Cultural Capital of the year, in 2022 it was Karakol in Kyrgyzstan.\nDemographics.\nThe combined population of all member states is 246,200,194 as of 2024.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Largest_cities/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLife expectancy.\nLife expectancy at birth in the countries of CIS in 2021, according to the World Bank Group are listed below:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Static row numbers/styles.css\" /&gt;&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPost-Soviet organisations and initiatives outside CIS framework.\nEurAsEc and EAEU.\nCommon Economic Space.\nAfter a discussion about the creation of a common economic space between the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries of Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and Kazakhstan, agreement in principle about the creation of this space was announced after a meeting in the Moscow suburb of Novo-Ogarevo on 23 February 2003. The Common Economic Space would involve a supranational commission on trade and tariffs that would be based in Kyiv, would initially be headed by a representative of Kazakhstan, and would not be subordinate to the governments of the four nations. The ultimate goal would be a regional organisation that would be open for other countries to join as well, and could eventually lead even to a single currency.\nOn 22 May 2003, the \"Verkhovna Rada\" (the Ukrainian Parliament) voted 266 votes in favour and 51 against the joint economic space. However, most believe that Viktor Yushchenko's victory in the Ukrainian presidential election of 2004 was a significant blow against the project: Yushchenko had shown renewed interest in Ukrainian membership in the European Union and such membership would be incompatible with the envisioned common economic space. Yushchenko's successor Viktor Yanukovych stated on 27 April 2010: \"Ukraine's entry into the Customs Union of Russia, Belarus and Kazakhstan is not possible today, since the economic principles and the laws of the WTO do not allow it, we develop our policy following WTO principles\". Ukraine has been a WTO member since 2008.\nA Customs Union of Belarus, Kazakhstan and Russia was thus created in 2010, A single market had been envisioned for 2012, but instead the customs union was renamed as the Eurasian Customs Union and expanded to include Armenia and Kyrgyzstan in 2015.\nOrganisation of Central Asian Cooperation.\nKazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan formed the OCAC in 1991 as Central Asian Commonwealth (CAC). The organisation continued in 1994 as the Central Asian Economic Union (CAEU), in which Tajikistan and Turkmenistan did not participate. In 1998 it became the Central Asian Economic Cooperation (CAEC), which marked the return of Tajikistan. On 28 February 2002, it was renamed to its current name. Russia joined on 28 May 2004. On 7 October 2005, it was decided between the member states that Uzbekistan will join the Eurasian Economic Community and that the organisations will merge. The organisations joined on 25 January 2006. It is not clear what will happen to the status of current CACO observers that are not observers to EurAsEC (Georgia and Turkey).\nCommunity for Democracy and Rights of Nations.\nThe post-Soviet disputed states of Abkhazia, South Ossetia, and Transnistria are all members of the Community for Democracy and Rights of Nations which aims to forge closer integration among the members.\nGUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development.\nThe GUAM Organization for Democracy and Economic Development is a regional organisation of four post-Soviet states: Georgia, Ukraine, Azerbaijan, and Moldova.\nAssessments and criticism.\nA. Elchibey, the 2nd president of Azerbaijan, called the CIS a \"big collective farm\" that Russia uses to \"preserve the old empire\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A serious mistake was made during the construction of such an entity as the CIS. Perhaps it could have stood if it had been conceived as a Commonwealth of Nations of Independent States \u2014 I emphasize the word \"independent\", in which the rights of each State: Armenia, Georgia and Azerbaijana \u2014 would be protected. Abkhazians in Abkhazia is using Russian troops to oust the Georgian population. Is this a Commonwealth of Nations? Russia uses the CIS, trying to preserve the old empire in a new form and inventing various mechanisms for this. The CIS leaders have not made at least one serious attempt to resolve the Armenian-Azerbaijani conflict or any other conflicts within the territory of post-Soviet zone. I once called the CIS a big collective farm without rights. Such a collective farm will inevitably fall apart, and this, in fact, has already happened.\nRussian diplomat A. Denisov does not believe that the CIS is being used by Russia to realise imperial ambitions, to restore the USSR:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As for the \"imperial ambitions\", the restoration of the USSR. The CIS is an organization that builds its work on the basis of consensus. Any participating State has the right to veto any decision. In practice, the principle of the so-called \"moving geometry\" is being implemented, when states decide which projects they should participate in and which not. Moreover, even the non-recognition of the legal personality of the CIS by one of the states does not prevent its participation in areas of cooperation beneficial to it in the Commonwealth format. I have already mentioned Georgia. Against this background, what imperial ambitions of Russia can we even talk about? It's just ridiculous.\nMikhail Krotov, a Russian scientist, government and international civil servant, who headed the Council of the CIS Interparliamentary Assembly in 1992\u20132012, writes that the liquidation of the USSR and the independence of Belarus, Russia and Ukraine through the signing of the Belovezha Accords on 8 December 1991, and then other Soviet republics, according to the Alma Ata Declaration on 21 December 1991, were \"They are directly linked to the creation of the Commonwealth of Independent States as an interstate association forming a common socio-economic space., a common military-strategic space under a joint command, conducting a coordinated foreign policy and protecting the ethnic, cultural, linguistic, etc. rights of national minorities.\" Krotov emphasises that in order to meet Ukraine halfway, the CIS founding document significantly reduced the level of integration, limited its scope and excluded supranational functions of the Commonwealth bodies, but \"Ukraine did not sign even such a weakened version of the CIS Charter,\" which, according to the author, \"grossly violated the terms of its withdrawal from the USSR.\". In this regard, Krotov agrees with Russian President Vladimir Putin's conclusion that \"Ukraine did not legally gain independence.\".\nAmerican geopolitician Zbigniew Brzezinski believed that \"it was Ukraine's actions... that prevented the CIS from becoming just a new name for a more federal USSR.\"\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nJournals.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36871", "revid": "1308945506", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36871", "title": "Show jumping", "text": "Competitive equestrian sport\nShow jumping is a part of a group of English riding equestrian events that also includes eventing, hunters, and equitation. Jumping classes are commonly seen at horse shows throughout the world, including the Olympics. Sometimes shows are limited exclusively to jumpers. Sometimes jumper classes are offered in conjunction with other English-style events. Sometimes, show jumping is but one division of a very large, all-breed competition that includes a very wide variety of disciplines. Jumping classes may be governed by various national horse show sanctioning organizations, such as the United States Equestrian Federation or the British Showjumping Association. International competitions are governed by the rules of the International Federation for Equestrian Sports.\nHunters or jumpers.\nShow jumping events have hunter classes, jumper classes and hunt seat equitation classes.\nHunters are judged subjectively on the degree to which they meet an ideal standard of manners, style, and way of going. Conversely, jumper classes are scored objectively, based entirely on a numerical score determined only by whether the horse attempts the obstacle, clears it, and finishes the course in the allotted time. Jumper courses tend to be much more complex and technical than hunter courses because riders and horses are not being judged on style. Courses often are colorful and at times, quite creatively designed. Jumper courses can range anywhere in height from 0.80 meters to 1.60 meters.\nHunters have meticulous turnout and tend toward very quiet, conservative horse tack and rider attire. Hunter bits, bridles, crops, spurs, and martingales are tightly regulated. Jumpers, while caring for their horses and grooming them well, are not scored on turnout, are allowed a wider range of equipment, and may wear less conservative attire, so long as it stays within the rules. Some events may make it compulsory to wear show jackets. Formal turnout always is preferred; a neat rider gives a good impression at shows.\nIn addition to hunters and jumpers, there are equitation classes, sometimes called hunt seat equitation, which judges the ability of the rider. The equipment, clothing, and fence styles used in equitation more closely resemble hunter classes, although the technical difficulty of the courses may more closely resemble showjumping events. This is because both disciplines are designed to test the rider's ability to control the horse through a difficult course consisting of rollbacks, combinations, and higher obstacles.\nRules.\nJumper classes are held over a course of show jumping obstacles, including verticals, spreads, and double and triple combinations, usually with many turns and changes of direction. The intent is to jump cleanly over a set course within an allotted time. Time faults are assessed for exceeding the time allowance. Jumping faults are incurred for knockdowns and blatant disobedience, such as refusals (when the horse stops before a fence or the horse, \"runs out\") (\"see Modern scoring below\"). Horses are allowed a limited number of refusals before being disqualified. A refusal may lead to a rider exceeding the time allowed on course. Placings are based on the lowest number of points or \"faults\" accumulated. A horse and rider who have not accumulated any jumping faults or penalty points are said to have scored a \"clear round\". Tied entries usually have a jump-off over a raised and shortened course, and the course is timed; if entries are tied for faults accumulated in the jump-off, the fastest time wins.\nIn most competitions, riders are allowed to walk the initial course but not the jump-off course (usually the same course with missing jumps, e.g., 1, 3, 5, 7, 8 instead of 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 or the same course but timed) before competition to plan their ride. Walking the course before the event is a chance for the rider to walk the lines he or she will have to ride, in order to decide how many strides the horse will need to take between each jump and from which angle. Going off course will cost time if minor errors are made and major departures will result in disqualification.\nThe higher levels of competition, such as \"A\" or \"AA\" rated shows in the United States, or the international \"Grand Prix\" circuit, present more technical and complex courses. Not only is the height and width (\"spread\") of an obstacle increased to present a greater challenge, technical difficulty also increases with tighter turns and shorter or unusual distances between fences. Horses sometimes also have to jump fences from an angle rather than straight on. For example, a course designer might set up a line so that there are six and a half strides (the standard measure for a canter stride is twelve feet) between the jumps, requiring the rider to adjust the horse's stride dramatically in order to make the distance. This could also mean that the rider may have to add or subtract a stride to clear the jump with more ease. How the rider chooses to adjust can also depend on their horse. If a horse has a smaller stride in comparison to the average, they may need to add another stride and vice versa if the horse has a longer stride. \nUnlike show hunter classes, which reward calmness and style, jumper classes require boldness, scope, power, accuracy, and control; speed also is a factor, especially in jump-off courses and speed classes (when time counts even in the first round). The first round of the class consists of the rider and horse having to go around the course without refusing or knocking down any jumps while also staying within the time allowed. If the horse/rider combination completes the first round successfully, then they move on to the second round, called the \"jump-off\". In a jump-off, the rider needs to plan ahead of time because they need to be very speedy and also not have any faults. The jump-off has fewer jumps than the first round but is usually much more difficult. To win this round, the rider has to be the quickest while still not refusing or knocking down any jumps. In most competitions, the penalties for knocking a pole down is four per pole. This is then added to any time penalties that have occurred\nHistory.\nShow jumping is a equestrian sport. Until the inclosure acts, which came into force in England in the 18th century, there had been little need for horses to jump fences routinely, but with this act of Parliament came new challenges for those who followed fox hounds. The inclosure acts brought fencing and boundaries to many parts of the country as common ground was dispersed amongst separate owners. This meant that those wishing to pursue their sport now needed horses that were capable of jumping these obstacles.\nIn the early horse shows held in France, there was a parade of competitors who then took off across country for the jumping. This sport was, however, not popular with spectators since they could not follow to watch the jumping. Thus, it was not long before fences began to appear in an arena for the competitions. This became known as \"Lepping\". 1869 was the year \u2018horse leaping\u2019 came to prominence at Dublin horse show. Fifteen years later, \"Lepping\" competitions were brought to Britain and by 1900 most of the more important shows had \"Lepping\" classes. Separate classes were held for women riding sidesaddle.\nAt this time, the principal cavalry schools of Europe at Pinerolo and Tor-di-Quinto in Italy, the French school in Saumur, and the Spanish school in Vienna all preferred to use a very deep seat with long stirrups when jumping. While this style of riding may have felt more secure for the rider, it also impeded the freedom of the horse to use its body to the extent needed to clear large obstacles.\nAn Italian riding instructor, Captain Federico Caprilli, heavily influenced the world of jumping with his ideas promoting a forward position with shorter stirrups. This style placed the rider in a position that did not interfere with the balance of the horse while negotiating obstacles. This style, now known as the forward seat, is commonly used today. The deep, Dressage-style seat, while useful for riding on the flat and in conditions where control of the horse is of greater importance than freedom of movement, is less suitable for jumping.\nThe first major show jumping competition held in England was at Olympia in 1907. Most of the competitors were members of the military and it became clear at this competition and in the subsequent years, that there was no uniformity of rules for the sport. Judges marked on their own opinions. Some marked according to the severity of the obstacle and others marked according to style. Before 1907 there were no penalties for a refusal and the competitor was sometimes asked to miss the fence to please the spectators. The first courses were built with little imagination, many consisting of only a straight bar fence and a water jump. A meeting was arranged in 1923 which led to the formation of the BSJA in 1925. In the United States, a similar need for national rules for jumping and other equestrian activities led to the formation of the American Horse Shows Association in 1917, which now is known as the United States Equestrian Federation.\nAn early form of show jumping first was incorporated into the Olympic Games in 1900. Show jumping in its current format appeared in 1912 and has thrived ever since, its recent popularity due in part to its suitability as a spectator sport that is well adapted for viewing on television.\nScoring.\nHistoric scoring.\nThe original list of faults introduced in Great Britain in 1925 were as follows:\n1st: 4 faults\n2nd: another 4 faults added on\n3rd: elimination (ELM)\n(At first, stadium jumps were set as a single rail that sometimes would be up to five feet high. Some horses began to duck under these jumps instead, which perhaps is the origin of the term \"ducking out\" at a fence.)\nWater jumps were once at least 15 feet (5 m) wide, although the water often had drained out of them by the time the last competitor jumped. High jumping would start with a pole at around five feet high, but this was later abandoned since many horses went under the pole. It was for this reason that more poles were added and fillers came into use. Time penalties were not counted until 1917.\nModern scoring.\nRules have evolved since then, with different national federations having different classes and rules. The international governing body for most major show jumping competitions is the F\u00e9d\u00e9ration \u00c9questre Internationale (FEI). The two most common types of penalties are jumping penalties and time penalties.\nTable C, speed scoring.\nThe above type of scoring is called \"Table A\" scoring. Table C is a method of scoring based only on speed. The penalties for each knockdown is to add 4 seconds to the rider's time. The fastest score wins.\nTack.\nShow jumping competitors use a very forward style of English saddle, most often the \"close contact\" design, which has a forward flap and a seat and cantle that is flatter than saddles designed for general all-purpose English riding or dressage. This construction allows greater freedom of movement for the rider when in jumping position and allows a shorter stirrup, allowing the rider to lighten the seat on the horse. Other saddles, such as those designed for dressage, feature a deep seat that can hinder a rider over large fences, forcing them into a position that limits the horse's movement and may put the rider dangerously behind the movement of the horse.\nAt international levels, saddle pads are usually white and square in shape, allowing the pair to display a sponsorship, national flag, or breeding affiliation. In contrast, riders in show hunters and equitation often use \"fitted\" fleece pads that are the same shape as the saddle. Girths vary in size and type, but usually have a contour to give room for the horse's elbows, and many have belly guards to protect the underside of the horse from its shoe studs when the front legs are tightly folded under.\nBridles may be used with any style of cavesson noseband, and there are few rules regarding the severity of this equipment. The figure-8 cavesson is the most popular type. Bits may also vary in severity, and competitors may use any bit, or even a \"bitless bridle\" or a mechanical hackamore. The ground jury at the show has the right, however, based on veterinary advice, to refuse a bit or bridling scheme if it could cause harm to the horse.\nBoots and wraps are worn by almost all horses, due to the fact that they may easily injure their legs when landing or when making tight turns at speed. Open-fronted tendon boots usually are worn on the forelegs, because they provide protection for the delicate tendons that run down the back of the leg, but still allow the horse to feel a rail should it get careless and hang its legs. Fetlock boots are sometimes seen on the rear legs, primarily to prevent the horse from hitting itself on tight turns. However, dressage horses are forbidden from wearing boots or wraps during competition or tests, due to the formality of dressage there are extended regulations on tack.\nMartingales are very common, especially on horses used at the Grand Prix level. The majority of jumpers are ridden in running martingales since these provide the most freedom over fences. Although a standing martingale (a strap connecting directly to the horse's noseband) is commonly seen on show hunters and may be helpful in keeping a horse from throwing its head up, it also may be quite dangerous in the event of a stumble, restricting a horse from using its head to regain its balance. For this reason, standing martingales are not used in show jumping or eventing. Breastplates also are common, used to keep the saddle in place as the horse goes over large fences.\nRider attire.\nRider attire may be somewhat less formal than that used in hunter riding. An approved ASTM/SEI equestrian helmet with a harness is always required, and is a practical necessity to protect the rider's head in the event of a fall. Tall boots are required, usually black. Spurs are optional, but commonly used. Breeches are usually white, tan, or beige. A dark-colored coat is typically worn, although some organizations allow tweed jackets or non-wool machine washable jackets. Shirts are light-colored (usually white) ratcatcher-styles with either a choker or stock tie. In hot summer weather, many riders wear a simple short-sleeved polo shirt with helmet, boots and breeches, and even where coats are required, the judges may waive the coat rule in extremely hot weather. Gloves, usually black, are optional, as is the plaiting of the horse's mane and tail.\nAt FEI Grand Prix levels, dress is more strictly controlled. Riders must wear white or light-colored shirts, white ties or chokers, black or brown boots, white or light fawn breeches, and red or black jackets. Members of the military, police forces, and national studs, however, have the right to wear their service uniforms instead of FEI-prescribed dress. In some circumstances, members of international teams may wear jackets in their country's respective colors or add national insignia.\nTypes of show jumps.\nShow jumping fences are man-made and often colorful or artistic in design. Fences are designed to break away if struck by the horse to simplify scoring, and to increase safety by reducing falls by the horse.\nSome of the basic types of fences seen in show jumping are verticals, spreads, water, and combinations.183 Most jumps are constructed with poles or planks supported on each end by \"standards\", upright supports which can hold multiple poles at various heights.458201 A \"vertical jump\" is an upright jump with a single pair of standards which hold a vertical stack of rails or planks, or a gate.516 A \"spread jump\" made of two or more pairs of standards, making a wider jump for the horse, is called an oxer.352, 454154 A wall is a vertical stack of blocks painted to look like a stone or brick wall.522 A water obstacle may be a wide open ditch of shallow water (usually lined with light blue plastic) or a smaller water ditch with a jump placed over it.301, 524 A combination jump is two or three jumps in a row, with one or two strides between each; two jumps in a row is called a double combination and three jumps is a triple combination.115, 150, 503\nHorses prefer a more solid looking jump, so many rail fences are filled with brush or flower boxes or other solid-looking objects. Since horses judge their takeoff from the base of a jump (the \"ground line\"), most fences have a rail placed on or near the base of a fence, however sometimes a jump is constructed without a ground line to test the horse's ability to jump without that cue.221\nThe horses.\nA show jumper must have the courage to jump large fences as well as the athletic ability to handle the sharp turns and bursts of speed necessary to navigate the most difficult courses. Many breeds of horses have been successful show jumpers, and even some grade horses of uncertain breeding have been champions. Most show jumpers are tall horses, over \u00a0hands , usually of Warmblood or Thoroughbred breeding, though horses as small as \u00a0hands have been on the Olympic teams of various nations and carried riders to Olympic and other international medals. There is no correlation between the size of a horse and its athletic ability, nor do tall horses necessarily have an advantage when jumping. Nonetheless, a taller horse may make a fence appear less daunting to the rider.\nPonies also compete in show jumping competitions in many countries, usually in classes limited to youth riders, defined as those under the age of 16 or 18 years, depending on the sanctioning organization. Pony-sized horses may, on occasion, compete in open competition with adult riders. The most famous example was Stroller, who only stood \u00a0hands but was nonetheless an Individual silver medal winner and part of the Great Britain show jumping team in the 1968 Summer Olympics, jumping one of the few clean rounds in the competition. Significant jumpers from the United States are included in the Show Jumping Hall of Fame.\nPara-showjumping.\nPara-showjumping, or para-jumping, is show jumping for disabled people.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36873", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36873", "title": "Admirals Mast", "text": ""}
{"id": "36874", "revid": "8066546", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36874", "title": "Captains Mast", "text": ""}
{"id": "36875", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36875", "title": "Non-judicial punishment", "text": "Military discipline beyond its judicial process\nIn the United States Armed Forces, Non-judicial punishment (NJP) is a disciplinary measure that may be applied to individual military personnel, without a need for a court martial or similar proceedings.\nGeneral.\nIn the United States Armed Forces, non-judicial punishment is a form of military justice authorized by Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice. Its rules are further elaborated on in various branch policy as well as the Manual for Courts-Martial. NJP permits commanders to administratively discipline troops without a court-martial.V-2 Punishment can range from reprimand to reduction in rank, correctional custody, loss of pay, extra duty or restrictions depending on rank of the imposing officer and receiving officer.V-2 The receipt of non-judicial punishment does not constitute a criminal conviction (it is equivalent to a civil action), but is often placed in the service record of the individual. The process for non-judicial punishment is governed by Part V of the Manual for Courts-Martial and by each service branch's regulations.\nNon-judicial punishment proceedings are known by different terms among the services. In the Army and the Air Force, non-judicial punishment is referred to as Article 15; in the Marine Corps it is called being \"NJP'd\", being sent to \"Office Hours\", or satirically amongst the junior ranks, \"Ninja Punched\". The Navy and the Coast Guard call non-judicial punishment captain's mast or admiral's mast, depending on the rank of the commanding officer.\nHearing.\nPrior to imposition of NJP, the commander will notify the accused of the commander's intention to impose punishment, the nature of the misconduct alleged, supporting evidence, and a statement of the accused's rights under the UCMJ.V-2 All service members, except those embarked or attached to a vessel currently away from its homeport, have a right to refuse NJP and request a court-martial V-3. If the accused does not accept the NJP, the NJP hearing is terminated and the commander must make the decision of whether to process the service member for court-martial. If the accused accepts NJP, the accused can choose to have a hearing or waive said right.V-3. If a hearing proceeds, the accused may choose to be accompanied by a spokesperson.V-3 The accused may present evidence and witnesses to the commander. The commander must consider any information offered during the hearing, and must be personally convinced that the service member committed misconduct before imposing punishment.\nPunishments.\nMaximum penalties depend on the rank of the accused and that of the officer imposing punishment:\nFor officers accused of misconduct.\nIf the officer imposing punishment holds General Court Martial authority, or if the commanding officer is of the grade O-7 or greater (Generals in the Army &amp; Air Force. Admirals in the Navy, https://)\nBy Commanding Officers of the grades O-4 to O-6 (Majors to Colonels in the Army &amp; Air Force. Lt. Commanders to Captains in the Navy, https://)\nBy Commanding Officers of the grades O-1 to O-3 (Lieutenants to Captains in the Army &amp; Air Force. Ensigns to Lieutenants in the Navy, https://)\nBy Officers In Charge (OIC)\nFor enlisted members accused of misconduct.\nThere are three types of non-judicial punishment commonly imposed.\nSummary Article 15: (O-3 and below) commanders and commissioned OIC may impose:\nCompany Grade (O-3 or below) commanders may impose the above plus:\nField Grade (O-4 to O-6) may impose:\nThe punishments listed above may be combined (with certain limitations listed in the Manual for Courts-Martial, Part 5, Section 5(d)). For example, extra duties, restriction and forfeiture of pay, and reduction in grade could be imposed.\nIf the member considers the punishment to be unjust or to be disproportionate to the misconduct committed, the member may appeal the NJP to a higher authority. This is usually the next officer in the chain of command. Upon considering the appeal, the higher authority may set aside the NJP, decrease the severity of the punishment, or may deny the appeal. They may not increase the severity of the punishment.V-1\nPersonnel are permitted to refuse NJP in favor of a court-martial; this might be done in cases where they do not feel their Commanding Officer will give them a fair hearing.V-2 But this option exposes them to a possible criminal court conviction. Navy and Marine Corps personnel assigned to or embarked aboard ship do not have the option of refusing NJP, nor can they appeal the decision of the officer imposing punishment; they may only appeal the severity of the punishment.\nMast.\nIn naval tradition, mast is the traditional location of the non-judicial hearing under which a commanding officer studies and disposes of cases involving those in his command. In the United States Navy and U.S. Coast Guard, these proceedings take place under the authority of Article 15 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice (UCMJ). \nIf the individual conducting the proceeding is either a captain, or a lower ranking officer (typically a commander or lieutenant commander) serving as commanding officer of a naval or coast guard vessel, an aviation squadron, or similar command afloat or ashore, then the proceeding is referred to as a captain's mast. \nIf an admiral is overseeing the mast, then the procedure is referred to as an admiral's mast or a flag mast.\nA captain's mast or admiral's mast is a procedure whereby the commanding officer must:\nA captain's mast is not:\nThe term \"mast\" may also refer to when a captain or commanding officer makes him/herself available to hear concerns, complaints, or requests from the crew. Traditionally, on a naval vessel, the captain would stand at the main mast of that vessel when holding \"mast\". The crew, who by custom did not speak with the captain, could speak to him directly at these times. It could also refer to the naval punishment of tying one to a mast and lashing them with a whip.\nIn modern times, a meritorious mast refers to the commanding officer taking this time to single out a member of the crew for praise and present written recognition of work well done.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36877", "revid": "49440083", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36877", "title": "Bucharest", "text": "Capital and largest city of Romania\nBucharest ( , ; ) is the capital and largest city of Romania. The metropolis stands on the River D\u00e2mbovi\u021ba in south-eastern Romania. Its population is officially estimated at 1.71 million residents within a greater metropolitan area of 2.31 million residents, which makes Bucharest the 8th most-populous city by population within city limits in the European Union. The city area measures , while the metropolitan area covers . The city proper is administratively known as the \"Municipality of Bucharest\" (), and has the same administrative level as that of a national county, being further subdivided into six sectors, each governed by a local mayor. Bucharest is a major cultural, political and economic hub, the country's seat of government, and the capital of the Muntenia region.\nBucharest was first mentioned in documents in 1459. The city became the capital in 1862 and is the centre of Romanian media, culture, and art. Its architecture is a mix of historical (mostly Eclectic, but also Neoclassical and Art Nouveau), interbellum (Bauhaus, Art Deco, and Romanian Revival architecture), socialist era, and modern. In the period between the two World Wars, the city's elegant architecture and the sophistication of its elite earned Bucharest the nicknames of Little Paris, or Paris of the East. Although buildings and districts in the historic city centre were heavily damaged or destroyed by war, earthquakes, and even Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu's program of systematization, many survived and have been renovated. In recent years, the city has been experiencing an economic and cultural boom. It is one of the fastest-growing high-tech cities in Europe. In 2016, the historical city centre was listed as \"endangered\" by the World Monuments Watch.\nBucharest is by far the most populous city of Romania, having reached one million inhabitants in the 1940s. In 2017, Bucharest was the European city with the highest growth of tourists who stay over night, according to the Mastercard Global Index of Urban Destinations. In 2018 and 2019, Bucharest ranked as the European destination with the highest potential for development according to the same study.\nEconomically, Bucharest is the most prosperous city in Romania and the richest capital and city in the region, having surpassed Budapest since 2017. The city has a number of large convention facilities, educational institutes, cultural venues, traditional \"shopping arcades\" and recreational areas. Bucharest is within, and surrounded by, the Ilfov County.\nEtymology.\nThe Romanian name has an unverified origin. Tradition connects the founding of Bucharest with the name of \"Bucur\", who was a prince, an outlaw, a fisherman, a shepherd or a hunter, according to different legends. In Romanian, the word stem means 'joy' ('happiness'), hence the city Bucharest means 'city of joy'.\nOther etymologies are given by early scholars, including the one of an Ottoman traveller, Evliya \u00c7elebi, who claimed that Bucharest was named after a certain \"Abu-Kari\u0219\", from the tribe of \"Bani-Kurei\u0219\". In 1781, Austrian historian Franz Sulzer claimed that it was related to \"bucurie\" (joy), \"bucuros\" (joyful), or \"a se bucura\" (to be joyful), while an early 19th-century book published in Vienna assumed its name to be derived from \"Bukovie\", a beech forest. In English, the city's name was formerly rendered as \"Bukarest\". A native or resident of Bucharest is called a \"Bucharester\" (Romanian: ).\nHistory.\nBucharest's history alternated periods of development and decline from the early settlements in antiquity until its consolidation as the national capital of Romania late in the 19th century. First mentioned as the 'Citadel of Bucure\u0219ti' in 1459, it became the residence of the ruler of Wallachia, Voivode Vlad the Impaler.\nThe Old Princely Court (\"Curtea Veche\") was erected by Mircea Ciobanul in the mid-16th century. Under subsequent rulers, Bucharest was established as the summer residence of the royal court. During the years to come, it competed with T\u00e2rgovi\u0219te on the status of capital city after an increase in the importance of Southern Muntenia brought about by demands of the \"suzerain\" power \u2013 the Ottoman Empire.\nBucharest finally became the permanent location of the Wallachian court after 1698, starting with the reign of Constantin Br\u00e2ncoveanu. The city was partly destroyed by natural disasters and rebuilt several times, in the following 200 years.\nThe Ottomans appointed Greek christian administrators (Phanariotes) to run the town () from the 18th century. The 1821 Wallachian uprising initiated by Tudor Vladimirescu led to the end of the Phanariotes' rule in Bucharest.\nIn 1813\u201314 the city was hit by the Caragea's plague. The city was wrested from Ottoman influence and occupied at several intervals by the Habsburg monarchy (1716, 1737, 1789) and Imperial Russia (three times between 1768 and 1806). It was placed under Russian administration between 1828 and the Crimean War, with an interlude during the Bucharest-centred 1848 Wallachian revolution. Later, an Austrian garrison took possession after the Russian departure (remaining in the city until March 1857). On 23 March 1847, a fire consumed about 2,000 buildings, destroying a third of the city.\nIn 1862, after Wallachia and Moldavia were united to form the Principality of Romania, Bucharest became the new nation's capital city. In 1881, it became the political centre of the newly proclaimed Kingdom of Romania under King Carol I. During the second half of the 19th century, the city's population increased dramatically, and a new period of urban development began. During this period, gas lighting, horse-drawn trams, and limited electrification were introduced. The D\u00e2mbovi\u021ba River was also massively channelled in 1883, thus putting a stop to previously endemic floods like the 1865 flooding of Bucharest. The Fortifications of Bucharest were built. The extravagant architecture and cosmopolitan high culture of this period won Bucharest the nickname of \"Paris of the East\" (\"Parisul Estului\"), with the Calea Victoriei as its Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es.\nBetween 6 December 1916 and November 1918, the city was occupied by German forces as a result of the Battle of Bucharest, with the official capital temporarily moved to Ia\u0219i (also called Jassy), in the Moldavia region. After World War I, Bucharest became the capital of Greater Romania. In the interwar years, Bucharest's urban development continued, with the city gaining an average of 30,000 new residents each year. Also, some of the city's main landmarks were built in this period, including Arcul de Triumf and Palatul Telefoanelor. However, the Great Depression in Romania took its toll on Bucharest's citizens, culminating in the Grivi\u021ba Strike of 1933.\nIn January 1941, the city was the scene of the Legionnaires' rebellion and Bucharest pogrom. As the capital of an Axis country and a major transit point for Axis troops en route to the Eastern Front, Bucharest suffered heavy damage during World War II due to Allied bombings. On 23 August 1944, Bucharest was the site of the royal coup which brought Romania into the Allied camp. The city suffered a short period of Nazi Luftwaffe bombings, as well as a failed attempt by German troops to regain the city.\nAfter the establishment of communism in Romania, the city continued growing. New districts were constructed, most of them dominated by tower blocks. During Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu's leadership (1965\u201389), a part of the historic city was demolished and replaced by 'Socialist realism' style development: (1) the Centrul Civic (the Civic Centre) and (2) the Palace of the Parliament, for which an entire historic quarter was razed to make way for Ceau\u0219escu's megalomaniac plans. On 4 March 1977, an earthquake centred in Vrancea, about away, claimed 1,500 lives and caused further damage to the historic centre.\nThe Romanian Revolution of 1989 began with massive anti-Ceau\u0219escu protests in Timi\u0219oara in December 1989 and continued in Bucharest, leading to the overthrow of the Communist regime. Dissatisfied with the postrevolutionary leadership of the National Salvation Front, some student leagues and opposition groups organised anti-Communist rallies in early 1990, which caused the political change.\nSince 2000, the city has been continuously modernised. Residential and commercial developments are underway, particularly in the northern districts; Bucharest's old historic centre has undergone restoration since the mid-2000s.\nIn 2015, 64 people were killed in the Colectiv nightclub fire. Later the Romanian capital saw the 2017\u20132019 Romanian protests against the judicial reforms, with a 2018 protest ending with 450 people injured.\nTreaties.\nThe following treaties were signed in the city:\nGeography.\nGeneral.\nThe city is situated on the banks of the D\u00e2mbovi\u021ba River, which flows into the Arge\u0219 River, a tributary of the Danube. Several lakes\u00a0\u2013 the most important of which are Lake Her\u0103str\u0103u, Lake Floreasca, Lake Tei, and Lake Colentina\u00a0\u2013 stretch across the northern parts of the city, along the Colentina River, a tributary of the D\u00e2mbovi\u021ba. In addition, in the centre of the capital is a small artificial lake\u00a0\u2013 Lake Ci\u0219migiu\u00a0\u2013 surrounded by the Ci\u0219migiu Gardens. These gardens have a rich history, having been frequented by poets and writers. Opened in 1847 and based on the plans of German architect Carl F.W. Meyer, the gardens are the main recreational facility in the city centre.\nBucharest parks and gardens also include Her\u0103str\u0103u Park, Tineretului Park and the Botanical Garden. Her\u0103str\u0103u Park is located in the northern part of the city, around Lake Her\u0103str\u0103u, and includes the site the Village Museum. Grigore Antipa Museum is also near in the Victoriei Square. One of its best known locations are Hard Rock Cafe Bucharest and Ber\u0103ria H (one of the largest beer halls in Europe). Tineretului Park was created in 1965 and designed as the main recreational space for southern Bucharest. It contains a Mini Town which is a play area for kids. The Botanical Garden, located in the Cotroceni neighbourhood a bit west of the city centre, is the largest of its kind in Romania and contains over 10,000 species of plants (many of them exotic); it originated as the pleasure park of the royal family. Besides them, there are many other smaller parks that should be visited, some of them being still large. Alexandru Ioan Cuza Park, Kiseleff Park, Carol Park, Izvor Park, Gr\u0103dina Icoanei, Circului Park and Moghioro\u0219 Park are a few of them. Other large parks in Bucharest are: National Park, Tei Park, Eroilor Park and Cr\u00e2nga\u0219i Park with Morii Lake.\nLake V\u0103c\u0103re\u0219ti is located in the southern part of the city. Over 190 hectares, including 90 hectares of water, host 97 species of birds, half of them protected by law, and at least seven species of mammals. The lake is surrounded by buildings of flats and is an odd result of human intervention and nature taking its course. The area was a small village that Ceau\u0219escu attempted to convert into a lake. After demolishing the houses and building the concrete basin, the plan was abandoned following the 1989 revolution. For nearly two decades, the area shifted from being an abandoned green space where children could play and sunbathe, to being contested by previous owners of the land there, to being closed for redevelopment into a sports centre. The redevelopment deal failed, and over the following years, the green space grew into a unique habitat. In May 2016, the lake was declared a national park, the V\u0103c\u0103re\u0219ti Nature Park. Dubbed the 'Delta of Bucharest', the area is protected.\nBucharest is situated in the center of the Romanian Plain, in an area once covered by the Vl\u0103siei Forest, which after it was cleared, gave way for a fertile flatland. As with many cities, Bucharest is traditionally considered to be built upon seven hills, similar to the seven hills of Rome. Bucharest's seven hills are: Mihai Vod\u0103, Dealul Mitropoliei, Radu Vod\u0103, Cotroceni, Dealul Spirii, V\u0103c\u0103re\u0219ti, and Sf\u00e2ntu Gheorghe Nou.\nThe city has an area of . The altitude varies from at the D\u00e2mbovi\u021ba bridge in C\u0103\u021belu, southeastern Bucharest and at the Militari church. The city has a roughly round shape, with the centre situated in the cross-way of the main north\u2013south/east-west axes at University Square. The milestone for Romania's Kilometre Zero is placed just south of University Square in front of the New St. George Church (Sf\u00e2ntul Gheorghe Nou) at St. George Square (Pia\u021ba Sf\u00e2ntul Gheorghe). Bucharest's radius, from University Square to the city limits in all directions, varies from .\nUntil recently, the regions surrounding Bucharest were largely rural, but after 1989, suburbs started to be built around Bucharest, in the surrounding Ilfov County. This county, which has experienced rapid demographic growth in the 21st century, being the fastest growing Romanian county between 2011 and 2021, had a population of 542,686 people at the 2021 Romanian census. In the 21st century, many of Ilfov county's villages and communes developed into high-income commuter towns, which act like suburbs or satellites of Bucharest.\nClimate.\nBucharest has a humid continental climate (\"Dfa)\", with hot, humid summers and cold, snowy winters. Owing to its position on the Romanian Plain, the city's winters can get windy, though some of the winds are mitigated due to urbanization. Winter temperatures often dip below , sometimes even to . In summer, the average high temperature is (the average for July and August). Temperatures frequently reach in midsummer in the city centre. Although average precipitation in summer is moderate, occasional heavy storms occur. During spring and autumn, daytime temperatures vary between , and precipitation during spring tends to be higher than in summer, with more frequent yet milder periods of rain.\nGovernment.\nAdministration.\nBucharest has a unique status in Romanian administration, since it is the only municipal area that is not part of a county. Its population, however, is larger than that of any other Romanian county, hence the power of the Bucharest General Municipality (\"Prim\u0103ria General\u0103\"), which is the capital's local government body, is the same as any other Romanian county council.\nThe Municipality of Bucharest, along with the surrounding Ilfov County, is part of the Bucure\u0219ti \u2013 Ilfov development region project, which is equivalent to NUTS-II regions in the European Union and is used both by the EU and the Romanian government for statistical analysis, and to co-ordinate regional development projects and manage funds from the EU. The Bucharest-Ilfov development region is not, however, an administrative entity yet.\nThe city government is headed by a general mayor (\"Primar General\"). Since 29 October 2020 onwards, it is Nicu\u0219or Dan, currently an independent politician previously backed by the PNL-USR PLUS centre-right alliance at the 2020 Romanian local elections. Decisions are approved and discussed by the capital's General Council (\"Consiliu General\") made up of 55 elected councilors. Furthermore, the city is divided into six administrative sectors (\"sectoare\"), each of which has its own 27-seat sectoral council, town hall, and mayor. The powers of the local government over a certain area are, therefore, shared both by the Bucharest municipality and the local sectoral councils with little or no overlapping of authority. The general rule is that the main capital municipality is responsible for citywide utilities such as the water and sewage system, the overall transport system, and the main boulevards, while sectoral town halls manage the contact between individuals and the local government, secondary streets and parks maintenance, schools administration, and cleaning services.\nThe six sectors are numbered from one to six and are disposed radially so that each one has under its administration a certain area of the city centre. They are numbered clockwise and are further divided into sectoral quarters (\"cartiere\") which are not part of the official administrative division:\nEach sector is governed by a local mayor, as follows: Sector 1 \u2013 Clotilde Armand (USR, since 2020), Sector 2 \u2013 Radu Mihaiu (USR, since 2020), Sector 3 \u2013 Robert Negoi\u021b\u0103 (PRO B, since 2012), Sector 4 \u2013 Daniel B\u0103lu\u021b\u0103 (PSD, since 2016), Sector 5 \u2013 Vlad Popescu Piedone (former mayor Cristian Popescu Piedone's son) (PUSL, since 2024), Sector 6 \u2013 Ciprian Ciucu (PNL, since 2020).\nLike all other local councils in Romania, the Bucharest sectoral councils, the capital's general council, and the mayors are elected every four years by the population. Additionally, Bucharest has a prefect, who is appointed by Romania's national government. The prefect is not allowed to be a member of a political party and his role is to represent the national government at the municipal level. The prefect is acting as a liaison official facilitating the implementation of national development plans and governing programs at local level. The prefect of Bucharest (as of 2024) is Mihai Mugur Toader.\nCity general council.\nThe city's general council has the following political composition, based on the results of the 2024 local elections:\nJustice system.\nBucharest's judicial system is similar to that of the Romanian counties. Each of the six sectors has its own local first-instance court (\"judec\u0103torie\"), while more serious cases are directed to the Bucharest Tribunal (\"Tribunalul Bucure\u015fti\"), the city's municipal court. The Bucharest Court of Appeal (\"Curtea de Apel Bucure\u015fti\") judges appeals against decisions taken by first-instance courts and tribunals in Bucharest and in five surrounding counties (Teleorman, Ialomi\u021ba, Giurgiu, C\u0103l\u0103ra\u0219i, and Ilfov). Bucharest is also home to Romania's supreme court, the High Court of Cassation and Justice, as well as to the Constitutional Court of Romania.\nBucharest has a municipal police force, the Bucharest Police (\"Poli\u021bia Bucure\u0219ti\"), which is responsible for policing crime within the whole city, and operates a number of divisions. The Bucharest Police are headquartered on \u0218tefan cel Mare Blvd. in the city centre, and at precincts throughout the city. From 2004 onwards, each sector city hall also has under its administration a community police force (\"Poli\u021bia Comunitar\u0103\"), dealing with local community issues. Bucharest also houses the general inspectorates of the \"Gendarmerie\" and the national police.\nCrime.\nBucharest's crime rate is rather low in comparison to other European capital cities, with the number of total offences declining by 51% between 2000 and 2004, and by 7% between 2012 and 2013. Bucharest, along with Cluj-Napoca, Timi\u0219oara, Bra\u0219ov and Ia\u0219i, was ranked among the top 100 safest cities in the world in a list compiled by Numbeo. The study found Bucharest to be very safe with regard to aspects such walking alone, home invasions, muggings, cars being stolen, assault, insults, assault due to skin color, ethnic origin, or gender, drug dealing, and armed robberies, with the only crimes in the high category being corruption and bribery. In 2015, the homicide rate of Bucharest was 0,8 per 100,000 people.\nCrime in Bucharest is combated by national forces, such as the Romanian Police and Romanian Gendarmerie, and by local forces, such as the Local Police of Bucharest.\nAlthough in the 2000s, a number of police crackdowns on organised crime gangs occurred, such as the C\u0103m\u0103taru clan, organised crime generally has little impact on public life. Petty crime, however, is more common, particularly in the form of pickpocketing, which occurs mainly on the city's public transport network. Confidence tricks were common in the 1990s, especially in regards to tourists, but the frequency of these incidents has since declined. Theft was reduced by 13.6% in 2013 compared to 2012. Levels of crime are higher in the southern districts of the city, particularly in Ferentari, a socially disadvantaged area.\nAlthough the presence of street children was a problem in Bucharest in the 1990s, their numbers have declined in recent years, now lying at or below the average of major European capital cities.\nQuality of life.\nAs stated by the Mercer international surveys for quality of life in cities around the world, Bucharest occupied the 94th place in 2001 and slipped lower, to the 108th place in 2009 and the 107th place in 2010. Compared to it, Vienna occupied number one worldwide in 2011 and 2009. Warsaw ranked 84th, Istanbul 112th, and neighbours Sofia 114th and Belgrade 136th (in the 2010 rankings).\nMercer Human Resource Consulting issues yearly a global ranking of the world's most livable cities based on 39 key quality-of-life issues. Among them: political stability, currency-exchange regulations, political and media censorship, school quality, housing, the environment, and public safety. Mercer collects data worldwide, in 215 cities. The difficult situation of the quality of life in Bucharest is confirmed also by a vast urbanism study, done by the Ion Mincu University of Architecture and Urbanism.\nIn 2016, Bucharest's urban situation was described as 'critical' by a Romanian Order of Architects (OAR) report that criticised the city's weak, incoherent and arbitrary public management policies, its elected officials' lack of transparency and public engagement, as well as its inadequate and unsustainable use of essential urban resources.\nBucharest's historical city centre is listed as 'endangered' by the World Monuments Watch (as of 2016).\nAlthough many neighbourhoods, particularly in the southern part of the city, lack sufficient green space, being formed of cramped, high-density blocks of flats, Bucharest also has many parks.\nIn 2024, Bucharest was ranked by the digital publication Freaking Nomads as the 9th best city in the world for digital nomads, due to its elaborate and diverse architecture, an arts scene featuring some of the world's best galleries, museums, and theatres, and its tranquil parks.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAs per the 2021 census, 1,716,961 inhabitants lived within the city limits, a decrease from the figure recorded at the 2011 census. This decrease is due to low natural increase, but also to a shift in population from the city itself to its smaller satellite towns such as Pope\u0219ti-Leordeni, Voluntari, Chiajna, Bragadiru, Pantelimon, Buftea and Otopeni. In a study published by the United Nations, Bucharest placed 19th among 28 cities that recorded sharp declines in population from 1990 to the mid-2010s. In particular, the population fell by 3.77%.\nThe city's population, according to the 2002 census, was 1,926,334 inhabitants, or 8.9% of the total population of Romania. A significant number of people commute to the city every day, mostly from the surrounding Ilfov County, but official statistics regarding their numbers do not exist.\nBucharest's population experienced two phases of rapid growth, the first beginning in the late 19th century when the city was consolidated as the national capital and lasting until the Second World War, and the second during the Ceau\u0219escu years (1965\u20131989), when a massive urbanization campaign was launched and many people migrated from rural areas to the capital. At this time, due to Ceau\u0219escu's decision to ban abortion and contraception, natural increase was also significant.\nBucharest is a city of high population density: 8,260/km2 (21,400/sq mi), as most of the population lives in high-density communist era apartment blocks (\"blocuri\"). However, this also depends on the part of the city: the southern boroughs have a higher density than the northern ones. Of the European Union country capital-cities, only Paris and Athens have a higher population density (see List of European Union cities proper by population density). In addition to blocks of flats built during the communist era, there are also older interwar ones, as well as newer ones built in the 1990s and in the 21st century. Although apartment buildings are strongly associated with the communist era, such housing schemes were first introduced in Bucharest in the 1920s.\nAbout 97.3% of the population of Bucharest for whom data are available is Romanian. Other significant ethnic groups are Romani, Hungarians, Turks, Jews, Germans (mostly Regat Germans), Chinese, Russians, Ukrainians, and Italians. A relatively small number of Bucharesters are also Greeks, Armenians, Kurds, Bulgarians, Albanians, Poles, French, Arabs, Africans (including the Afro-Romanians), Iranians, Vietnamese, Filipinos, Nepalis, Afghans, Sri Lankans, Bangladeshis, Pakistanis, and Indians. 226,943 people did not declare their ethnicity.\nIn terms of religious affiliation, during the 2021 Census, 27.5% of the resident population did not provide their religion. Of the remaining 72.5% for whom data are available, 92.4% is Romanian Orthodox, 1.4% is Roman Catholic, 1.3% is Protestant Christian, 0.6% is Muslim, and 0.2% is Romanian Greek Catholic. Despite this, only 18% of the population, of any religion, attends a place of worship once a week or more. The life expectancy of residents of Bucharest in 2015 was 77.8 years old, which is 2.4 years above the national average.\nEconomy.\nBucharest is the centre of the Romanian economy and industry, accounting for around 24% (2017) of the country's GDP and about one-quarter of its industrial production, while being inhabited by 9% of the country's population. Almost one-third of national taxes is paid by Bucharest's citizens and companies. The living standard in the Bucharest\u2013Ilfov region was 145% of the EU average in 2017, according to GDP per capita at the purchasing power parity standard (adjusted to the national price level).\nThe Bucharest area surpassed, on comparable terms, European metropolitan areas such as Budapest (139%), Madrid (125%), Berlin (118%), Rome (110%), Lisbon (102%), and Sofia (79%), and more than twice the Romanian average. After relative stagnation in the 1990s, the city's strong economic growth has revitalised infrastructure and led to the development of shopping malls, residential estates, and high-rise office buildings. In January 2013, Bucharest had an unemployment rate of 2.1%, significantly lower than the national unemployment rate of 5.8%.\nBucharest's economy is centred on industry and services, with services particularly growing in importance in the past 10 years. The headquarters of 186,000 firms, including nearly all large Romanian companies, are located in Bucharest. An important source of growth since 2000 has been the city's rapidly expanding property and construction sector. Bucharest is also Romania's largest centre for information technology and communications and is home to several software companies operating offshore delivery centres. Romania's largest stock exchange, the Bucharest Stock Exchange, which was merged in December 2005 with the Bucharest-based electronic stock exchange Rasdaq, plays a major role in the city's economy.\nMalls and large shopping centres have been built since the late 1990s, such as B\u0103neasa Shopping City, AFI Palace Cotroceni, Mega Mall, Bucure\u0219ti Mall, ParkLake Shopping Centre, Sun Plaza, Promenada Mall and longest Unirea Shopping Centre. Bucharest has over 20 malls as of 2019.\nThe corporations Amazon, Microsoft, Ubisoft, Oracle Corporation, or IBM are all present in the Romanian capital. The top ten is also dominated by companies operating in automotive, oil &amp; gas (such as Petrom), as well as companies in telecommunication and FMCG. The Speedtest Global Index ranks Bucharest the 6th city in the world (after Beijing, Shanghai, Abu Dhabi, Valpara\u00edso, and Lyon) in terms of fixed broadband speed, at 250Mbps as of 2023.\nTransport.\nBucharest is crossed by two major international routes: Pan-European transport corridor IV and IX.\nPublic transport.\nBucharest's public transport system is the largest in Romania and one of the largest in Europe. It is made up of the Bucharest Metro, run by Metrorex, as well as a surface transport system run by STB (\"Societatea de Transport Bucure\u0219ti\", previously known as the RATB), which consists of buses, trams, trolleybuses, and light rail. In addition, a private minibus system operates there. As of 2007[ [update]], a limit of 10,000 taxicab licences was imposed.\nThe Bucharest Metro consists of five lines (M1, M2, M3, M4, and M5) ran by Metrorex, and is one of the fastest ways to get around the city. The oldest metro line is M1, which was opened in 1979. The newest metro line is M5, which was opened in 2020. A sixth metro line, M6 line, is currently under construction.\nRailways.\nIt is the hub of Romania's national railway network, run by \"C\u0103ile Ferate Rom\u00e2ne\". The main railway station is Gara de Nord ('North Station'), which provides connections to all major cities in Romania, as well as international destinations: Belgrade, Sofia, Varna, Chi\u0219in\u0103u, Kyiv, Chernivtsi, Lviv, Thessaloniki, Vienna, Budapest, Istanbul, etc.\nThe city has five other railway stations run by CFR, of which the most important are Basarab (adjacent to North Station), Obor, B\u0103neasa, and Progresul. These are in the process of being integrated into a commuter railway serving Bucharest and the surrounding Ilfov County. Seven main lines radiate out of Bucharest.\nThe oldest railway station in Bucharest is Filaret, inaugurated in 1869. In 1960, the communist government turned it into a bus terminal.\nRoads.\nBucharest is a major intersection of Romania's national road network. A few of the busiest national roads and motorways link the city to all of Romania's major cities, as well as to neighbouring countries such as Hungary, Bulgaria and Ukraine. The A1 to Pite\u0219ti, and from Sibiu to the Hungarian border, the A2 Sun Motorway to the Dobrogea region and Constan\u021ba, and the A3 to Ploie\u0219ti all start from Bucharest.\nBy road, Bucharest is located 182.5\u00a0km from Bra\u0219ov, 202.9\u00a0km from Constan\u021ba, 407.6\u00a0km from Ia\u0219i, 451.2\u00a0km from Cluj-Napoca, and 544.1\u00a0km from Timi\u0219oara.\nA series of high-capacity boulevards, which generally radiate out from the city centre to the outskirts, provides a framework for the municipal road system. The main axes, which run north\u2013south, east\u2013west and northwest\u2013southeast, as well as one internal and one external ring road, support the bulk of the traffic.\nThe city's roads are usually very crowded during rush hours, due to an increase in car ownership in recent years. In 2013, the number of cars registered in Bucharest amounted to 1,125,591. This results in wear and potholes appearing on busy roads, particularly secondary roads, this being identified as one of Bucharest's main infrastructural problems. A comprehensive effort on behalf of the City Hall to boost road infrastructure was made, and according to the general development plan, 2,000 roads have been repaired by 2008. The huge number of cars registered in the city forced the Romanian Auto Registry to switch to 3-digit numbers on registration plates in 2010.\nOn 17 June 2011, the Basarab Overpass was inaugurated and opened to traffic, thus completing the inner city traffic ring. The overpass took five years to build and is the longest cable-stayed bridge in Romania and the widest such bridge in Europe; upon completion, traffic on the Grant Bridge and in the Gara de Nord area became noticeably more fluid.\nWater.\nAlthough it is situated on the banks of a river, Bucharest has never functioned as a port city. Other Romanian cities such as Constan\u021ba and Gala\u021bi serve as the country's main ports. The unfinished Danube-Bucharest Canal, which is long and around 70% completed, could link Bucharest to the Danube River, and via the Danube-Black Sea Canal, to the Black Sea. Works on the canal were suspended in 1989, but proposals have been made to resume construction as part of the European Strategy for the Danube Region.\nCulture.\nBucharest has a growing cultural scene, in fields including the visual arts, performing arts, and nightlife. Unlike other parts of Romania, such as the Black Sea coast or Transylvania, Bucharest's cultural scene has no defined style, and instead incorporates elements of Romanian and international culture.\nLandmarks.\nBucharest has landmark buildings and monuments. Perhaps the most prominent of these is the Palace of the Parliament, built in the 1980s during the rule of Communist dictator Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu. The largest Parliament building in the world, the palace houses the Romanian Parliament (the Chamber of Deputies, and the Senate), as well as the National Museum of Contemporary Art. The building boasts one of the largest convention centres in the world.\nAnother landmark in Bucharest is Arcul de Triumf (\"The Triumphal Arch\"), built in its current form in 1935 and modelled after the Arc de Triomphe in Paris. A newer landmark of the city is the Memorial of Rebirth, a stylised marble pillar unveiled in 2005 to commemorate the victims of the Romanian Revolution of 1989, which overthrew Communism. The abstract monument sparked controversy when it was unveiled, being dubbed with names such as 'the olive on the toothpick' (\"m\u0103slina-n scobitoare\"), as many argued that it does not fit in its surroundings and believed that its choice was political.\nThe Romanian Athenaeum building is considered a symbol of Romanian culture and since 2007 has been on the list of the Label of European Heritage sites. It was built between 1886 and 1888 by the architect Paul Louis Albert Galeron, through public funding.\nInterContinental Bucharest is a high-rise five-star hotel near University Square and is also a landmark of the city. The building is designed so that each room has a unique panorama of the city.\nHouse of the Spark (\"Casa Sc\u00e2nteii\") is a replica of the Lomonosov Moscow State University. This edifice, built in the characteristic style of the large-scale Soviet projects, was intended to be representative of the new political regime and to assert the superiority of the Communist doctrine. Construction started in 1952 and was completed in 1957, a few years after Stalin's death in 1953. Popularly known as Casa Sc\u00e2nteii ('House of the Spark') after the name of the official gazette of the Central Committee of the Romanian Communist Party, \"Sc\u00e2nteia\", it was made for the purpose of bringing together under one roof all of Bucharest's official press and publishing houses. It is the only building in Bucharest featuring the Hammer and Sickle, the Red Star and other communist insignia carved into medallions adorning the fa\u00e7ade.\nOther cultural venues include the National Museum of Art of Romania, Grigore Antipa National Museum of Natural History, Museum of the Romanian Peasant, National History Museum and the Military Museum.\nVisual arts.\nIn terms of visual arts, the city has museums featuring both classical and contemporary Romanian art, as well as selected international works. The National Museum of Art of Romania is perhaps the best-known of Bucharest museums. It is located in the royal palace and features collections of medieval and modern Romanian art, including works by sculptor Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i, as well as an international collection assembled by the Romanian royal family.\nOther, smaller, museums contain specialised collections. The Zambaccian Museum, which is situated in the former home of art collector Krikor H. Zambaccian, contains works by well-known Romanian artists and international artists such as Paul C\u00e9zanne, Eug\u00e8ne Delacroix, Henri Matisse, Camille Pissarro, and Pablo Picasso.\nThe Gheorghe Tattarescu Museum contains portraits of Romanian revolutionaries in exile such as Gheorghe Magheru, \u0219tefan Golescu, and Nicolae B\u0103lcescu, and allegorical compositions with revolutionary (\"Romania's rebirth\", 1849) and patriotic (\"The Principalities' Unification\", 1857) themes. Another impressive art collection gathering important Romanian painters, can be found at the Ligia and Pompiliu Macovei residence, which is open to visitors as it is now part of the Bucharest Museum patrimony.\nThe Theodor Pallady Museum is situated in one of the oldest surviving merchant houses in Bucharest and includes works by Romanian painter Theodor Pallady, as well as European and oriental furniture pieces. The Museum of Art Collections contains the collections of Romanian art aficionados, including Krikor Zambaccian and Theodor Pallady.\nDespite the classical art galleries and museums in the city, a contemporary arts scene also exists. The National Museum of Contemporary Art (MNAC), situated in a wing of the Palace of the Parliament, was opened in 2004 and contains Romanian and international contemporary art. The MNAC also manages the Kalinderu MediaLab, which caters to multimedia and experimental art. Private art galleries are scattered throughout the city centre.\nThe palace of the National Bank of Romania houses the national numismatic collection. Exhibits include banknotes, coins, documents, photographs, maps, silver and gold bullion bars, bullion coins, and dies and moulds. The building was constructed between 1884 and 1890. The thesaurus room contains notable marble decorations.\nPerforming arts.\nPerforming arts are some of the strongest cultural elements of Bucharest. The most famous symphony orchestra is National Radio Orchestra of Romania. One of the most prominent buildings is the neoclassical Romanian Athenaeum, which was founded in 1852, and hosts classical music concerts, the George Enescu Festival, and is home to the George Enescu Philharmonic Orchestra.\nBucharest is home to the Romanian National Opera and the I.L. Caragiale National Theatre. Another well-known theatre in Bucharest is the State Jewish Theatre, which features plays starring world-renowned Romanian-Jewish actress Maia Morgenstern. Smaller theatres throughout the city cater to specific genres, such as the Comedy Theatre, the Nottara Theatre, the Bulandra Theatre, the Odeon Theatre, and the revue theatre of Constantin T\u0103nase.\nMusic and nightlife.\nBucharest is home to Romania's largest recording labels, and is often the residence of Romanian musicians. Romanian rock bands of the 1970s and 1980s, such as Iris and Holograf, continue to be popular, particularly with the middle-aged, while since the beginning of the 1990s, the hip hop/rap scene has developed. Hip-hop bands and artists from Bucharest such as B.U.G. Mafia, Parazi\u021bii, and La Familia enjoy national and international recognition.\nThe pop-rock band Taxi have been gaining international respect, as has Spitalul de Urgen\u021b\u0103's raucous updating of traditional Romanian music. While many neighbourhood discos play \"manele\", an Oriental- and Roma-influenced genre of music that is particularly popular in Bucharest's working-class districts, the city has a rich jazz and blues scene, and to an even larger extent, house music/trance and heavy metal/punk scenes. Bucharest's jazz profile has especially risen since 2002, with the presence of two venues, Green Hours and Art Jazz, as well as an American presence alongside established Romanians.\nWith no central nightlife strip, entertainment venues are dispersed throughout the city, with clusters in Lipscani and Regie.\nCultural events and festivals.\nA number of cultural festivals are held in Bucharest throughout the year, but most festivals take place in June, July, and August. The National Opera organises the International Opera Festival every year in May and June, which includes ensembles and orchestras from all over the world.\nThe Romanian Athaeneum Society hosts the George Enescu Festival at locations throughout the city in September every two years (odd years). The Museum of the Romanian Peasant and the Village Museum organise events throughout the year, showcasing Romanian folk arts and crafts.\nIn the 2000s, due to the growing prominence of the Chinese community in Bucharest, Chinese cultural events took place. The first officially organised Chinese festival was the Chinese New Year's Eve Festival of February 2005, which took place in Nichita St\u0103nescu Park and was organised by the Bucharest City Hall.\nIn 2005, Bucharest was the first city in Southeastern Europe to host the international CowParade, which resulted in dozens of decorated cow sculptures being placed across the city.\nIn 2004, Bucharest imposed in the circle of important festivals in Eastern Europe with the Bucharest International Film Festival, an event widely acknowledged in Europe, having as guests of honour famous names from the world cinema: Andrei Konchalovsky, Danis Tanovi\u0107, Nikita Mikhalkov, Rutger Hauer, Jerzy Skolimowski, Jan Harlan, Radu Mih\u0103ileanu, and many others.\nSince 2005, Bucharest has its own contemporary art biennale, the Bucharest Biennale.\nTraditional culture.\nTraditional Romanian culture continues to have a major influence in arts such as theatre, film, and music. Bucharest has two internationally renowned ethnographic museums, the Museum of the Romanian Peasant and the open-air Dimitrie Gusti National Village Museum, in King Michael I Park. It contains 272 authentic buildings and peasant farms from all over Romania.\nThe Museum of the Romanian Peasant was declared the European Museum of the Year in 1996. Patronised by the Ministry of Culture, the museum preserves and exhibits numerous collections of objects and monuments of material and spiritual culture. The Museum of the Romanian Peasant holds one of the richest collections of peasant objects in Romania, its heritage being nearly 90,000 pieces, those being divided into several collections: ceramics, costumes, textiles, wooden objects, religious objects, customs, etc.\nThe Museum of Romanian History is another important museum in Bucharest, containing a collection of artefacts detailing Romanian history and culture from the prehistoric times, Dacian era, medieval times, and the modern era.\nReligion.\nBucharest is the seat of the Patriarch of the Romanian Orthodox Church, one of the Eastern Orthodox churches in communion with the Patriarch of Constantinople, and also of its subdivisions, the Metropolis of Muntenia and Dobrudja and the Archbishopric of Bucharest. Orthodox believers consider Demetrius of Basarabov to be the patron saint of the city.\nThe city is a centre for other Christian organizations in Romania, including the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bucharest, established in 1883, and the Romanian Greek-Catholic Eparchy of Saint Basil the Great, founded in 2014.\nBucharest also hosts six synagogues, including the Choral Temple of Bucharest, the Great Synagogue of Bucharest and the Holy Union Temple. The latter was converted into the Museum of the History of the Romanian Jewish Community, while the Great Synagogue and the Choral Temple are both active and hold regular services.\nA mosque with a capacity for 2,000 people was in the planning stages at 22\u201330 Expozi\u021biei Boulevard. The project was later abandoned due to financial problems and public protests. However, there are several smaller Sunni and Shia mosques active in Bucharest.\nArchitecture.\nThe city centre is a mixture of medieval, neoclassical, Art Deco, and Art Nouveau buildings, as well as 'neo-Romanian' buildings dating from the beginning of the 20th century and a collection of modern buildings from the 1920s and 1930s. The mostly utilitarian Communist-era architecture dominates most southern boroughs. Recently built contemporary structures such as skyscrapers and office buildings complete the landscape.\nHistorical architecture.\nOf the city's medieval architecture, most of what survived into modern times was destroyed by communist systematization, fire, and military incursions. Some medieval and renaissance edifices remain, the most notable are in the Lipscani area. This precinct contains notable buildings such as Manuc's Inn (\"Hanul lui Manuc\") and the ruins of the Old Court (\"Curtea Veche\"); during the late Middle Ages, this area was the heart of commerce in Bucharest. From the 1970s onwards, the area went through urban decline, and many historical buildings fell into disrepair. In 2005, the Lipscani area was restored.\nTo execute a massive redevelopment project during the rule of Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu, the government conducted extensive demolition of churches and many other historic structures in Romania. According to Alexandru Budi\u0219teanu, former chief architect of Bucharest, \"The sight of a church bothered Ceau\u0219escu. It didn't matter if they demolished or moved it, as long as it was no longer in sight\". Nevertheless, a project organised by Romanian engineer Eugeniu Iord\u0103chescu was able to move many historic structures to less-prominent sites and save them.\nThe city centre has retained architecture from the late 19th and early 20th centuries, particularly the interwar period, which is often seen as the 'golden age' of Bucharest architecture. During this time, the city grew in size and wealth, therefore seeking to emulate other large European capitals such as Paris. Much of the architecture of the time belongs to a Modern (rationalist) Architecture current, led by Horia Creang\u0103 and Marcel Iancu.\nIn Romania, the tendencies of innovation in the architectural language met the need of valorisation and affirmation of the national cultural identity. The Art Nouveau movement found expression through new architectural style initiated by Ion Mincu and taken over by other prestigious architects who capitalised important references of Romanian laic and medieval ecclesiastical architecture (for example the Mogo\u0219oaia Palace, the Stavropoleos Church or the disappeared church of V\u0103c\u0103re\u0219ti Monastery) and Romanian folk motifs. The Romanian Revival architecture, which was born as the result of the attempts of finding a specific Romanian architectural style, is exemplified though buildings such as Nicolae Minovici Folk Art Museum and the Romanian Peasant Museum.\nAnother style of the 1930s is the Moorish-Florentine or Mediterranean Picturesque, which eclectically uses Romanesque, Gothic and Renaissance elements in civic architecture, with a Mediterranean vibe, giving rise to Mediterranean Revival architecture.\nSome buildings from the interwar era have a modernist brutalist look, such as the Tehnoimport Building, which was built in 1935, and may be mistaken as communist architecture. Modernist styles during the interwar period include Art Deco, Stripped Classicism, Bauhaus and Rationalism.\nTwo buildings from this time are the Cre\u021bulescu Palace, housing cultural institutions including UNESCO's European Centre for Higher Education, and the Cotroceni Palace, the residence of the Romanian President. Many large-scale constructions such as the Gara de Nord, the busiest railway station in the city, National Bank of Romania's headquarters, and the Telephones Company Building date from these times. In the 2000s, some historic buildings in the city centre underwent restoration. In some residential areas of the city, particularly in high-income central and northern districts, turn-of-the-20th-century villas were mostly restored beginning in the late 1990s.\nCommunist era architecture.\nA major part of Bucharest's architecture is made up of buildings constructed during the Communist era replacing the historical architecture with high-density apartment blocks \u2013 significant portions of the historic centre of Bucharest were demolished to construct one of the largest buildings in the world, the Palace of the Parliament (then officially called the House of the Republic). In Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu's project of systematization, new buildings were built in previously historical areas, which were razed and then built upon.\nCommunist architecture broadly includes three stages: architecture that was built in the early years of communism, in the late 1940s and 1950s, which followed the Soviet Stalinist trend of Socialist Realism, an example being the House of the Free Press (which was named \"Casa Sc\u00eenteii\" during communism); postwar Modernism in the 1960s and the 1970s; and the systematization program of the late 1970s and 1980s, which included mass demolitions of historical buildings and their replacement with North Korean influenced buildings after Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu visited East Asia in 1971, and was impressed by its Juche ideology.\nThe Communist regime installed after World War II took control over all aspects of life, including architecture, dictating a uniform bureaucratic vision of urbanism and architectural design. Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, who was premier of the Socialist Republic of Romania from 1947 until 1965, began the country's policies of industrialization, with infrastructure development for heavy industry, and construction for mass resettlement to new industrial and agricultural centers away from Bucharest and other principal cities. The architecture from this period is more or less easy to spot, by its use of Neoclassical elements and proportions, but in a simplified way. There are also some small 3\u20134 floors \"Russian blocks\" from this era, some of them built of red bricks.\nCommunist-era architecture from the 1960s and 1970s can be found especially in Bucharest's residential districts, mainly in \"blocuri\", which are high-density apartment blocks that house the majority of the city's population. Initially, these apartment blocks started to be constructed in the 1960s, on relatively empty areas and fields (good examples include Pajura, Drumul Taberei, Berceni and Titan), however with the 1970s, they mostly targeted peripheral neighbourhoods such as Colentina, Pantelimon, Militari and Rahova. Construction of these apartment blocks were also often randomised, for instance some small streets were demolished and later widened with the blocks being built next to them, but other neighbouring streets were left intact (like in the example of Calea Mo\u0219ilor from 1978 to 1982), or built in various patterns such as the Pia\u021ba Iancului-Lizeanu apartment buildings from 1962 to 1963.\nThe last years of communism were marked by major urban redevelopment schemes which changed dramatically the face of many cities, including Bucharest. One of the most singular examples of late stage communist architecture of the 1980s is Centrul Civic, a development that replaced a major part of Bucharest's historic city centre with giant utilitarian buildings, mainly with marble or travertine fa\u00e7ades, inspired by North Korean architecture. The mass demolitions that occurred in the 1980s, under which an overall area of eight square kilometres of the historic centre of Bucharest were levelled, including monasteries, churches, synagogues, a hospital, and a noted Art Deco sports stadium, changed drastically the appearance of the city.\nContemporary architecture.\nSince the fall of communism in 1989, several communist-era buildings have been refurbished, modernised, and used for other purposes. Perhaps the best example of this is the conversion of obsolete retail complexes into shopping malls and commercial centres. These giant, circular halls, which were unofficially called hunger circuses due to the food shortages experienced in the 1980s, were constructed during the Ceau\u0219escu era to act as produce markets and refectories, although most were left unfinished at the time of the revolution.\nModern shopping malls such as the Unirea Shopping Centre, Bucharest Mall, Plaza Romania, and City Mall emerged on pre-existent structures of former hunger circuses. Another example is the conversion of a large utilitarian construction in Centrul Civic into a Marriott Hotel. This process was accelerated after 2000, when the city underwent a property boom, and many communist-era buildings in the city centre became prime real estate due to their location. Many communist-era apartment blocks have also been refurbished to improve urban appearance.\nThe newest contribution to Bucharest's architecture took place after the fall of communism, particularly after 2000, when the city went through a period of urban renewal\u00a0\u2013 and architectural revitalization\u00a0\u2013 on the back of Romania's economic growth. Buildings from this time are mostly made of glass and steel, and often have more than 10 stories. Examples include shopping malls (particularly the Bucharest Mall, a conversion and extension of an abandoned building), office buildings, bank headquarters, etc.\nDuring the 21st century, several high rise office buildings were built, particularly in the northern and eastern parts of the city. Additionally, a trend to add modern wings and fa\u00e7ades to historic buildings has occurred, the most prominent example of which is the Bucharest Architects' Association Building, which is a modern glass-and-steel construction built inside a historic stone fa\u00e7ade. In 2013, the Bucharest skyline enriched with a 137-m-high office building (SkyTower of Floreasca City Centre), the tallest building in Romania. Examples of modern skyscrapers built in the 21st century include Bucharest Tower Centre, Euro Tower, Nusco Tower, Cathedral Plaza, City Gate Towers, Rin Grand Hotel, Premium Plaza, Bucharest Corporate Centre, Millennium Business Centre, PGV Tower, Charles de Gaulle Plaza, Business Development Centre Bucharest, BRD Tower, and Bucharest Financial Plaza. Despite this vertical development, Romanian architects avoid designing very tall buildings due to vulnerability to earthquakes.\nAside from buildings used for business and institutions, residential developments have also been built, many of which consist of high-rise office buildings and suburban residential communities. An example of a new high rise residential complex is Asmita Gardens. These developments are increasingly prominent in northern Bucharest, which is less densely populated and is home to middle- and upper-class Bucharesters due to the process of gentrification.\nEducation.\nOverall, 159 faculties are in 34 universities. Sixteen public universities are in Bucharest, the largest of which are the University of Bucharest, the Politehnica University of Bucharest, the Bucharest University of Economic Studies, the Carol Davila University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Technical University of Civil Engineering, the National University of Political Studies and Public Administration, and the University of Agronomic Sciences and Veterinary Medicine of Bucharest.\nThese are supplemented by nineteen private universities, such as the Romanian-American University. Private universities, however, have a mixed reputation due to irregularities.\nIn the 2020 QS World University Rankings, from Bucharest, only the University of Bucharest was included in the top universities of the world. The Politehnica University disappeared from the ranking. Also, in recent years, the city has had increasing numbers of foreign students enrolling in its universities.\nThe first modern educational institution was the Princely Academy from Bucharest, founded in 1694 and divided in 1864 to form the present-day University of Bucharest and the Saint Sava National College, both of which are among the most prestigious of their kind in Romania.\nOver 450 public primary and secondary schools are in the city, all of which are administered by the Bucharest Municipal Schooling Inspectorate. Each sector also has its own Schooling Inspectorate, subordinated to the municipal one.\nBucharest is also home to many scientific sections of the Romanian Academy.\nMedia.\nThe city is well-served by a modern landline and mobile network. Offices of Po\u0219ta Rom\u00e2n\u0103, the national postal operator, are spread throughout the city, with the central post office () located at 12 Matei Millo Street. Public telephones are located in many places and are operated by Telekom Romania, a subsidiary of Deutsche Telekom and successor of the former monopoly Romtelecom.\nBucharest is the headquarters of most national television networks and national newspapers, radio stations and online news websites. The largest daily newspapers in Bucharest include \"Evenimentul Zilei\", \"Jurnalul Na\u021bional\", \"Cotidianul\", \"Rom\u00e2nia Liber\u0103\", and , while the biggest news websites are HotNews (with English and Spanish versions), , and \"G\u00e2ndul\". During the rush hours, tabloid newspapers \"Click!\", \"Libertatea\", and \"Cancan\" are popular for commuters.\nSeveral newspapers and media publications are based in House of the Free Press (), a landmark of northern Bucharest, originally named Casa Sc\u00e2nteii after the Communist Romania-era official newspaper \"Sc\u00eenteia\". The House of the Free Press is not the only Bucharest landmark that grew out of the media and communications industry. Palatul Telefoanelor (\"The Telephone Palace\") was the first major modernist building on Calea Victoriei in the city's centre, and the massive, unfinished communist-era Casa Radio looms over a park a block away from the Opera.\nEnglish-language newspapers became available in the early 1930s and reappeared in the 1990s. The two daily English-language newspapers are the \"Bucharest Daily News\" and \"Nine O' Clock\"; several magazines and publications in other languages are available, such as the Hungarian-language daily \"\u00daj Magyar Sz\u00f3\".\n\"Observator Cultural\" covers the city's arts, and the free weekly magazines \"\u0218apte Seri\" (\"Seven Evenings\") and \"B24FUN\", list entertainment events. The city is home to the intellectual journal \"Dilema veche\" and the satire magazine \"Academia Ca\u021bavencu\".\nVisit Bucharest Today is another online platform promoting Bucharest as a tourist destination. It serves as a comprehensive resource for local and international travelers seeking to learn about the capital city of Romania. The online platform showcases Bucharest's rich history, cultural landmarks, hidden gems, and exciting experiences.\nHealthcare.\nOne of the most modern hospitals in the capital is Col\u021bea that has been re-equipped after a 90-million-euro investment in 2011. It specialises in oncological and cardiac disorders. It was built by Mihai Cantacuzino between 1701 and 1703, composed of many buildings, each with 12 to 30 beds, a church, three chapels, a school, and doctors' and teachers' houses.\nAnother conventional hospital is Pantelimon, which was established in 1733 by Grigore II Ghica. The surface area of the hospital land property was . The hospital had in its inventory a house for infectious diseases and a house for persons with disabilities.\nOther hospitals or clinics are Bucharest Emergency Hospital, Floreasca Emergency Clinic Hospital, Bucharest University Emergency Hospital, and Fundeni Clinical Institute or Biomedica International and Euroclinic, which are private.\nSports.\nFootball is the most widely followed sport in Bucharest, with the city having numerous club teams, including, most notably, Steaua Bucure\u0219ti, Dinamo Bucure\u0219ti, Rapid Bucure\u0219ti and FCSB.\nArena Na\u021bional\u0103, a new stadium inaugurated on 6 September 2011, hosted the 2012 Europa League Final and has a 55,600-seat capacity, making it one of the largest stadiums in Southeastern Europe and one of the few with a roof.\nSport clubs have formed for handball, water polo, volleyball, rugby union, basketball and ice hockey. The majority of Romanian track and field athletes and most gymnasts are affiliated with clubs in Bucharest. The largest indoor arena in Bucharest is the Romexpo Dome with a seating capacity of 40,000. It can be used for boxing, kickboxing, handball and tennis.\nBucharest hosted annual races along a temporary urban track surrounding the Palace of the Parliament, called Bucharest Ring. The Bucharest City Challenge race hosted FIA GT, FIA GT3, British F3, and Logan Cup races. Since 2009, Bucharest has the largest Ferrari Shop in Eastern Europe and the 2nd largest in Europe after Milan shop.\nThe capital also hosted the international tennis tournaments WTA Bucharest Open and ATP Romanian Open. Ice hockey games are held at the Mihai Flamaropol Arena, which holds 8,000 spectators. Rugby games are held in different locations, but the most modern stadium is Arcul de Triumf Stadium, which is also home to the Romanian national rugby team.\nBucharest hosted the UEFA Euro 2020 championship at the Arena Na\u021bional\u0103 or Bucharest National Arena. The championship took place in 2021, being postponed due to the outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nBucharest is twinned with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn addition, Bucharest has a partnership with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36880", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36880", "title": "Nuclear warfare", "text": "Military conflict that deploys nuclear weaponry\nNuclear warfare, also known as atomic warfare, is a military conflict or prepared political strategy that deploys nuclear weaponry. Nuclear weapons are weapons of mass destruction; in contrast to conventional warfare, nuclear warfare can produce destruction in a much shorter time and can have a long-lasting radiological result. A major nuclear exchange would likely have long-term effects, primarily from the fallout released, and could also lead to secondary effects, such as \"nuclear winter\", nuclear famine, and societal collapse. A global thermonuclear war with Cold War-era stockpiles, or even with the current smaller stockpiles, may lead to various scenarios including human extinction.\nTo date, the only use of nuclear weapons in armed conflict occurred in 1945 with the American atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki. On August 6, 1945, a uranium gun-type device (code name \"Little Boy\") was detonated over the Japanese city of Hiroshima. Three days later, on August 9, a plutonium implosion-type device (code name \"Fat Man\") was detonated over the Japanese city of Nagasaki. Together, these two bombings resulted in the deaths of approximately 200,000 people and contributed to the surrender of Japan, which occurred before any further nuclear weapons could be deployed.\nAfter World War II, nuclear weapons were also developed by the Soviet Union (1949), the United Kingdom (1952), France (1960), and China (1964), which contributed to the state of conflict and extreme tension that became known as the Cold War. In 1974, India, and in 1998, Pakistan, two countries that were openly hostile toward each other, developed nuclear weapons. Israel (1960s) and North Korea (2006) are also thought to have developed stocks of nuclear weapons, though it is not known how many. The Israeli government has never admitted nor denied having nuclear weapons, although it is known to have constructed the reactor and reprocessing plant necessary for building nuclear weapons. South Africa also manufactured several complete nuclear weapons in the 1980s, but during the 1990s, it subsequently became the first country to voluntarily destroy its domestically made weapons stocks and abandon further nuclear weapon production. Nuclear weapons have been detonated on over 2,000 occasions for testing purposes and demonstrations.\nAfter the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 and the resultant end of the Cold War, the threat of a major nuclear war between the two nuclear superpowers was generally thought to have declined. Since then, concern over nuclear weapons has shifted to the prevention of localized nuclear conflicts resulting from nuclear proliferation, and the threat of nuclear terrorism. However, the threat of nuclear war is considered to have resurged after the Russian invasion of Ukraine, particularly with regard to Russian threats to use nuclear weapons during the invasion.\nSince 1947, the Doomsday Clock of the \"Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists\" has visualized how close the world is to a nuclear war. The Doomsday Clock reached a high point in 1953, when the Clock was set to two minutes until midnight after the U.S. and the Soviet Union began testing hydrogen bombs, and in 2018, following the failure of world leaders to address tensions relating to nuclear weapons and climate change issues. Since 2025, the Clock has been set at 89 seconds to midnight, the closest it has ever been. The 2023 advance of the Clock's time setting was largely attributed to the risk of nuclear escalation that arose from the Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nTypes of nuclear warfare.\nNuclear warfare scenarios are usually divided into two groups, each with different effects and potentially fought with different types of nuclear armaments.\nThe first, a limited nuclear war (sometimes \"attack\" or \"exchange\"), refers to the controlled use of nuclear weapons, whereby the implicit threat exists that a nation can still escalate their use of nuclear weapons. For example, using a small number of nuclear weapons against strictly military targets could be escalated through increasing the number of weapons used, or escalated through the selection of different targets. Limited attacks are thought to be a more credible response against attacks that do not justify all-out retaliation, such as an enemy's limited use of nuclear weapons.\nThe second, a full-scale nuclear war, could consist of large numbers of nuclear weapons used in an attack aimed at an entire country, including military, economic, and civilian targets. Such an attack would almost certainly destroy the entire economic, social, and military infrastructure of the target nation, and would likely have a devastating effect on Earth's biosphere.\nSome Cold War strategists such as Henry Kissinger argued that a limited nuclear war could be possible between two heavily armed superpowers (such as the United States and the Soviet Union). Some predict, however, that a limited war could potentially \"escalate\" into a full-scale nuclear war. Others have called limited nuclear war \"global nuclear holocaust in slow motion\", arguing that\u2014once such a war took place\u2014others would be sure to follow over a period of decades, effectively rendering the planet uninhabitable in the same way that a \"full-scale nuclear war\" between superpowers would, only taking a much longer (and arguably more agonizing) path to the same result.\nEven the most optimistic predictions of the effects of a major nuclear exchange foresee the death of many millions of victims within a very short period of time. Such predictions usually include the breakdown of government, professional, and commercial institutions, vital to the continuation of civilization. The resulting loss of vital affordances (food, water and electricity production and distribution, medical and information services, etc.) would account for millions more deaths. More pessimistic predictions argue that a full-scale nuclear war could potentially bring about the human extinction, or at least its \"near\" extinction, with only a relatively small number of survivors (mainly in remote areas) and a reduced quality of life and life expectancy for centuries afterward. However, such predictions, assuming total war with nuclear arsenals at Cold War highs, have not been without criticism. Such a horrific catastrophe as global nuclear warfare would almost certainly cause permanent damage to most complex life on the planet, its ecosystems, and the global climate.\nA study presented at the annual meeting of the American Geophysical Union in December 2006 asserted that a small-scale regional nuclear war could produce as many direct fatalities as all of World War II and disrupt the global climate for a decade or more. In a regional nuclear conflict scenario in which two opposing nations in the subtropics each used 50 Hiroshima-sized nuclear weapons (c. 15 kiloton each) on major population centers, the researchers predicted fatalities ranging from 2.6\u00a0million to 16.7\u00a0million per country. The authors of the study estimated that as much as five million tons of soot could be released, producing a cooling of several degrees over large areas of North America and Eurasia (including most of the grain-growing regions). The cooling would last for years and could be \"catastrophic\", according to the researchers.\nEither a limited or full-scale nuclear exchange could occur during an \"accidental nuclear war\", in which the use of nuclear weapons is triggered unintentionally. Postulated triggers for this scenario have included malfunctioning early warning devices and/or targeting computers, deliberate malfeasance by rogue military commanders, consequences of an accidental straying of warplanes into enemy airspace, reactions to unannounced missile tests during tense diplomatic periods, reactions to military exercises, mistranslated or miscommunicated messages, and others.\nA number of these scenarios actually occurred during the Cold War, though none resulted in the use of nuclear weapons. Many such scenarios have been depicted in popular culture, such as in the 1959 film \"On the Beach\", the 1962 novel \"Fail-Safe\", the 1964 film \"\", the 1983 film \"WarGames\", and the 1984 film \"Threads\".\nSub-strategic use.\nThe above examples envisage nuclear warfare at a strategic level, i.e., total war. However, nuclear powers have the ability to undertake more limited engagements.\n\"Sub-strategic use\" includes the use of either \"low-yield\" tactical nuclear weapons, or of variable yield strategic nuclear weapons in a very limited role, as compared to exchanges of larger-yield strategic nuclear weapons over major population centers. This was described by the UK Parliamentary Defence Select Committee as \"the launch of one or a limited number of missiles against an adversary as a means of conveying a political message, warning or demonstration of resolve\". It is believed that all current nuclear weapons states possess tactical nuclear weapons, with the exception of the United Kingdom, which decommissioned its tactical warheads in 1998. However, the UK does possess scalable-yield strategic warheads, and this technology tends to blur the difference between \"strategic\", \"sub-strategic\", and \"tactical\" use or weapons. American, French and British nuclear submarines are believed to carry at least \"some\" missiles with dial-a-yield warheads for this purpose, potentially allowing a strike as low as one kiloton (or less) against a single target. Only the People's Republic of China and the Republic of India have declarative, unqualified, unconditional \"no first use\" nuclear weapons policies. India and Pakistan maintain only a credible minimum deterrence.\nCommodore Tim Hare, former Director of Nuclear Policy at the British Ministry of Defence, has described \"sub-strategic use\" as offering the Government \"an extra option in the escalatory process before it goes for an all-out strategic strike which would deliver unacceptable damage\". However, this sub-strategic capacity has been criticized as potentially increasing the \"acceptability\" of using nuclear weapons. Combined with the trend in the reduction in the worldwide nuclear arsenal as of 2007 is the warhead miniaturization and modernization of the remaining strategic weapons that is presently occurring in all the declared nuclear weapon states, into more \"usable\" configurations. The Stockholm International Peace Research Institute suggests that this is creating a culture where use of these weapons is more acceptable and therefore is increasing the risk of war, as these modern weapons do not possess the same psychological deterrent value as the large Cold-War era, multi-megaton warheads.\nIn many ways, this present change in the balance of terror can be seen as the complete embracement of the switch from the 1950s Eisenhower doctrine of \"massive retaliation\" to one of \"flexible response\", which has been growing in importance in the US nuclear war fighting plan/SIOP every decade since.\nFor example, the United States adopted a policy in 1996 of allowing the targeting of its nuclear weapons at non-state actors (\"terrorists\") armed with weapons of mass destruction.\nAnother dimension to the tactical use of nuclear weapons is that of such weapons deployed at sea for use against surface and submarine vessels. Until 1992, vessels of the United States Navy (and their aircraft) deployed various such weapons as bombs, rockets (guided and unguided), torpedoes, and depth charges. Such tactical naval nuclear weapons were considered more acceptable to use early in a conflict because there would be few civilian casualties. It was feared by many planners that such use would probably quickly have escalated into a large-scale nuclear war. This situation was particularly exacerbated by the fact that such weapons at sea were not constrained by the safeguards provided by the Permissive Action Link attached to U.S. Air Force and Army nuclear weapons. It is unknown if the navies of the other nuclear powers yet today deploy tactical nuclear weapons at sea.\nThe 2018 US Nuclear Posture Review emphasised the need for the US to have sub-strategic nuclear weapons as additional layers for its nuclear deterrence.\nNuclear terrorism.\nNuclear terrorism by non-state organizations or actors (even individuals) is a largely unknown and understudied factor in nuclear deterrence thinking, as states possessing nuclear weapons are susceptible to retaliation in kind, while sub- or trans-state actors may be less so. The collapse of the Soviet Union has given rise to the possibility that former Soviet nuclear weapons might become available on the black market (so-called 'loose nukes').\nA number of other concerns have been expressed about the security of nuclear weapons in newer nuclear powers with relatively less stable governments, such as Pakistan, but in each case, the fears have been addressed to some extent by statements and evidence provided by those nations, as well as cooperative programs between nations. Worry remains, however, in many circles that a relative decrease in the security of nuclear weapons has emerged in recent years, and that terrorists or others may attempt to exert control over (or use) nuclear weapons, militarily applicable technology, or nuclear materials and fuel.\nAnother possible nuclear terrorism threat are devices designed to disperse radioactive materials over a large area using conventional explosives, called dirty bombs. The detonation of a \"dirty bomb\" would not cause a nuclear explosion, nor would it release enough radiation to kill or injure a large number of people. However, it could cause severe disruption and require potentially very costly decontamination procedures and increased spending on security measures.\nRadioactive materials can also be used for targeted assassinations. For example, the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko was described by medical professionals, as \"an ominous landmark: the beginning of an era of nuclear terrorism.\"\nAlternative conflict resolution.\nAlternatives to nuclear warfare include nuclear deterrence, nuclear disarmament and Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons.\nHistory.\n1940s.\nAtomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.\nDuring the final stages of World War II in 1945, the United States conducted atomic raids on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the first on August 6, 1945, and the second on August 9, 1945. These two events were the only times nuclear weapons have been used in combat.\nFor six months before the atomic bombings, the U.S. 20th Air Force under General Curtis LeMay executed low-level incendiary raids against Japanese cities. The most destructive air raid to occur during the process was not the nuclear attacks, but the \"Operation Meetinghouse\" raid on Tokyo. On the night of March 9\u201310, 1945, \"Operation Meetinghouse\" commenced and 334 Boeing B-29 Superfortress bombers took off to raid, with 279 of them dropping 1,665 tons of incendiaries and explosives on Tokyo. The bombing was meant to burn wooden buildings and indeed the bombing caused fire that created a 50\u00a0m/s wind, which is comparable to tornadoes. Each bomber carried 6 tons of bombs. A total of 381,300 bombs, which amount to 1,783 tons of bombs, were used in the bombing. Within a few hours of the raid, it had killed an estimated 100,000 people and destroyed of the city and 267,000 buildings in a single night \u2014 the deadliest bombing raid in military aviation history other than the atomic raids on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. By early August 1945, an estimated 450,000 people had died as the U.S. had intensely firebombed a total of 67 Japanese cities.\nIn late June 1945, as the U.S. wrapped up the two-and-a-half-month Battle of Okinawa (which cost the lives of 260,000 people, including 150,000 civilians), it was faced with the prospect of invading the Japanese home islands in an operation codenamed Operation Downfall. Based on the U.S. casualties from the preceding island-hopping campaigns, American commanders estimated that between 50,000 and 500,000 U.S. troops would die and at least 600,000\u20131,000,000 others would be injured while invading the Japanese home islands. The U.S. manufacture of 500,000 Purple Hearts from the anticipated high level of casualties during the U.S. invasion of Japan gave a demonstration of how deadly and costly it would be. President Harry S. Truman realized he could not afford such a horrendous casualty rate, especially since over 400,000 American combatants had already died fighting in both the European and the Pacific theaters of the war.\nOn July 26, 1945, the United States, the United Kingdom, and the Republic of China issued a Potsdam Declaration that called for the unconditional surrender of Japan. It stated that if Japan did not surrender, it would face \"prompt and utter destruction\". The Japanese government ignored this ultimatum, sending a message that they were not going to surrender. In response to the rejection, President Truman authorized the dropping of the atomic bombs. At the time of its use, there were only two atomic bombs available, and despite the fact that more were in production back in mainland U.S., the third bomb wouldn't be available for combat until September.\nOn August 6, 1945, the uranium-type nuclear weapon codenamed \"Little Boy\" was detonated over the Japanese city of Hiroshima with an energy of about , destroying nearly 50,000 buildings (including the headquarters of the 2nd General Army and Fifth Division) and killing approximately 70,000 people, including 20,000 Japanese combatants and 20,000 Korean slave laborers. Three days later, on August 9, a plutonium-type nuclear weapon codenamed \"Fat Man\" was used against the Japanese city of Nagasaki, with the explosion equivalent to about , destroying 60% of the city and killing approximately 35,000 people, including 23,200\u201328,200 Japanese munitions workers, 2,000 Korean slave laborers, and 150 Japanese combatants. The industrial damage in Nagasaki was high, partly owing to the inadvertent targeting of the industrial zone, leaving 68\u201380 percent of the non-dock industrial production destroyed. The U.S., despite not having a third device ready to be dropped, gave Japan one last warning that there would be another bombing if they did not surrender, and the target would be Tokyo.\nSix days after the detonation over Nagasaki, Japan announced its surrender to the Allied Powers on August 15, 1945, signing the Instrument of Surrender on September 2, 1945, officially ending the Pacific War and, therefore, World War II, as Germany had already signed its Instrument of Surrender on May 8, 1945, ending the war in Europe. The two atomic bombings led, in part, to post-war Japan's adopting of the Three Non-Nuclear Principles, which forbade the nation from developing nuclear armaments.\nImmediately after the Japan bombings.\nAfter the successful Trinity nuclear test July 16, 1945, which was the very first nuclear detonation, the Manhattan Project lead manager J. Robert Oppenheimer recalled:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;We knew the world would not be the same. A few people laughed, a few people cried, and most people were silent. I remembered the line from the Hindu scripture the \"Bhagavad Gita\". Vishnu is trying to persuade the prince that he should do his duty and to impress him takes on his multiarmed form and says, \"Now, I am become Death, the destroyer of worlds.\" I suppose we all thought that one way or another.\u2014\u200a\nImmediately after the atomic bombings of Japan, the status of atomic weapons in international and military relations was unclear. Presumably, the United States hoped atomic weapons could offset the Soviet Union's larger conventional ground forces in Eastern Europe, and possibly be used to pressure Soviet leader Joseph Stalin into making concessions. Under Stalin, the Soviet Union pursued its own atomic capabilities through a combination of scientific research and espionage directed against the American program. The Soviets believed that the Americans, with their limited nuclear arsenal, were unlikely to engage in any new world wars, while the Americans were not confident they could prevent a Soviet takeover of Europe, despite their atomic advantage.\nWithin the United States, the authority to produce and develop nuclear weapons was removed from military control and put instead under the civilian control of the United States Atomic Energy Commission. This decision reflected an understanding that nuclear weapons had unique risks and benefits that were separate from other military technology known at the time.\nFor several years after World War II, the United States developed and maintained a strategic force based on the Convair B-36 bomber that would be able to attack any potential enemy from bomber bases in the United States. It deployed atomic bombs around the world for potential use in conflicts. Over a period of a few years, many in the American defense community became increasingly convinced of the invincibility of the United States to a nuclear attack. Indeed, it became generally believed that the threat of nuclear war would deter any strike against the United States.\nMany proposals were suggested to put all American nuclear weapons under international control (by the newly formed United Nations, for example) as an effort to deter both their usage and a nuclear arms race. However, no terms could be arrived at that would be agreed upon by both the United States and the Soviet Union.\nOn August 29, 1949, the Soviet Union tested its first nuclear weapon at Semipalatinsk in Kazakhstan (see also Soviet atomic bomb project). Scientists in the United States from the Manhattan Project had warned that, in time, the Soviet Union would certainly develop nuclear capabilities of its own. Nevertheless, the effect upon military thinking and planning in the United States was dramatic, primarily because American military strategists had not anticipated the Soviets would \"catch up\" so soon. However, at this time, they had not discovered that the Soviets had conducted significant nuclear espionage of the project from spies at Los Alamos National Laboratory, the most significant of which was done by the theoretical physicist Klaus Fuchs. The first Soviet bomb was more or less a deliberate copy of the Fat Man plutonium device. In the same year the first US-Soviet nuclear war plan was penned in the US with Operation Dropshot.\nWith the monopoly over nuclear technology broken, worldwide nuclear proliferation accelerated. The United Kingdom tested its first independent atomic bomb in 1952, followed by France developing its first atomic bomb in 1960 and then China developing its first atomic bomb in 1964. While much smaller than the arsenals of the United States and the Soviet Union, Western Europe's nuclear reserves were nevertheless a significant factor in strategic planning during the Cold War. A top-secret White paper, compiled by the Royal Air Force and produced for the British Government in 1959, estimated that British V bombers carrying nuclear weapons were capable of destroying key cities and military targets in the Soviet Union, with an estimated 16\u00a0million deaths in the Soviet Union (half of whom were estimated to be killed on impact and the rest fatally injured) \"before\" bomber aircraft from the U.S. Strategic Air Command reached their targets.\n1950s.\nAlthough the Soviet Union had nuclear weapon capabilities at the beginning of the Cold War, the United States still had an advantage in terms of bombers and weapons. In any exchange of hostilities, the United States would have been capable of bombing the Soviet Union, whereas the Soviet Union would have more difficulty carrying out the reverse mission.\nThe widespread introduction of jet-powered interceptor aircraft upset this imbalance somewhat by reducing the effectiveness of the American bomber fleet. In 1949 Curtis LeMay was placed in command of the Strategic Air Command and instituted a program to update the bomber fleet to one that was all-jet. During the early 1950s the B-47 Stratojet and B-52 Stratofortress were introduced, providing the ability to bomb the Soviet Union more easily. Before the development of a capable strategic missile force in the Soviet Union, much of the war-fighting doctrine held by western nations revolved around using a large number of smaller nuclear weapons in a tactical role. It is debatable whether such use could be considered \"limited\" however because it was believed that the United States would use its own strategic weapons (mainly bombers at the time) should the Soviet Union deploy any kind of nuclear weapon against civilian targets. Douglas MacArthur, an American general, was fired by President Harry Truman, partially because he persistently requested permission to use his own discretion in deciding whether to utilize atomic weapons on the People's Republic of China in 1951 during the Korean War. Mao Zedong, China's communist leader, gave the impression that he would welcome a nuclear war with the capitalists because it would annihilate what he viewed as their imperialist system.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let us imagine how many people would die if war breaks out. There are 2.7 billion people in the world, and a third could be lost. If it is a little higher it could be half ... I say that if the worst came to the worst and one-half dies, there will still be one-half left, but imperialism would be razed to the ground and the whole world would become socialist. After a few years there would be 2.7 billion people again.\u2014\u200a\nThe concept of a \"Fortress North America\" emerged during the Second World War and persisted into the Cold War to refer to the option of defending Canada and the United States against their enemies if the rest of the world were lost to them. This option was rejected with the formation of NATO and the decision to permanently station troops in Europe.\nIn the summer of 1951, Project Vista started, in which project analysts such as Robert F. Christy looked at how to defend Western Europe from a Soviet invasion. The emerging development of tactical nuclear weapons was looked upon as a means to give Western forces a qualitative advantage over the Soviet numerical supremacy in conventional weapons.\nSeveral scares about the increasing ability of the Soviet Union's strategic bomber forces surfaced during the 1950s. The defensive response by the United States was to deploy a fairly strong \"layered defense\" consisting of interceptor aircraft and anti-aircraft missiles, like the Nike, and guns, like the M51 Skysweeper, near larger cities. However, this was a small response compared to the construction of a huge fleet of nuclear bombers. The principal nuclear strategy was to massively penetrate the Soviet Union. Because such a large area could not be defended against this overwhelming attack in any credible way, the Soviet Union would lose any exchange.\nThis logic became ingrained in American nuclear doctrine and persisted for much of the duration of the Cold War. As long as the strategic American nuclear forces could overwhelm their Soviet counterparts, a Soviet pre-emptive strike could be averted. Moreover, the Soviet Union could not afford to build any reasonable counterforce, as the economic output of the United States was far larger than that of the Soviets, and they would be unable to achieve \"nuclear parity\".\nSoviet nuclear doctrine, however, did not match American nuclear doctrine. Soviet military planners assumed they could win a nuclear war. Therefore, they \"expected\" a large-scale nuclear exchange, followed by a \"conventional war\" which itself would involve heavy use of tactical nuclear weapons. American doctrine rather assumed that Soviet doctrine was similar, with the \"mutual\" in mutually assured destruction necessarily requiring that the other side see things in much the same way, rather than believing\u2014as the Soviets did\u2014that they could fight a large-scale, \"combined nuclear and conventional\" war.\nIn accordance with their doctrine, the Soviet Union conducted large-scale military exercises to explore the possibility of defensive and offensive warfare during a nuclear war. The exercise, under the code name of \"Snowball\", involved the detonation of a nuclear bomb about twice as powerful as that which fell on Nagasaki and an army of approximately 45,000 soldiers on maneuvers through the hypocenter immediately after the blast. The exercise was conducted on September 14, 1954, under command of Marshal Georgy Zhukov to the north of Totskoye village in Orenburg Oblast, Russia.\nA revolution in nuclear strategic thought occurred with the introduction of the intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM), which the Soviet Union first successfully tested in August 1957. In order to deliver a warhead to a target, a missile was much faster and more cost-effective than a bomber, and enjoyed a higher survivability due to the enormous difficulty of interception of the ICBMs (due to their high altitude and extreme speed). The Soviet Union could now afford to achieve nuclear parity with the United States in raw numbers, although for a time, they appeared to have chosen not to.\nPhotos of Soviet missile sites set off a wave of panic in the U.S. military, something the launch of Sputnik would do for the American public a few months later. Politicians, notably then-U.S. Senator John F. Kennedy suggested that a \"missile gap\" existed between the Soviet Union and the United States. The US military gave missile development programs the highest national priority, and several spy aircraft and reconnaissance satellites were designed and deployed to observe Soviet progress.\nEarly ICBMs and bombers were relatively inaccurate, which led to the concept of countervalue strikes \u2014 attacks directly on the enemy population, which would theoretically lead to a collapse of the enemy's will to fight. During the Cold War, the Soviet Union invested in extensive protected civilian infrastructure, such as large \"nuclear-proof\" bunkers and non-perishable food stores. By comparison, smaller scale civil defense programs were instituted in the United States starting in the 1950s, where schools and other public buildings had basements stocked with non-perishable food supplies, canned water, first aid, and dosimeter and Geiger counter radiation-measuring devices. Many of the locations were given \"fallout shelter\" designation signs. CONELRAD radio information systems were adopted, whereby the commercial radio sector (later supplemented by the National Emergency Alarm Repeaters) would broadcast on two AM radio frequencies in the event of a Civil Defense (CD) emergency. These two frequencies, 640 and 1240\u00a0kHz, were marked with small CD triangles on the tuning dial of radios of the period, as can still be seen on 1950s-vintage radios on online auction sites and museums. A few backyard fallout shelters were built by private individuals.\nHenry Kissinger's view on tactical nuclear war in his controversial 1957 book \"Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy\" was that any nuclear weapon exploded in air burst mode that was below 500 kilotons in yield and thus averting serious fallout, may be more decisive and less costly in human lives than a protracted conventional war.\nA list of targets made by the United States was released sometime during December 2015 by the U.S. National Archives and Records Administration. The language used to describe targets is \"designated ground zeros\". The list was released after a request was made during 2006 by William Burr who belongs to a research group at George Washington University, and belongs to a previously top-secret 800-page document. The list is entitled \"Atomic Weapons Requirements Study for 1959\" and was produced by U.S. Strategic Air Command during the year 1956.\n1960s.\nIn 1960, the United States developed its first Single Integrated Operational Plan, a range of targeting options, and described launch procedures and target sets against which nuclear weapons would be launched, variants of which were in use from 1961 to 2003. That year also saw the start of the Missile Defense Alarm System, an American system of 12 early-warning satellites that provided limited notice of Soviet intercontinental ballistic missile launches between 1960 and 1966. The Ballistic Missile Early Warning System was completed in 1964.\nThe most powerful atomic bomb ever made, the Tsar Bomba, was tested by the Soviets on October 30, 1961. It was 50 megatons, or equal to 50 million tons of regular explosives. A complex and worrisome situation developed in 1962, in what is called the Cuban Missile Crisis. The Soviet Union placed medium-range ballistic missiles from the United States, possibly as a direct response to American Jupiter missiles placed in Turkey. After intense negotiations, the Soviets ended up removing the missiles from Cuba and decided to institute a massive weapons-building program of their own. In exchange, the United States dismantled its launch sites in Turkey, although this was done secretly and not publicly revealed for over two decades. First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev did not even reveal this part of the agreement when he came under fire by political opponents for mishandling the crisis. Communication delays during the crisis led to the establishment of the Moscow\u2013Washington hotline to allow reliable, direct communications between the two nuclear powers.\nBy the late 1960s, the number of ICBMs and warheads was so high on both sides that it was believed that both the United States and the Soviet Union were capable of completely destroying the infrastructure and a large proportion of the population of the other country. Thus, by some western game theorists, a balance of power system known as mutually assured destruction (or \"MAD\") came into being. It was thought that no full-scale exchange between the powers would result in an outright winner, with at best one side emerging the pyrrhic victor. Thus both sides were deterred from risking the initiation of a direct confrontation, instead being forced to engage in lower-intensity proxy wars.\nDuring this decade the People's Republic of China began to build subterranean infrastructure such as the Underground Project 131 following the Sino-Soviet split.\nOne drawback of the MAD doctrine was the possibility of a nuclear war occurring without either side intentionally striking first. Early Warning Systems (EWS) were notoriously error-prone. For example, on 78 occasions in 1979 alone, a \"missile display conference\" was called to evaluate detections that were \"potentially threatening to the North American continent\". Some of these were trivial errors and were spotted quickly, but several went to more serious levels. On September 26, 1983, Stanislav Petrov received convincing indications of an American first strike launch against the Soviet Union, but positively identified the warning as a false alarm. Though it is unclear what role Petrov's actions played in preventing a nuclear war during this incident, he has been honored by the United Nations for his actions.\nSimilar incidents happened many times in the United States, due to failed computer chips, misidentifications of large flights of geese, test programs, and bureaucratic failures to notify early warning military personnel of legitimate launches of test or weather missiles. For many years, the U.S. Air Force's strategic bombers were kept airborne on a daily rotating basis \"around the clock\" (see Operation Chrome Dome), until the number and severity of accidents, the 1968 Thule Air Base B-52 crash in particular, persuaded policymakers it was not worthwhile.\n1970s.\nIsrael responded to the Arab Yom Kippur War attack on 6 October 1973 by assembling 13 nuclear weapons in a tunnel under the Negev desert when Syrian tanks were sweeping in across the Golan Heights. On 8 October 1973, Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir authorized Defense Minister Moshe Dayan to activate the 13 Israeli nuclear warheads and distribute them to Israeli air force units, with the intent that they be used if Israel began to be overrun.\nOn 24 October 1973, as US President Richard Nixon was preoccupied with the Watergate scandal, Henry Kissinger ordered a DEFCON-3 alert preparing American B-52 nuclear bombers for war. Intelligence reports indicated that the USSR was preparing to defend Egypt in its Yom Kippur War with Israel. It had become apparent that if Israel had dropped nuclear weapons on Egypt or Syria, as it prepared to do, then the USSR would have retaliated against Israel, with the US then committed to providing Israeli assistance, possibly escalating to a general nuclear war.\nBy the late 1970s, people in both the United States and the Soviet Union, along with the rest of the world, had been living with the concept of mutual assured destruction (MAD) for about a decade, and it became deeply ingrained into the psyche and popular culture of those countries.\nOn May 18, 1974, India conducted its first nuclear test in the Pokhran test range. The name of the operation was Smiling Buddha, and India termed the test as a \"peaceful nuclear explosion.\"\nThe Soviet Duga early warning over-the-horizon radar system was made operational in 1976. The extremely powerful radio transmissions needed for such a system led to much disruption of civilian shortwave broadcasts, earning it the nickname \"Russian Woodpecker\".\nThe idea that any nuclear conflict would eventually escalate was a challenge for military strategists. This challenge was particularly severe for the United States and its NATO allies. It was believed (until the 1970s) that a Soviet tank offensive into Western Europe would quickly overwhelm NATO conventional forces, leading to the necessity of the West escalating to the use of tactical nuclear weapons, one of which was the W-70.\nThis strategy had one major (and possibly critical) flaw, which was soon realized by military analysts but highly underplayed by the U.S. military: conventional NATO forces in the European theatre of war were far outnumbered by similar Soviet and Warsaw Pact forces, and it was assumed that in case of a major Soviet attack (commonly envisioned as the \"Red tanks rolling towards the North Sea\" scenario) that NATO\u2014in the face of quick conventional defeat\u2014would soon have no other choice but to resort to tactical nuclear strikes against these forces. Most analysts agreed that once the first nuclear exchange had occurred, escalation to global nuclear war would likely become inevitable. The Warsaw Pact's vision of an atomic war between NATO and Warsaw Pact forces was simulated in the top-secret exercise Seven Days to the River Rhine in 1979. The British government exercised their vision of a Soviet nuclear attack with Square Leg in early 1980.\nLarge hardened nuclear weapon storage areas were built across European countries in anticipation of local US and European forces falling back as the conventional NATO defense from the Soviet Union, named REFORGER, was believed to only be capable of stalling the Soviets for a short time.\n1980s.\nIn the late 1970s and, particularly, during the early 1980s under U.S. President Ronald Reagan, the United States renewed its commitment to a more powerful military, which required a large increase in spending on U.S. military programs. These programs, which were originally part of the defense budget of U.S. President Jimmy Carter, included spending on conventional and nuclear weapons systems. Under Reagan, defensive systems like the Strategic Defense Initiative were emphasized as well.\nAnother major shift in nuclear doctrine was the development and the improvement of the submarine-launched, nuclear-armed, ballistic missile, or SLBM. It was hailed by many military theorists as a weapon that would make nuclear war less likely. SLBMs\u2014which can move with \"stealth\" (greatly lessened detectability) virtually anywhere in the world\u2014give a nation a \"second strike\" capability (i.e., after absorbing a \"first strike\"). Before the advent of the SLBM, thinkers feared that a nation might be tempted to initiate a first strike if it felt confident that such a strike would incapacitate the nuclear arsenal of its enemy, making retaliation impossible. With the advent of SLBMs, no nation could be certain that a first strike would incapacitate its enemy's entire nuclear arsenal. To the contrary, it would have to fear a near-certain retaliatory second strike from SLBMs. Thus, a first strike was a much less feasible (or desirable) option, and a deliberately initiated nuclear war was thought to be less likely to start.\nHowever, it was soon realized that submarines could approach enemy coastlines undetected and decrease the warning time (the time between detection of the missile launch and the impact of the missile) from as much as half an hour to possibly under three minutes. This effect was especially significant to the United States, Britain and China, whose capitals of Washington D.C., London, and Beijing all lay within 100 miles (160\u00a0km) of their coasts. Moscow was much more secure from this type of threat, due to its considerable distance from the sea. This greatly increased the credibility of a \"surprise first strike\" by one faction and (theoretically) made it possible to knock out or disrupt the chain of command of a target nation before any counterstrike could be ordered (known as a \"decapitation strike\"). It strengthened the notion that a nuclear war could possibly be \"won\", resulting not only in greatly increased tensions and increasing calls for fail-deadly control systems, but also in a dramatic increase in military spending. The submarines and their missile systems were very expensive, and one fully equipped nuclear-powered and nuclear-armed missile submarine could cost more than the entire GNP of a developing country. It was also calculated, however, that the greatest cost came in the development of \"both\" sea- and land-based anti-submarine defenses and in improving and strengthening the \"chain of command\", and as a result, military spending skyrocketed.\nSouth Africa developed a nuclear weapon capability during the 1970s and early 1980s. It was operational for a brief period before being dismantled in the early 1990s.\nAccording to the 1980 United Nations report \"General and Complete Disarmament: Comprehensive Study on Nuclear Weapons: Report of the Secretary-General\", it was estimated that there were a total of about 40,000 nuclear warheads in existence at that time, with a potential combined explosive yield of approximately 13,000 megatons. By comparison, the largest volcanic eruption in recorded history when the volcano Mount Tambora erupted in 1815\u2014turning 1816 into the Year Without A Summer due to the levels of global dimming sulfate aerosols and ash expelled\u2014it exploded with a force of roughly 33 billion tons of TNT or 33,000 megatons of TNT this is about 2.2 million Hiroshima Bombs, and ejected of mostly rock/tephra, that included 120\u00a0million tonnes of sulfur dioxide as an upper estimate. A larger eruption, approximately 74,000 years ago, in Mount Toba produced of tephra, forming lake Toba, and produced an estimated of sulfur dioxide. The explosive energy of the eruption may have been as high as equivalent to 20,000,000 megatons (Mt) of TNT, while the asteroid created Chicxulub impact, that is connected with the extinction of the dinosaurs corresponds to at least 70,000,000\u00a0Mt of energy, which is roughly 7000 times the maximum arsenal of the US and Soviet Union.\nHowever, comparisons with supervolcanoes are more misleading than helpful due to the different aerosols released, the likely air burst fuzing height of nuclear weapons and the globally scattered location of these potential nuclear detonations all being in contrast to the singular and subterranean nature of a supervolcanic eruption. Moreover, assuming the entire world stockpile of weapons were grouped together, it would be difficult, due to the nuclear fratricide effect, to ensure the individual weapons would go off all at once. Nonetheless, many people believe that a full-scale nuclear war would result, through the nuclear winter effect, in the human extinction, though not all analysts agree on the assumptions that underpin these nuclear winter models.\nOn 26 September 1983, a Soviet early warning station under the command of Stanislav Petrov falsely detected 5 inbound intercontinental ballistic missiles from the US. Petrov correctly assessed the situation as a false alarm, and hence did not report his finding to his superiors. It is quite possible that his actions prevented \"World War III\", as the Soviet policy at that time was immediate nuclear response upon discovering inbound ballistic missiles.\nThe world came unusually close to nuclear war in November 1983 when the Soviet Union thought that the NATO military exercise Able Archer 83 was a ruse or \"cover-up\" to begin a nuclear first strike. The Soviets responded by raising readiness and preparing their nuclear arsenal for immediate use. Soviet fears of an attack ceased once the exercise concluded without incident.\nPost-Cold War.\nAlthough the dissolution of the Soviet Union ended the Cold War in 1991 and greatly reduced the political tensions between the United States and the Russian Federation, the Soviet Union's formal successor state, both countries remained in a \"nuclear stand-off\" due to the continuing presence of a very large number of deliverable nuclear warheads on both sides. Additionally, the end of the Cold War led the United States to become increasingly concerned with the development of nuclear technology by other nations outside of the former Soviet Union. In 1995, a branch of the U.S. Strategic Command produced an outline of forward-thinking strategies in the document \"Essentials of Post\u2013Cold War Deterrence\".\nIn 1995, a Black Brant sounding rocket launched from the And\u00f8ya Space Center caused a high alert in Russia, known as the Norwegian Rocket Incident. The Russians thought it might be a nuclear missile launched from an American submarine.\nIn 1996, a Russian continuity of government facility, Kosvinsky Mountain, which is believed to be a counterpart to the US Cheyenne Mountain Complex, was completed. It was designed to resist US earth-penetrating nuclear warheads, and is believed to host the Russian Strategic Rocket Forces alternate command post, a post for the general staff built to compensate for the vulnerability of older Soviet era command posts in the Moscow region. In spite of this, the primary command posts for the Strategic Rocket Forces remains Kuntsevo in Moscow and the secondary is the Kosvinsky Mountain in the Ural Mountains. The timing of the Kosvinsky facilities completion date is regarded as one explanation for U.S. interest in a new nuclear \"bunker buster\" Earth-penetrating warhead and the declaration of the deployment of the B-61 mod 11 in 1997; Kosvinsky is protected by about 1000 feet of granite.\nAs a consequence of the September 11 attacks, American forces immediately increased their readiness to the highest level in 28 years, closing the blast doors of the NORAD's Cheyenne Mountain Operations Center for the first time due to a non-exercise event. But unlike similar increases during the Cold War, Russia immediately decided to stand down a large military exercise in the Arctic region, in order to minimize the risk of incidents, rather than following suit.\nThe former chair of the United Nations disarmament committee stated that there are more than 16,000 strategic and tactical nuclear weapons ready for deployment and another 14,000 in storage, with the U.S. having nearly 7,000 ready for use and 3,000 in storage, and Russia having about 8,500 ready for use and 11,000 in storage. In addition, China is thought to possess about 400 nuclear weapons, Britain about 200, France about 350, India about 80\u2013100, and Pakistan 100\u2013110. North Korea is confirmed as having nuclear weapons, though it is not known how many, with most estimates between 1 and 10. Israel is also widely believed to possess usable nuclear weapons. NATO has stationed about 480 American nuclear weapons in Belgium, the Netherlands, Italy, Germany, and Turkey, and several other nations are thought to be in pursuit of an arsenal of their own.\nPakistan's nuclear policy was significantly affected by the 1965 war with India. The 1971 war and India's nuclear program played a role in Pakistan's decision to go nuclear. India and Pakistan both decided not to participate in the NPT. Pakistan's nuclear policy became fixated on India because India refused to join the Non-proliferation Treaty and remained open to nuclear weapons. Impetus by Indian actions spurred Pakistan's nuclear research. After nuclear weapons construction was started by President Zulfikar Ali Bhutto's command, the chair of Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission Usmani quit in objection. The 1999 war between Pakistan and India occurred after both acquired nuclear weapons. It is believed by some that nuclear weapons are the reason a big war has not broken out in the subcontinent. India and Pakistan still have a risk of nuclear conflict on the issue of war over Kashmir. Nuclear capability deliverable by sea were claimed by Pakistan in 2012. The aim was to achieve a \"minimum credible deterrence\". Pakistan's nuclear program culminated in the tests at Chagai. One of the aims of Pakistan's programs is fending off potential annexation and maintaining independence.\nA key development in nuclear warfare throughout the 2000s and early 2010s is the proliferation of nuclear weapons to the developing world, with India and Pakistan both publicly testing several nuclear devices, and North Korea conducting an underground nuclear test on October 9, 2006. The U.S. Geological Survey measured a 4.2 magnitude earthquake in the area where the North Korean test is said to have occurred. A further test was announced by the North Korean government on May 25, 2009. Iran, meanwhile, has embarked on a nuclear program which, while officially for civilian purposes, has come under close scrutiny by the United Nations and many individual states.\nRecent studies undertaken by the CIA cite the enduring India-Pakistan conflict as the one \"flash point\" most likely to escalate into a nuclear war. During the Kargil War in 1999, Pakistan came close to using its nuclear weapons in case the conventional military situation underwent further deterioration. Pakistan's foreign minister had even warned that it would \"use any weapon in our arsenal\", hinting at a nuclear strike against India. The statement was condemned by the international community, with Pakistan denying it later on. This conflict remains the only war (of any sort) between two declared nuclear powers. The 2001-2002 India-Pakistan standoff again stoked fears of nuclear war between the two countries. Despite these very serious and relatively recent threats, relations between India and Pakistan have been improving somewhat over the last few years. However, with the November 26, 2008 Mumbai terror attacks, tensions again worsened.\nAnother potential geopolitical issue that is considered particularly worrisome by military analysts is a possible conflict between the United States and the People's Republic of China over Taiwan. Although economic forces are thought to have reduced the possibility of a military conflict, there remains concern about the increasing military buildup of China (China is rapidly increasing its naval capacity), and that any move toward Taiwan independence could potentially spin out of control.\nIsrael is thought to possess somewhere between one hundred and four hundred nuclear warheads. It has been asserted that the Dolphin-class submarines which Israel received from Germany have been adapted to carry nuclear-armed Popeye cruise missiles, so as to give Israel a second strike capability. Israel has been involved in wars with its neighbors in the Middle East (and with other \"non-state actors\" in Lebanon and Palestine) on numerous prior occasions, and its small geographic size and population could mean that, in the event of future wars, the Israel Defense Forces might have very little time to react to an invasion or other major threat. Such a situation could escalate to nuclear warfare very quickly in some scenarios.\nOn March 7, 2013, North Korea threatened the United States with a pre-emptive nuclear strike. On April 9, North Korea urged foreigners to leave South Korea, stating that both countries were on the verge of nuclear war. On April 12, North Korea stated that a nuclear war was unavoidable. The country declared Japan as its first target.\nIn 2014, when Russia-United States and Russia-NATO relations worsened over the Russo-Ukrainian War, the Russian state-owned television channel Russia 1 stated that \"Russia is the only country in the world that is really capable of turning the USA into radioactive ash.\" U.S. Secretary of Defense Ash Carter considered proposing deployment of ground-launched cruise missiles in Europe that could pre-emptively destroy Russian weapons.\nIn August 2017, North Korea warned that it might launch mid-range ballistic missiles into waters within of Guam, following an exchange of threats between the governments of North Korea and the United States. Escalating tensions between North Korea and the United States, including threats by both countries that they could use nuclear weapons against one another, prompted a heightened state of readiness in Hawaii. The perceived ballistic missile threat broadcast all over Hawaii on 13 January 2018 was a false missile alarm.\nIn October 2018, the former Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev commented that U.S. withdrawal from the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty is \"not the work of a great mind\" and that \"a new arms race has been announced\".\nIn early 2019, more than 90% of world's 13,865 nuclear weapons were owned by Russia and the United States.\nIn 2019, Vladimir Putin warned that Russia would deploy nuclear missiles in Europe if the United States deployed intermediate-range nuclear missiles there. Journalist Dmitry Kiselyov listed the targets in the United States, which includes The Pentagon, Camp David, Fort Ritchie, McClellan Air Force Base, and Jim Creek Naval Radio Station. Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov denies the existence of the target list.\nOn February 24, 2022, in a televised address preceding the start of Russia's full-scale invasion of Ukraine, Russian President Vladimir Putin stated that Russia \"is today one of the most powerful nuclear powers in the world... No one should have any doubts that a direct attack on our country will lead to defeat and dire consequences for any potential aggressor.\" Later in the same speech, Putin stated: \"Now a few important, very important words for those who may be tempted to intervene in ongoing events. Whoever tries to hinder us, and even more so to create threats for our country, for our people, should know that Russia's response will be immediate and will lead you to such consequences that you have never experienced in your history.\" On February 27, 2022, Putin publicly put his nuclear forces on alert, stating that NATO powers had made \"aggressive statements\". On April 14, \"The New York Times\" reported comments by CIA director William Burns, who said \"potential desperation\" could lead President Putin to order the use of tactical nuclear weapons. On September 21, 2022, days before declaring the annexation of additional parts of Ukraine, Putin claimed in a national television address that high NATO officials had made statements about the possibility of \"using nuclear weapons of mass destruction against Russia\", and stated \"if the territorial integrity of our country is threatened, we will certainly use all the means at our disposal to protect Russia and our people... It's not a bluff.\" NBC News characterized Putin's statements as a \"thinly veiled\" threat that Putin was willing to risk nuclear conflict if necessary to win the war with Ukraine. Hans M. Kristensen, director of the Nuclear Information Project at the Federation of American Scientists, stated that \"if you start detonating nuclear weapons in the [battlefield] you potentially get radioactive fallout that you can't control \u2014 it could rain over your own troops as well, so it might not be an advantage to do that in the field.\"\nAccording to a peer-reviewed study published in the journal \"Nature Food\" in August 2022, a full-scale nuclear war between the U.S. and Russia would kill 360 million people directly, with a further 5 billion people dying from starvation. More than 2 billion people would die from a smaller-scale nuclear war between India and Pakistan. \nSurvival.\nThe predictions of the effects of a major countervalue nuclear exchange include millions of city dweller deaths within a short period of time. Some 1980s predictions had gone further and argued that a full-scale nuclear war could eventually bring about human extinction. Such predictions, sometimes but not always based on total war with nuclear arsenals at Cold War highs, received contemporary criticism. On the other hand, some 1980s governmental predictions, such as FEMA's CRP-2B and NATO's Carte Blanche, have received criticism from groups such as the Federation of American Scientists for being overly optimistic. CRP-2B, for instance, infamously predicted that 80% of Americans would survive a nuclear exchange with the Soviet Union, a figure that neglected nuclear war's impacts on healthcare infrastructure, the food supply, and the ecosystem and assumed that all major cities could be successfully evacuated within 3\u20135 days. A number of Cold War publications advocated preparations that could purportedly enable a large proportion of civilians to survive even a total nuclear war. Among the most famous of these is \"Nuclear War Survival Skills\".\nTo avoid injury and death from a nuclear weapon's heat flash and blast effects, the two most far-ranging prompt effects of nuclear weapons, schoolchildren were taught to duck and cover by the early Cold War film of the same name. Such advice is once again being given in case of nuclear terrorist attacks.\nPrussian blue, or \"Radiogardase\", is stockpiled in the US, along with potassium iodide and DPTA, as pharmaceuticals useful in treating internal exposure to harmful radioisotopes in fallout.\nPublications on adapting to a changing diet and supplying nutritional food sources following a nuclear war, with particular focus on agricultural radioecology, include \"Nutrition in the postattack environment\" by the RAND corporation.\nThe British government developed a public alert system for use during a nuclear attack with the expectation of a four-minute warning before detonation. The United States expected a warning time of anywhere from half an hour (for land-based missiles) to less than three minutes (for submarine-based weapons). Many countries maintain plans for continuity of government following a nuclear attack or similar disasters. These range from a designated survivor, intended to ensure the survival of some form of government leadership, to the Soviet Dead Hand system, which allows for retaliation even if all Soviet leadership were destroyed. Nuclear submarines are given letters of last resort: orders on what action to take in the event that an enemy nuclear strike has destroyed the government.\nA number of other countries around the world have taken significant efforts to maximize their survival prospects in the event of large calamities, both natural and manmade. For example, metro stations in Pyongyang, North Korea, were constructed below ground, and were designed to serve as nuclear shelters in the event of war, with each station entrance built with thick steel blast doors. An example of privately funded fallout shelters is the Ark Two Shelter in Ontario, Canada, and autonomous shelters have been constructed with an emphasis on post-war networking and reconstruction.\nIn Switzerland, the majority of homes have an underground blast and fallout shelter. The country has an overcapacity of such shelters and can accommodate slightly more than the nation's population size.\nWhile the nuclear fallout shelters described above are the ideal long-term protection methods against dangerous radiation exposure in the event of a nuclear catastrophe, it is also necessary to have mobile protection equipment for medical and security personnel to safely assist in containment, evacuation, and many other necessary public safety objectives which ensue as a result of nuclear detonation. There are many basic shielding strategies used to protect against the deposition of radioactive material from external radiation environments. Respirators that protect against internal deposition are used to prevent the inhalation and ingestion of radioactive material and dermal protective equipment which is used to protect against the deposition of material on external structures like skin, hair, and clothing. While these protection strategies do slightly reduce the exposure, they provide almost no protection from externally penetrating gamma radiation, which is the cause of acute radiation syndrome and can be extremely lethal in high dosages. Naturally, shielding the entire body from high-energy gamma radiation is optimal, but the required mass to provide adequate attenuation makes functional movement nearly impossible.\nRecent scientific studies have shown the feasibility of partial body shielding as a viable protection strategy against externally penetrating gamma radiation. The concept is based in providing sufficient attenuation to only the most radio-sensitive organs and tissues in efforts to defer the onset of acute radiation syndrome, the most immediate threat to humans from high doses of gamma radiation. Acute radiation syndrome is a result of irreversible bone marrow damage from high-energy radiation exposure. Due to the regenerative property of hematopoietic stem cells found in bone marrow, it is only necessary to protect enough bone marrow to repopulate the exposed areas of the body with the shielded supply. Because 50% of the body's supply of bone marrow is stored in the pelvic region which is also in close proximity to other radio-sensitive organs in the abdomen, the lower torso is a logical choice as the primary target for protection.\nIn fiction.\nNuclear warfare and weapons are staple elements of speculative fiction.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36882", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36882", "title": "Blake Edwards", "text": "American filmmaker (1922\u20132010)\nBlake Edwards (born William Blake Crump; July 26, 1922 \u2013 December 15, 2010) was an American filmmaker, producer, and screenwriter. Often thought of as primarily a director of comedies, he also directed several drama, musical, and detective films. Late in his career, he took up writing, producing and directing for theater. He received an Honorary Academy Award in recognition of his writing, directing and producing an extraordinary body of work for the screen.\nBorn in Tulsa, Oklahoma, Edwards began his career in the 1940s as an actor, but he soon began writing screenplays and radio scripts before turning to producing and directing in television and films. His best-known films include \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (1961), \"Days of Wine and Roses\" (1962), \"A Shot in the Dark\" (1964), \"The Great Race\" (1965), \"10\" (1979), \"Victor/Victoria\" (1982), \"Blind Date\" (1987), and the hugely successful \"Pink Panther\" film series with British actor Peter Sellers.\nEarly life and education.\nBorn William Blake Crump July 26, 1922, in Tulsa, Oklahoma, he was the son of Donald and Lillian (n\u00e9e Grommett) Crump (1897\u20131992). In an interview with Andre Previn, Blake Edwards claimed to be a descendant of William Blake. His father reportedly left the family before he was born. His mother married again, to Jack McEdward, who became his stepfather. McEdward was the son of J. Gordon Edwards, a director of silent movies, and in 1925, he moved the family to Los Angeles and became a film production manager. In an interview with \"The Village Voice\" in 1971, Blake Edwards said that he had \"always felt alienated, estranged from my own father, Jack McEdward\". After graduating from Beverly Hills High School in the class of Winter 1941, Blake began taking jobs as an actor during World War II.\nEdwards describes this period:\nI worked with the best directors \u2013 Ford, Wyler, Preminger \u2013 and learned a lot from them. But I wasn't a very cooperative actor. I was a spunky, smart-assed kid. Maybe even I was indicating that I wanted to give, not take, direction.\nEdwards served in the United States Coast Guard during World War II, where he suffered a severe back injury, which left him in pain for years afterwards.\nCareer.\nEdwards's debut as a director came in 1952 on the television program \"Four Star Playhouse\".\nIn the 1954\u20131955 television season, Edwards joined with Richard Quine to create Mickey Rooney's first television series, \"The Mickey Rooney Show: Hey, Mulligan\". Edwards's hard-boiled private detective scripts for \"Richard Diamond, Private Detective\" became NBC's answer to Sam Spade and Philip Marlowe, reflecting Edwards's unique humor. Edwards also created, wrote, and directed the 1958\u201361 TV detective series \"Peter Gunn\", which starred Craig Stevens, with music by Henry Mancini. The following year, Edwards produced \"Mr. Lucky,\" an adventure series on CBS starring John Vivyan and Ross Martin. Mancini's association with Edwards continued in his film work, significantly contributing to their success.\nEdwards's most popular films were comedies, the melodrama \"Days of Wine and Roses\" being a notable exception. His most dynamic and successful collaboration was with Peter Sellers in six of the movies in the \"Pink Panther\" series. Edwards later directed the comedy film \"10\" with Dudley Moore and Bo Derek.\n\"Operation Petticoat\" (1959).\n\"Operation Petticoat\" was Edwards's first big-budget movie as a director. The film, which starred Cary Grant and Tony Curtis and was produced by Grant's own production company, Granart Company, became the \"greatest box-office success of the decade for Universal [Studios]\" and made Edwards a recognized director.\n\"Breakfast at Tiffany's\" (1961).\n\"Breakfast at Tiffany's\", based on the novella by Truman Capote, is credited with establishing him as a \"cult figure\" with many critics. Andrew Sarris called it the \"directorial surprise of 1961\", and it became a \"romantic touchstone\" for college students in the early 1960s.\n\"Days of Wine and Roses\" (1962).\n\"Days of Wine And Roses\", a dark psychological film about the effects of alcoholism on a previously happy marriage, starred Jack Lemmon and Lee Remick. It has been described as \"perhaps the most unsparing tract against drink that Hollywood has yet produced, more pessimistic than Billy Wilder's \"The Lost Weekend\"\". The film gave another major boost to Edwards's reputation as an important director.\n\"Darling Lili\" (1970).\nAccording to critic George Morris, \"Darling Lili\" \"synthesizes every major Edwards theme: the disappearance of gallantry and honor, the tension between appearances and reality and the emotional, spiritual, moral, and psychological disorder\" in such a world. Edwards used complex cinematography techniques, including long-shot zooms, tracking, and focus distortion, to great effect. However, the film failed badly with most critics and at the box office. Despite a cost of $17\u00a0million to make, it was seen by few cinema-goers, and the few who did watch were unimpressed. It brought Paramount Pictures to \"the verge of financial collapse\", and became an example of \"self-indulgent extravagance\" in filmmaking \"that was ruining Hollywood\".\n\"Darling Lili\" star Julie Andrews had married Edwards in 1969.\n\"Pink Panther\" film series.\nEdwards also directed most of the comedy film series \"The Pink Panther\", the majority of installments starring Peter Sellers as the inept Inspector Clouseau. The relationship between the director and the lead actor was considered a fruitful yet complicated one with many disagreements during production. At various times in their film relationship, \"he more than once swore off Sellers\" as too hard to direct. However, in his later years, he admitted that working with Sellers was often irresistible:\n\"We clicked on comedy and we were lucky we found each other because we both had so much respect for it. We also had an ability to come up with funny things and great situations that had to be explored. But in that exploration there would often times be disagreement. But I couldn't resist those moments when we jelled. And if you ask me who contributed most to those things, it couldn't have happened unless both of us were involved, even though it wasn't always happy.\"\nFive of those films involved Edwards and Sellers in original material; those films being \"The Pink Panther\" (1963), \"A Shot in the Dark\" (1964), \"The Return of the Pink Panther\" (1975), \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" (1976), and \"Revenge of the Pink Panther\" (1978). (1968's \"Inspector Clouseau\", the third film in the series, was made without the involvement of Edwards or Sellers.) The films were all highly profitable: \"The Return of the Pink Panther\", for example, cost just $2.5\u00a0million to make but grossed $100\u00a0million, while \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" did even better.\nAfter Sellers's death in 1980, Edwards directed three further \"Pink Panther\" films. \"Trail of the Pink Panther\" (1982) consisted of unused material of Sellers from \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" as well as previously seen material from the earlier films. \"Curse of the Pink Panther\" (1983) and \"Son of the Pink Panther\" (1993) were further attempts by Edwards to continue the series without Sellers but both films were critical and financial disappointments. Edwards eventually retired from film making two years after the release of \"Son of the Pink Panther\".\nIn addition to the \"Pink Panther\" films, Edwards directed Sellers in the comedy film \"The Party\".\nSilent-film style.\nHaving grown up in Hollywood, the stepson of a studio production manager and stepgrandson of a silent-film director, Edwards had watched the films of the great silent-era comedians, including Charlie Chaplin, Buster Keaton, Harold Lloyd, and Laurel and Hardy. He and Sellers appreciated and understood the comedy styles in silent films and tried to recreate them in their work together. After their immense success with the first two \"Pink Panther\" films, \"The Pink Panther\" (1963) and \"A Shot in the Dark\" (1964), which adapted many silent-film aspects, including slapstick, they attempted to go even further in \"The Party\" (1968). The film has always had a cult following, and some critics and fans have considered it a \"masterpiece in this vein\" of silent comedy, though it did include minimal dialogue.\nPersonal life.\nMarriages.\nEdwards married his first wife, actress Patricia Walker, in 1953; they divorced in 1967. Edwards and Walker had two children, actress Jennifer Edwards and actor-writer-director Geoffrey Edwards. Walker appeared in the comedy \"All Ashore\" (1953), for which Edwards was one of the screenwriters. Edwards also named one of his film production companies, Patricia Productions, Incorporated, after her.\nEdwards's second marriage, from 1969 until his death in 2010, was to Julie Andrews. They were married for 41 years. He was the stepfather to Emma, from Andrews's previous marriage. In the 1970s, Edwards and Andrews adopted two Vietnamese daughters; Amy Leigh (later known as Amelia) in 1974 and Joanna Lynne in 1975.\nHealth.\nEdwards described his struggle for 15 years with the illness myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS) in the documentary \"I Remember Me\" (2000).\nDeath and legacy.\nOn December 15, 2010, Edwards died of complications of pneumonia at the Saint John's Health Center in Santa Monica, California. He was 88.\nEdwards was greatly admired, and criticized, as a filmmaker. His critics are alluded to by American film author George Morris:\nIt has been difficult for many critics to accept Blake Edwards as anything more than a popular entertainer. Edwards' detractors acknowledge his formal skill, but deplore the absence of profundity in his movies. Edwards' movies \"are\" slick and glossy, but their shiny surfaces reflect all too accurately the disposable values of contemporary life.\nOthers, however, recognized him more for his significant achievements at different periods of his career. British film critic Peter Lloyd, for example, described Edwards, in 1971, as \"the finest director working in the American commercial cinema at the present time\". Edwards's biographers, William Luhr and Peter Lehman, in an interview in 1974, called him \"the finest American director working at this time\". They refer especially to the \"Pink Panther's\" Clouseau, developed with the comedic skills of Peter Sellers as a character \"perfectly consistent\" with his \"absurdist view of the world, because he has no faith in anything and constantly adapts\". Critic Stuart Byron calls his first two \"Pink Panther\" films \"two of the best comedies an American has ever made\". Polls taken at the time showed that his name, as a director, was a rare \"marketable commodity\" in Hollywood.\nEdwards himself described one of the secrets to success in the film industry:\nFor someone who wants to practice his art in this business, all you can hope to do, as \"S.O.B.\" says, is stick to your guns, make the compromises you must, and hope that somewhere along the way you acquire a few good friends who understand. And keep half a conscience.\nFilmography.\nTelevision.\nTV movies\nAwards and honors.\nIn 2004, Edwards received an Honorary Academy Award for cumulative achievements over the course of his film career. As \"Entertainment Weekly\" reported, \"Honorary Oscar winner Blake Edwards made an entrance worthy of Peter Sellers in one of Edwards' \"Pink Panther\" films: A stuntman who looked just like Edwards rode a speeding wheelchair past a podium and crashed through a wall. When the octogenarian director entered and dusted himself off as if he had crashed, he told presenter Jim Carrey, 'Don't touch my Oscar.'\" Also in 2004, Edwards received The Life Career Award from the Academy of Science Fiction, Fantasy and Horror Films, during that year's Saturn Award ceremony.\nIn 1983, Edwards was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Screenplay for \"Victor/Victoria\" as well as winning Best Foreign Film and Best Foreign Screenplay in France and Italy, respectively for \"Victor/Victoria\". In 1988, Edwards received the Creative Achievement Award from the American Comedy Awards. In 1991, Edwards received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame. In 1993, Edwards received the Preston Sturges Award jointly from the Directors Guild and the Writers Guild. In 2000, Edwards received the Contribution to Cinematic Imagery Award from the Art Directors Guild. In 2002, Edwards received the Laurel Award for Screenwriting Achievement from the Writers Guild as well as the Special Edgar from The Mystery Writers of America for career achievement.\nBetween 1962 and 1968, Edwards was nominated six times for a Golden Laurel Award as Best Director by Motion Picture Exhibitors. In 1963, Edwards was nominated for a Golden Globe as Best Director for \"Days of Wine and Roses\". In 1962, Edwards was nominated for Outstanding Achievement by the Directors Guild for \"Breakfast at Tiffany's\". In 1960, Edwards was nominated for an Edgar for Best Teleplay by the Mystery Writers of America for \"Peter Gunn\". In 1959, Edwards was nominated for two Primetime Emmys as Best Director and Best Teleplay for \"Peter Gunn\" Between 1958 and 1983, Edwards was nominated eight times for Best Screenplay by the Writers Guild and won twice, for \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" and \"Victor/Victoria\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36885", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36885", "title": "Tristan Tzara", "text": "Romanian-French poet (1896\u20131963)\nTristan Tzara (; ; ; born Samuel or Samy Rosenstock, also known as S. Samyro; 28 April\u00a0[O.S. 16 April]\u00a01896 \u2013 25 December 1963) was a Romanian and French avant-garde poet, essayist and performance artist. Also active as a journalist, playwright, literary and art critic, composer and film director, he was known best for being one of the founders and central figures of the anti-establishment Dada movement. Under the influence of Adrian Maniu, the adolescent Tzara became interested in Symbolism and co-founded the magazine \"Simbolul\" with Ion Vinea (with whom he also wrote experimental poetry) and painter Marcel Janco.\nDuring World War I, after briefly collaborating on Vinea's \"Chemarea\", he joined Janco in Switzerland. There, Tzara's shows at the Cabaret Voltaire and Zunfthaus zur Waag, as well as his poetry and art manifestos, became a main feature of early Dadaism. His work represented Dada's nihilistic side, in contrast with the more moderate approach favored by Hugo Ball.\nAfter moving to Paris in 1919, Tzara, by then one of the \"presidents of Dada\", joined the staff of \"Litt\u00e9rature\" magazine, which marked the first step in the movement's evolution toward Surrealism. He was involved in the major polemics which led to Dada's split, defending his principles against Andr\u00e9 Breton and Francis Picabia, and, in Romania, against the eclectic modernism of Vinea and Janco. This personal vision on art defined his Dadaist plays \"The Gas Heart\" (1921) and \"Handkerchief of Clouds\" (1924). A forerunner of automatist techniques, Tzara eventually aligned himself with Breton's Surrealism, and under its influence wrote his celebrated utopian poem \"The Approximate Man\".\nDuring the final part of his career, Tzara combined his humanist and anti-fascist perspective with a communist vision, joining the Republicans in the Spanish Civil War and the French Resistance during World War II, and serving a term in the National Assembly. Having spoken in favor of liberalization in the People's Republic of Hungary just before the Revolution of 1956, he distanced himself from the French Communist Party, of which he was by then a member. In 1960, he was among the intellectuals who protested against French actions in the Algerian War.\nTristan Tzara was an influential author and performer, whose contribution is credited with having created a connection from Cubism and Futurism to the Beat Generation, Situationism and various currents in rock music. The friend and collaborator of many modernist figures, he was the lover of dancer Maja Kruscek in his early youth and was later married to Swedish artist and poet Greta Knutson.\nName.\n\"S. Samyro\", a partial anagram of \"Samy Rosenstock\", was used by Tzara from his debut and throughout the early 1910s. A number of undated writings, which he probably authored as early as 1913, bear the signature \"Tristan Ruia\", and, in summer of 1915, he was signing his pieces with the name \"Tristan\".\nIn the 1960s, Rosenstock's collaborator and later rival Ion Vinea claimed that he was responsible for coining the \"Tzara\" part of his pseudonym in 1915. Vinea also stated that Tzara wanted to keep \"Tristan\" as his adopted first name, and that this choice had later attracted him the \"infamous pun\" \"Triste \u00c2ne Tzara\" (French for \"Sad Donkey Tzara\"). This version of events is uncertain, as manuscripts show that the writer may have already been using the full name, as well as the variations \"Tristan \u021aara\" and \"Tr. Tzara\", in 1913\u20131914 (although there is a possibility that he was signing his texts long after committing them to paper).\nIn 1972, art historian Serge Fauchereau, based on information received from Colomba, the wife of avant-garde poet Ilarie Voronca, recounted that Tzara had explained his chosen name was a pun in Romanian, \"trist \u00een \u021bar\u0103\", meaning \"sad in the country\"; Colomba Voronca was also dismissing rumors that Tzara had selected \"Tristan\" as a tribute to poet Tristan Corbi\u00e8re or to Richard Wagner's \"Tristan und Isolde\" opera. Samy Rosenstock legally adopted his new name in 1925, after filing a request with Romania's Ministry of the Interior. The French pronunciation of his name has become commonplace in Romania, where it replaces its more natural reading as \"\u021bara\" (\"the land\", ).\nBiography.\nEarly life and \"Simbolul\" years.\nTzara was born in Moine\u0219ti, Bac\u0103u County, in the historical region of Western Moldavia. His parents were Jewish Romanians who reportedly spoke Yiddish as their first language; his father Filip and grandfather Ilie were entrepreneurs in the forestry business. Tzara's mother was Emilia Rosenstock (n\u00e9e Zibalis). Owing to the Romanian Kingdom's discrimination laws, the Rosenstocks were not emancipated, and thus Tzara was not a full citizen of the country until after 1918.\nHe moved to Bucharest at the age of eleven, and attended the Schemitz-Tierin boarding school. It is believed that the young Tzara completed his secondary education at a state-run high school, which is identified as the Saint Sava National College or as the Sf\u00e2ntul Gheorghe High School. In October 1912, when Tzara was aged sixteen, he joined his friends Vinea and Marcel Janco in editing \"Simbolul\". Reputedly, Janco and Vinea provided the funds. Like Vinea, Tzara was also close to their young colleague Jacques G. Costin, who was later his self-declared promoter and admirer.\nDespite their young age, the three editors were able to attract collaborations from established Symbolist authors, active within Romania's own Symbolist movement. Alongside their close friend and mentor Adrian Maniu (an Imagist who had been Vinea's tutor), they included N. Davidescu, Alfred Hefter-Hidalgo, Emil Isac, Claudia Millian, Ion Minulescu, I. M. Ra\u0219cu, Eugeniu Sperantia, Al. T. Stamatiad, Eugeniu \u0218tef\u0103nescu-Est, and Constantin T. Stoika, as well as journalist and lawyer Poldi Chapier. In its inaugural issue, the journal even printed a poem by one of the leading figures in Romanian Symbolism, Alexandru Macedonski. \"Simbolul\" also featured illustrations by Maniu, Millian and Iosif Iser.\nAlthough the magazine ceased print in December 1912, it played an important part in shaping Romanian literature of the period. Literary historian Paul Cernat sees \"Simbolul\" as a main stage in Romania's modernism, and credits it with having brought about the first changes from Symbolism to the radical avant-garde. Also according to Cernat, the collaboration between Samyro, Vinea and Janco was an early instance of literature becoming \"an interface between arts\", which had for its contemporary equivalent the collaboration between Iser and writers such as Ion Minulescu and Tudor Arghezi. Although Maniu parted with the group and sought a change in style which brought him closer to traditionalist tenets, Tzara, Janco and Vinea continued their collaboration. Between 1913 and 1915, they were frequently vacationing together, either on the Black Sea coast or at the Rosenstock family property in G\u00e2rceni, Vaslui County; during this time, Vinea and Samyro wrote poems with similar themes and alluding to one another.\n\"Chemarea\" and 1915 departure.\nTzara's career changed course between 1914 and 1916, during a period when the Romanian Kingdom kept out of World War I. In autumn 1915, as founder and editor of the short-lived journal \"Chemarea\", Vinea published two poems by his friend, the first printed works to bear the signature \"Tristan Tzara\". At the time, the young poet and many of his friends were adherents of an anti-war and anti-nationalist current, which progressively accommodated anti-establishment messages. \"Chemarea\", which was a platform for this agenda and again attracted collaborations from Chapier, may also have been financed by Tzara and Vinea. According to Romanian avant-garde writer Claude Sernet, the journal was \"totally different from everything that had been printed in Romania before that moment.\" During the period, Tzara's works were sporadically published in Hefter-Hidalgo's \"Versuri \u0219i Proz\u0103\", and, in June 1915, Constantin R\u0103dulescu-Motru's \"Noua Revist\u0103 Rom\u00e2n\u0103\" published Samyro's known poem \"Veri\u0219oar\u0103, fat\u0103 de pension\" (\"Little Cousin, Boarding School Girl\").\nTzara had enrolled at the University of Bucharest in 1914, studying mathematics and philosophy, but did not graduate. In autumn 1915, he left Romania for Z\u00fcrich, in neutral Switzerland. Janco, together with his brother Jules Janco, had settled there a few months before, and was later joined by his other brother, Georges Janco. Tzara, who may have applied to the Faculty of Philosophy at the local university, shared lodging with Marcel Janco, who was a student at the \"Technische Hochschule\", in the Altinger Guest House (by 1918, Tzara had moved to the Limmatquai Hotel). His departure from Romania, like that of the Janco brothers, may have been in part a pacifist political statement. After settling in Switzerland, the young poet almost completely discarded Romanian as his language of expression, writing most of his subsequent works in French. The poems he had written before, which were the result of poetic dialogues between him and his friend, were left in Vinea's care. Most of these pieces were first printed only in the interwar period.\nIt was in Z\u00fcrich that the Romanian group met with the German Hugo Ball, an anarchist poet and pianist, and his young wife Emmy Hennings, a music hall performer. In February 1916, Ball had rented the Cabaret Voltaire from its owner, Jan Ephraim, and intended to use the venue for performance art and exhibits. Hugo Ball recorded this period, noting that Tzara and Marcel Janco, like Hans Arp, Arthur Segal, Otto van Rees, and Max Oppenheimer, and Marcel S\u0142odki, \"readily agreed to take part in the cabaret\". According to Ball, among the performances of songs mimicking or taking inspiration from various national folklores, \"Herr Tristan Tzara recited Rumanian poetry.\" In late March, Ball recounted, the group was joined by German writer and drummer Richard Huelsenbeck. He was soon after involved in Tzara's \"simultaneist verse\" performance, \"the first in Z\u00fcrich and in the world\", also including renditions of poems by two promoters of Cubism, Fernand Divoire and Henri Barzun.\nBirth of Dada.\nIt was in this milieu that Dada was born, at some point before May 1916, when a publication of the same name first saw print. The story of its establishment was the subject of a disagreement between Tzara and his fellow writers. Cernat believes that the first Dadaist performance took place as early as February, when the nineteen-year-old Tzara, wearing a monocle, entered the Cabaret Voltaire stage singing sentimental melodies and handing paper wads to his \"scandalized spectators\", leaving the stage to allow room for masked actors on stilts, and returning in clown attire. The same type of performances took place at the Zunfthaus zur Waag beginning in summer 1916, after the Cabaret Voltaire was forced to close down.\nAccording to music historian Bernard Gendron, for as long as it lasted, \"the Cabaret Voltaire was dada. There was no alternative institution or site that could disentangle 'pure' dada from its mere accompaniment [...] nor was any such site desired.\" Other opinions link Dada's beginnings with much earlier events, including the experiments of Alfred Jarry, Andr\u00e9 Gide, Christian Morgenstern, Jean-Pierre Brisset, Guillaume Apollinaire, Jacques Vach\u00e9, Marcel Duchamp, and Francis Picabia.\nIn the first of the movement's manifestos, Ball wrote: \"[The booklet] is intended to present to the Public the activities and interests of the Cabaret Voltaire, which has as its sole purpose to draw attention, across the barriers of war and nationalism, to the few independent spirits who live for other ideals. The next objective of the artists who are assembled here is to publish a \"revue internationale\" [French for 'international magazine'].\" Ball completed his message in French, and the paragraph translates as: \"The magazine shall be published in Z\u00fcrich and shall carry the name 'Dada' ('Dada'). Dada Dada Dada Dada.\" The view according to which Ball had created the movement was notably supported by writer Walter Serner, who directly accused Tzara of having abused Ball's initiative.\nA secondary point of contention between the founders of Dada regarded the paternity for the movement's name, which, according to visual artist and essayist Hans Richter, was first adopted in print in June 1916. Ball, who claimed authorship and stated that he picked the word randomly from a dictionary, indicated that it stood for both the French-language equivalent of \"hobby horse\" and a German-language term reflecting the joy of children being rocked to sleep. Tzara himself declined interest in the matter, but Marcel Janco credited him with having coined the term. Dada manifestos, written or co-authored by Tzara, record that the name shares its form with various other terms, including a word used in the Kru languages of West Africa to designate the tail of a sacred cow; a toy and the name for \"mother\" in an unspecified Italian dialect; and the double affirmative in Romanian and in various Slavic languages.\nDadaist promoter.\nBefore the end of the war, Tzara had assumed a position as Dada's main promoter and manager, helping the Swiss group establish branches in other European countries. This period also saw the first conflict within the group: citing irreconcilable differences with Tzara, Ball left the group. With his departure, Gendron argues, Tzara was able to move Dada vaudeville-like performances into more of \"an incendiary and yet jocularly provocative theater.\"\nHe is often credited with having inspired many young modernist authors from outside Switzerland to affiliate with the group, in particular the Frenchmen Louis Aragon, Andr\u00e9 Breton, Paul \u00c9luard, Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes and Philippe Soupault. Richter, who also came into contact with Dada at this stage in its history, notes that these intellectuals often had a \"very cool and distant attitude to this new movement\" before being approached by the Romanian author. In June 1916, he began editing and managing the periodical \"Dada\" as a successor of the short-lived magazine \"Cabaret Voltaire\"\u2014Richter describes his \"energy, passion and talent for the job\", which he claims satisfied all Dadaists. He was at the time the lover of Maja Kruscek, who was a student of Rudolf Laban; in Richter's account, their relationship was always tottering.\nAs early as 1916, Tristan Tzara took distance from the Italian Futurists, rejecting the militarist and proto-fascist stance of their leader Filippo Tommaso Marinetti. Richter notes that, by then, Dada had replaced Futurism as the leader of modernism, while continuing to build on its influence: \"we had swallowed Futurism\u2014bones, feathers and all. It is true that in the process of digestion all sorts of bones and feathers had been regurgitated.\" Despite this and the fact that Dada did not make any gains in Italy, Tzara could count poets Giuseppe Ungaretti and Alberto Savinio, painters Gino Cantarelli and Aldo Fiozzi, as well as a few other Italian Futurists, among the Dadaists. Among the Italian authors supporting Dadaist manifestos and rallying with the Dada group was the poet, painter and in the future a fascist racial theorist Julius Evola, who became a personal friend of Tzara.\nThe next year, Tzara and Ball opened the \"Galerie Dada\" permanent exhibit, through which they set contacts with the independent Italian visual artist Giorgio de Chirico and with the German Expressionist journal \"Der Sturm\", all of whom were described as \"fathers of Dada\". During the same months, and probably owing to Tzara's intervention, the Dada group organized a performance of \"Sphinx and Strawman\", a puppet play by the Austro-Hungarian Expressionist Oskar Kokoschka, whom he advertised as an example of \"Dada theater\". He was also in touch with \"Nord-Sud\", the magazine of French poet Pierre Reverdy (who sought to unify all avant-garde trends), and contributed articles on African art to both \"Nord-Sud\" and Pierre Albert-Birot's \"SIC\" magazine. In early 1918, through Huelsenbeck, Z\u00fcrich Dadaists established contacts with their more explicitly left-wing disciples in the German Empire \u2014 George Grosz, John Heartfield, Johannes Baader, Kurt Schwitters, Walter Mehring, Raoul Hausmann, Carl Einstein, Franz Jung, and Heartfield's brother Wieland Herzfelde. With Breton, Soupault and Aragon, Tzara traveled Cologne, where he became familiarized with the elaborate collage works of Schwitters and Max Ernst, which he showed to his colleagues in Switzerland. Huelsenbeck nonetheless declined to Schwitters membership in Berlin Dada.\nAs a result of his campaigning, Tzara created a list of so-called \"Dada presidents\", who represented various regions of Europe. According to Hans Richter, it included, alongside Tzara, figures ranging from Ernst, Arp, Baader, Breton and Aragon to Kruscek, Evola, Rafael Lasso de la Vega, Igor Stravinsky, Vicente Huidobro, Francesco Meriano and Th\u00e9odore Fraenkel. Richter notes: \"I'm not sure if all the names who appear here would agree with the description.\"\nEnd of World War I.\nThe shows Tzara staged in Z\u00fcrich often turned into scandals or riots, and he was in permanent conflict with the Swiss law enforcers. Hans Richter speaks of a \"pleasure of letting fly at the bourgeois, which in Tristan Tzara took the form of coldly (or hotly) calculated insolence\" (\"see \u00c9pater la bourgeoisie\"). In one instance, as part of a series of events in which Dadaists mocked established authors, Tzara and Arp falsely publicized that they were going to fight a duel in Rehalp, near Z\u00fcrich, and that they were going to have the popular novelist Jakob Christoph Heer for their witness. Richter also reports that his Romanian colleague profited from Swiss neutrality to play the Allies and Central Powers against each other, obtaining art works and funds from both, making use of their need to stimulate their respective propaganda efforts. While active as a promoter, Tzara also published his first volume of collected poetry, the 1918 \"Vingt-cinq po\u00e8mes\" (\"Twenty-five Poems\").\nA major event took place in autumn 1918, when Francis Picabia, who was then publisher of \"391\" magazine and a distant Dada affiliate, visited Z\u00fcrich and introduced his colleagues there to his nihilistic views on art and reason. In the United States, Picabia, Man Ray and Marcel Duchamp had earlier set up their own version of Dada. This circle, based in New York City, sought affiliation with Tzara's only in 1921, when they jokingly asked him to grant them permission to use \"Dada\" as their own name (to which Tzara replied: \"Dada belongs to everybody\"). The visit was credited by Richter with boosting the Romanian author's status, but also with making Tzara himself \"switch suddenly from a position of balance between art and anti-art into the stratospheric regions of pure and joyful nothingness.\" The movement subsequently organized its last major Swiss show, held at the Saal zur Kaufleutern, with choreography by Susanne Perrottet, Sophie Taeuber-Arp, and with the participation of K\u00e4the Wulff, Hans Heusser, Tzara, Hans Richter and Walter Serner. It was there that Serner read from his 1918 essay, whose very title advocated \"Letzte Lockerung\" (\"Final Dissolution\"): this part is believed to have caused the subsequent m\u00eal\u00e9e, during which the public attacked the performers and succeeded in interrupting, but not canceling, the show.\nFollowing the November 1918 Armistice with Germany, Dada's evolution was marked by political developments. In October 1919, Tzara, Arp and Otto Flake began publishing \"Der Zeltweg\", a journal aimed at further popularizing Dada in a post-war world were the borders were again accessible. Richter, who admits that the magazine was \"rather tame\", also notes that Tzara and his colleagues were dealing with the impact of communist revolutions, in particular the October Revolution and the German revolts of 1918, which \"had stirred men's minds, divided men's interests and diverted energies in the direction of political change.\" The same commentator, however, dismisses those accounts which, he believes, led readers to believe that \"Der Zeltweg\" was \"an association of revolutionary artists.\" According to one account rendered by historian Robert Levy, Tzara shared company with a group of Romanian communist students, and, as such, may have met with Ana Pauker, who was later one of the Romanian Communist Party's most prominent activists.\nArp and Janco drifted away from the movement ca. 1919, when they created the Constructivist-inspired workshop \"Das Neue Leben\". In Romania, Dada was awarded an ambiguous reception from Tzara's former associate Vinea. Although he was sympathetic to its goals, treasured Hugo Ball and Hennings and promised to adapt his own writings to its requirements, Vinea cautioned Tzara and the Jancos in favor of lucidity. When Vinea submitted his poem \"Dolean\u021be\" (\"Grievances\") to be published by Tzara and his associates, he was turned down, an incident which critics attribute to a contrast between the reserved tone of the piece and the revolutionary tenets of Dada.\nParis Dada.\nIn late 1919, Tristan Tzara left Switzerland to join Breton, Soupault and Claude Rivi\u00e8re in editing the Paris-based magazine \"Litt\u00e9rature\". Already a mentor for the French avant-garde, he was, according to Hans Richter, perceived as an \"Anti-Messiah\" and a \"prophet\". Reportedly, Dada mythology had it that he entered the French capital in a snow-white or lilac-colored car, passing down Boulevard Raspail through a triumphal arch made from his own pamphlets, being greeted by cheering crowds and a fireworks display. Richter dismisses this account, indicating that Tzara actually walked from Gare de l'Est to Picabia's home, without anyone expecting him to arrive.\nHe is often described as the main figure in the \"Litt\u00e9rature\" circle, and credited with having more firmly set its artistic principles in the line of Dada. When Picabia began publishing a new series of \"391\" in Paris, Tzara seconded him and, Richter says, produced issues of the magazine \"decked out [...] in all the colors of Dada.\" He was also issuing his \"Dada\" magazine, printed in Paris but using the same format, renaming it \"Bulletin Dada\" and later \"Dadaphone\". At around that time, he met American author Gertrude Stein, who wrote about him in \"The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas\", and the artist couple Robert and Sonia Delaunay (with whom he worked in tandem for \"poem-dresses\" and other simultaneist literary pieces).\nTzara became involved in a number of Dada experiments, on which he collaborated with Breton, Aragon, Soupault, Picabia or Paul \u00c9luard. Other authors who came into contact with Dada at that stage were Jean Cocteau, Paul Derm\u00e9e and Raymond Radiguet. The performances staged by Dada were often meant to popularize its principles, and Dada continued to draw attention on itself by hoaxes and false advertising, announcing that the Hollywood film star Charlie Chaplin was going to appear on stage at its show, or that its members were going to have their heads shaved or their hair cut off on stage. In another instance, Tzara and his associates lectured at the \"Universit\u00e9 populaire\" in front of industrial workers, who were reportedly less than impressed. Richter believes that, ideologically, Tzara was still in tribute to Picabia's nihilistic and anarchic views (which made the Dadaists attack all political and cultural ideologies), but that this also implied a measure of sympathy for the working class.\nDada activities in Paris culminated in the March 1920 variety show at the Th\u00e9\u00e2tre de l'\u0152uvre, which featured readings from Breton, Picabia, Derm\u00e9e and Tzara's earlier work, \"La Premi\u00e8re aventure c\u00e9leste de M. Antipyrine\" (\"The First Heavenly Adventure of Mr. Antipyrine\"). Tzara's melody, \"Vaseline symphonique\" (\"Symphonic Vaseline\"), which required ten or twenty people to shout \"cra\" and \"cri\" on a rising scale, was also performed. A scandal erupted when Breton read Picabia's \"Manifeste cannibale\" (\"Cannibal Manifesto\"), lashing out at the audience and mocking them, to which they answered by aiming rotten fruit at the stage.\nThe Dada phenomenon was only noticed in Romania beginning in 1920, and its overall reception was negative. Traditionalist historian Nicolae Iorga, Symbolist promoter Ovid Densusianu, the more reserved modernists Camil Petrescu and Benjamin Fondane all refused to accept it as a valid artistic manifestation. Although he rallied with tradition, Vinea defended the subversive current in front of more serious criticism, and rejected the widespread rumor that Tzara had acted as an agent of influence for the Central Powers during the war. Eugen Lovinescu, editor of \"Sbur\u0103torul\" and one of Vinea's rivals on the modernist scene, acknowledged the influence exercised by Tzara on the younger avant-garde authors, but analyzed his work only briefly, using as an example one of his pre-Dada poems, and depicting him as an advocate of literary \"extremism\".\nDada stagnation.\nBy 1921, Tzara had become involved in conflicts with other figures in the movement, whom he claimed had parted with the spirit of Dada. He was targeted by the Berlin-based Dadaists, in particular by Huelsenbeck and Serner, the former of whom was also involved in a conflict with Raoul Hausmann over leadership status. According to Richter, tensions between Breton and Tzara had surfaced in 1920, when Breton first made known his wish to do away with musical performances altogether and alleged that the Romanian was merely repeating himself. The Dada shows themselves were by then such common occurrences that audiences expected to be insulted by the performers.\nA more serious crisis occurred in May, when Dada organized a mock trial of Maurice Barr\u00e8s, whose early affiliation with the Symbolists had been shadowed by his antisemitism and reactionary stance: Georges Ribemont-Dessaignes was the prosecutor, Aragon and Soupault the defense attorneys, with Tzara, Ungaretti, Benjamin P\u00e9ret and others as witnesses (a mannequin stood in for Barr\u00e8s). P\u00e9ret immediately upset Picabia and Tzara by refusing to make the trial an absurd one, and by introducing a political subtext with which Breton nevertheless agreed. In June, Tzara and Picabia clashed with each other, after Tzara expressed an opinion that his former mentor was becoming too radical. During the same season, Breton, Arp, Ernst, Maja Kruschek and Tzara were in Austria, at Imst, where they published their last manifesto as a group, \"Dada au grand air\" (\"Dada in the Open Air\") or \"Der S\u00e4ngerkrieg in Tirol\" (\"The Battle of the Singers in Tyrol\"). Tzara also visited Czechoslovakia, where he reportedly hoped to gain adherents to his cause.\nAlso in 1921, Ion Vinea wrote an article for the Romanian newspaper \"Adev\u0103rul\", arguing that the movement had exhausted itself (although, in his letters to Tzara, he continued to ask his friend to return home and spread his message there). After July 1922, Marcel Janco rallied with Vinea in editing \"Contimporanul\", which published some of Tzara's earliest poems but never offered space to any Dadaist manifesto. Reportedly, the conflict between Tzara and Janco had a personal note: Janco later mentioned \"some dramatic quarrels\" between his colleague and him. They avoided each other for the rest of their lives and Tzara even struck out the dedications to Janco from his early poems. Julius Evola also grew disappointed by the movement's total rejection of tradition and began his personal search for an alternative, pursuing a path which later led him to esotericism and fascism.\n\"Evening of the Bearded Heart\".\nTzara was openly attacked by Breton in a February 1922 article for \"Le Journal de Peuple\", where the Romanian writer was denounced as \"an impostor\" avid for \"publicity\". In March, Breton initiated the \"Congress for the Determination and Defense of the Modern Spirit\". The French writer used the occasion to strike out Tzara's name from among the Dadaists, citing in his support Dada's Huelsenbeck, Serner, and Christian Schad. Basing his statement on a note supposedly authored by Huelsenbeck, Breton also accused Tzara of opportunism, claiming that he had planned wartime editions of Dada works in such a manner as not to upset actors on the political stage, making sure that German Dadaists were not made available to the public in countries subject to the Supreme War Council. Tzara, who attended the Congress only as a means to subvert it, responded to the accusations the same month, arguing that Huelsenbeck's note was fabricated and that Schad had not been one of the original Dadaists. Rumors reported much later by American writer Brion Gysin had it that Breton's claims also depicted Tzara as an informer for the Prefecture of Police.\nIn May 1922, Dada staged its own funeral. According to Hans Richter, the main part of this took place in Weimar, where the Dadaists attended a festival of the Bauhaus art school, during which Tzara proclaimed the elusive nature of his art: \"Dada is useless, like everything else in life. [...] Dada is a virgin microbe which penetrates with the insistence of air into all those spaces that reason has failed to fill with words and conventions.\"\nIn \"The Bearded Heart\" manifesto a number of artists backed the marginalization of Breton in support of Tzara. Alongside Cocteau, Arp, Ribemont-Dessaignes, and \u00c9luard, the pro-Tzara faction included Erik Satie, Theo van Doesburg, Serge Charchoune, Louis-Ferdinand C\u00e9line, Marcel Duchamp, Ossip Zadkine, Jean Metzinger, Ilia Zdanevich, and Man Ray. During an associated soir\u00e9e, \"Evening of the Bearded Heart\", which began on 6 July 1923, Tzara presented a re-staging of his play \"The Gas Heart\" (which had been first performed two years earlier to howls of derision from its audience), for which Sonia Delaunay designed the costumes. Breton interrupted its performance and reportedly fought with several of his former associates and broke furniture, prompting a theatre riot that only the intervention of the police halted. Dada's vaudeville declined in importance and disappeared altogether after that date.\nPicabia took Breton's side against Tzara, and replaced the staff of his \"391\", enlisting collaborations from Cl\u00e9ment Pansaers and Ezra Pound. Breton marked the end of Dada in 1924, when he issued the first \"Surrealist Manifesto\". Richter suggests that \"Surrealism devoured and digested Dada.\" Tzara distanced himself from the new trend, disagreeing with its methods and, increasingly, with its politics. In 1923, he and a few other former Dadaists collaborated with Richter and the Constructivist artist El Lissitzky on the magazine \"G\", and, the following year, he wrote pieces for the Yugoslav-Slovenian magazine \"Tank\" (edited by Ferdinand Delak).\nTransition to Surrealism.\nTzara continued to write, becoming more seriously interested in the theater. In 1924, he published and staged the play \"Handkerchief of Clouds\", which was soon included in the repertoire of Serge Diaghilev's \"Ballets Russes\". He also collected his earlier Dada texts as the \"Seven Dada Manifestos\". Marxist thinker Henri Lefebvre reviewed them enthusiastically; he later became one of the author's friends.\nIn Romania, Tzara's work was partly recuperated by \"Contimporanul\", which notably staged public readings of his works during the international art exhibit it organized in 1924, and again during the \"new art demonstration\" of 1925. In parallel, the short-lived magazine \"Integral\", where Ilarie Voronca and Ion C\u0103lug\u0103ru were the main animators, took significant interest in Tzara's work. In a 1927 interview with the publication, he voiced his opposition to the Surrealist group's adoption of communism, indicating that such politics could only result in a \"new bourgeoisie\" being created, and explaining that he had opted for a personal \"permanent revolution\", which would preserve \"the holiness of the ego\".\nIn 1925, Tristan Tzara was in Stockholm, where he married Greta Knutson, with whom he had a son, Christophe (born 1927). A former student of painter Andr\u00e9 Lhote, she was known for her interest in phenomenology and abstract art. Around the same period, with funds from Knutson's inheritance, Tzara commissioned Austrian architect Adolf Loos, a former representative of the Vienna Secession whom he had met in Z\u00fcrich, to build him a house in Paris. The rigidly functionalist \"Maison Tristan Tzara\", built in Montmartre, was designed following Tzara's specific requirements and decorated with samples of African art. It was Loos' only major contribution in his Parisian years.\nIn 1929, he reconciled with Breton, and sporadically attended the Surrealists' meetings in Paris. The same year, he issued the poetry book \"De nos oiseaux\" (\"Of Our Birds\"). This period saw the publication of \"The Approximate Man\" (1931), alongside the volumes \"L'Arbre des voyageurs\" (\"The Travelers' Tree\", 1930), \"O\u00f9 boivent les loups\" (\"Where Wolves Drink\", 1932), \"L'Antit\u00eate\" (\"The Antihead\", 1933) and \"Grains et issues\" (\"Seed and Bran\", 1935). By then, it was also announced that Tzara had started work on a screenplay. In 1930, he directed and produced a cinematic version of \"Le C\u0153ur \u00e0 barbe\", starring Breton and other leading Surrealists. Five years later, he signed his name to \"The Testimony against Gertrude Stein\", published by Eugene Jolas's magazine \"transition\" in reply to Stein's memoir \"The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas\", in which he accused his former friend of being a megalomaniac.\nThe poet became involved in further developing Surrealist techniques, and, together with Breton and Valentine Hugo, drew one of the better-known examples of \"exquisite corpses\". Tzara also prefaced a 1934 collection of Surrealist poems by his friend Ren\u00e9 Char, and the following year he and Greta Knutson visited Char in L'Isle-sur-la-Sorgue. Tzara's wife was also affiliated with the Surrealist group at around the same time. This association ended when she parted with Tzara late in the 1930s.\nAt home, Tzara's works were collected and edited by the Surrealist promoter Sa\u0219a Pan\u0103, who corresponded with him over several years. The first such edition saw print in 1934, and featured the 1913\u20131915 poems Tzara had left in Vinea's care. In 1928\u20131929, Tzara exchanged letters with his friend Jacques G. Costin, a \"Contimporanul\" affiliate who did not share all of Vinea's views on literature, who offered to organize his visit to Romania and asked him to translate his work into French.\nAffiliation with communism and Spanish Civil War.\nAlarmed by the establishment of Adolf Hitler's Nazi regime, which also signified the end of Berlin's avant-garde, he merged his activities as an art promoter with the cause of anti-fascism, and was close to the French Communist Party (PCF). In 1936, Richter recalled, he published a series of photographs secretly taken by Kurt Schwitters in Hanover, works which documented the destruction of Nazi propaganda by the locals, ration stamp with reduced quantities of food, and other hidden aspects of Hitler's rule. After the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War, he briefly left France and joined the Republican forces. Alongside Soviet reporter Ilya Ehrenburg, Tzara visited Madrid, which was besieged by the Nationalists (\"see Siege of Madrid\"). Upon his return, he published the collection of poems \"Midis gagn\u00e9s\" (\"Conquered Southern Regions\"). Some of them had previously been printed in the brochure \"Les po\u00e8tes du monde d\u00e9fendent le peuple espagnol\" (\"The Poets of the World Defend the Spanish People\", 1937), which was edited by two prominent authors and activists, Nancy Cunard and the Chilean poet Pablo Neruda. Tzara had also signed Cunard's June 1937 call to intervention against Francisco Franco. Reportedly, he and Nancy Cunard were romantically involved.\nAlthough the poet was moving away from Surrealism, his adherence to strict Marxism-Leninism was reportedly questioned by both the PCF and the Soviet Union. Semiotician Philip Beitchman places their attitude in connection with Tzara's own vision of Utopia, which combined communist messages with Freudo-Marxist psychoanalysis and made use of particularly violent imagery. Reportedly, Tzara refused to be enlisted in supporting the party line, maintaining his independence and refusing to take the forefront at public rallies.\nHowever, others note that the former Dadaist leader would often show himself a follower of political guidelines. As early as 1934, Tzara, together with Breton, \u00c9luard and communist writer Ren\u00e9 Crevel, organized an informal trial of independent-minded Surrealist Salvador Dal\u00ed, who was at the time a confessed admirer of Hitler, and whose portrait of William Tell had alarmed them because it shared likeness with Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin. Historian Irina Livezeanu notes that Tzara, who agreed with Stalinism and shunned Trotskyism, submitted to the PCF cultural demands during the writers' congress of 1935, even when his friend Crevel committed suicide to protest the adoption of socialist realism. At a later stage, Livezeanu remarks, Tzara reinterpreted Dada and Surrealism as revolutionary currents, and presented them as such to the public. This stance she contrasts with that of Breton, who was more reserved in his attitudes.\nWorld War II and Resistance.\nDuring World War II, Tzara took refuge from the German occupation forces, moving to the southern areas, controlled by the Vichy regime. On one occasion, the antisemitic and collaborationist publication \"Je Suis Partout\" made his whereabouts known to the Gestapo.\nHe was in Marseille in late 1940-early 1941, joining the group of anti-fascist and Jewish refugees who, protected by American diplomat Varian Fry, were seeking to escape Nazi-occupied Europe. Among the people present there were the anti-totalitarian socialist Victor Serge, anthropologist Claude L\u00e9vi-Strauss, playwright Arthur Adamov, philosopher and poet Ren\u00e9 Daumal, and several prominent Surrealists: Breton, Char, and Benjamin P\u00e9ret, as well as artists Max Ernst, Andr\u00e9 Masson, Wifredo Lam, Jacques H\u00e9rold, Victor Brauner and \u00d3scar Dom\u00ednguez. During the months spent together, and before some of them received permission to leave for America, they invented a new card game, on which traditional card imagery was replaced with Surrealist symbols.\nSome time after his stay in Marseille, Tzara joined the French Resistance, rallying with the Maquis. A contributor to magazines published by the Resistance, Tzara also took charge of the cultural broadcast for the Free French Forces clandestine radio station. He lived in Aix-en-Provence, then in Souillac, and ultimately in Toulouse. His son Cristophe was at the time a Resistant in northern France, having joined the \"Francs-Tireurs et Partisans\". In Axis-allied and antisemitic Romania (\"see Romania during World War II\"), the regime of Ion Antonescu ordered bookstores not to sell works by Tzara and 44 other Jewish-Romanian authors. In 1942, with the generalization of antisemitic measures, Tzara was also stripped of his Romanian citizenship rights.\nIn December 1944, five months after the Liberation of Paris, he was contributing to \"L'\u00c9ternelle Revue\", a pro-communist newspaper edited by philosopher Jean-Paul Sartre, through which Sartre was publicizing the heroic image of a France united in resistance, as opposed to the perception that it had passively accepted German control. Other contributors included writers Aragon, Char, \u00c9luard, Elsa Triolet, Eug\u00e8ne Guillevic, Raymond Queneau, Francis Ponge, Jacques Pr\u00e9vert and painter Pablo Picasso.\nUpon the end of the war and the restoration of French independence, Tzara was naturalized a French citizen. During 1945, under the Provisional Government of the French Republic, he was a representative of the Sud-Ouest region to the National Assembly. According to Livezeanu, he \"helped reclaim the South from the cultural figures who had associated themselves to Vichy [France].\" In April 1946, his early poems, alongside similar pieces by Breton, \u00c9luard, Aragon and Dal\u00ed, were the subject of a midnight broadcast on Parisian Radio. In 1947, he became a full member of the PCF (according to some sources, he had been one since 1934).\nInternational leftism.\nOver the following decade, Tzara lent his support to political causes. Pursuing his interest in primitivism, he became a critic of the Fourth Republic's colonial policy, and joined his voice to those who supported decolonization. Nevertheless, he was appointed cultural ambassador of the Republic by the Paul Ramadier cabinet. He also participated in the PCF-organized Congress of Writers, but, unlike \u00c9luard and Aragon, again avoided adapting his style to socialist realism.\nHe returned to Romania on an official visit in late 1946-early 1947, as part of a tour of the emerging Eastern Bloc during which he also stopped in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and the Federal People's Republic of Yugoslavia. The speeches he and Sa\u0219a Pan\u0103 gave on the occasion, published by \"Orizont\" journal, were noted for condoning official positions of the PCF and the Romanian Communist Party, and are credited by Irina Livezeanu with causing a rift between Tzara and young Romanian avant-gardists such as Victor Brauner and Gherasim Luca (who rejected communism and were alarmed by the Iron Curtain having fallen over Europe). In September of the same year, he was present at the conference of the pro-communist International Union of Students (where he was a guest of the French-based Union of Communist Students, and met with similar organizations from Romania and other countries).\nIn 1949\u20131950, Tzara answered Aragon's call and become active in the international campaign to liberate Naz\u0131m Hikmet, a Turkish poet whose 1938 arrest for communist activities had created a \"cause c\u00e9l\u00e8bre\" for the pro-Soviet public opinion. Tzara chaired the Committee for the Liberation of Naz\u0131m Hikmet, which issued petitions to national governments and commissioned works in honor of Hikmet (including musical pieces by Louis Durey and Serge Nigg). Hikmet was eventually released in July 1950, and publicly thanked Tzara during his subsequent visit to Paris.\nHis works of the period include, among others: \"Le Signe de vie\" (\"Sign of Life\", 1946), \"Terre sur terre\" (\"Earth on Earth\", 1946), \"Sans coup f\u00e9rir\" (\"Without a Need to Fight\", 1949), \"De m\u00e9moire d'homme\" (\"From a Man's Memory\", 1950), \"Parler seul\" (\"Speaking Alone\", 1950), and \"La Face int\u00e9rieure\" (\"The Inner Face\", 1953), followed in 1955 by \"\u00c0 haute flamme\" (\"Flame out Loud\") and \"Le Temps naissant\" (\"The Nascent Time\"), and the 1956 \"Le Fruit permis\" (\"The Permitted Fruit\"). Tzara continued to be an active promoter of modernist culture. Around 1949, having read Irish author Samuel Beckett's manuscript of \"Waiting for Godot\", Tzara facilitated the play's staging by approaching producer Roger Blin. He also translated into French some poems by Hikmet and the Hungarian author Attila J\u00f3zsef. In 1949, he introduced Picasso to art dealer Heinz Berggruen (thus helping start their lifelong partnership), and, in 1951, wrote the catalog for an exhibit of works by his friend Max Ernst; the text celebrated the artist's \"free use of stimuli\" and \"his discovery of a new kind of humor.\"\n1956 protest and final years.\nIn October 1956, Tzara visited the People's Republic of Hungary, where the government of Imre Nagy was coming into conflict with the Soviet Union. This followed an invitation on the part of Hungarian writer Gyula Illy\u00e9s, who wanted his colleague to be present at ceremonies marking the rehabilitation of L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Rajk (a local communist leader whose prosecution had been ordered by Joseph Stalin). Tzara was receptive of the Hungarians' demand for liberalization, contacted the anti-Stalinist and former Dadaist Lajos Kass\u00e1k, and deemed the anti-Soviet movement \"revolutionary\". However, unlike much of Hungarian public opinion, the poet did not recommend emancipation from Soviet control, and described the independence demanded by local writers as \"an abstract notion\". The statement he issued, widely quoted in the Hungarian and international press, forced a reaction from the PCF: through Aragon's reply, the party deplored the fact that one of its members was being used in support of \"anti-communist and anti-Soviet campaigns.\"\nHis return to France coincided with the outbreak of the Hungarian Revolution, which ended with a Soviet military intervention. On 24 October, Tzara was ordered to a PCF meeting, where activist Laurent Casanova reportedly ordered him to keep silent, which Tzara did. Tzara's apparent dissidence and the crisis he helped provoke within the Communist Party were celebrated by Breton, who had adopted a pro-Hungarian stance, and who defined his friend and rival as \"the first spokesman of the Hungarian demand.\"\nHe was thereafter mostly withdrawn from public life, dedicating himself to researching the work of 15th-century poet Fran\u00e7ois Villon, and, like his fellow Surrealist Michel Leiris, to promoting primitive and African art, which he had been collecting for years. In early 1957, Tzara attended a Dada retrospective on the Rive Gauche, which ended in a riot caused by the rival avant-garde Mouvement Jariviste, an outcome which reportedly pleased him. In August 1960, one year after the Fifth Republic had been established by President Charles de Gaulle, French forces were confronting the Algerian rebels (\"see Algerian War\"). Together with Simone de Beauvoir, Marguerite Duras, J\u00e9r\u00f4me Lindon, Alain Robbe-Grillet and other intellectuals, he addressed Premier Michel Debr\u00e9 a letter of protest, concerning France's refusal to grant Algeria its independence. As a result, Minister of Culture Andr\u00e9 Malraux announced that his cabinet would not subsidize any films to which Tzara and the others might contribute, and the signatories could no longer appear on stations managed by the state-owned French Broadcasting Service.\nIn 1961, as recognition for his work as a poet, Tzara was awarded the prestigious Taormina Prize. One of his final public activities took place in 1962, when he attended the International Congress on African Culture, organized by English curator Frank McEwen and held at the National Gallery in Salisbury, Southern Rhodesia. He died one year later in his Paris home, and was buried at the Cimeti\u00e8re du Montparnasse.\nLiterary contributions.\nIdentity issues.\nMuch critical commentary about Tzara surrounds the measure to which the poet identified with the national cultures which he represented. Paul Cernat notes that the association between Samyro and the Jancos, who were Jews, and their ethnic Romanian colleagues, was one sign of a cultural dialogue, in which \"the openness of Romanian environments toward artistic modernity\" was stimulated by \"young emancipated Jewish writers.\" Salomon Schulman, a Swedish researcher of Yiddish literature, argues that the combined influence of Yiddish folklore and Hasidic philosophy shaped European modernism in general and Tzara's style in particular, while American poet Andrei Codrescu speaks of Tzara as one in a Balkan line of \"absurdist writing\", which also includes the Romanians Urmuz, Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco and Emil Cioran. According to literary historian George C\u0103linescu, Samyro's early poems deal with \"the voluptuousness over the strong scents of rural life, which is typical among Jews compressed into ghettos.\"\nTzara himself used elements alluding to his homeland in his early Dadaist performances. His collaboration with Maja Kruscek at Zuntfhaus z\u00fcr Waag featured samples of African literature, to which Tzara added Romanian-language fragments. He is also known to have mixed elements of Romanian folklore, and to have sung the native suburban romanza \"La moar\u0103 la H\u00e2r\u021ba\" (\"At the Mill in H\u00e2r\u021ba\") during at least one staging for Cabaret Voltaire. Addressing the Romanian public in 1947, he claimed to have been captivated by \"the sweet language of Moldavian peasants\".\nTzara nonetheless rebelled against his birthplace and upbringing. His earliest poems depict provincial Moldavia as a desolate and unsettling place. In Cernat's view, this imagery was in common use among Moldavian-born writers who also belonged to the avant-garde trend, notably Benjamin Fondane and George Bacovia. Like in the cases of Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco and Fondane, Cernat proposes, Samyro sought self-exile to Western Europe as a \"modern, voluntarist\" means of breaking with \"the peripheral condition\", which may also serve to explain the pun he selected for a pseudonym. According to the same author, two important elements in this process were \"a maternal attachment and a break with paternal authority\", an \"Oedipus complex\" which he also argued was evident in the biographies of other Symbolist and avant-garde Romanian authors, from Urmuz to Mateiu Caragiale. Unlike Vinea and the \"Contimporanul\" group, Cernat proposes, Tzara stood for radicalism and insurgency, which would also help explain their impossibility to communicate. In particular, Cernat argues, the writer sought to emancipate himself from competing nationalisms, and addressed himself directly to the center of European culture, with Z\u00fcrich serving as a stage on his way to Paris. The 1916 \"Monsieur's Antipyrine's Manifesto\" featured a cosmopolitan appeal: \"DADA remains within the framework of European weaknesses, it's still shit, but from now on we want to shit in different colors so as to adorn the zoo of art with all the flags of all the consulates.\"\nWith time, Tristan Tzara came to be regarded by his Dada associates as an exotic character, whose attitudes were intrinsically linked with Eastern Europe. Early on, Ball referred to him and the Janco brothers as \"Orientals\". Hans Richter believed him to be a fiery and impulsive figure, having little in common with his German collaborators. According to Cernat, Richter's perspective seems to indicate a vision of Tzara having a \"Latin\" temperament. This type of perception also had negative implications for Tzara, particularly after the 1922 split within Dada. In the 1940s, Richard Huelsenbeck alleged that his former colleague had always been separated from other Dadaists by his failure to appreciate the legacy of \"German humanism\", and that, compared to his German colleagues, he was \"a barbarian\". In his polemic with Tzara, Breton also repeatedly placed stress on his rival's foreign origin.\nAt home, Tzara was occasionally targeted for his Jewishness, culminating in the ban enforced by the Ion Antonescu regime. In 1931, Const. I. Emilian, the first Romanian to write an academic study on the avant-garde, attacked him from a conservative and antisemitic position. He depicted Dadaists as \"Judaeo-Bolsheviks\" who corrupted Romanian culture, and included Tzara among the main proponents of \"literary anarchism\". Alleging that Tzara's only merit was to establish a literary fashion, while recognizing his \"formal virtuosity and artistic intelligence\", he claimed to prefer Tzara in his \"Simbolul\" stage. This perspective was deplored early on by the modernist critic Perpessicius. Nine years after Emilian's polemic text, fascist poet and journalist Radu Gyr published an article in \"Convorbiri Literare\", in which he attacked Tzara as a representative of the \"Judaic spirit\", of the \"foreign plague\" and of \"materialist-historical dialectics\".\nSymbolist poetry.\nTzara's earliest Symbolist poems, published in \"Simbolul\" during 1912, were later rejected by their author, who asked Sa\u0219a Pan\u0103 not to include them in editions of his works. The influence of French Symbolists on the young Samyro was particularly important, and surfaced in both his lyric and prose poems. Attached to Symbolist musicality at that stage, he was indebted to his \"Simbolul\" colleague Ion Minulescu and the Belgian Maurice Maeterlinck. Philip Beitchman argues that \"Tristan Tzara is one of the writers of the twentieth century who was most profoundly influenced by symbolism\u2014and utilized many of its methods and ideas in the pursuit of his own artistic and social ends.\" However, Cernat believes, the young poet was by then already breaking with the syntax of conventional poetry, and that, in subsequent experimental pieces, he progressively stripped his style of its Symbolist elements.\nDuring the 1910s, Samyro experimented with Symbolist imagery, in particular with the \"hanged man\" motif, which served as the basis for his poem \"Se sp\u00e2nzur\u0103 un om\" (\"A Man Hangs Himself\"), and which built on the legacy of similar pieces authored by Christian Morgenstern and Jules Laforgue. \"Se sp\u00e2nzur\u0103 un om\" was also in many ways similar to ones authored by his collaborators Adrian Maniu (\"Balada sp\u00e2nzuratului\", \"The Hanged Man's Ballad\") and Vinea (\"Visul sp\u00e2nzuratului\", \"The Hanged Man's Dream\"): all three poets, who were all in the process of discarding Symbolism, interpreted the theme from a tragicomic and iconoclastic perspective. These pieces also include \"Vacan\u021b\u0103 \u00een provincie\" (\"Provincial Holiday\") and the anti-war fragment \"Furtuna \u0219i c\u00e2ntecul dezertorului\" (\"The Storm and the Deserter's Song\"), which Vinea published in his \"Chemarea\". The series is seen by Cernat as \"the general rehearsal for the Dada adventure.\" The complete text of \"Furtuna \u0219i c\u00e2ntecul dezertorului\" was published at a later stage, after the missing text was discovered by Pan\u0103. At the time, he became interested in the free verse work of the American Walt Whitman, and his translation of Whitman's epic poem \"Song of Myself\", probably completed before World War I, was published by Alfred Hefter-Hidalgo in his magazine \"Versuri \u0219i Proz\u0103\" (1915).\nBeitchman notes that, throughout his life, Tzara used Symbolist elements against the doctrines of Symbolism. Thus, he argues, the poet did not cultivate a memory of historical events, \"since it deludes man into thinking that there was something when there was nothing.\" Cernat notes: \"That which essentially unifies, during [the 1910s], the poetic output of Adrian Maniu, Ion Vinea and Tristan Tzara is an acute awareness of literary conventions, a satiety [...] in respect to calophile literature, which they perceived as exhausted.\" In Beitchman's view, the revolt against cultivated beauty was a constant in Tzara's years of maturity, and his visions of social change continued to be inspired by Arthur Rimbaud and the Comte de Lautr\u00e9amont. According to Beitchman, Tzara uses the Symbolist message, \"the birthright [of humans] has been sold for a mess of porridge\", taking it \"into the streets, cabarets and trains where he denounces the deal and asks for his birthright back.\"\nCollaboration with Vinea.\nThe transition to a more radical form of poetry seems to have taken place in 1913\u20131915, during the periods when Tzara and Vinea were vacationing together. The pieces share a number of characteristics and subjects, and the two poets even use them to allude to one another (or, in one case, to Tzara's sister).\nIn addition to the lyrics were they both speak of provincial holidays and love affairs with local girls, both friends intended to reinterpret William Shakespeare's \"Hamlet\" from a modernist perspective, and wrote incomplete texts with this as their subject. However, Paul Cernat notes, the texts also evidence a difference in approach, with Vinea's work being \"meditative and melancholic\", while Tzara's is \"hedonistic\". Tzara often appealed to revolutionary and ironic images, portraying provincial and middle class environments as places of artificiality and decay, demystifying pastoral themes and evidencing a will to break free. His literature took a more radical perspective on life, and featured lyrics with subversive intent:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nIn his \"\u00censereaz\u0103\" (roughly, \"Night Falling\"), probably authored in Mangalia, Tzara writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nVinea's similar poem, written in Tuzla and named after that village, reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nCernat notes that \"Nocturn\u0103\" (\"Nocturne\") and \"\u00censereaz\u0103\" were the pieces originally performed at Cabaret Voltaire, identified by Hugo Ball as \"Rumanian poetry\", and that they were recited in Tzara's own spontaneous French translation. Although they are noted for their radical break with the traditional form of Romanian verse, Ball's diary entry of 5 February 1916, indicates that Tzara's works were still \"conservative in style\". In C\u0103linescu's view, they announce Dadaism, given that \"bypassing the relations which lead to a realistic vision, the poet associates unimaginably dissipated images that will surprise consciousness.\" In 1922, Tzara himself wrote: \"As early as 1914, I tried to strip the words of their proper meaning and use them in such a way as to give the verse a completely new, general, meaning [...].\"\nAlongside pieces depicting a Jewish cemetery in which graves \"crawl like worms\" on the edge of a town, chestnut trees \"heavy-laden like people returning from hospitals\", or wind wailing \"with all the hopelessness of an orphanage\", Samyro's poetry includes \"Veri\u0219oar\u0103, fat\u0103 de pension\", which, Cernat argues, displays \"playful detachment [for] the musicality of internal rhymes\". It opens with the lyrics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nThe G\u00e2rceni pieces were treasured by the moderate wing of the Romanian avant-garde movement. In contrast to his previous rejection of Dada, \"Contimporanul\" collaborator Benjamin Fondane used them as an example of \"pure poetry\", and compared them to the elaborate writings of French poet Paul Val\u00e9ry, thus recuperating them in line with the magazine's ideology.\nDada synthesis and \"simultaneism\".\nTzara the Dadaist was inspired by the contributions of his experimental modernist predecessors. Among them were the literary promoters of Cubism: in addition to Henri Barzun and Fernand Divoire, Tzara cherished the works of Guillaume Apollinaire. Despite Dada's condemnation of Futurism, various authors note the influence Filippo Tommaso Marinetti and his circle exercised on Tzara's group. In 1917, he was in correspondence with both Apollinaire and Marinetti. Traditionally, Tzara is also seen as indebted to the early avant-garde and black comedy writings of Romania's Urmuz.\nFor a large part, Dada focused on performances and satire, with shows that often had Tzara, Marcel Janco and Huelsenbeck for their main protagonists. Often dressed up as Tyrolian peasants or wearing dark robes, they improvised poetry sessions at the Cabaret Voltaire, reciting the works of others or their spontaneous creations, which were or pretended to be in Esperanto or M\u0101ori language. Bernard Gendron describes these soir\u00e9es as marked by \"heterogeneity and eclecticism\", and Richter notes that the songs, often punctuated by loud shrieks or other unsettling sounds, built on the legacy of noise music and Futurist compositions.\nWith time, Tristan Tzara merged his performances and his literature, taking part in developing Dada's \"simultaneist poetry\", which was meant to be read out loud and involved a collaborative effort, being, according to Hans Arp, the first instance of Surrealist automatism. Ball stated that the subject of such pieces was \"the value of the human voice.\" Together with Arp, Tzara and Walter Serner produced the German-language \"Die Hyperbel vom Krokodilcoiffeur und dem Spazierstock\" (\"The Hyperbole of the Crocodile's Hairdresser and the Walking-Stick\"), in which, Arp stated, \"the poet crows, curses, sighs, stutters, yodels, as he pleases. His poems are like Nature [where] a tiny particle is as beautiful and important as a star.\" Another noted simultaneist poem was \"L'Amiral cherche une maison \u00e0 louer\" (\"The Admiral Is Looking for a House to Rent\"), co-authored by Tzara, Marcel Janco and Huelsenbach.\nArt historian Roger Cardinal describes Tristan Tzara's Dada poetry as marked by \"extreme semantic and syntactic incoherence\". Tzara, who recommended destroying just as it is created, had devised a personal system for writing poetry, which implied a seemingly chaotic reassembling of words that had been randomly cut out of newspapers.\nDada and anti-art.\nThe Romanian writer also spent the Dada period issuing a long series of manifestos, which were often authored as prose poetry, and, according to Cardinal, were characterized by \"rumbustious tomfoolery and astringent wit\", which reflected \"the language of a sophisticated savage\". Huelsenbeck credited Tzara with having discovered in them the format for \"compress[ing] what we think and feel\", and, according to Hans Richter, the genre \"suited Tzara perfectly.\" Despite its production of seemingly theoretical works, Richter indicates, Dada lacked any form of program, and Tzara tried to perpetuate this state of affairs. His Dada manifesto of 1918 stated: \"Dada means nothing\", adding \"Thought is produced in the mouth.\" Tzara indicated: \"I am against systems; the most acceptable system is on principle to have none.\" In addition, Tzara, who once stated that \"logic is always false\", probably approved of Serner's vision of a \"final dissolution\". According to Philip Beitchman, a core concept in Tzara's thought was that \"as long as we do things the way we think we once did them we will be unable to achieve any kind of livable society.\"\nDespite adopting such anti-artistic principles, Richter argues, Tzara, like many of his fellow Dadaists, did not initially discard the mission of \"furthening the cause of art.\" He saw this evident in \"La Revue Dada 2\", a poem \"as exquisite as freshly-picked flowers\", which included the lyrics:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\n\"La Revue Dada 2\", which also includes the onomatopoeic line \"tralalalalalalalalalalala\", is one example where Tzara applies his principles of chance to sounds themselves. This sort of arrangement, treasured by many Dadaists, was probably connected with Apollinaire's calligrams, and with his announcement that \"Man is in search of a new language.\" C\u0103linescu proposed that Tzara willingly limited the impact of chance: taking as his example a short parody piece which depicts the love affair between cyclist and a Dadaist, which ends with their decapitation by a jealous husband, the critic notes that Tzara transparently intended to \"shock the bourgeois\". Late in his career, Huelsenbeck alleged that Tzara never actually applied the experimental methods he had devised.\nThe Dada series makes ample use of contrast, ellipses, ridiculous imagery and nonsensical verdicts. Tzara was aware that the public could find it difficult to follow his intentions, and, in a piece titled \"Le g\u00e9ant blanc l\u00e9preux du paysage\" (\"The White Leprous Giant in the Landscape\") even alluded to the \"skinny, idiotic, dirty\" reader who \"does not understand my poetry.\" He called some of his own poems \"lampisteries\", from a French word designating storage areas for light fixtures. The Lettrist poet Isidore Isou included such pieces in a succession of experiments inaugurated by Charles Baudelaire with the \"destruction of the anecdote for the form of the poem\", a process which, with Tzara, became \"destruction of the word for nothing\". According to American literary historian Mary Ann Caws, Tzara's poems may be seen as having an \"internal order\", and read as \"a simple spectacle, as creation complete in itself and completely obvious.\"\nPlays of the 1920s.\nTristan Tzara's first play, \"The Gas Heart\", dates from the final period of Paris Dada. Created with what Enoch Brater calls a \"peculiar verbal strategy\", it is a dialogue between characters called Ear, Mouth, Eye, Nose, Neck, and Eyebrow. They seem unwilling to actually communicate to each other and their reliance on proverbs and idiotisms willingly creates confusion between metaphorical and literal speech. The play ends with a dance performance that recalls similar devices used by the proto-Dadaist Alfred Jarry. The text culminates in a series of doodles and illegible words. Brater describes \"The Gas Heart\" as a \"parod[y] of theatrical conventions\".\nIn his 1924 play \"Handkerchief of Clouds\", Tzara explores the relation between perception, the subconscious and memory. Largely through exchanges between commentators who act as third parties, the text presents the tribulations of a love triangle (a poet, a bored woman, and her banker husband, whose character traits borrow the clich\u00e9s of conventional drama), and in part reproduces settings and lines from \"Hamlet\". Tzara mocks classical theater, which demands from characters to be inspiring, believable, and to function as a whole: \"Handkerchief of Clouds\" requires actors in the role of commentators to address each other by their real names, and their lines include dismissive comments on the play itself, while the protagonist, who in the end dies, is not assigned any name. Writing for \"Integral\", Tzara defined his play as a note on \"the relativity of things, sentiments and events.\" Among the conventions ridiculed by the dramatist, Philip Beitchman notes, is that of a \"privileged position for art\": in what Beitchman sees as a comment on Marxism, poet and banker are interchangeable capitalists who invest in different fields. Writing in 1925, Fondane rendered a pronouncement by Jean Cocteau, who, while commenting that Tzara was one of his \"most beloved\" writers and a \"great poet\", argued: \"\"Handkerchief of Clouds\" was poetry, and great poetry for that matter\u2014but not theater.\" The work was nonetheless praised by Ion C\u0103lug\u0103ru at \"Integral\", who saw in it one example that modernist performance could rely not just on props, but also on a solid text.\n\"The Approximate Man\" and later works.\nAfter 1929, with the adoption of Surrealism, Tzara's literary works discard much of their satirical purpose, and begin to explore universal themes relating to the human condition. According to Cardinal, the period also signified the definitive move from \"a studied inconsequentiality\" and \"unreadable gibberish\" to \"a seductive and fertile surrealist idiom.\" The critic also remarks: \"Tzara arrived at a mature style of transparent simplicity, in which disparate entities could be held together in a unifying vision.\" In a 1930 essay, Fondane had given a similar verdict: arguing that Tzara had infused his work with \"suffering\", had discovered humanity, and had become a \"clairvoyant\" among poets.\nThis period in Tzara's creative activity centers on \"The Approximate Man\", an epic poem which is reportedly recognized as his most accomplished contribution to French literature. While maintaining some of Tzara's preoccupation with language experimentation, it is mainly a study in social alienation and the search for an escape. Cardinal calls the piece \"an extended meditation on mental and elemental impulses [...] with images of stunning beauty\", while Breitchman, who notes Tzara's rebellion against the \"excess baggage of [man's] past and the notions [...] with which he has hitherto tried to control his life\", remarks his portrayal of poets as voices who can prevent human beings from destroying themselves with their own intellects. The goal is a new man who lets intuition and spontaneity guide him through life, and who rejects measure. One of the appeals in the text reads:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\nThe next stage in Tzara's career saw a merger of his literary and political views. His poems of the period blend a humanist vision with communist theses. The 1935 \"Grains et issues\", described by Beitchman as \"fascinating\", was a prose poem of social criticism connected with \"The Approximate Man\", expanding on the vision of a possible society, in which haste has been abandoned in favor of oblivion. The world imagined by Tzara abandons symbols of the past, from literature to public transportation and currency, while, like psychologists Sigmund Freud and Wilhelm Reich, the poet depicts violence as a natural means of human expression. People of the future live in a state which combines waking life and the realm of dreams, and life itself turns into revery. \"Grains et issues\" was accompanied by \"Personage d'insomnie\" (\"Personage of Insomnia\"), which went unpublished.\nCardinal notes: \"In retrospect, harmony and contact had been Tzara's goals all along.\" The post-World War II volumes in the series focus on political subjects related to the conflict. In his last writings, Tzara toned down experimentation, exercising more control over the lyrical aspects. He was by then undertaking a hermeutic research into the work of Goliards and Fran\u00e7ois Villon, whom he deeply admired.\nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nBeside the many authors who were attracted into Dada through his promotional activities, Tzara was able to influence successive generations of writers. This was the case in his homeland during 1928, when the first avant-garde manifesto issued by \"unu\" magazine, written by Sa\u0219a Pan\u0103 and Moldov, cited as its mentors Tzara, writers Breton, Ribemont-Dessaignes, Vinea, Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, and Tudor Arghezi, as well as artists Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i and Theo van Doesburg. One of the Romanian writers to claim inspiration from Tzara was Jacques G. Costin, who nevertheless offered an equally good reception to both Dadaism and Futurism, while Ilarie Voronca's \"Zodiac\" cycle, first published in France, is traditionally seen as indebted to \"The Approximate Man\". The Kabbalist and Surrealist author Marcel Avramescu, who wrote during the 1930s, also appears to have been directly inspired by Tzara's views on art. Other authors from that generation to have been inspired by Tzara were Polish Futurist writer Bruno Jasie\u0144ski, Japanese poet and Zen thinker Takahashi Shinkichi, and Chilean poet and Dadaist sympathizer Vicente Huidobro, who cited him as a precursor for his own \"Creacionismo\".\nAn immediate precursor of Absurdism, he was acknowledged as a mentor by Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco, who developed on his principles for his early essays of literary and social criticism, as well as in tragic farces such as \"The Bald Soprano\". Tzara's poetry influenced Samuel Beckett (who translated some of it into English); the Irish author's 1972 play \"Not I\" shares some elements with \"The Gas Heart\". In the United States, the Romanian author is cited as an influence on Beat Generation members. Beat writer Allen Ginsberg, who made his acquaintance in Paris, cites him among the Europeans who influenced him and William S. Burroughs. The latter also mentioned Tzara's use of chance in writing poetry as an early example of what became the cut-up technique, adopted by Brion Gysin and Burroughs himself. Gysin, who conversed with Tzara in the late 1950s, records the latter's indignation that Beat poets were \"going back over the ground we [Dadaists] covered in 1920\", and accuses Tzara of having consumed his creative energies into becoming a \"Communist Party bureaucrat\".\nAmong the late 20th-century writers who acknowledged Tzara as an inspiration are Jerome Rothenberg, Isidore Isou and Andrei Codrescu. The former Situationist Isou, whose experiments with sounds and poetry come in succession to Apollinaire and Dada, declared his Lettrism to be the last connection in the Charles Baudelaire-Tzara cycle, with the goal of arranging \"a nothing [...] for the creation of the anecdote.\" For a short period, Codrescu even adopted the pen name \"Tristan Tzara\". He recalled the impact of having discovered Tzara's work in his youth, and credited him with being \"the most important French poet after Rimbaud.\"\nIn retrospect, various authors describe Tzara's Dadaist shows and street performances as \"happenings\", with a word employed by post-Dadaists and Situationists, which was coined in the 1950s. Some also credit Tzara with having provided an ideological source for the development of rock music, including punk rock, punk subculture and post-punk. Tristan Tzara has inspired the songwriting technique of Radiohead, and is one of the avant-garde authors whose voices were mixed by DJ Spooky on his trip hop album \"Rhythm Science\". Romanian contemporary classical musician Cornel \u021a\u0103ranu set to music five of Tzara's poems, all of which date from the post-Dada period. \u021a\u0103ranu, Anatol Vieru and ten other composers contributed to the album \"La Cl\u00e9 de l'horizon\", inspired by Tzara's work.\nTributes and portrayals.\nIn France, Tzara's work was collected as \"Oeuvres compl\u00e8tes\" (\"Complete Works\"), of which the first volume saw print in 1975, and an international poetry award is named after him (\"Prix International de Po\u00e9sie Tristan Tzara\"). An international periodical titled \"Caietele Tristan Tzara\", edited by the Tristan Tzara Cultural-Literary Foundation, has been published in Moine\u0219ti since 1998.\nAccording to Paul Cernat, \"Aliluia\", one of the few avant-garde texts authored by Ion Vinea features a \"transparent allusion\" to Tristan Tzara. Vinea's fragment speaks of \"the Wandering Jew\", a character whom people notice because he sings \"La moar\u0103 la H\u00e2r\u021ba\", \"a suspicious song from Greater Romania.\" The poet is a character in Indian novelist Mulk Raj Anand's \"Thieves of Fire\", part four of his \"The Bubble\" (1984), as well as in \"The Prince of West End Avenue\", a 1994 book by the American Alan Isler. Rothenberg dedicated several of his poems to Tzara, as did the Neo-Dadaist Valery Oi\u0219teanu. Tzara's legacy in literature also covers specific episodes of his biography, beginning with Gertrude Stein's controversial memoir. One of his performances is enthusiastically recorded by Malcolm Cowley in his autobiographical book of 1934, \"Exile's Return\", and he is also mentioned in Harold Loeb's memoir \"The Way It Was\". Among his biographers is the French author Fran\u00e7ois Buot, who records some of the lesser-known aspects of Tzara's life.\nAt some point between 1915 and 1917, Tzara is believed to have played chess in a coffeehouse that was also frequented by Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin. While Richter himself recorded the incidental proximity of Lenin's lodging to the Dadaist milieu, no record exists of an actual conversation between the two figures. Andrei Codrescu believes that Lenin and Tzara did play against each other, noting that an image of their encounter would be \"the proper icon of the beginning of [modern] times.\" This meeting is mentioned as a fact in \"Harlequin at the Chessboard\", a poem by Tzara's acquaintance Kurt Schwitters. German playwright and novelist Peter Weiss, who has introduced Tzara as a character in his 1969 play about Leon Trotsky (\"Trotzki im Exil\"), recreated the scene in his 1975\u20131981 cycle \"The Aesthetics of Resistance\". The imagined episode also inspired much of Tom Stoppard's 1974 play \"Travesties\", which also depicts conversations between Tzara, Lenin, and the Irish modernist author James Joyce (who is also known to have resided in Z\u00fcrich after 1915). His role was notably played by David Westhead in the 1993 British production, and by Tom Hewitt in the 2005 American version.\nAlongside his collaborations with Dada artists on various pieces, Tzara himself was a subject for visual artists. Max Ernst depicts him as the only mobile character in the Dadaists' group portrait \"Au Rendez-vous des Amis\" (\"A Friends' Reunion\", 1922), while, in one of Man Ray's photographs, he is shown kneeling to kiss the hand of an androgynous Nancy Cunard. Years before their split, Francis Picabia used Tzara's calligraphed name in \"Mol\u00e9culaire\" (\"Molecular\"), a composition printed on the cover of \"391\". The same artist also completed his schematic portrait, which showed a series of circles connected by two perpendicular arrows. In 1949, Swiss artist Alberto Giacometti made Tzara the subject of one of his first experiments with lithography. Portraits of Tzara were also made by Greta Knutson, Robert Delaunay, and the Cubist painters M. H. Maxy and Lajos Tihanyi. As an homage to Tzara the performer, art rocker David Bowie adopted his accessories and mannerisms during a number of public appearances. In 1996, he was depicted on a series of Romanian stamps, and, the same year, a concrete and steel monument dedicated to the writer was erected in Moine\u0219ti.\nSeveral of Tzara's Dadaist editions had illustrations by Picabia, Janco and Hans Arp. In its 1925 edition, \"Handkerchief of Clouds\" featured etchings by Juan Gris, while his late writings \"Parler seul\", \"Le Signe de vie\", \"De m\u00e9moire d'homme\", \"Le Temps naissant\", and \"Le Fruit permis\" were illustrated with works by, respectively, Joan Mir\u00f3, Henri Matisse, Pablo Picasso, Nejad Devrim and Sonia Delaunay. Tzara was the subject of a 1949 eponymous documentary film directed by Danish filmmaker J\u00f8rgen Roos, and footage of him featured prominently in the 1953 production \"Les statues meurent aussi\" (\"Statues Also Die\"), jointly directed by Chris Marker and Alain Resnais.\nPosthumous controversies.\nThe many polemics which surrounded Tzara in his lifetime left traces after his death, and determine contemporary perceptions of his work. The controversy regarding Tzara's role as a founder of Dada extended into several milieus, and continued long after the writer died. Richter, who discusses the lengthy conflict between Huelsenbeck and Tzara over the issue of Dada foundation, speaks of the movement as being torn apart by \"petty jealousies\". In Romania, similar debates often involved the supposed founding role of Urmuz, who wrote his avant-garde texts before World War I, and Tzara's status as a communicator between Romania and the rest of Europe. Vinea, who claimed that Dada had been invented by Tzara in G\u00e2rceni ca. 1915 and thus sought to legitimize his own modernist vision, also saw Urmuz as the ignored precursor of radical modernism, from Dada to Surrealism. In 1931 the young, modernist literary critic Lucian Boz evidenced that he partly shared Vinea's perspective on the matter, crediting Tzara and Constantin Br\u00e2ncu\u0219i with having, each on his own, invented the avant-garde. Eug\u00e8ne Ionesco argued that \"before Dadaism there was Urmuzianism\", and, after World War II, sought to popularize Urmuz's work among aficionados of Dada. Rumors in the literary community had it that Tzara successfully sabotaged Ionesco's initiative to publish a French edition of Urmuz's texts, allegedly because the public could then question his claim to have initiated the avant-garde experiment in Romania and the world (the edition saw print in 1965, two years after Tzara's death).\nA more radical questioning of Tzara's influence came from Romanian essayist Petre Pandrea. In his personal diary, published long after he and Tzara had died, Pandrea depicted the poet as an opportunist, accusing him of adapting his style to political requirements, of dodging military service during World War I, and of being a \"Lumpenproletarian\". Pandrea's text, completed just after Tzara's visit to Romania, claimed that his founding role within the avant-garde was an \"illusion [...] which has swelled up like a multicolored balloon\", and denounced him as \"the Balkan provider of interlope odalisques, [together] with narcotics and a sort of scandalous literature.\" Himself an adherent to communism, Pandrea grew disillusioned with the ideology, and later became a political prisoner in Communist Romania. Vinea's own grudge probably shows up in his 1964 novel \"Lunatecii\", where Tzara is identifiable as \"Dr. Barbu\", a thick-hided charlatan.\nFrom the 1960s to 1989, after a period when it ignored or attacked the avant-garde movement, the Romanian communist regime sought to recuperate Tzara, in order to validate its newly adopted emphasis on nationalist and national communist tenets. In 1977, literary historian Edgar Papu, whose controversial theories were linked to \"protochronism\", which presumes that Romanians took precedence in various areas of world culture, mentioned Tzara, Urmuz, Ionesco and Isou as representatives of \"Romanian initiatives\" and \"road openers at a universal level.\" Elements of protochronism in this area, Paul Cernat argues, could be traced back to Vinea's claim that his friend had single-handedly created the worldwide avant-garde movement on the basis of models already present at home.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36886", "revid": "51064685", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36886", "title": "Rococo", "text": "18th-century artistic movement and style\nRococo, less commonly Roccoco ( , ; ), also known as Late Baroque, is an exceptionally ornamental and dramatic style of architecture, art, and decoration which combines asymmetry, scrolling curves, gilding, white and pastel colours, sculpted moulding, and \"trompe-l'\u0153il\" frescoes to create surprise and the illusion of motion and drama. It is often described as the final expression of the Baroque movement.\nOriginally known as the \u201cstyle Rocaille,\" Rococo began in France in the 1730s as a reaction against the more formal and geometric Louis XIV style. It soon spread to other parts of Europe, particularly northern Italy, Austria, southern Germany, Central Europe and Russia. It also came to influence other arts, particularly sculpture, furniture, silverware, glassware, painting, music, theatre, and literature. Although originally a secular style primarily used for interiors of private residences, the Rococo had a spiritual aspect to it which led to its widespread use in church interiors, particularly in Central Europe, Portugal, and South America.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"rococo\" was first used as a humorous variation of the word \"rocaille\" by Pierre-Maurice Quays (1777\u20131803). Rocaille was originally a method of decoration utilizing pebbles, seashells, and cement, which from the Renaissance had often been used to decorate grottoes and fountains. In the late 17th and early 18th century, rocaille became the term for a decorative motif that appeared in the late Louis XIV style in the form of a seashell interlaced with acanthus leaves. In 1736, the designer and jeweler Jean Mondon published the \"Premier Livre de forme rocquaille et cartel\", a collection of designs for ornaments of furniture and interior decoration. It was the first appearance in print of the term \"rocaille\" to designate the style. The carved or moulded seashell motif was combined with palm leaves or twisting vines to decorate doorways, furniture, wall panels, and other architectural elements.\nThe term \"rococo\" was first used in print in 1825 to describe decoration which was \"out of style and old-fashioned.\" It was used in 1828 for decoration \"which belonged to the style of the 18th century, overloaded with twisting ornaments.\" In 1829, the author Stendhal described rococo as \"the rocaille style of the 18th century.\"\nIn the 19th century, the term was used to describe architecture or music which was excessively ornamental. Since the mid-19th century, the term has been accepted by art historians. While there is still some debate about the historical significance of the style, Rococo is now often considered a distinct period in the development of European art.\nCharacteristics.\nRococo features exuberant decoration, with an abundance of curves, counter-curves, undulations, and elements modeled on nature. The exteriors of Rococo buildings are often simple, while the interiors are dominated by ornamentation. The style was highly theatrical, designed to create an impression of surprise, awe, and wonder on first view. Floor plans of churches were often complex, featuring interlocking ovals. In palaces, grand stairways became centrepieces, offering different viewpoints of the decoration. The main ornaments of Rococo include asymmetrical shells, acanthus and other leaves, birds, bouquets of flowers, fruit, musical instruments, angels, and Chinoiserie (pagodas, dragons, monkeys, bizarre flowers, and Chinese people).\nThe style often integrated moulded stucco, wood carving, and \"quadratura\", or illusionist ceiling paintings, which were designed to give the impression that those entering the room were looking up at the sky, with cherubs and other figures gazing down at them. Materials used included stucco that had been either painted or left white, combinations of different coloured woods (usually oak, beech, or walnut), lacquered wood in the Japanese style, gilded bronze, and marble.\nDifferences between Baroque and Rococo.\nRococo tends to have the following characteristics, which Baroque does not:\nFrance.\nThe \"Rocaille\" style, or French Rococo, appeared in Paris during the reign of Louis XV, and flourished between about 1723 and 1759. The characteristics of French Rococo include exceptional artistry and the use of vegetal forms (vines, leaves, flowers) intertwined in complex designs. The style was used particularly in salons, a new type of room designed to impress and entertain guests, the most prominent example being the salon of the Princess in H\u00f4tel de Soubise in Paris, designed by Germain Boffrand and Charles-Joseph Natoire between 1735 and 1740.\nFurniture from the era also features the sinuous curves and vegetal designs characteristic of the style, especially in the complex frames made for mirrors and paintings, which were sculpted in plaster and often gilded. The leading furniture designers and craftsmen in the style included Juste-Aurele Meissonier, Charles Cressent, and Nicolas Pineau.\nFrench Rococo never achieved the extravagance of the style seen in Bavaria, Austria, or Italy. Lasting until the mid-18th century, the discoveries of Roman antiquities at Herculaneum in 1738 and Pompeii in 1748 turned French architecture in the direction of the more symmetrical and less flamboyant neo-classicism.\nItaly.\nArtists in Italy, particularly Venice, produced their own version of the Rococo style. Venetian commodes imitated the curving lines and carved ornaments of the French Rocaille, but with a particular Venetian variation; the pieces were painted\u2014often with landscapes, flowers, scenes from Guardi or other painters, or Chinoiserie\u2014against a blue or green background, matching the colours of the Venetian school of painters whose work decorated salons.\nNotable decorative painters included Giovanni Battista Crosato, who painted the ballroom ceiling of the Ca' Rezzonico in the quadraturo manner, and Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, who painted ceilings and murals in both churches and palazzos. Tiepolo travelled to Germany with his son from 1750 to 1753, decorating the ceilings of the W\u00fcrzburg Residence, one of the major landmarks of Bavarian Rococo. Another celebrated Venetian painter was Giovanni Battista Piazzetta, who painted several notable church ceilings.\nVenetian Rococo also featured exceptional glassware, particularly Murano glass, which was often engraved and coloured, and was exported across Europe. Works included multicolour chandeliers and mirrors with extremely ornate frames.\nSouthern Germany.\nThe Rococo decorative style reached its summit in southern Germany and Austria from the 1730s until the 1770s. There it dominates the church landscape to this day and is deeply anchored in popular culture. It was first introduced from France through the publications and works of French architects and decorators, including sculptor Claude III Audran, interior designer Gilles-Marie Oppenordt, architect Germain Boffrand, sculptor Jean Mondon, and draftsman and engraver Pierre Lepautre. Their work had an important influence on the German Rococo style, but does not reach the extravagance of buildings in southern Germany.\nGerman architects adapted the Rococo style by making it far more asymmetrical and ornate than the original French. The German style was characterized by an explosion of forms that cascaded down the walls. It featured molding formed into curves and counter-curves, twisting and turning patterns, and stucco foliage which seemed to be creeping up the walls and across the ceiling. The decoration was often gilded or silvered to give it contrast with the white or pale pastel walls.\nOne of the first Rococo buildings in Germany, the pavilion of Amalienburg in Munich (1734\u20131739), was created by the Belgian-born architect and designer Fran\u00e7ois de Cuvilli\u00e9s, who was inspired by the pavilions of the Grand Trianon and the Ch\u00e2teau de Marly in France. It was built as a hunting lodge, with a platform on the roof for shooting pheasants. The interior Hall of Mirrors by painter and stucco sculptor Johann Baptist Zimmermann is far more elaborate than any French Rococo.\nAnother notable example of early German Rococo is the W\u00fcrzburg Residence (1720\u20131744), commissioned by Prince-Bishop Johann Philipp Franz von Sch\u00f6nborn. Early in the palace's construction, court architect Balthasar Neumann travelled to Paris and consulted with the French rocaille decorative artists Germain Boffrand and Robert de Cotte. While the exterior of the palace is in the more sober Baroque style, the interior, particularly the stairways and ceilings, is much more extravagant. Neumann described the interior of the residence as \"a theatre of light.\" From 1750\u20131753, the Italian Rococo painter Giovanni Battista Tiepolo was imported to create a mural over the top of the three-level ceremonial stairway. Neumann also designed the iconic Rococo stairway at Augustusburg Castle in Br\u00fchl (1725\u20131768), which leads visitors up through a fantasy of painting, sculpture, and ironwork, with surprising views at every turn.\nIn the 1740s and 1750s, a number of pilgrimage churches were constructed in Bavaria with interiors decorated in a distinctive variant of Rococo style. One of the most notable examples is the Wieskirche (1745\u20131754) designed by Dominikus Zimmermann. Like most Bavarian pilgrimage churches, the exterior is very simple, with pastel walls and little ornament. Entering the church, the visitor encounters an astonishing harmony of art and form. The oval-shaped sanctuary, preceded to the west by a semicircular antechamber, fills the church with light from all sides. The white walls are contrasted with columns of blue and pink stucco in the choir, and the domed ceiling is painted in the appearance of an open sky, across which, angels fly. Other notable Bavarian pilgrimage churches include the Basilica of the Fourteen Holy Helpers by Balthasar Neumann (1743\u20131772), and Ottobeuren Abbey (1748\u20131766) by Johann Michael Fischer, which features, like much of German Rococo architecture, a remarkable contrast between the regularity of its facade and the overabundance of decoration in its interior.\nEngland.\nIn Great Britain, rococo had less influence on design and the decorative arts than in continental Europe, although its influence was still felt in such areas as silverwork, porcelain, and furniture.\nThroughout the early 18th-century, English furniture followed the neoclassical Palladian model under designer William Kent, who designed for Lord Burlington and other important patrons of the arts. As a result, Rococo was slow to arrive in England, first appearing in the 1730s through the work of immigrant artists and Huguenot refugees from France, including the silversmith Paul de Lamerie. The St Martin's Lane Academy, founded by William Hogarth in 1735, was also integral to introducing Rococo style to designers and artists in England.\nThe Rococo flourished in England between 1740 and 1770. In an effort to compete with imported French goods, furniture designers developed a distinctly British style of Rococo most commonly used in woodcarving. The most influential of these designers was Thomas Chippendale, whose 1754 book \"The Gentleman and Cabinet Maker's Director\", a catalogue of designs for rococo, \"chinoiserie,\" and Gothic furniture, achieved wide popularity. Unlike French designers, Chippendale did not employ marquetry or inlays in his furniture. The predominant designers of inlaid furniture were Vile and Cob, the cabinet-makers for King George III. Another important figure in British furniture was Thomas Johnson, who in 1761, published a catalogue of Rococo furniture designs. This included furnishings based on rather fantastic Chinese and Indian motifs, including a canopy bed crowned by a Chinese pagoda (now in the Victoria and Albert Museum).\nAnother notable figure of the British Rococo is the silversmith Charles Friedrich Kandler.\nRussia.\nThe Russian rococo style was introduced largely by Empress Elisabeth and Catherine the Great, during the eighteenth century by court architects such as Francesco Bartolomeo Rastrelli.\nRastrelli's work at palaces such as the Winter Palace in Saint Petersburg and the Catherine Palace in Tsarskoye Selo incorporated many features of western European rococo architecture, including grand rooms ornamented with gold leaf, mirrors, and large windows for natural light on the interiors, and soft pastel colours framed with large hooded windows and cornices on the exteriors featuring rocaille motifs, such as asymmetrical shells and rocks. Plafonds often featured rococo scrollwork surrounding allegorical paintings of ancient Greek and Roman gods and goddesses. Flooring was often inlaid with parquetry formed from different woods to create elaborate designs in the woodwork.\nRussian orthodox church architecture was also heavily influenced by rococo designs during the eighteenth century, often featuring a square Greek cross design with four equidistant wings. Exteriors were painted in light pastel colours such as blues and pinks, and bell towers were often topped with gilded onion domes.\nFrederician Rococo.\nFrederician Rococo is a form of Rococo which developed in Prussia during the reign of Frederick the Great and combined influences from France, Germany (especially Saxony) and the Netherlands. Its most famous adherent was the architect Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff. Furthermore, the painter Antoine Pesne and even King Frederick himself influenced Knobelsdorff's designs. Famous buildings in the Frederician style include Sanssouci Palace, the Potsdam City Palace, and parts of Charlottenburg Palace.\nDecline and end.\nThe art of Fran\u00e7ois Boucher and other painters of the period, with its emphasis on decorative mythology and gallantry, soon inspired a reaction, and a demand for more \"noble\" themes. While the Rococo continued in Germany and Austria, the French Academy in Rome began to teach the classic style. This was confirmed by the nomination of Jean Fran\u00e7ois de Troy as director of the academy in 1738, and then in 1751 by Charles-Joseph Natoire.\nMadame de Pompadour, the mistress of Louis XV contributed to the decline of the Rococo style. In 1750 she sent her brother, Abel-Fran\u00e7ois Poisson de Vandi\u00e8res, on a two-year mission to study artistic and archeological developments in Italy. He was accompanied by several artists, including the engraver Charles-Nicolas Cochin and the architect Soufflot. They returned to Paris with a passion for classical art. Vandi\u00e8res became the Marquis of Marigny, and was named director general of the King's Buildings. He turned official French architecture toward the neoclassical. Cochin became an important art critic; he denounced the \"petit style\" of Boucher, and called for a grand style with a new emphasis on antiquity and nobility in the academies of painting and architecture.\nThe beginning of the end for Rococo came in the early 1760s as figures such as Voltaire and Jacques-Fran\u00e7ois Blondel began to voice their criticism of the superficiality and degeneracy of the art. Blondel decried the \"ridiculous jumble of shells, dragons, reeds, palm-trees and plants\" in contemporary interiors.\nBy 1785, Rococo had passed out of fashion in France, replaced by the order and seriousness of Neoclassical artists such as Jacques-Louis David. In Germany, late 18th-century Rococo was ridiculed as \"Zopf und Per\u00fccke\" (\"pigtail and periwig\"), and this phase is sometimes referred to as \"Zopfstil\". Rococo remained popular in certain German provincial states and in Italy, until the second phase of neoclassicism, \"Empire style\", arrived with Napoleonic governments and swept Rococo away.\nFurniture and decoration.\nThe ornamental style called \"rocaille\" emerged in France between 1710 and 1750, mostly during the regency and reign of Louis XV; the style was also called \"Louis Quinze\". Its principal characteristics were picturesque detail, curves and counter-curves, asymmetry, and a theatrical exuberance. On the walls of new Paris salons, the twisting and winding designs, usually made of gilded or painted stucco, wound around the doorways and mirrors like vines. One of the earliest examples was the H\u00f4tel Soubise in Paris (1704\u20131705), with its famous oval salon decorated with paintings by Boucher, and Charles-Joseph Natoire.\nThe best known French furniture designer of the period was Juste-Aur\u00e8le Meissonnier (1695\u20131750), who was also a sculptor, painter. and goldsmith for the royal household. He held the title of official designer to the Chamber and Cabinet of Louis XV. His work is well known today because of the enormous number of engravings made of his work which popularized the style throughout Europe. He designed works for the royal families of Saxony and Portugal.\nItaly was another place where the Rococo flourished, both in its early and later phases. Craftsmen in Rome, Milan and Venice all produced lavishly decorated furniture and decorative items.\nThe sculpted decoration included fleurettes, palmettes, seashells, and foliage, carved in wood. The most extravagant rocaille forms were found in the consoles, tables designed to stand against walls. The Commodes, or chests, which had first appeared under Louis XIV, were richly decorated with rocaille ornament made of gilded bronze. They were made by master craftsmen including Jean-Pierre Latz and also featured marquetry of different-coloured woods, sometimes placed in draughtsboard cubic patterns, made with light and dark woods. The period also saw the arrival of Chinoiserie, often in the form of lacquered and gilded commodes, called \"falcon de Chine\" of \"Vernis Martin\", after the ebenist who introduced the technique to France. Ormolu, or gilded bronze, was used by master craftsmen including Jean-Pierre Latz. Latz made a particularly ornate clock mounted atop a cartonnier for Frederick the Great for his palace in Potsdam. Pieces of imported Chinese porcelain were often mounted in ormolu (gilded bronze) rococo settings for display on tables or consoles in salons. Other craftsmen imitated Japanese lacquered furniture, and produced commodes with Japanese motifs.\nBritish Rococo tended to be more restrained. Thomas Chippendale's furniture designs kept the curves and feel, but stopped short of the French heights of whimsy. The most successful exponent of British Rococo was probably Thomas Johnson, a gifted carver and furniture designer working in London in the mid-18th century.\nPainting.\nElements of the \"Rocaille\" style appeared in the work of some French painters, including a taste for the picturesque in details; curves and counter-curves; and dissymmetry which replaced the movement of the baroque with exuberance, though the French \"rocaille\" never reached the extravagance of the Germanic rococo. The leading proponent was Antoine Watteau, particularly in \"The Embarkation for Cythera\" (1717), Louvre, in a genre called \"F\u00eate galante\" depicting scenes of young nobles gathered together to celebrate in a pastoral setting. Watteau died in 1721 at the age of thirty-seven, but his work continued to have influence through the rest of the century. A version of Watteau's painting titled \"Pilgrimage to Cythera\" was purchased by Frederick the Great of Prussia in 1752 or 1765 to decorate his palace of Charlottenburg in Berlin.\nThe successor of Watteau and the \"F\u00e9te Galante\" in decorative painting was Fran\u00e7ois Boucher (1703\u20131770), the favorite painter of Madame de Pompadour. His work included the sensual \"Toilette de Venus\" (1746), which became one of the best known examples of the style. Boucher participated in all of the genres of the time, designing tapestries, models for porcelain sculpture, set decorations for the Paris Opera and \"Op\u00e9ra-Comique\", and decor for the Fair of Saint-Laurent. Other important painters of the \"F\u00eate Galante\" style included Nicolas Lancret and Jean-Baptiste Pater. The style particularly influenced Fran\u00e7ois Lemoyne, who painted the lavish decoration of the ceiling of the Salon of Hercules at the Palace of Versailles, completed in 1735. Paintings with f\u00e9tes gallant and mythological themes by Boucher, Pierre-Charles Tr\u00e9moli\u00e8res and Charles-Joseph Natoire decorated the famous salon of the H\u00f4tel Soubise in Paris (1735\u20131740). Other Rococo painters include: Jean Fran\u00e7ois de Troy (1679\u20131752), Jean-Baptiste van Loo (1685\u20131745), his two sons Louis-Michel van Loo (1707\u20131771) and Charles-Am\u00e9d\u00e9e-Philippe van Loo (1719\u20131795), his younger brother Charles-Andr\u00e9 van Loo (1705\u20131765), Nicolas Lancret (1690\u20131743), and Jean Honor\u00e9 Fragonard (1732\u20131806).\nIn Austria and Southern Germany, Italian painting had the largest effect on the Rococo style. The Venetian painter Giovanni Battista Tiepolo, assisted by his son, Giovanni Domenico Tiepolo, was invited to paint frescoes for the W\u00fcrzburg Residence (1720\u20131744). The most prominent painter of Bavarian rococo churches was Johann Baptist Zimmermann, who painted the ceiling of the Wieskirche (1745\u20131754).\nSculpture.\nRococo sculpture was theatrical, sensual and dynamic, giving a sense of movement in every direction. It was most commonly found in the interiors of churches, usually closely integrated with painting and the architecture. Religious sculpture followed the Italian baroque style, as exemplified in the theatrical altarpiece of the Karlskirche in Vienna.\nEarly Rococo or Rocaille sculpture in France sculpture was lighter and offered more movement than the classical style of Louis XIV. It was encouraged in particular by Madame de Pompadour, mistress of Louis XV, who commissioned many works for her chateaux and gardens. The sculptor Edm\u00e9 Bouchardon represented Cupid engaged in carving his darts of love from the club of Hercules. Rococo figures also crowded the later fountains at Versailles, such as the Fountain of Neptune by Lambert-Sigisbert Adam and Nicolas-Sebastien Adam (1740). Based on their success at Versailles, they were invited to Prussia by Frederick the Great to create fountain sculpture for Sanssouci Park, Prussia (1740s).\n\u00c9tienne-Maurice Falconet (1716\u20131791) was another leading French sculptor during the period. Falconet was most famous for his Bronze Horseman statue of Peter the Great in St. Petersburg, but he also created a series of smaller works for wealthy collectors, which could be reproduced in a series in terracotta or cast in bronze. The French sculptors, Jean-Louis Lemoyne, Jean-Baptiste Lemoyne, Louis-Simon Boizot, Michel Clodion, Lambert-Sigisbert Adam and Jean-Baptiste Pigalle all produced sculpture in series for collectors.\nIn Italy, Antonio Corradini was among the leading sculptors of the Rococo style. A Venetian, he travelled around Europe, working for Peter the Great in St. Petersburg, for the courts in Austria and Naples. He preferred sentimental themes and made several skilled works of women with faces covered by veils, one of which is now in the Louvre.\nThe most elaborate examples of rococo sculpture were found in Spain, Austria and southern Germany, in the decoration of palaces and churches. The sculpture was closely integrated with the architecture; it was impossible to know where one stopped and the other began. In the Belvedere Palace in Vienna, (1721\u20131722), the vaulted ceiling of the Hall of the Atlantes is held up on the shoulders of muscular figures designed by Johann Lukas von Hildebrandt. The portal of the Palace of the Marqu\u00e9s de Dos Aguas in Valencia (1715\u20131776) was completely drenched in sculpture carved in marble, from designs by Hipolito Rovira Brocandel.\nThe \"El Transparente\" altar, in the major chapel of Toledo Cathedral is a towering sculpture of polychrome marble and gilded stucco, combined with paintings, statues and symbols. It was made by Narciso Tom\u00e9 (1721\u20131732), Its design allows light to pass through, and in changing light it seems to move.\nPorcelain.\nA new form of small-scale sculpture appeared, the porcelain figure, or small group of figures, initially replacing sugar sculptures on grand dining room tables, but soon popular for placing on mantelpieces and furniture. The number of European factories grew steadily through the century, and some made porcelain that the expanding middle classes could afford. The amount of colourful overglaze decoration used on them also increased. They were usually modelled by artists who had trained in sculpture. Common subjects included figures from the commedia dell'arte, city street vendors, lovers and figures in fashionable clothes, and pairs of birds.\nJohann Joachim K\u00e4ndler was the most important modeller of Meissen porcelain, the earliest European factory, which remained the most important until about 1760. The Swiss-born German sculptor Franz Anton Bustelli produced a wide variety of colourful figures for the Nymphenburg Porcelain Manufactory in Bavaria, which were sold throughout Europe. The French sculptor \u00c9tienne-Maurice Falconet (1716 \u2013 1791) followed this example. While also making large-scale works, he became director of the Sevres Porcelain manufactory and produced small-scale works, usually about love and gaiety, for production in series.\nMusic.\nA Rococo period existed in music history, although it is not as well known as the earlier Baroque and later Classical forms. The Rococo music style itself developed out of baroque music both in France, where the new style was referred to as \"style galant\" (\"gallant\" or \"elegant\" style), and in Germany, where it was referred to as \"empfindsamer Stil\" (\"sensitive style\"). It can be characterized as light, intimate music with extremely elaborate and refined forms of ornamentation. The style's main proponents were Jean Philippe Rameau, Fran\u00e7ois Couperin and Louis-Claude Daquin in France; Georg Philipp Telemann, Johann Adolph Hasse, Johann Schobert, Johann Joachim Quantz, Carl Friedrich Abel, C. P. E. Bach and J. C. Bach, two sons of J. S. Bach, in Germany; Georg Christoph Wagenseil, Georg Matthias Monn and Leopold Mozart in Austria; Giovanni Battista Sammartini, Giovanni Battista Martini and Baldassare Galuppi in Italy; Thomas Arne, William Boyce and John Stanley in England.\nIn the second half of the 18th century, a reaction against the Rococo style occurred, primarily against its perceived overuse of ornamentation and decoration. Led by Christoph Willibald Gluck, this reaction ushered in the Classical era. By the early 19th century, Catholic opinion had turned against the suitability of the style for ecclesiastical contexts because it was \"in no way conducive to sentiments of devotion\".\nRussian composer of the Romantic era Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky wrote The \"Variations on a Rococo Theme\", Op. 33, for cello and orchestra in 1877. Although the theme is not Rococo in origin, it is written in Rococo style.\nFashion.\nRococo fashion was based on extravagance, elegance, refinement and decoration. Women's fashion of the seventeenth-century was contrasted by the fashion of the eighteenth-century, which was ornate and sophisticated, the true style of Rococo. \nThese fashions spread beyond the royal court into the salons and caf\u00e9s of the ascendant bourgeoisie. The exuberant, playful, elegant style of decoration and design that we now call 'Rococo' was then known as \"le style rocaille, le style moderne, le gout.\"\nA style that appeared in the early eighteenth-century was the \"robe volante\", a flowing gown, that became popular towards the end of King Louis XIV's reign. This gown had the features of a bodice with large pleats flowing down the back to the ground over a rounded petticoat. The colour palette was rich, dark fabrics accompanied by elaborate, heavy design features. After the death of Louis XIV the clothing styles began to change. The fashion took a turn to a lighter, more frivolous style, transitioning from the baroque period to the well-known style of Rococo. The later period was known for their pastel colours, more revealing frocks, and the plethora of frills, ruffles, bows, and lace as trims. Shortly after the typical women's Rococo gown was introduced, \"robe \u00e0 la Fran\u00e7aise,\" a gown with a tight bodice that had a low cut neckline, usually with a large ribbon bows down the centre front, wide panniers, and was lavishly trimmed in large amounts of lace, ribbon, and flowers.\nThe \"Watteau pleats\" also became more popular, named after the painter Jean-Antoine Watteau, who painted the details of the gowns down to the stitches of lace and other trimmings with immense accuracy. Later, the \"'pannier'\" and \"'mantua\"' became fashionable around 1718. They were wide hoops under the dress to extend the hips out sideways and they soon became a staple in formal wear. This gave the Rococo period the iconic dress of wide hips combined with the large amount of decoration on the garments. Wide panniers were worn for special occasions, and could reach up to in diameter, and smaller hoops were worn for the everyday settings. These features originally came from seventeenth-century Spanish fashion, known as \"guardainfante\", initially designed to hide the pregnant stomach, then reimagined later as the pannier. 1745 became the Golden Age of the Rococo with the introduction of a more exotic, oriental culture in France called \"a la turque\". This was made popular by Louis XV's mistress, Madame de Pompadour, who commissioned the artist, Charles-Andr\u00e9 van Loo, to paint her as a Turkish sultana.\nIn the 1760s, a style of less formal dresses emerged and one of these was the \"polonaise\", with inspiration taken from Poland. It was shorter than the French dress, allowing the underskirt and ankles to be seen, which made it easier to move around in. Another dress that came into fashion was the \"robe a l'anglais\", which included elements inspired by the males' fashion; a short jacket, broad lapels and long sleeves. It also had a snug bodice, a full skirt without panniers but still a little long in the back to form a small train, and often some type of lace kerchief worn around the neck. Another piece was the 'redingote', halfway between a cape and an overcoat.\nAccessories were also important to all women during this time, as they added to the opulence and the decor of the body to match their gowns. At any official ceremony ladies were required to cover their hands and arms with gloves if their clothes were sleeveless.\nLiterature.\nIn literature the term is \"unhelpfully vague, but usually suggests a cheerful lightness and intimacy of tone, and an elegant playfulness.\" Principal Rococo literary genres were small forms, such as erotic light poetry ( or \"po\u00e9sie fugitive\"), sonnet, madrigal and other songs, pastoral, fairy tail, novella, but there were also long narrative poems, for example, Christoph Martin Wieland's German-language masterpiece \"Oberon\".\nPredominantly an 18th-century French literature style, influenced by the 17th-century \"Pr\u00e9cieuses\" school, is represented by Anne Claude de Caylus, the author of the \"Art of Love\" P. J. Bernard, Alexandre Masson de Pezay (the narrative poem \"Z\u00e9lis' Bathing\"), Abb\u00e9 de Favre (the poem \"Les quatre heures de la toilette des dames\"), \u00c9variste de Parny, Jean-Baptiste Louvet de Couvray, and other writers. The Rococo had also followers in Italy (Paolo Rolli, Pietro Metastasio) and Germany (Friedrich von Hagedorn, Johann Wilhelm Ludwig Gleim, Johann Uz,\nJohann Nikolaus G\u00f6tz), and to a lesser extent, within English and Russian (Ippolit Bogdanovich) writings.\nNotes and citations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36887", "revid": "6104108", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36887", "title": "1493", "text": "Calendar year\nYear 1493 (MCDXCIII) was a common year starting on Tuesday of the Julian calendar.\nEvents.\n&lt;onlyinclude&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36889", "revid": "33788190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36889", "title": "IOM", "text": "IOM may refer to:\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36891", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36891", "title": "Silicate", "text": "Any polyatomic anion containing silicon and oxygen\nA silicate is any member of a family of polyatomic anions consisting of silicon and oxygen, usually with the general formula [SiO4\u2212\"x\"(4\u22122\"x\")\u2212]\"n\", where 0 \u2264 \"x\" &lt; 2. The family includes orthosilicate (\"x\" = 0), metasilicate (\"x\" = 1), and pyrosilicate (\"x\" = 0.5, \"n\" = 2). The name is also used for any salt of such anions, such as sodium metasilicate; or any ester containing the corresponding chemical group, such as tetramethyl orthosilicate. The name \"silicate\" is sometimes extended to any anions containing silicon, even if they do not fit the general formula or contain other atoms besides oxygen; such as hexafluorosilicate . Most commonly, silicates are encountered as silicate minerals.\nFor diverse manufacturing, technological, and artistic needs, silicates are versatile materials, both natural (such as granite, gravel, and garnet) and artificial (such as Portland cement, ceramics, glass, and waterglass).\nStructural principles.\nIn most silicates, a silicon atom occupies the center of an idealized tetrahedron whose corners are four oxygen atoms, connected to it by single covalent bonds according to the octet rule. The oxygen atoms, which bear some negative charge, link to other cations (Mn+). This Si-O-M-O-Si linkage is strong and rigid, which properties are manifested in the rock-like silicates. The silicates can be classified according to the length and crosslinking of the silicate anions.\nIsolated silicates.\nIsolated orthosilicate anions have the formula SiO44\u2212. A common mineral in this group is olivine ().\nTwo or more silicon atoms can share oxygen atoms in various ways, to form more complex anions, such as pyrosilicate Si2O76\u2212.\nChains.\nWith two shared oxides bound to each silicon, cyclic or polymeric structures can result. The cyclic metasilicate ring Si6O1812\u2212 is a hexamer of SiO32-. Polymeric silicate anions of can exist also as long chains.\nIn single-chain silicates, which are a type of inosilicate, tetrahedra link to form a chain by sharing two oxygen atoms each. A common mineral in this group is pyroxene.\nDouble-chain silicates, the other category of inosilicates, occur when tetrahedra form a double chain (not always but mostly) by sharing two or three oxygen atoms each. Common minerals for this group are amphiboles.\nSheets.\nIn this group, known as phyllosilicates, tetrahedra all share three oxygen atoms each and in turn link to form two-dimensional sheets. This structure does lead to minerals in this group having one strong cleavage plane. Micas fall into this group. Both muscovite and biotite have very weak layers that can be peeled off in sheets.\nFramework.\nIn a framework silicate, known as a tectosilicate, each tetrahedron shares all 4 oxygen atoms with its neighbours, forming a 3D structure. Quartz and feldspars are in this group.\nSilicates with non-tetrahedral silicon.\nAlthough the tetrahedron is a common coordination geometry for silicon(IV) compounds, silicon may also occur with higher coordination numbers. For example, in the anion hexafluorosilicate SiF62\u2212, the silicon atom is surrounded by six fluorine atoms in an octahedral arrangement. This structure is also seen in the hexahydroxysilicate anion Si(OH)62- that occurs in thaumasite, a mineral found rarely in nature but sometimes observed among other calcium silicate hydrates artificially formed in cement and concrete structures submitted to a severe sulfate attack in argillaceous grounds containing oxidized pyrite.\nAt very high pressure, such as exists in the majority of the Earth's rock, even SiO2 adopts the six-coordinated octahedral geometry in the mineral stishovite, a dense polymorph of silica found in the lower mantle of the Earth and also formed by shock during meteorite impacts.\nChemical properties.\nSilicates with alkali cations and small or chain-like anions, such as sodium ortho- and metasilicate, are fairly soluble in water. They form several solid hydrates when crystallized from solution. Soluble sodium silicates and mixtures thereof, known as waterglass are important industrial and household chemicals. Silicates of non-alkali cations, or with sheet and tridimensional polymeric anions, generally have negligible solubility in water at normal conditions.\nReactions.\nSilicates are generally inert chemically. Hence they are common minerals. Their resiliency also recommends their use as building materials.\nWhen treated with calcium oxides and water, silicate minerals form Portland cement.\nEquilibria involving hydrolysis of silicate minerals are difficult to study. The chief challenge is the very low solubility of SiO44- and its various protonated forms. Such equilibria are relevant to the processes occurring on geological time scales. Some plants excrete ligands that dissolve silicates, a step in biomineralization.\nCatechols can depolymerize SiO2\u2014a component of silicates with ionic structures like orthosilicate (SiO44-), metasilicate (SiO23-), and pyrosilicate (Si2O67-)\u2014by forming bis- and tris(catecholate)silicate dianions through coordination. This complexes can be further coated on various substrates for applications such as drug delivery systems, antibacterial and antifouling applications.\nDetection.\nSilicate anions in solution react with molybdate anions yielding yellow silicomolybdate complexes. In a typical preparation, monomeric orthosilicate was found to react completely in 75 seconds; dimeric pyrosilicate in 10 minutes; and higher oligomers in considerably longer time. In particular, the reaction is not observed with suspensions of colloidal silica.\nZeolite formation and geopolymers polymerisation.\nThe nature of soluble silicates is relevant to understanding biomineralization and the synthesis of aluminosilicates, such as the industrially important catalysts called zeolites. Along with aluminate anions, soluble silicate anions also play a major role in the polymerization mechanism of geopolymers. Geopolymers are amorphous aluminosilicates whose production requires less energy than that of ordinary Portland cement. So, geopolymer cements could contribute to limiting the CO2 emissions in the Earth atmosphere and the global warming caused by this greenhouse gas.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36893", "revid": "36336112", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36893", "title": "International Organization for Migration", "text": "Intergovernmental organization\nThe International Organization for Migration (IOM) is a United Nations related organization working in the field of migration. The organization implements operational assistance programmes for migrants, including internally displaced persons, refugees, and migrant workers.\nThe International Organization for Migration is a UN agency based in Geneva. Its director general is Amy E. Pope.\nHistory.\nHistorical context and predecessor organizations (1951 to 1989).\nThe International Organization for Migration (IOM) was founded in 1951 in response to the large number of internally displaced persons and war refugees in Europe after the Second World War. The IOM was initially a logistics agency that organized the transport of nearly one million migrants in the 1950s and has undergone several name changes since its inception. The transition from the Provisional Intergovernmental Committee for the Movement of Migrants from Europe (PICMME) in 1951 to the Intergovernmental Committee for European Migration (ICEM) in 1952, to the Intergovernmental Committee for Migration (ICM) in 1980, and finally to the International Organization for Migration (IOM) in 1989 reflects the evolution of the IOM's mandate over its existence, becoming the leading intergovernmental organization in the field of migration.\nIntegration into the United Nations and the present (1990 to date).\nIn 1992, it was granted observer status at the United Nations General Assembly (GA resolution A/RES/47/4). In September 2016, the United Nations (UN) Member States, through the General Assembly, unanimously adopted a resolution approving the agreement to transform IOM into an affiliated organization of the UN. This agreement has strengthened the relationship between IOM and the UN and improved its ability to fulfill its respective mandates in the interests of migrants and Member States.\nThe IOM supported the creation of the Global Compact for Migration, the first-ever intergovernmental agreement on international migration which was adopted in Marrakesh, Morocco, in December 2018. To support the implementation, follow-up and review of the Global Compact on Migration, the UN secretary-general Ant\u00f3nio Guterres established the UN Network on Migration in 2019. IOM coordinates the United Nations Network on Migration which includes UNHCR, WFP and UNDP, among others. While the IOM's history tracks the man-made and natural disasters of the past half century, including Kosovo and Timor 1999, and the Asian tsunami, the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the Pakistan earthquake of 2004/2005, the 2010 Haiti earthquake, and the European migrant crisis\u2014its credo that humane and orderly migration benefits migrants and society has steadily gained more international acceptance.\nStructure.\nOrganization.\nThe organization is headquartered in Geneva, with liaison offices in New York City and Addis Ababa. The Global Migration Data Analysis Centre (GMDAC) is based in Berlin. In 2020, the organization reported that it had over 15,311 employees, with 168 nationalities represented. The highest decision-making body of the IOM is the council, in which all member states are represented. It has rules of procedure and meets at regular intervals to adopt the annual budget and determine the organization's programmatic objectives. The official languages are English, French and Spanish. According to its own figures, the organization's budget in 2020 was around two billion US dollars. This is made up of voluntary contributions from the member states and donations.\nDirector General.\nThe Director General of the organization is elected by the delegates of the IOM member states for a five-year term. The following table lists the previous directors of the IOM and its predecessor organization, the ICEM. The current Director General is Amy Pope from the United States of America, with Ugochi Daniels from Nigeria serving as Deputy Directors General.\nMandate.\nThe organization's global mandate includes assistance to migrants, including migrant workers, refugees and internally displaced persons. This broad mandate of the organization has earned it praise for flexibility in crisis situations, but also criticism for legal accountability in protection issues. Due to complementary mandates, IOM often cooperates with the UNHCR.\nFor example IOM coordinates work in response to the situation in Venezuela through the Office of International Organization for Migration Director General's Special Envoy for the Regional Response to the Venezuela Situation working with UNHCR and 17 countries in South and Central America and the Caribbean.\nAccording to the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), IOM is one of the central actors in humanitarian aid within the UN system, especially in the context of displacement. IOM's main aid measures include shelter, protection, the provision of basic medical and sanitary care, life safety, coordination, telecommunications and logistics. On the instructions of the UN Emergency Relief Coordinator, IOM, together with UNHCR, is primarily responsible for camp coordination and management in humanitarian emergencies. The organization is also active in stabilization, peacebuilding and development in the context of migration.\nMember states.\nAs of 2023, the International Organization for Migration has 175 member states and 8 observer states. \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nObserver States:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNon-Member States:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nCriticism.\n2003 Amnesty and Human Rights Watch.\nIn 2003, both Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch were critical of the IOM's role in the Australian government's \"Pacific Solution\" of transferring asylum seekers to offshore detention centres. Human Rights Watch criticized the IOM for operating Manus Regional Processing Centre and the processing centre on Nauru despite not having a refugee protection mandate. Human Rights Watch criticized the IOM for being part of \"arbitrary detention\" and for denying asylum seekers access to legal advice. Human Rights Watch urged the IOM to cease operation the process centres, which it stated were \"detention centres\" and to hand management of the centres to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.\nAmnesty International expressed concern that the IOM undertook actions on behalf of governments that negatively impacted the human rights of asylum seekers, refugees and migrants. Amnesty International cited an example of fourteen Kurds in Indonesia who were expelled from Australian waters by Australian authorities and relocated to Indonesia. Amnesty International requested an assurance that the IOM will abide by the principle of non-refoulement.\n2022 Refugee Council of Australia.\nIn 2022, the role that the IOM played in housing refugees in Indonesia was described by the Refugee Council of Australia as presenting a \"humanitarian veneer while carrying out rights-violating activities on behalf of Western nations\u201d by researchers Asher Hirsch and Cameron Doig in \"The Globe and Mail\".\nThe community housing that the IOM operated, using Australian government funding, was described by the Refugee Council of Australia \"inhumane conditions, solitary confinement, lack of basic essentials and medical care, physical and sexual abuse, and severe overcrowding\". Rohingya John Joniad described the housing as an \"open prison\".\nUyghur refugees.\nIn 2024, the IOM was criticized for being unable or willing to intervene in refugee cases involving Uyghurs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36895", "revid": "28469164", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36895", "title": "History of Burgundy", "text": "Occurrences and people in Burgundy throughout history\nThe history of Burgundy refers to the history of Burgundy, stretching from the late antiquity up to the contemporary period. As a historical region, Burgundy was impacted by various changes, that were affecting both political development and territorial scope of Burgundian lands and polities.\nIn the 5th century, the Burgundians, a Germanic people, settled in the wider region of the river Rh\u00f4ne, and established the Kingdom of the Burgundians, thus giving the new name to those parts of Roman Gaul. In 534, the Burgundian realm was incorporated into the Frankish Kingdom. Since the Treaty of Pr\u00fcm (855), a renewed Burgundian polity started to emerge, following various divisions of the Carolingian Empire. In time, two distinctive realms were formed, the Lower Burgundy (879) and the Upper Burgundy (888). In 933, they were united to form the Kingdom of Burgundy (Arles), that existed until 1032, when it was incorporated into the Holy Roman Empire.\nSince the 10th century, northern Burgundian regions were divided between the Duchy of Burgundy (to the west of the river Sa\u00f4ne, belonging to the Kingdom of France), and the Free County of Burgundy (to the east of the same river, belonging to the Holy Roman Empire). The Duchy of Burgundy later became the French province of Bourgogne, while the Free County of Burgundy became the province of Franche-Comt\u00e9 (literally meaning \"the free county\").\nAt different times and under different geopolitical circumstances, various political entities have gone by the name of 'Burgundy'. Historian Norman Davies has commented that \"[f]ew subjects in European history have created more havoc than that summarized by the phrase 'all the Burgundies'.\" In 1862, James Bryce compiled a list of ten such entities, a list which Davies himself extends to fifteen, ranging from the first Burgundian kingdom founded by Gunther in the fifth century, to the modern French \"r\u00e9gion\" of Burgundy.\nIn 2016, the area was formally reorganized into Bourgogne-Franche-Comt\u00e9, merging the two former regions.\nHistory.\nThe first recorded peoples of the area now referred to as Burgundy were various tribes of Celtic Gauls, the most prominent of which were the Aedui. Under a chief magistrate known as a Vergobret, the Aedui maintained a semi-republican form of government, but were eventually absorbed into the expanding Roman Empire. Following several revolts, the Aedui leadership was invited to join the Roman Senate, becoming the first Gauls to receive such an offering, after which Gallo-Roman culture flourished in the region.\nKingdom of Burgundy (411\u2013534).\nThe Burgundians, who migrated into the Western Roman Empire as it collapsed, are generally regarded as a Germanic people, possibly originating in Bornholm (modern Denmark). (A fringe theory suggests that the Burgundians may have been the \u0392\u03bf\u03c5\u03c1\u03bf\u03c5\u03b3\u03bf\u03c5\u03bd\u03b4\u03bf\u03b9 \"Bourougoundoi\" later alluded to by the Aeolian historian Agathias, as a component of Eurasian steppe peoples, namely the \"Scythian or Huns\" and, by implication, Turkic peoples like the Bulgars). While they were dominated by the Huns for a time and adopted some of their cultural practices, Agathias may have confused or conflated the Burgundians with the Lombards, who apparently had more significant ties to the Huns and Bulgars.\nIn 411, the Burgundians crossed the Rhine and established a kingdom at Worms. Amidst repeated clashes between the Romans and Huns, the Burgundian kingdom eventually occupied what is today the borderlands between Switzerland, France, and Italy. In 534, the Franks defeated Godomar, the last Burgundian king, and absorbed the territory into the Frankish Kingdom.\nFrankish Burgundy.\nThe Frankish period in the history of Burgundy is divided in two dynastic eras, the Merovingian (534\u2013751) and the Carolingian (751\u2013879).\nMerovingian Burgundy (534\u2013751).\nSince the Frankish conquest in 534, Burgundy was ruled by various members of the Merovingian dynasty, and became one of the three main polities that together defined the core Frankish realm, together with Austrasia and Neustria. Between 561 and 592, and again between 639 and 737, several Merovingian rulers used the title of \"King of Burgundy\".\nCarolingian Burgundy (751\u2013879).\nUnder the Carolingian rule, since 751, Burgundy became the central region within the realm of Carloman I (768-771). In 843, under the Treaty of Verdun, most of Burgundy became part of the Middle Francia that included lands from the North Sea to central Italy and was ruled by emperor Lothair I, while the northwestern part of Burgundy was assigned to the kingdom of West Francia, thus setting the bases for a lasting division of Burgundian lands.\nIn 855, under the Treaty of Pr\u00fcm (855), Lothair's realm was divided between his three sons: Italy went to Louis II, while Lothair II received Lotharingia with Upper Burgundy, and Charles being awarded Lower Burgundy with Provence. As Charles was still young, the actual power in his realm was held by regent, count Girart II of Vienne whose wife was the sister-in-law of emperor Lothair I. Girart was an able regent, who was successful in defending the kingdom from Vikings, who raided as far as Valence. In the same time, older Carolingians, who ruled West Francia and East Francia, tried to expand their influence towards the former Middle Francia. Thus in 861, Charles' uncle, Charles the Bald of West Francia, attempted to intervene in Provence after receiving an appeal for intervention from the Count of Arles. He invaded as far as M\u00e2con, before being restrained by the powerful archbishop Hincmar of Rheims.\nIn 858, count Girart made an arrangement that, if young Charles should die without heirs, his realm would revert to Charles' older brother Lothair II who ruled in Lotharingia, but when Charles died in 863, his kingdom was divided between both of his brothers: Lothair II received the bishoprics of Lyon, Vienne and Grenoble, to be administered by Girart, while emperor Louis II received Arles, Aix-en-provence and Embrun.\nAfter the death of Lothair II, the Treaty of Meerssen was concluded in 870, dividing much of his domains between West Francia and East Francia, while the Lower Burgundy with Provence remained under the control of emperor Louis II. After emperors death in 875, those regions were seized by the West Frankish king Charles the Bald, and also ruled by his son and successor Louis the Stammerer.\nBosonid and Welfish Burgundy (879\u20131032).\nDuring and after the dissolution of the Frankish Empire a number of polities existed at different times and covering different areas. During the late 9th century there were three Burgundies: \nThe two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Burgundy were reunited in 933 as the Kingdom of Burgundy. This kingdom in turn was absorbed into the Holy Roman Empire under Conrad II in 1032, and known from the 12th century as the Kingdom of Arles. \nThe Duchy of Burgundy was annexed by the French throne in 1004.\nKingdom of Burgundy (Arles).\nDuring the 12th and 13th centuries, the County of Burgundy emerged from the area previously within the Kingdom of Upper Burgundy. It became known as the Free County of Burgundy or Franche-Comt\u00e9.\nDuring the Middle Ages, Burgundy was the seat of some of the most important Western churches and monasteries, among them Cluny, C\u00eeteaux, and V\u00e9zelay.\nDuring the Hundred Years' War, King John II of France gave the duchy to his youngest son, Philip the Bold, rather than leaving it for his successor on the French throne. Following a personal union between the Duchy and the County of Burgundy, the \"Two Burgundies\" soon became a major rival to the French throne. The Dukes of Burgundy succeeded in assembling an empire stretching from Switzerland to the North Sea, in large part by marriage. This Burgundian State consisted of a number of fiefdoms on both sides of the (then largely symbolic) border between the Kingdom of France and the Holy Roman Empire. Its economic heartland was in the Low Countries, particularly Flanders and Brabant. The Burgundian court outshone the French court both economically and culturally. In Belgium and in the south of the Netherlands, the expression \"Burgundian lifestyle\" is still used to denote enjoyment of life, good food, and extravagant spectacle.\nIn 1477, at the battle of Nancy during the Burgundian Wars, the last duke Charles the Bold was killed in battle, and the Duchy itself was annexed by France. In the late 15th and early 16th centuries, the other Burgundian territories provided a power base for the rise of the Habsburgs, after Maximilian of Austria married the surviving daughter of the ducal family, Mary. After her death, her husband moved his court first to Mechelen and later to the palace at Coudenberg, Brussels, and from there ruled the remnants of the empire, the Low Countries (Burgundian Netherlands) and Franche-Comt\u00e9, then still an imperial fief. The latter territory was ceded to France in the Treaty of Nijmegen of 1678.\nWith the French Revolution in the end of the 18th century, the administrative units of the regions disappeared, but were reconstituted during the Fifth Republic in the 1970s. The modern-day administrative \"r\u00e9gion\" includes most of the former duchy.\nIn 2016, the regions of Burgundy and Franche-Comt\u00e9 were merged to found the new administrative region of Bourgogne-Franche-Comt\u00e9.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36896", "revid": "28481209", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36896", "title": "Lion", "text": "Large cat native to Africa and India\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe lion (Panthera leo) is a large cat of the genus \"Panthera\", currently ranging only in Sub-Saharan Africa and India. It has a muscular, broad-chested body; a short, rounded head; round ears; and a dark, hairy tuft at the tip of its tail. It is sexually dimorphic; adult male lions are larger than females and have a more prominent mane that usually obscures the ears and extends to the shoulders.\nThe lion inhabits grasslands, savannahs, and shrublands. It is an apex and keystone predator, preying mostly on medium-sized and large ungulates. It is usually more diurnal than other wild cats, but when persecuted, it adapts to being active at night and at twilight. It is a social species, forming groups called prides. A lion pride consists of related females and cubs, and a few or one adult male who is unrelated to the females. Groups of female lions usually hunt together. Adult males often compete to keep or gain that membership in the pride.\nDuring the Neolithic period, the lion ranged throughout Africa and Eurasia, from Southeast Europe to India, but it has been reduced to fragmented populations in sub-Saharan Africa and one population in western India. It has been listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List since 1996 because populations in African countries have declined by about 43% since the early 1990s. Lion populations are untenable outside designated protected areas. Although the cause of the decline is not fully understood, habitat loss and conflicts with humans are the greatest causes for concern.\nThe lion has been extensively depicted in sculptures and paintings, on national flags, and in literature and films. It is one of the most widely recognised animal symbols in human culture. Lions have been kept in menageries since the time of the Roman Empire and have been a key species sought for exhibition in zoological gardens across the world since the late 18th century. Cultural depictions of lions have occurred worldwide, particularly as a symbol of power and royalty. They figure prominently as symbols and deities in ancient religions.\nEtymology.\nThe English word \"lion\" is derived via Anglo-Norman from Latin (nominative: ), which in turn was a borrowing from Ancient Greek . The Hebrew word may also be related. The generic name \"Panthera\" is traceable to the classical Latin word 'panth\u0113ra' and the ancient Greek word \u03c0\u03ac\u03bd\u03b8\u03b7\u03c1 'panther'.\nTaxonomy.\n\"Felis leo\" was the scientific name used by Carl Linnaeus in 1758, who described the lion in his work \"Systema Naturae\". The genus name \"Panthera\" was coined by Lorenz Oken in 1816. Between the mid-18th and mid-20th centuries, 26 lion specimens were described and proposed as subspecies, of which 11 were recognised as valid in 2005. They were distinguished mostly by the size and colour of their manes and skins.\nSubspecies.\nIn the 19th and 20th centuries, several lion type specimens were described and proposed as subspecies, with about a dozen recognised as valid taxa until 2017. Between 2008 and 2016, IUCN Red List assessors used only two subspecific names: \"P. l. leo\" for African lion populations, and \"P. l. persica\" for the Asiatic lion population. In 2017, the Cat Classification Task Force of the Cat Specialist Group revised lion taxonomy, and recognises two subspecies based on results of several phylogeographic studies on lion evolution, namely:\nHowever, there seems to be some degree of overlap between both groups in northern Central Africa. DNA analysis from a more recent study indicates that Central African lions are derived from both northern and southern lions, as they cluster with \"P. leo leo\" in mtDNA-based phylogenies whereas their genomic DNA indicates a closer relationship with P. \"leo melanochaita\".\nLion samples from some parts of the Ethiopian Highlands cluster genetically with those from Cameroon and Chad, while lions from other areas of Ethiopia cluster with samples from East Africa. Researchers, therefore, assume Ethiopia is a contact zone between the two subspecies. Genome-wide data of a wild-born historical lion sample from Sudan showed that it clustered with \"P. l. leo\" in mtDNA-based phylogenies, but with a high affinity to \"P. l. melanochaita\"; this suggested that the taxonomic position of lions in Central Africa may require revision.\nFossil records.\nOther lion subspecies or sister species to the modern lion existed in prehistoric times:\nAdditionally, in 1938 paleontologist Paulus Deraniyagala named a subspecies \"P. l. sinhaleyus\" based on two fossils, a lower left carnassial and a damaged right lower canine tooth, both excavated from deposits in Kuruwita, Sri Lanka. He called it \"narrower and more elongate\" but otherwise failed to distinguish \"P. l. sinhaleyus\" from other lion subspecies. A subsequent study of felid fossils from the Kuruwita deposits in 2005 described the fossils in further detail but only assigned to them to \"P. leo\".\nEvolution.\nThe \"Panthera\" lineage is estimated to have genetically diverged from the common ancestor of the Felidae around https://\u00a0million years ago. Hybridisation between lion and snow leopard ancestors possibly continued until about 2.1 million years ago. The lion-leopard clade was distributed in the Asian and African Palearctic since at least the early Pliocene. The earliest fossils recognisable as lions were found at Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania and are estimated to be up to 2 million years old.\nEstimates for the divergence time of the modern and cave lion lineages range from 529,000 to 392,000 years ago based on mutation rate per generation time of the modern lion. There is no evidence for gene flow between the two lineages, indicating that they did not share the same geographic area. The Eurasian and American cave lions became extinct at the end of the last glacial period without mitochondrial descendants on other continents. The modern lion was probably widely distributed in Africa during the Middle Pleistocene and started to diverge in sub-Saharan Africa during the Late Pleistocene. Lion populations in East and Southern Africa became separated from populations in West and North Africa when the equatorial rainforest expanded 183,500 to 81,800 years ago. They shared a common ancestor probably between 98,000 and 52,000 years ago. Due to the expansion of the Sahara between 83,100 and 26,600 years ago, lion populations in West and North Africa became separated. As the rainforest decreased and thus gave rise to more open habitats, lions moved from West to Central Africa. Lions from North Africa dispersed to southern Europe and Asia between 38,800 and 8,300 years ago.\nExtinction of lions in southern Europe, North Africa and the Middle East interrupted gene flow between lion populations in Asia and Africa. Genetic evidence revealed numerous mutations in lion samples from East and Southern Africa, which indicates that this group has a longer evolutionary history than genetically less diverse lion samples from Asia and West and Central Africa. A whole genome-wide sequence of lion samples showed that samples from West Africa shared alleles with samples from Southern Africa, and samples from Central Africa shared alleles with samples from Asia. This phenomenon indicates that Central Africa was a melting pot of lion populations after they had become isolated, possibly migrating through corridors in the Nile Basin during the early Holocene.\nHybrids.\nIn zoos, lions have been bred with tigers to create hybrids for the curiosity of visitors or for scientific purpose. The liger is bigger than a lion and a tiger, whereas most tigons are relatively small compared to their parents because of reciprocal gene effects. The leopon is a hybrid between a lion and leopard.\nDescription.\nThe lion is a muscular, broad-chested cat with a short, rounded head, a reduced neck, and round ears; males have broader heads. The fur varies in colour from light buff to silvery grey, yellowish red, and dark brown. The colours of the underparts are generally lighter. A new-born lion has dark spots, which fade as the cub reaches adulthood, although faint spots may still be seen on the legs and underparts. The tail of all lions ends in a dark, hairy tuft that, in some lions, conceals an approximately -long, hard \"spine\" or \"spur\" composed of dermal papillae. The functions of the spur are unknown. The tuft is absent at birth, develops at around &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;5+1\u20442 months of age and is readily identifiable at the age of seven months.\nIts skull is very similar to that of the tiger, although the frontal region is usually more depressed and flattened and has a slightly shorter postorbital region and broader nasal openings than those of the tiger. Due to the amount of skull variation in the two species, usually only the structure of the lower jaw can be used as a reliable indicator of species.\nThe skeletal muscles of the lion make up 58.8% of its body weight and represent the highest percentage of muscles among mammals. Despite this, their thigh muscles do not exceed and only approach the mass predicted for their body mass. The lion has a high concentration of fast twitch muscle fibres, giving them quick bursts of speed but less stamina. \nSize.\nAmong felids, the lion is second only to the tiger in size. The size and weight of adult lions vary across its range and habitats. Accounts of a few individuals that were larger than average exist from Africa and India.\nMane.\nThe male lion's mane is the most recognisable feature of the species. It may have evolved around 320,000\u2013190,000 years ago. It grows downwards and backwards, covering most of the head, neck, shoulders, and chest. The mane is typically brownish and tinged with yellow, rust, and black hairs. Mutations in the genes microphthalmia-associated transcription factor and tyrosinase are possibly responsible for the colour of manes. It starts growing when lions enter adolescence, when testosterone levels increase, and reach their full size at around four years old. Cool ambient temperatures in European and North American zoos may result in a heavier mane. On average, Asiatic lions have sparser manes than African lions.\nThis feature likely evolved to signal the fitness of males to females. Males with darker manes appear to have greater reproductive success and are more likely to remain in a pride for longer. They have longer and thicker hair and higher testosterone levels, but they are also more vulnerable to heat stress. The core body temperature does apparently not increase regardless of sex, season, feeding time, length and colour of mane, but only surface temperature is affected. Unlike in other felid species, female lions consistently interact with multiple males at once. Another hypothesis suggests that the mane also serves to protect the neck in fights, but this is disputed. During fights, including those involving maneless females and adolescents, the neck is not targeted as much as the face, back, and hindquarters. Injured lions also begin to lose their manes. \nAlmost all male lions in Pendjari National Park are either maneless or have very short manes. Maneless lions have also been reported in Senegal, in Sudan's Dinder National Park and in Tsavo East National Park, Kenya. Castrated lions often have little to no mane because the removal of the gonads inhibits testosterone production. Rarely, both wild and captive lionesses have manes. Increased testosterone may be the cause of maned lionesses reported in northern Botswana.\nColour variation.\nThe white lion is a rare morph with a genetic condition called leucism, which is caused by a double recessive allele. It is not albino; it has normal pigmentation in the eyes and skin. White lions have occasionally been encountered in and around Kruger National Park and the adjacent Timbavati Private Game Reserve in eastern South Africa. They were removed from the wild in the 1970s, thus decreasing the white lion gene pool. Nevertheless, 17 births have been recorded in five prides between 2007 and 2015. White lions are selected for breeding in captivity. They have reportedly been bred in camps in South Africa for use as trophies to be killed during canned hunts.\nDistribution and habitat.\nAfrican lions live in scattered populations across sub-Saharan Africa. The lion prefers grassy plains and savannahs, scrub bordering rivers, and open woodlands with bushes. It rarely enters closed forests. On Mount Elgon, the lion has been recorded up to an elevation of and close to the snow line on Mount Kenya. Savannahs with an annual rainfall of make up the majority of lion habitat in Africa, estimated at at most, but remnant populations are also present in tropical moist forests in West Africa and montane forests in East Africa. The Asiatic lion now survives only in and around Gir National Park in Gujarat, western India. Its habitat is a mixture of dry savannah forest and very dry, deciduous scrub forest.\nHistorical range.\nIn Africa, the range of the lion originally spanned most of the central African rainforest zone and the Sahara desert. In the 1960s, it became extinct in North Africa, except in the southern part of Sudan.\nDuring the mid-Holocene, around 8,000-6,000 years ago, the range of lions expanded into Southeastern and Eastern Europe, partially re-occupying the range of the now extinct cave lion. In Hungary, the modern lion was present from about 4,500 to 3,200 years Before Present. In Ukraine, the modern lion was present from about 6,400 to 2,000 years Before Present. In Greece, it was common, as reported by Herodotus in 480 BC; it was considered rare by 300 BC and extirpated by AD 100.\nIn Asia the lion once ranged in regions where climatic conditions supported an abundance of prey. It was present in the Caucasus until the 10th century. It lived in the Levant until the Middle Ages and in Southwest Asia until the late 19th century. By the late 19th century, it had been extirpated in most of Turkey. The last live lion in Iran was sighted in 1942, about northwest of Dezful, although the corpse of a lioness was found on the banks of the Karun river in Khuzestan province in 1944. It once ranged from Sind and Punjab in Pakistan to Bengal and the Narmada River in central India.\nBehaviour and ecology.\nLions spend much of their time resting; they are inactive for about twenty hours per day. Although lions can be active at any time, their activity generally peaks after dusk with a period of socialising, grooming, and defecating. Intermittent bursts of activity continue until dawn, when hunting most often takes place. They spend an average of two hours a day walking and fifty minutes eating.\nGroup organisation.\nThe lion is the most social of all wild felid species, living in groups of related individuals with their offspring. Such a group is called a \"pride\". Groups of male lions are called \"coalitions\". Females form the stable social unit in a pride and do not tolerate outside females. The majority of females remain in their birth prides while all males and some females disperse. The average pride consists of around 15 lions, including several adult females and up to four males and their cubs of both sexes. Large prides of up to 30 individuals have been observed. The sole exception to this pattern is the Tsavo lion pride that always had only one adult male. Prides act as fission\u2013fusion societies, and members split into subgroups that keep in contact with roars.\nNomadic lions range widely and move around sporadically, either in pairs or alone. Pairs are more frequent among related males. A lion may switch lifestyles; nomads can become residents and vice versa. Interactions between prides and nomads tend to be hostile, although pride females in estrus allow nomadic males to approach them. Males spend years in a nomadic phase before gaining residence in a pride. A study undertaken in the Serengeti National Park revealed that nomadic coalitions gain residency at between 3.5 and 7.3 years of age. In Kruger National Park, dispersing male lions move more than away from their natal pride in search of their own territory. Female lions stay closer to their natal pride. Therefore, female lions in an area are more closely related to each other than male lions in the same area.\nThe evolution of sociability in lions was likely driven both by high population density and the clumped resources of savannah habitats. The larger the pride, the more high-quality territory they can defend; \"hotspots\" are near river confluences, where they have optimal access to water, prey and vegetation cover. A study on three lion prides in a Zimbabwean wildlife reserve revealed that the dominant pride of 12 lions had the shortest average distance to water and the smallest home range of ; the smallest pride of four lions had the longest average distance to water and the largest home range of .\nThe area occupied by a pride is called a \"pride area\" whereas that occupied by a nomad is a \"range\". Males associated with a pride patrol the fringes. Both males and females defend the pride against intruders, but the male lion is better-suited for this purpose due to its stockier, more powerful build. Some individuals consistently lead the defence against intruders, while others lag behind. Lions tend to assume specific roles in the pride; slower-moving individuals may provide other valuable services to the group. Alternatively, there may be rewards associated with being a leader that fends off intruders; the rank of lionesses in the pride is reflected in these responses. The male or males associated with the pride must defend their relationship with the pride from outside males who may attempt to usurp them.\nAsiatic lion prides differ in group composition. Male Asiatic lions are solitary or associate with up to three males, forming a loose pride while females associate with up to 12 other females, forming a stronger pride together with their cubs. Female and male lions associate only when mating. Coalitions of males hold territory for a longer time than single lions. Males in coalitions of three or four individuals exhibit a pronounced hierarchy, in which one male dominates the others and mates more frequently.\nHunting and diet.\nThe lion is a generalist hypercarnivore and is considered to be both an apex and keystone predator due to its wide prey spectrum. Its prey consists mainly of medium-sized to large ungulates, particularly blue wildebeest, plains zebra, African buffalo, gemsbok and giraffe. It also frequently takes common warthog despite it being much smaller. In India, chital and sambar deer are the most common wild prey, while livestock contributes significantly to lion kills outside protected areas. It usually avoids adult elephants, rhinoceros and hippopotamus and small prey like dik-dik, hyraxes, hares and monkeys, and seldom consumes other predators; unusual prey include small reptiles and porcupines.\nYoung lions first display stalking behaviour at around three months of age, although they do not participate in hunting until they are almost a year old and begin to hunt effectively when nearing the age of two. Single lions are capable of bringing down zebra and wildebeest, while larger prey like buffalo and giraffe are riskier. In Chobe National Park, large prides have been observed hunting African bush elephants up to around 15 years old in exceptional cases, with the victims being calves, juveniles, and even subadults. In typical group hunts, each lioness has a favoured position in the group, either stalking prey on the \"wing\", then attacking, or moving a smaller distance in the centre of the group and capturing prey fleeing from other lionesses. Males attached to prides do not usually participate in group hunting.\nSome evidence suggests, however, that males are just as successful as females; they are typically solo hunters who ambush prey in small bushland. They join in the hunting of large, slower-moving prey like buffalo; and even hunt them on their own. Moderately-sized hunting groups generally have higher success rates than lone females and larger groups. Lions studied in Queen Elizabeth National Park increased their chances of success when hunting at night and moonless nights, when the prey was solitary and the cover of bushes dense; the chances of success increased when they attacked from a distance of and with a grass cover of tall.\nLions are not particularly known for their stamina. For instance, a lioness's heart comprises only 0.57% of her body weight and a male's is about 0.45% of his body weight, whereas a hyena's heart comprises almost 1% of its body weight. Thus, lions run quickly only in short bursts at about and need to be close to their prey before starting the attack. They take advantage of factors that reduce visibility; many kills take place near some form of cover or at night. One study in 2018 recorded a lion running at a top speed of . Analysis of films of lion hunting has found that lions have an initial acceleration of 9.5 m/s\u00b2, while a Thomson's gazelle has an acceleration of only 4.5 m/s\u00b2, even though lions only would reach 50 km/h (31 mph) compared to the gazelles' nearly 97 km/h (60 mph); lions stalk their prey in order to attack them unexpectedly, as their prey begins to run unprepared while the predator is better prepared to start. The lion's attack is short and powerful; it attempts to catch prey with a fast rush and final leap, usually pulls it down by the rump, and kills with a clamping bite to the throat or muzzle. It can hold the prey's throat for up to 13 minutes, until the prey stops moving. A lioness has a bite force of 1593.8\u20131768 Newtons (162.5\u2013180.3 kgf) at the canine tip and of 4167.6 Newtons (425 kgf) at the carnassials.\nLions typically consume prey at the location of the hunt but sometimes drag large prey into cover. They tend to squabble over kills, particularly the males. Cubs suffer most when food is scarce but otherwise all pride members eat their fill, including old and crippled lions, which can live on leftovers. Large kills are shared more widely among pride members. An adult lioness requires an average of about of meat per day while males require about . Lions gorge themselves and eat up to in one session. If it is unable to consume all of the kill, it rests for a few hours before continuing to eat. On hot days, the pride retreats to shade with one or two males standing guard. Lions defend their kills from scavengers such as vultures and hyenas.\nLions scavenge on carrion when the opportunity arises, scavenging animals dead from natural causes such as disease or those that were killed by other predators. Scavenging lions keep a constant lookout for circling vultures, which indicate the death or distress of an animal. Most carrion on which both hyenas and lions feed upon are killed by hyenas rather than lions. Carrion is thought to provide a large part of lion diet.\nPredatory competition.\nLions and spotted hyenas occupy a similar ecological niche and compete for prey and carrion; a review of data across several studies indicates a dietary overlap of 58.6%. Lions typically ignore hyenas unless they are on a kill or are being harassed, while the latter tend to visibly react to the presence of lions with or without the presence of food. In the Ngorongoro crater, lions subsist largely on kills stolen from hyenas, causing them to increase their kill rate. In Botswana's Chobe National Park, the situation is reversed as hyenas there frequently challenge lions and steal their kills, obtaining food from 63% of all lion kills. When confronted on a kill, hyenas may either leave or wait patiently at a distance of until the lions have finished. Hyenas may feed alongside lions and force them off a kill. The two species attack one another even when there is no food involved for no apparent reason. Lions can account for up to 71% of hyena deaths in Etosha National Park. Hyenas have adapted by frequently mobbing lions that enter their home ranges. When the lion population in Kenya's Masai Mara National Reserve declined, the spotted hyena population increased rapidly.\nLions tend to dominate cheetahs and leopards, steal their kills and kill their cubs and even adults when given the chance. Cheetahs often lose their kills to lions or other predators. A study in the Serengeti ecosystem revealed that lions killed at least 17 of 125 cheetah cubs born between 1987 and 1990. Cheetahs avoid their competitors by hunting at different times and habitats. Leopards, by contrast, do not appear to be motivated by an avoidance of lions, as they use heavy vegetation regardless of whether lions are present in an area and both cats are active around the same time of day. In addition, there is no evidence that lions affect leopard abundance. Leopards take refuge in trees, though lionesses occasionally attempt to climb up and retrieve their kills.\nLions similarly dominate African wild dogs, taking their kills and dispatching pups or adult dogs. Population densities of wild dogs are low in areas where lions are more abundant. However, there are a few reported cases of old and wounded lions falling prey to wild dogs.\nReproduction and life cycle.\nMost lionesses reproduce by the time they are four years of age. Lions do not mate at a specific time of year and the females are polyestrous. Like those of other cats, the male lion's penis has spines that point backward. During withdrawal of the penis, the spines rake the walls of the female's vagina, which may cause ovulation. A lioness may mate with more than one male when she is in heat. Lions of both sexes may be involved in group homosexual and courtship activities. Males also head-rub and roll around with each other before mounting each other. Generation length of the lion is about seven years. The average gestation period is around 110days; the female gives birth to a litter of between one and four cubs in a secluded den, which may be a thicket, a reed-bed, a cave, or some other sheltered area, usually away from the pride. She will often hunt alone while the cubs are still helpless, staying relatively close to the den. Lion cubs are born blind, their eyes opening around seven days after birth. They weigh at birth and are almost helpless, beginning to crawl a day or two after birth and walking around three weeks of age. To avoid a buildup of scent attracting the attention of predators, the lioness moves her cubs to a new den site several times a month, carrying them one-by-one by the nape of the neck.\nLionesses of reproductive age within a pride have a similar number of surviving cubs, which they initially keep hidden. Lionesses without offspring do not assist in the care of the communal litter.\nUsually, the mother does not integrate herself and her cubs back into the pride until the cubs are six to eight weeks old. Sometimes the introduction to pride life occurs earlier, particularly if other lionesses have given birth at about the same time. When first introduced to the rest of the pride, lion cubs lack confidence when confronted with adults other than their mother. They soon begin to immerse themselves in the pride life, however, playing among themselves or attempting to initiate play with the adults. Lionesses with cubs of their own are more likely to be tolerant of another lioness's cubs than lionesses without cubs. Male tolerance of the cubs varies\u2014one male could patiently let the cubs play with his tail or his mane, while another may snarl and bat the cubs away.\nPride lionesses often synchronise their reproductive cycles and communal rearing and suckling of the young, which suckle indiscriminately from any or all of the nursing females in the pride. The synchronisation of births is advantageous because the cubs grow to being roughly the same size and have an equal chance of survival, and sucklings are not dominated by older cubs. Weaning occurs after six or seven months. Male lions reach maturity at about three years of age and at four to five years are capable of challenging and displacing adult males associated with another pride. They begin to age and weaken at between 10 and 15 years of age at the latest.\nWhen one or more new males oust the previous males associated with a pride, the victors often kill any existing young cubs, perhaps because females do not become fertile and receptive until their cubs mature or die. Females often fiercely defend their cubs from a usurping male but are rarely successful unless a group of three or four mothers within a pride join forces against the male. Cubs also die from starvation and abandonment, and predation by leopards, hyenas and wild dogs. Male cubs are excluded from their maternal pride when they reach maturity at around two or three years of age, while some females may leave when they reach the age of two. When a new male lion takes over a pride, adolescents both male and female may be evicted.\nHealth and mortality.\nLions may live 12\u201317 years in the wild. Although adult lions have no natural predators, evidence suggests most die violently from attacks by humans or other lions. Lions often inflict serious injuries on members of other prides they encounter in territorial disputes or members of the home pride when fighting at a kill. Crippled lions and cubs may fall victim to hyenas and leopards or be trampled by buffalo or elephants. Careless lions may be maimed when hunting prey. Nile crocodiles also kill and eat lions, evidenced by the occasional lion claw found in crocodile stomachs.\nTicks commonly infest the ears, neck and groin regions of the lions. Adult forms of several tapeworm species of the genus \"Taenia\" have been isolated from lion intestines, having been ingested as larvae in antelope meat. Lions in the Ngorongoro Crater were afflicted by an outbreak of stable fly (\"Stomoxys calcitrans\") in 1962, resulting in lions becoming emaciated and covered in bloody, bare patches. Lions sought unsuccessfully to evade the biting flies by climbing trees or crawling into hyena burrows; many died or migrated and the local population dropped from 70 to 15 individuals. A more recent outbreak in 2001 killed six lions.\nCaptive lions have been infected with canine distemper virus (CDV) since at least the mid-1970s. CDV is spread by domestic dogs and other carnivores; a 1994 outbreak in Serengeti National Park resulted in many lions developing neurological symptoms such as seizures. During the outbreak, several lions died from pneumonia and encephalitis. Feline immunodeficiency virus and lentivirus also affect captive lions.\nCommunication.\nWhen resting, lion socialisation occurs through a number of behaviours; the animal's expressive movements are highly developed. The most common peaceful, tactile gestures are head rubbing and social licking, which have been compared with the role of allogrooming among primates. Head rubbing, nuzzling the forehead, face and neck against another lion appears to be a form of greeting and is seen often after an animal has been apart from others or after a fight or confrontation. Males tend to rub other males, while cubs and females rub females. Social licking often occurs in tandem with head rubbing; it is generally mutual and the recipient appears to express pleasure. The head and neck are the most common parts of the body licked; this behaviour may have arisen out of utility because lions cannot lick these areas themselves.\nLions have an array of facial expressions and body postures that serve as visual gestures. A common facial expression is the \"grimace face\" or flehmen response, which a lion makes when sniffing chemical signals and involves an open mouth with bared teeth, raised muzzle, wrinkled nose, closed eyes and relaxed ears. Lions also use chemical and visual marking; males spray urine and scrape plots of ground and objects within the territory.\nThe lion's repertoire of vocalisations is large; variations in intensity and pitch appear to be central to communication. Most lion vocalisations are variations of roaring, growling and snarling. Other sounds produced include puffing, humming, and exhalations similar to purring, while cubs communicate by meowing and bleating. Roaring is used to advertise the animal's presence. Lions most often roar at night, a sound that can be heard from a distance of . A 2025 study identified four stages in a roaring sequence; moaning, full-roaring, intermediary roaring (which is shorter and deeper) and grunting.\nConservation.\nThe lion is listed as Vulnerable on the IUCN Red List. The Indian population is listed on CITES Appendix I and the African population on CITES Appendix II.\nIn Africa.\nSeveral large and well-managed protected areas in Africa host large lion populations. Where an infrastructure for wildlife tourism has been developed, cash revenue for park management and local communities is a strong incentive for lion conservation. Most lions now live in East and Southern Africa; their numbers are rapidly decreasing, and fell by an estimated 30\u201350% in the late half of the 20th century. Primary causes of the decline include disease and human interference. In 1975, it was estimated that since the 1950s, lion numbers had decreased by half to 200,000 or fewer. Estimates of the African lion population range between 16,500 and 47,000 living in the wild in 2002\u20132004.\nIn the Republic of the Congo, Odzala-Kokoua National Park was considered a lion stronghold in the 1990s. By 2014, no lions were recorded in the protected area so the population is considered locally extinct. The West African lion population is isolated from the one in Central Africa, with little or no exchange of breeding individuals. In 2015, it was estimated that this population consists of about 400 animals, including fewer than 250 mature individuals. They persist in three protected areas in the region, mostly in one population in the W A P protected area complex, shared by Benin, Burkina Faso and Niger. This population is listed as Critically Endangered. Field surveys in the WAP ecosystem revealed that lion occupancy is lowest in the W National Park, and higher in areas with permanent staff and thus better protection.\nA population occurs in Cameroon's Waza National Park, where between approximately 14 and 21 animals persisted as of 2009. In addition, 50 to 150 lions are estimated to be present in Burkina Faso's Arly-Singou ecosystem. In 2015, an adult male lion and a female lion were sighted in Ghana's Mole National Park. These were the first sightings of lions in the country in 39 years. In the same year, a population of up to 200 lions that was previously thought to have been extirpated was filmed in the Alatash National Park, Ethiopia, close to the Sudanese border.\nIn 2005, Lion Conservation Strategies were developed for West and Central Africa, and East and Southern Africa. The strategies seek to maintain suitable habitat, ensure a sufficient wild prey base for lions, reduce factors that lead to further fragmentation of populations, and make lion\u2013human coexistence sustainable. Lion depredation on livestock is significantly reduced in areas where herders keep livestock in improved enclosures. Such measures contribute to mitigating human\u2013lion conflict.\nIn Asia.\nThe last refuge of the Asiatic lion population is the Gir National Park and surrounding areas in the region of Saurashtra or Kathiawar Peninsula in Gujarat State, India. The population has risen from approximately 180 lions in 1974 to about 400 in 2010. It is geographically isolated, which can lead to inbreeding and reduced genetic diversity. Since 2008, the Asiatic lion has been listed as Endangered on the IUCN Red List. By 2015, the population had grown to 523 individuals inhabiting an area of in Saurashtra. In 2017, about 650 individuals were recorded during the Asiatic Lion Census.\nThe presence of numerous human settlements close to Gir National Park resulted in conflict between lions, local people and their livestock. Some consider the presence of lions a benefit, as they keep populations of crop damaging herbivores in check.\nCaptive breeding.\nLions imported to Europe before the middle of the 19th century were possibly foremost Barbary lions from North Africa, or Cape lions from Southern Africa. Another 11 animals thought to be Barbary lions kept in Addis Ababa Zoo are descendants of animals owned by Emperor Haile Selassie. WildLink International in collaboration with Oxford University launched an ambitious International Barbary Lion Project with the aim of identifying and breeding Barbary lions in captivity for eventual reintroduction into a national park in the Atlas Mountains of Morocco. However, a genetic analysis showed that the captive lions at Addis Ababa Zoo were not Barbary lions, but rather closely related to wild lions in Chad and Cameroon.\nIn 1982, the Association of Zoos and Aquariums started a Species Survival Plan for the Asiatic lion to increase its chances of survival. In 1987, it was found that most lions in North American zoos were hybrids between African and Asiatic lions. Breeding programs need to note origins of the participating animals to avoid cross-breeding different subspecies and thus reducing their conservation value. Captive breeding of lions was halted to eliminate individuals of unknown origin and pedigree. Wild-born lions were imported to American zoos from Africa between 1989 and 1995. Breeding was continued in 1998 in the frame of an African lion Species Survival Plan.\nAbout 77% of the captive lions registered in the International Species Information System in 2006 were of unknown origin; these animals might have carried genes that are extinct in the wild and may therefore be important to the maintenance of the overall genetic variability of the lion.\nInteractions with humans.\nIn zoos and circuses.\nLions are part of a group of exotic animals that have been central to zoo exhibits since the late 18th century. Although many modern zoos are more selective about their exhibits, there are more than 1,000 African and 100 Asiatic lions in zoos and wildlife parks around the world. They are considered an ambassador species and are kept for tourism, education and conservation purposes. Lions can live over twenty years in captivity; for example, three sibling lions at the Honolulu Zoo lived to the age of 22 in 2007.\nThe first European \"zoos\" spread among noble and royal families in the 13th century, and until the 17th century were called seraglios. At that time, they came to be called menageries, an extension of the cabinet of curiosities. They spread from France and Italy during the Renaissance to the rest of Europe. In England, although the seraglio tradition was less developed, lions were kept at the Tower of London in a seraglio established by King John in the 13th century; this was probably stocked with animals from an earlier menagerie started in 1125 by Henry I at his hunting lodge in Woodstock, Oxfordshire, where according to William of Malmesbury lions had been stocked.\nLions were kept in cramped and squalid conditions at London Zoo until a larger lion house with roomier cages was built in the 1870s. Further changes took place in the early 20th century when Carl Hagenbeck designed enclosures with concrete \"rocks\", more open space and a moat instead of bars, more closely resembling a natural habitat. Hagenbeck designed lion enclosures for both Melbourne Zoo and Sydney's Taronga Zoo; although his designs were popular, the use of bars and caged enclosures prevailed in many zoos until the 1960s. In the late 20th century, larger, more natural enclosures and the use of wire mesh or laminated glass instead of lowered dens allowed visitors to come closer than ever to the animals; some attractions such as the Cat Forest/Lion Overlook of Oklahoma City Zoological Park placed the den on ground level, higher than visitors.\nLion taming has been part of both established circuses and individual acts such as Siegfried &amp; Roy. The practice began in the early 19th century by Frenchman Henri Martin and American Isaac Van Amburgh, who both toured widely and whose techniques were copied by a number of followers. Martin composed a pantomime titled \"Les Lions de Mysore\" (\"the lions of Mysore\"), an idea Amburgh quickly borrowed. These acts eclipsed equestrianism acts as the central display of circus shows and entered public consciousness in the early 20th century with cinema. In demonstrating the superiority of human over animal, lion taming served a purpose similar to animal fights of previous centuries. The ultimate proof of a tamer's dominance and control over a lion is demonstrated by the placing of the tamer's head in the lion's mouth. The now-iconic lion tamer's chair was possibly first used by American Clyde Beatty (1903\u20131965).\nHunting and games.\nLion hunting has occurred since ancient times and was often a royal tradition, intended to demonstrate the power of the king over nature. Such hunts took place in a reserved area in front of an audience. The monarch was accompanied by his men and controls were put in place to increase their safety and ease of killing. The earliest surviving record of lion hunting is an ancient Egyptian inscription dated circa 1380 BC that mentions Pharaoh Amenhotep\u00a0III killing 102 lions in ten years \"with his own arrows\". The Assyrian emperor Ashurbanipal had one of his lion hunts depicted on a sequence of Assyrian palace reliefs c.\u2009640 BC, known as the Lion Hunt of Ashurbanipal. Lions were also hunted during the Mughal Empire, where Emperor Jahangir is said to have excelled at it. In Ancient Rome, lions were kept by emperors for hunts, gladiator fights and executions.\nThe Maasai people have traditionally viewed the killing of lions as a rite of passage. Historically, lions were hunted by individuals, however, due to reduced lion populations, elders discourage solo lion hunts. During the European colonisation of Africa in the 19th century, the hunting of lions was encouraged because they were considered pests and lion skins were sold for \u00a31 each. The widely reproduced imagery of the heroic hunter chasing lions would dominate a large part of the century. Trophy hunting of lions in recent years has been met with controversy, notably with the killing of Cecil the lion in mid-2015.\nMan-eating.\nLions do not usually hunt humans but some (usually males) seem to seek them out. One well-publicised case is the Tsavo maneaters; in 1898, 28 officially recorded workers building the Uganda Railway were taken by lions over nine months during the construction of a bridge in Kenya. The hunter who killed the lions wrote a book detailing the animals' predatory behaviour; they were larger than normal and lacked manes, and one seemed to suffer from tooth decay. The infirmity theory, including tooth decay, is not favoured by all researchers; an analysis of teeth and jaws of man-eating lions in museum collections suggests that while tooth decay may explain some incidents, prey depletion in human-dominated areas is a more likely cause of lion predation on humans. Sick or injured animals may be more prone to man-eating but the behaviour is not unusual, nor necessarily aberrant.\nLions' proclivity for man-eating has been systematically examined. American and Tanzanian scientists report that man-eating behaviour in rural areas of Tanzania increased greatly from 1990 to 2005. At least 563 villagers were attacked and many eaten over this period. The incidents occurred near Selous Game Reserve in Rufiji River and in Lindi Region near the Mozambican border. While the expansion of villages into bush country is one concern, the authors argue conservation policy must mitigate the danger because in this case, conservation contributes directly to human deaths. Cases in Lindi in which lions seize humans from the centres of substantial villages have been documented. Another study of 1,000 people attacked by lions in southern Tanzania between 1988 and 2009 found that the weeks following the full moon, when there was less moonlight, were a strong indicator of increased night-time attacks on people.\nAccording to Robert R. Frump, Mozambican refugees regularly crossing Kruger National Park, South Africa, at night are attacked and eaten by lions. Frump said thousands may have been killed in the decades after apartheid sealed the park and forced refugees to cross the park at night.\nCultural significance.\nThe lion is one of the most widely recognised animal symbols in human culture. It has been extensively depicted in sculptures and paintings, on national flags, and in contemporary films and literature. It is considered to be the 'King of the Beasts' and has symbolised power, royalty and protection. Several leaders have had \"lion\" in their name including Sundiata Keita of the Mali Empire, who was called \"Lion of Mali\", and Richard the Lionheart of England. The male's mane makes it a particularly recognisable feature and thus has been represented more than the female. Nevertheless, the lioness has also had importance as a guardian.\nIn sub-Saharan Africa, the lion has been a common character in stories, proverbs and dances, but rarely featured in visual arts. In the Swahili language, the lion is known as \"simba\" which also means \"aggressive\", \"king\" and \"strong\". In parts of West and East Africa, the lion is associated with healing and provides the connection between seers and the supernatural. In other East African traditions, the lion represents laziness. In much of African folklore, the lion is portrayed as having low intelligence and is easily tricked. In Nubia, the lion-god Apedemak was associated with the flooding of the Nile. In Ancient Egypt, lions were linked both with the sun and the waters of the Nile. Several gods were conceived as being part lion, including the war deities Sekhmet and Maahes, and Tefnut, the goddess of moisture.\nThe lion was a prominent symbol in ancient Mesopotamia from Sumer up to Assyrian and Babylonian times, where it was strongly associated with kingship. The big cat was a symbol and steed of fertility goddess Inanna. Lions decorate the Processional Way leading to the Ishtar Gate in Babylon which was built by Nebuchadnezzar II in the 6th century BCE. The Lion of Babylon symbolised the power of the king and protection of the land against enemies, but was also invoked for good luck. The constellation Leo the lion was first recognised by the Sumerians around 4,000 years ago and is the fifth sign of the zodiac. In ancient Israel, a lion represented the tribe of Judah. Lions are frequently mentioned in the Bible, notably in the Book of Daniel, in which the eponymous hero is forced to sleep in the lions' den.\nIndo-Persian chroniclers regarded the lion as keeper of order in the realm of animals. The Sanskrit word \"mrigendra\" signifies a lion as king of animals. In India, the Lion Capital of Ashoka, erected by Emperor Ashoka in the 3rd century BCE, depicts four lions standing back to back. In Hindu mythology, the half-lion Narasimha, an avatar of the deity Vishnu, battles and slays the evil ruler Hiranyakashipu. In Buddhist art, lions are associated with both \"arhats\" and bodhisattvas and may be ridden by the Manjushri. Though they were never native to the country, lions have played important roles in Chinese culture. Statues of the beast have guarded the entrances to the imperial palace and many religious shrines. The lion dance has been performed for over a thousand years.\nIn ancient Greece, the lion is featured in several of Aesop's fables, notably The Lion and the Mouse. In Greek mythology, the Nemean lion is slain by the hero Heracles who then wears its skin. Lancelot and Gawain were also heroes slaying lions in medieval Europe. Lions continue to appear in modern literature such as the Cowardly Lion in L. Frank Baum's 1900 \"The Wonderful Wizard of Oz\", and in C. S. Lewis's \"The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe\". For cinema, the lion was portrayed as the ruler of animals in the 1994 Disney animated feature film \"The Lion King\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36897", "revid": "541573", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36897", "title": "Gruy\u00e8res", "text": "Gruy\u00e8res (; ; Fribourgeois: \"Grevire\"; ) is a town in the district of Gruy\u00e8re in the canton of Fribourg, Switzerland.\nThe medieval town is an important tourist location in the upper valley of the Saane/Sarine river, and gives its name to Gruy\u00e8re cheese. The medieval town is located at the top of an hill overlooking the Saane valley and the Lake of Gruy\u00e8re.\nGeography.\nGruy\u00e8res has an area, as of 2009[ [update]], of . Of this area, or 40.5% is used for agricultural purposes, while or 50.0% is forested. Of the rest of the land, or 5.5% is settled (buildings or roads), or 0.8% is either rivers or lakes and or 3.2% is unproductive land.\nOf the built up area, housing and buildings made up 2.5% and transportation infrastructure made up 2.1%. Out of the forested land, 46.8% of the total land area is heavily forested and 2.7% is covered with orchards or small clusters of trees. Of the agricultural land, 4.6% is used for growing crops and 12.9% is pastures and 22.9% is used for alpine pastures. All the water in the municipality is flowing water.\nGruy\u00e8res is above sea level, south-south-east of the district capital Bulle. The historical town is placed on top of an isolated hill north of the alps, in the foothills of mount Mol\u00e9son. It is also the location where the Saane river (French name: Sarine) leaves the Fribourg alps.\nThe area of the municipality comprises a section of the Saane valley and of the Fribourg alps. The central part of the area is the plains of Alluvial ( above sea level) next to the alps, between Gruy\u00e8res and Broc, from which the hill of Gruy\u00e8res rises to above sea level. From the west, the brook Tr\u00eame meets the Saane. East of the Saane, the municipality area ends in a small corner, bordered by the ridges of \"Dent de Broc\" ( above sea level) in the north and \"Dent du Chamois\" ( above sea level) in the south, ending at the valley of Mot\u00e9lon. The two peaks with their saddle between them are a popular subject for photographs of Gruy\u00e8res.\nSouthwest of Gruy\u00e8res, the municipality comprises most of the catchment area of the brook \"Albeuve\", which originates on the flanks of mount Mol\u00e9son. The top of mount Mol\u00e9son is the highest point of the municipality, reaching above sea level. West of the Mol\u00e9son, the densely wooded right valley side of the Tr\u00eame and the terrace of La Part Dieu belong to Gruy\u00e8res.\nThe municipality of Gruy\u00e8res also comprises the two villages of \u00c9pagny ( above sea level) to the north and Pringy ( above sea level) to the west of the town hill. Further, the small village \"Saussivue\" ( above sea level) to the south and the holiday settlement \"Mol\u00e9son-Village\" (above sea level) in the valley of the Albeuve in the foothills of mount Mol\u00e9son as well as several isolated farms. Neighbour municipalities of Gruy\u00e8res are Broc, Charmey, Bas-Intyamon, Haut-Intyamon, Semsales, Vaulruz, Vuadens, Bulle, La Tour-de-Tr\u00eame and Le P\u00e2quier.\nCoat of arms.\nThe blazon of the municipal coat of arms is \"Gules, a Crane rising Argent.\"\nDemographics.\nGruy\u00e8res has a population (as of December 2020[ [update]]) of . As of 2008[ [update]], 14.7% of the population are resident foreign nationals. Over the last 10 years (2000\u20132010) the population has changed at a rate of 21.2%. Migration accounted for 17.5%, while births and deaths accounted for 4.2%.\nMost of the population (as of 2000[ [update]]) speaks French (1,398 or 90.4%) as their first language, German is the second most common (60 or 3.9%) and Portuguese is the third (18 or 1.2%). There are 7 people who speak Italian and 2 people who speak Romansh.\nAs of 2008[ [update]], the population was 50.6% male and 49.4% female. The population was made up of 760 Swiss men (42.0% of the population) and 154 (8.5%) non-Swiss men. There were 764 Swiss women (42.3%) and 130 (7.2%) non-Swiss women. Of the population in the municipality, 508 or about 32.9% were born in Gruy\u00e8res and lived there in 2000. There were 598 or 38.7% who were born in the same canton, while 194 or 12.5% were born somewhere else in Switzerland, and 182 or 11.8% were born outside of Switzerland.\nAs of 2000[ [update]], children and teenagers (0\u201319 years old) made up 29.7% of the population, while adults (20\u201364 years old) made up 55% and seniors (over 64 years old) made up 15.3%.\nAs of 2000[ [update]], there were 684 people who were single and never married in the municipality. There were 710 married individuals, 94 widows or widowers and 58 individuals who are divorced.\nAs of 2000[ [update]], there were 581 private households in the municipality, and an average of 2.5 persons per household. There were 176 households that consist of only one person and 53 households with five or more people. In 2000[ [update]], a total of 562 apartments (64.4% of the total) were permanently occupied, while 257 apartments (29.5%) were seasonally occupied and 53 apartments (6.1%) were empty. As of 2009[ [update]], the construction rate of new housing units was 2.2 new units per 1000 residents. The vacancy rate for the municipality, in 2010[ [update]], was 0.74%.\nThe historical population is given in the following chart:\nEconomics.\nGruy\u00e8res has always been a rural town. Agricultural products from the surroundings were processed and brought to the market here. Formerly, the focus was on trading cheese and small and big animals. There were several mills and sawmills and since the 18th century a gunpowder factory. Until the beginning of the 20th century, straw-twisting was also rather important.\nAgriculture is still specialized in milk production and cattle-breeding. It delivers raw materials for the cheese production and meat treating. Most important is Gruy\u00e8re cheese. Forestry is also a factor, but tillage is less applied. In secondary sector, there are cabinetmaking, precision mechanics and craftworks. Services has a lot of jobs to offer in gastronomics and hotels. The villages of Epagny and Pringy have in the last years become a living place for commuters, mostly working in the town of Bulle.\nAs of \u00a02010[ [update]], Gruy\u00e8res had an unemployment rate of 2.5%. As of 2008[ [update]], there were 59 people employed in the primary economic sector and about 19 businesses involved in this sector. 229 people were employed in the secondary sector and there were 27 businesses in this sector. 447 people were employed in the tertiary sector, with 69 businesses in this sector. There were 757 residents of the municipality who were employed in some capacity, of which women made up 42.8% of the workforce.\nIn 2008[ [update]] the total number of full-time equivalent jobs was 601. The number of jobs in the primary sector was 44, of which 39 were in agriculture and 5 were in forestry or lumber production. The number of jobs in the secondary sector was 215 of which 120 or (55.8%) were in manufacturing and 95 (44.2%) were in construction. The number of jobs in the tertiary sector was 342. In the tertiary sector; 62 or 18.1% were in wholesale or retail sales or the repair of motor vehicles, 33 or 9.6% were in the movement and storage of goods, 131 or 38.3% were in a hotel or restaurant, 1 was in the information industry, 3 or 0.9% were technical professionals or scientists, 35 or 10.2% were in education and 45 or 13.2% were in health care.\nIn 2000[ [update]], there were 366 workers who commuted into the municipality and 478 workers who commuted away. The municipality is a net exporter of workers, with about 1.3 workers leaving the municipality for every one entering. Of the working population, 7.5% used public transportation to get to work, and 69.7% used a private car.\nHistory.\nGraves from the Hallstatt era and La T\u00e8ne era (325-250 BC) as well as other traces from the Bronze Age were discovered in Epagny. The remains of a Roman era villa from the 2nd-3rd century AD and an Early Middle Ages cemetery were also found nearby. A Roman settlement was probably located on a hill in Gruy\u00e8res.\nGruy\u00e8res stands in the midst of the Fribourg green pre-Alpine foothills. The castle towers above the medieval town. Gruerius, the legendary founder of Gruy\u00e8res, captured a crane (in French: \u201cgrue\u201d) and chose it as his heraldic animal, inspiring the name Gruy\u00e8res. Despite the importance of the House of Gruy\u00e8res, its beginnings remain quite mysterious. Gruy\u00e8res is first mentioned around 1138-39 as \"de Grueri\". The town developed beneath the castle, which the Count of Gruyere had built on top of the hill, to control the upper Saanen valley. By 1195-96 it became a market town with a central street and city walls. The town developed separately of the castle. In 1397 Count Rudolph IV of Gruy\u00e8res confirmed an older town charter that was based on the model of Moudon.\nOn 22 June 1476 Gruy\u00e8res participated in the Battle of Morat against Charles the Bold, Duke of Burgundy. With the help of the Old Swiss Confederacy, they routed the Burgundian army and captured three capes of the Order of the Golden Fleece which belonged to Charles the Bold including one with the emblems of Philip the Good, his father. At the time of the battle he was celebrating the anniversary of the death of his father.\nThe town church of Gruy\u00e8res originally belonged to the parish of Bulle. Count Rudolph III allowed the villages on the left bank of the Saane to build St. Theodul's church. When it was dedicated in 1254, it was the parish church of the new Gruy\u00e8res parish. The Counts of Gruy\u00e8res were buried under the altar of St. Michael in the church. It was mostly destroyed in 1670 and again in 1856 by fire, which only left the choir and tower undamaged. The renovated church was consecrated in 1860. In addition to the parish church, the Counts had the Chapel of St. John the Baptist in the castle, with two glass windows dating from the late 15th century. The Chapel of St. Moritz in the old hospital was built with the hospital in 1431. The Chapelle du Berceau was built in 1612, following a plague that killed 140.\nDuring the Thirty Years' War, nuns from St. Bernard and the Visitation Order fled from Besan\u00e7on and Dole to settle in Gruy\u00e8res. The latter remained in town between 1639 and 1651 and conducted a private school. Starting in the 15th century a primary school opened in town which was open mainly to boys. A secondary school opened in town in the 20th century but it moved in 1973 to Bulle. Gruy\u00e8res had a plague house which was first mentioned in 1341. The town's hospital was founded in the mid-15th century and remained in operation until the second half of the 19th century. One side of the hospital building housed the primary school until 1988 and was then renovated into a nursing home. Between 1891 and 1925 the Ingenbohl sisters ran the Deaf and Dumb Institute of Saint-Joseph in Gruy\u00e8res. In 1925 it moved to Fribourg.\nNineteen counts are accounted for in the period between the 11th and 16th centuries. The last of them, Michel, had been in financial trouble almost all his life only to end in bankruptcy in 1554. His creditors the cantons of Fribourg and Bern shared his earldom between them. From 1555 to 1798 the castle became residence to the bailiffs and then to the prefects sent by Fribourg. In 1849 the castle was put up for sale and sold to the Bovy and Balland families, who stayed at the castle during summer time and restored it with the help of their painter friends. The castle was then bought back by the canton of Fribourg in 1938, made into a museum and opened to the public. Since 1993, a foundation ensures the conservation as well as the highlighting of the building and the collection.\nGallery.\nTourism.\nGruy\u00e8re cheese is an important factor in supporting the tourist trade in the region. A major tourist attraction is the medieval town of Gruy\u00e8res with its castle, containing a regional museum and an arts museum. There are cultural activities in the castle (concerts, theater). There is a cheese factory in Pringy which is open to visitors. Nearby is Mont Mol\u00e9son, a mountain suitable for climbing, or for the less athletic there is a cablecar to the summit which was rebuilt in 1998. The resort town Mol\u00e9son-Village caters for both summer and winter tourism.\nIn 1998 Swiss surrealist painter, sculptor and set designer H. R. Giger acquired the Saint-Germain Castle, and it now houses the H. R. Giger Museum and Bar, a permanent repository of his work and is a popular tourist destination. Next to this, there is a museum holding antiquities from Tibet.\nMain sights.\nThe castle was constructed between 1270 and 1282 in the typical square plan of the fortifications in Savoy. The end of the 15th century stands out as the golden age in the history of the counts. In 1476, count Louis takes part in the Burgundy war by the Confederates\u2019 side. Following this deed of valour, modernization works were undertaken. The adjustment of the esplanade with its chapel, the spiral staircase in the courtyard and the transformation of the main building go back to that time. Thus, the castle loses its fortress appearance to become a stately residence. The baroque interiors remind one of the time when the bailiffs sent by Fribourg lived there. The romantic landscapes were painted in the mid-19th century by Jean-Baptiste-Camille Corot, Barth\u00e9lemy Menn and other artists.\nPolitics.\nIn the 2011 federal election the most popular party was the SP which received 28.8% of the vote. The next three most popular parties were the CVP (21.5%), the SVP (20.7%) and the FDP (14.4%).\nThe SPS improved their position in Gruy\u00e8res rising to first, from third in 2007 (with 21.4%) The CVP moved from first in 2007 (with 27.9%) to second in 2011, the SVP moved from second in 2007 (with 25.0%) to third and the FDP retained about the same popularity (15.9% in 2007). A total of 609 votes were cast in this election, of which 6 or 1.0% were invalid.\nReligion.\nFrom the 2000 census[ [update]], 1,261 or 81.6% were Roman Catholic, while 92 or 6.0% belonged to the Swiss Reformed Church. Of the rest of the population, there were 10 members of an Orthodox church (or about 0.65% of the population), and there were 43 individuals (or about 2.78% of the population) who belonged to another Christian church. There were 2 individuals (or about 0.13% of the population) who were Jewish, and 32 (or about 2.07% of the population) who were Islamic. There was 1 individual who belonged to another church. 74 (or about 4.79% of the population) belonged to no church, are agnostic or atheist, and 51 individuals (or about 3.30% of the population) did not answer the question.\nEducation.\nIn Gruy\u00e8res about 456 or (29.5%) of the population have completed non-mandatory upper secondary education, and 155 or (10.0%) have completed additional higher education (either university or a \"Fachhochschule\"). Of the 155 who completed tertiary schooling, 61.9% were Swiss men, 24.5% were Swiss women, 10.3% were non-Swiss men and 3.2% were non-Swiss women.\nThe Canton of Fribourg school system provides one year of non-obligatory Kindergarten, followed by six years of Primary school. This is followed by three years of obligatory lower Secondary school where the students are separated according to ability and aptitude. Following the lower Secondary students may attend a three or four year optional upper Secondary school. The upper Secondary school is divided into gymnasium (university preparatory) and vocational programs. After they finish the upper Secondary program, students may choose to attend a Tertiary school or continue their apprenticeship.\nDuring the 2010-11 school year, there were a total of 240 students attending 18 classes in Gruy\u00e8res. A total of 363 students from the municipality attended any school, either in the municipality or outside of it. There was one kindergarten class with a total of 17 students in the municipality. The municipality had 7 primary classes and 149 students. During the same year, there were 3 lower secondary classes with a total of 31 students. There were 2 vocational upper Secondary classes and were 5 upper Secondary classes, with 40 upper Secondary students and 3 vocational upper Secondary students The municipality had no non-university Tertiary classes, but there were 3 specialized Tertiary students who attended classes in another municipality.\nAs of 2000[ [update]], there were 31 students in Gruy\u00e8res who came from another municipality, while 109 residents attended schools outside the municipality.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36898", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36898", "title": "10s BC", "text": "Decade\nThis article concerns the period 19 BC \u2013 10 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36899", "revid": "48923851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36899", "title": "20s BC", "text": "Decade\nDecade\nThis article concerns the period 29 BC \u2013 20 BC.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36900", "revid": "1639942", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36900", "title": "Antioch", "text": "Hellenistic city, modern Antakya, Turkey\nAntioch on the Orontes (; , ) was a Hellenistic Greek city founded by Seleucus I Nicator in 300\u00a0BC. One of the most important Greek cities of the Hellenistic period, it served as the capital of the Seleucid Empire and later as regional capital to both the Roman and Byzantine Empire. During the Crusades, Antioch served as the capital of the Principality of Antioch, one of four Crusader states that were founded in the Levant. Its inhabitants were known as \"Antiochenes\". The remains of the ancient city of Antioch are mostly buried beneath alluvial deposits from the Orontes River. The modern city of Antakya, in Hatay Province of Turkey, lies in its place.\nAntioch was founded near the end of the 4th century BC by Seleucus I Nicator, one of Alexander the Great's generals, as one of the tetrapoleis of Seleucis of Syria. Seleucus encouraged Greeks from all over the Mediterranean to settle in the city. The city's location offered geographical, military, and economic benefits to its occupants; Antioch was heavily involved in the spice trade and lay within close reach of the Silk Road and the Royal Road. The city was the capital of the Seleucid Empire from 240\u00a0BC until 63\u00a0BC, when the Romans took control, making it the capital of the province of Syria and later of Coele Syria. During the late Hellenistic and Roman Principate periods, Antioch's population may have reached a peak of over 500,000 inhabitants (most generally estimate between 200,000 and 250,000), making the city the third largest in the Roman Empire after Rome and Alexandria and one of the most important cities in the eastern Mediterranean. From the early 4th century, Antioch was the seat of the \"comes Orientis\", head of the Diocese of the East. The Romans provided the city with walls that encompassed almost .\nThe city was the main center of Hellenistic Judaism at the end of the Second Temple period. As one of the cities of the pentarchy, Antioch was called \"the cradle of Christianity\" as a result of its longevity and the pivotal role that it played in the emergence of early Christianity. The Christian New Testament asserts that the name \"Christian\" first emerged in Antioch. The city declined to relative insignificance during the Middle Ages due to warfare, repeated earthquakes, and a change in trade routes. \nThe city still lends its name to the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate of Antioch, one of the most important modern churches of the Levant and the eastern Mediterranean. The city also attracts Muslim pilgrims who visit the Habib-i Nejjar Mosque, which they believe to contain the tomb of Habib the Carpenter, mentioned in surah Y\u0101-S\u012bn of the Quran.\nGeography.\nTwo routes from the Mediterranean Sea, lying through the Orontes River gorge and the Belen Pass, converge in the plain of the Antioch Lake, now called Lake Amik, and are met there by:\nPrehistory.\nA settlement called \"Meroe\" pre-dated Antioch. A shrine of the goddess Anat, called by Herodotus the \"Persian Artemis\", was located there. The site was included in the eastern suburbs of Antioch. There was a village on the spur of Mount Silpius named \"Io\", or \"Iopolis\". This name was adduced as evidence by Antiochenes (\"e.g.\" Libanius) eager to affiliate themselves to the Attic Ionians\u2014an eagerness which is illustrated by the Athenian types used on the city's coins. Io may have been a small early colony of trading Greeks (Javan). 5th century chronicler John Malalas mentions an archaic village, Bottia, in the plain by the river.\nFounding by Seleucus I.\nAlexander the Great is said to have camped on the site of Antioch and dedicated an altar to Zeus Bottiaeus; it lay in the northwest of the future city. This account is found only in the writings of Libanius, a 4th-century orator from Antioch, and may be legend intended to enhance Antioch's status.\nAfter Alexander's death in 323\u00a0BC, his generals, the Diadochi, divided up the territory he had conquered. After the Battle of Ipsos in 301 BC, Seleucus I Nicator won the territory of Syria, and he proceeded to found four \"sister cities\" in northwestern Syria, one of which was Antioch, a city named in honor of his father Antiochus; according to the \"Suda\", it might be named after his son Antiochus. He is reputed to have built 16 cities dubbed Antioch. Seleucus founded Antioch on a site chosen through ritual means. An eagle, the bird of Zeus, had been given a piece of sacrificial meat and the city was founded on the site to which the eagle carried the offering. Seleucus did this on the 22nd day of the month of Artem\u00edsios in the 12th year of his reign, equivalent to May 300 BC. Antioch soon rose above Seleucia Pieria to become the Syrian capital. \nHellenistic age.\nThe original city of Seleucus was laid out in imitation of the grid plan of Alexandria by the architect Xenarius. Libanius describes the first building and arrangement of this city (i. p.\u00a0300. 17). The citadel was on Mount Silpius, and the city lay mainly on the low ground to the north, fringing the river. Two great colonnaded streets intersected in the centre. A second walled area to the east was added by Antiochus I Soter. North of the city, Seleucus II Callinicus built a third walled area on an island within the Orontes. A fourth and last quarter was added by Antiochus IV Epiphanes; thenceforth Antioch was known as \"Tetrapolis\". From west to east the whole was about in diameter and a little less from north to south. This area included many large gardens.\nThe city was populated by a mix of local settlers that Athenians brought from nearby Antigonia, Macedonians, and Jews (who were given full status from the beginning). According to ancient tradition, Antioch was settled by 5,500 Athenians and Macedonians, together with an unknown number of native Syrians. This number probably refers to free adult citizens, so that the total number of free Greek settlers including women and children was probably between 17,000 and 25,000.\nAbout west and beyond the suburb Heraclea lay the paradise of Daphne, a park of woods and waters, in the midst of which rose a great temple to the Pythian Apollo, also founded by Seleucus I and enriched with a cult-statue of the god, as Musagetes, by Bryaxis. A companion sanctuary of Hecate was constructed underground by Diocletian. The beauty and the lax morals of Daphne were celebrated all over the ancient world; and indeed Antioch as a whole shared in both these titles to fame.\nAntioch became the capital and court-city of the western Seleucid Empire under Antiochus I, its counterpart in the east being Seleucia; but its paramount importance dates from the Battle of Ancyra (240\u00a0BC), which shifted the Seleucid centre of gravity from Anatolia and led indirectly to the rise of Pergamon.\nThe Seleucids reigned from Antioch. We know little of it in the Hellenistic period, apart from Syria, all our information coming from authors of the late Roman time. Among its great Greek buildings we hear only of the theatre, of which substructures still remain on the flank of Silpius, and of the royal palace, probably situated on the island. It enjoyed a reputation for being \"a populous city, full of most erudite men and rich in the most liberal studies\", but the only names of distinction in these pursuits during the Seleucid period that have come down to us are Apollophanes, the Stoic, and one Phoebus, a writer on dreams. The nicknames which they gave to their later kings were Aramaic; and, except Apollo and Daphne, the great divinities of north Syria seem to have remained essentially native, such as the \"Persian Artemis\" of Meroe and Atargatis of Hierapolis Bambyce.\nThe epithet \"Golden\" suggests that the external appearance of Antioch was impressive, but the city needed constant restoration owing to the seismic disturbances to which the district has always been subjected. The first great earthquake in recorded history was related by the native chronicler John Malalas. It occurred in 148\u00a0BC and did immense damage.\nLocal politics were turbulent. In the many dissensions of the Seleucid house the population took sides, and frequently rose in rebellion, for example against Alexander Balas in 147\u00a0BC, and Demetrius II Nicator in 129\u00a0BC. The latter, enlisting a body of Jews, punished his capital with fire and sword. In the last struggles of the Seleucid house, Antioch turned against its feeble rulers, invited Tigranes the Great to occupy the city in 83\u00a0BC, tried to unseat Antiochus XIII Asiaticus in 65\u00a0BC, and petitioned Rome against his restoration in the following year. Antioch's wish prevailed, and it passed with Syria to the Roman Republic in 64\u00a0BC, but remained a \"civitas libera\".\nRoman period.\nRoman rule before Constantine.\nThe Roman emperors favored the city, seeing it as a more suitable capital for the eastern part of the empire than Alexandria could be, because of the isolated position of Egypt. To a certain extent they tried to make it an eastern Rome. Julius Caesar visited it in 47\u00a0BC and confirmed its freedom. A great temple to Jupiter Capitolinus rose on Silpius, probably at the insistence of Octavian, whose cause the city had espoused. A Roman forum was laid out. Tiberius built two long colonnades on the south towards Silpius.\nStrabo, writing in the reign of Augustus and the first years of Tiberius, states that Antioch is not much smaller than Seleucia and Alexandria; Alexandria had been said by Diodorus Siculus in the mid-1st century BC to have 300,000 free inhabitants, which would mean that Antioch was about this size in Strabo's time.\nAgrippa and Tiberius enlarged the theatre, and Trajan finished their work. Antoninus Pius paved the great east to west artery with granite. Other colonnades and great numbers of baths were built, and aqueducts to supply them bore the names of caesars, the finest being the work of Hadrian. The Roman client King Herod (most likely Herod the Great), erected a long \"stoa\" on the east, and Marcus Vipsanius Agrippa encouraged the growth of a new suburb south of this.\nOne of the most famous Roman additions to the city was its hippodrome, the Circus of Antioch. This chariot racing venue was probably built in the reign of Augustus, when the city had more than half a million inhabitants; it was modelled on the Circus Maximus in Rome and other circus buildings throughout the empire. Measuring more than long and wide, the circus could house up to 80,000 spectators. The most important building though was the Imperial Palace. It housed the Roman emperor on occasion and may have originally been the Seleucid palace. According to Libanius, at his time the palace won in any comparison of its size and was unsurpassed in beauty.\nZarmanochegas (Zarmarus) a monk of the Sramana tradition of India, according to Strabo and Dio Cassius, met Nicholas of Damascus in Antioch around 13\u00a0AD as part of a mission to Augustus. At Antioch Germanicus died in 19\u00a0AD, and his body was burnt in the forum. An earthquake that shook Antioch in 37 caused Caligula to send two senators to report on the condition of the city. Another quake followed in the next reign. Titus visited Antioch in the spring of 71, where he encountered a crowd demanding the expulsion of Jews from the city. He refused, explaining that their country had been destroyed, and no other place would accept them. The crowd then sought to revoke the Jews' political privileges by asking Titus to remove the bronze tablets inscribed with their rights, but Titus declined once more.\nIn 115, during Trajan's travel there during his war against Parthia, the whole site was convulsed by a huge earthquake. The landscape altered, and Trajan was forced to take shelter in the circus for several days. He and his successor restored the city, but the population was reduced to less than 400,000 inhabitants, and many sections of the city were abandoned.\nCommodus had Olympic games celebrated at Antioch. In 256 the city was suddenly raided by the Persians under Shapur I, and many of the people were slain in the theatre. The city was burned, and some 100,000 inhabitants were killed while the rest were deported to Shapur's newly built city of Gundeshapur. It was recaptured by Valerian the following year.\nChristianity.\nAntioch was a chief center of early Christianity during Roman times, and converts there were the first people to be called Christians. The city had a large population of Jewish origin in a quarter called the Kerateion, and so attracted the earliest missionaries. Among these was Saint Peter, according to the tradition upon which the Patriarchate of Antioch still rests its claim for primacy. This is not to be confused with Antioch in Pisidia, to which Barnabas and Paul later travelled.\nBetween 252 and 300, ten assemblies of the church were held at Antioch, and it became the seat of one of the five original patriarchates, along with Constantinople, Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Rome. Today five churches use the title of patriarch of Antioch for their prime bishops: one Oriental Orthodox (the Syriac Orthodox Church); three Eastern Catholic (the Maronite, Syriac Catholic, and Melkite Greek Catholic Churches); and one Eastern Orthodox (the Greek Orthodox Church of Antioch). This title has been maintained though most of them have moved their seat to Damascus. This is somewhat analogous to the manner in which several popes, heads of the Roman Catholic Church remained \"Bishop of Rome\" even while residing in Avignon in the 14th century. The Maronite Church, which has also moved the seat away to Bkerk\u00e9, Lebanon, continues the Antiochene liturgical tradition and the use of the Syro-Aramaic language in their liturgies. Emperor Constantine, who had decriminalised Christianity in 313, began the building of the Domus Aurea or Great Church in 327 which served for the next two centuries as the leading church of Antioch. \nJohn Chrysostom writes that when Ignatius of Antioch was bishop in the city, the \"d\u00eamos,\" probably meaning the number of free adult men and women without counting children and slaves, numbered 200,000. In a letter written in 363, Libanius says the city contains 150,000 \"anthr\u00f4poi\" (plural of anthropos, human, a word which would ordinarily mean all human beings of any age, sex, or social status) seemingly indicating a decline in the population since the first century. Chrysostom also says in one of his homilies on the Gospel of Matthew, which were delivered between 386 and 393, that in his own time there were 100,000 Christians in Antioch, a figure which may refer to orthodox Christians who belonged to the Great Church as opposed to members of other groups such as Arians and Apollinarians, or to all Christians of any persuasion.\nAge of Julian and Valens.\nWhen the emperor Julian visited in 362 on a detour to the Sasanian Empire, he had high hopes for Antioch, regarding it as a rival to the imperial capital of Constantinople. Antioch had a mixed pagan and Christian population, which Ammianus Marcellinus implies lived quite harmoniously together. However, Julian's visit began ominously as it coincided with a lament for Adonis, the doomed lover of Aphrodite. Thus, Ammianus wrote, the emperor and his soldiers entered the city not to the sound of cheers but to wailing and screaming.\nAfter being advised that the bones of 3rd-century martyred bishop Babylas were suppressing the oracle of Apollo at Daphne, he made a public-relations mistake in ordering the removal of the bones from the vicinity of the temple. The result was a massive Christian procession. Shortly after that, when the temple was destroyed by fire, Julian suspected the Christians and ordered stricter investigations than usual. He also shut up Constantine's Great Church, before the investigations proved that the fire was the result of an accident.\nJulian found much else to criticize about the Antiochenes; he had wanted the empire's cities to be more self-managing, as they had been some 200\u00a0years before, but Antioch's city councilmen showed themselves unwilling to shore up a local food shortage with their own resources, so dependent were they on the emperor. Ammianus wrote that the councilmen shirked their duties by bribing unwitting men in the marketplace to do the job for them. Further, Julian was surprised and dismayed when at the city's annual feast of Apollo the only Antiochene present was an old priest clutching a goose, showing the decay of paganism in the town.\nAmmianus writes that the Antiochenes hated Julian in turn for worsening the food shortage with the burden of his billeted troops. His enthusiasm for large scale animal sacrifice meant that the soldiers were often to be found gorged on sacrificial meat, making a drunken nuisance of themselves on the streets while Antioch's hungry citizens looked on in disgust. The Christian Antiochenes and Julian's pagan Gallic soldiers also never quite saw eye to eye. Even to those who kept the old religion, Julian's brand of paganism was distasteful, being very much unique to himself, with little support outside the most educated Neoplatonist circles. Julian gained no admiration for his personal involvement in the sacrifices, only the nickname \"axeman\", wrote Ammianus. The emperor's high-handed, severe methods and his rigid administration prompted Antiochene lampoons about, among other things, Julian's unfashionably pointed beard.\nJulian's successor Valens endowed Antioch with a new forum, including a statue of his brother and co-emperor Valentinian I on a central column, and reopened the great church of Constantine, which stood until the Persian sack in 538, by Khosrow.\nTheodosius and after.\nIn 387 there was a great sedition caused by a tax levied by order of Theodosius I, and the city was punished by the loss of its metropolitan status. Theodosius placed Antioch under Constantinople's rule when he divided the Roman Empire. John Malalas, a chronicler writing in the 6th century, describes a theater in the city's suburb of Daphne that was built on the ruins of a synagogue. The theater had an inscription stating it was constructed \"from the spoils of Judaea\". He also mentions a gate of cherubs in the city, which Titus constructed using the spoils of the Second Temple.\nIn 490 or 491 CE, violent anti-Jewish riots broke out in Antioch. The events are recorded in the \"Chronicle\" of John Malalas, but the surviving accounts belong to two divergent narrative traditions that have long perplexed historians. The fullest Greek manuscript (\"Baroccianus Graecus\" 182) describes a violent outbreak in which the city's Green faction indiscriminately massacred local Jews; in this version, Emperor Zeno rebuked the Greens, not in defense of the Jews, but lamenting that they had only burned corpses rather than living Jews. A different tradition, preserved in later Slavonic versions and in excerpts compiled under Constantine VII Porphyrogenitus, distinguishes two phases: an initial clash in the hippodrome between the Blues and Greens, followed months later by a Green-led pogrom against Antioch's Jews, who were reportedly allied with the rival Blue faction. According to this account, many were killed, the Asabiniani synagogue was destroyed, and Jewish graves were desecrated.\nAntioch and its port, Seleucia Pieria, were severely damaged by an earthquake in 526. Seleucia Pieria, which was already fighting a losing battle against continual silting, never recovered. A second earthquake affected Antioch in 528. Justinian I renamed Antioch Theopolis (\"City of God\") and restored many of its public buildings, but the destructive work was completed in 540 Khosrow I, who deported the population to a newly built city in Persian Mesopotamia, Weh Antiok Khosrow. Antioch lost as many as 300,000 people. Justinian I made an effort to revive it, and Procopius describes his repairing of the walls; but its glory was past. Another earthquake in 588 destroyed the Domus Aureus of Constantine, whereafter the church of Cassian became the most important church of Antioch.\nDuring the Byzantine\u2013Sasanian War of 602\u2013628, the emperor Heraclius confronted the invading Persian army of Khosrow II outside Antioch in 613. The Byzantines were defeated by forces under the generals Shahrbaraz and Shahin Vahmanzadegan at the Battle of Antioch, after which the city fell to the Sassanians, together with much of Syria and eastern Anatolia.\nAntioch gave its name to a certain school of Christian thought, distinguished by literal interpretation of the Scriptures and insistence on the human limitations of Jesus. Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia were the leaders of this school. The principal local saint was Simeon Stylites, who lived an extremely ascetic life atop a pillar for 40\u00a0years some east of Antioch. His body was brought to the city and buried in a building erected under the emperor Leo. During the Byzantine era, great bathhouses were built in Byzantine centers such as Constantinople and Antioch.\nArab and Byzantine era.\nIn 637, during the reign of Heraclius, Antioch was conquered by Abu Ubayda ibn al-Jarrah of the Rashidun Caliphate during the Battle of the Iron Bridge, marking the beginning of Islamic influence in the region. The city became known in Arabic as . Under the Umayyad Caliphate (661\u2013750 AD), Antioch served as a significant military and administrative center. The Umayyads fortified the city, utilizing it as a base for operations in the region. The city remained an important urban center, with its multicultural population including Christians, Muslims, and Jews living together, although there were periods of tension and conflict. However, since the Umayyad dynasty was unable to penetrate the Anatolian Plateau, Antioch found itself on the frontline of the conflicts between two hostile empires during the next 350\u00a0years, so that the city went into a precipitous decline. During the Abbasid period (750\u2013969 AD), Antioch continued to thrive as a hub of commerce and culture. Under the Abbasids, closer relations were developed with Byzantium, but it was not until the Fatimids opened up the Mediterranean for shipping from the end of the 10th century that the affairs of western Europe and the Near East began to interact once again. The Abbasids placed a strong emphasis on trade, which facilitated economic prosperity in Antioch. The city became known for its diverse markets, contributing to the flow of goods and ideas between the Islamic world and the Byzantine Empire.\nThe decline of Arab rule in Antioch began in the late 9th century with increasing pressure from the Byzantine forces. The city changed hands several times during the Byzantine-Arab wars, Before finally in 969, under the Byzantine Emperor Nikephoros II Phokas, the city was captured after a siege by the Byzantine general Michael Bourtzes and the \"stratopedarches\" Peter. It soon became the seat of a \"doux\", the civil governor of the homonymous theme, but also the seat of the somewhat more important \"Domestic of the Schools of the Orient\", the supreme military commander of the imperial forces on the eastern frontier. Sometimes both offices were held by the same person, usually military officers such as Nikephoros Ouranos, or Philaretos Brachamios, who managed to retain the integrity of the eastern borderline after the Seljuk conquest of Anatolia. The size of the Melkite community increased during that time due to immigration from Christians from Fatimid Egypt but also other parts of the Near East, and Christians remained the dominant population up to the Crusades.\nAs the empire disintegrated rapidly before the Komnenian restoration, \"Dux of Antioch\" &amp; \"Domestic of the Schools of the East\" Philaretos Brachamios held the city until Suleiman ibn Qutalmish, the emir of Rum, captured it from him in 1084. Two years later, Suleiman was killed fighting against Tutush, the brother of the Seljuk Sultan, who annexed the city into the Seljuk Empire. Yagisiyan was appointed governor. He became increasingly independent within the tumultuous years following Malik-Shah's death in 1092.\nCrusader era.\nThe Crusaders' siege of Antioch conquered the city in June 1098 after a siege lasting eight months on their way to Jerusalem. At this time, the bulk of far eastern trade traveled through Egypt, but in the second half of the 12th century Nur ed-Din and later Saladin brought order to Muslim Syria, opening up long-distance trade routes, including to Antioch and on to its new port, St Symeon, which had replaced Seleucia Pieria. However, the Mongol conquests of the 13th century altered the main trade routes from the far east, as they encouraged merchants to take the overland route through Mongol territory to the Black Sea, reducing the prosperity of Antioch. Surrounding the city were a number of Greek, Syrian, Georgian, Armenian, and Latin monasteries.\nConsolidation of the Principality.\nIn 1100, Tancred became the regent of Antioch after his uncle and predecessor Bohemond I of Antioch was taken prisoner from 1100 to 1103 by Gazi G\u00fcm\u00fcshtigin of the Danishmends at the Battle of Melitene. Tancred expanded the territory of Antioch by conquering Byzantine Cilicia, Tarsus, and Adana in 1101. In 1107 Bohemond, enraged by an earlier defeat, renamed Tancred as the regent of Antioch so he could sail for Europe with the intent of gaining support for an attack against the Greeks.\nBohemond laid siege to Dyrrachium but capitulated in September 1108 and was forced to accede to a peace accord, the Treaty of Devol which stipulated that Bohemond was to hold Antioch for the remainder of his life as the emperor's subject and the Greek patriarch was to be restored to power in the city. However, Tancred refused to honor the treaty in which Bohemond swore an oath, and it is not until 1156 that it truly became a vassal state of the Byzantine Empire. Six months after the treaty Bohemond died, and Tancred remained regent of Antioch until his death during a typhoid epidemic in 1112.\nAfter the death of Tancred, the principality passed to Roger of Salerno, who helped rebuild Antioch after an earthquake destroyed its foundations in 1114. With the death of Roger at the Battle of Ager Sanguinis in 1119, the role of regent was assumed by Baldwin II of Jerusalem, lasting until 1126. In 1126 Bohemond II arrived from Apulia to gain regency over Antioch. In 1130 Bohemond was lured into an ambush by Leo I, Prince of Armenia who allied with the Danishmend Gazi G\u00fcm\u00fcshtigin, and was killed in the subsequent battle.\nAntioch was again ruled by a regency, firstly being Baldwin II, after his daughter and Bohemond II's wife, Alice of Antioch attempted to block Baldwin from entering Antioch, but failed when Antiochene nobles such as Fulk of Jerusalem (Alice's brother-in-law) opened up the gates for representatives of Baldwin II. Alice was then expelled from Antioch. With the death of Baldwin in 1131, Alice briefly took control of Antioch and allied herself with Pons of Tripoli and Joscelin II of Edessa in an attempt to prevent Fulk from marching north in 1132; however, this attempt failed. In 1133 the king chose Raymond of Poitiers as a groom for Constance of Antioch, daughter of Bohemund II of Antioch and Alice. The marriage took place in 1136 between the 21-year-old Raymond and the 9-year-old Constance.\nImmediately after assuming control, Raymond was involved in conflicts with the Byzantine Emperor John II Comnenus who had come south to recover Cilicia from Leo of Armenia, and to reassert his rights over Antioch. The engagement lasted until 1137 when John arrived with an army before the walls of Antioch. Although the basileus did not enter the city, his banner was raised atop the citade,l and Raymond was compelled to do homage. Raymond agreed with the emperor that if he was capable of capturing Aleppo, Shaizar, and Homs, he would exchange Antioch for them. John went on to attack Aleppo with the aid of Antioch and Edessa, and failed to capture it, with the Franks withdrawing their support when he moved on to capture Shaizar. John returned to Antioch ahead of his army and entered Antioch, only to be forced to leave when Joscelin II, Count of Edessa rallied the citizens to oust him. After the fall of Edessa in 1144, many Syriac Orthodox Christians came into the city, spreading the veneration of Mor Barsauma among the local population which resulted in the building of a church to the saint in 1156.\nSecond Crusade.\nNur ad-Din Zangi attacked Antioch in both 1147 and 1148 and succeeded during the second venture in occupying most of the territory east of the Orontes but failed to capture Antioch itself. Louis VII of France arrived in Antioch on March 19, 1148, where he was welcomed by the uncle of his spouse Eleanor of Aquitaine, Raymond of Poitiers. Louis refused to help Antioch defend against the Turks and to lead an expedition against Aleppo, and instead decided to finish his pilgrimage to Jerusalem rather than focus on the military aspect of the Crusades.\nWith Raymond dead and Bohemond III only five years of age, the principality came under the control of Constance; however, real control lay with Aimery of Limoges. In 1153, Constance chose Raynald of Ch\u00e2tillon and married him in secret without consulting her first cousin and liege lord, Baldwin III, and neither Baldwin nor Aimery of Limoges approved of her choice. In 1156 Raynald claimed that the Byzantine emperor Manuel I Comnenus had reneged on his promises to pay Raynald a sum of money, and would later attack Cyprus. This caused Manuel to raise an army to Syria. Raynald then surrendered, the emperor insisted on the installation of a Greek Patriarch and the surrender of the citadel in Antioch. The following spring, Manuel made a triumphant entry into the city and established himself as the unquestioned suzerain of Antioch.\nIn 1160 Raynald was captured by Muslims and held captive for 16 years. With Raynald disposed, the patriarch Aimery became the regent, chosen by Baldwin III. To further consolidate his own claim over Antioch, Manuel chose Maria of Antioch (daughter of Constance and Raymond) as his bride. Antioch remained in crisis until 1163 when Constance asked the Armenia to help maintain her rule, as a result the citizens of Antioch exiled her and installed her son Bohemond III and now brother-in-law to the emperor, as regent.\nOne year later, Nur ad-Din Zangi captured Bohemond III but was soon released; however, Harem, Syria, which Raynald had recaptured in 1158, was lost again and the frontier of Antioch was permanently placed west of the Orontes.\nThird Crusade.\nWhile travelling on crusade, Emperor Frederick Barbarossa drowned in the river Saleph. His son, Frederick VI, then led the remnant of the Crusader army south towards Antioch. Subsequently, he arranged for his father's remains to be buried in the Cathedral of Saint Peter in Antioch. Throughout the Third Crusade, Antioch remained neutral; however, with the end of the Third Crusade (1192), they were included in the Treaty of Ramla between Richard and Saladin.\nHenry II, Count of Champagne travelled to Lesser Armenia and managed to persuade Leo that in exchange for Antioch, renouncing its overlordship to Lesser Armenia and to release Bohemond, who died in 1201. With the death of Bohemond III there followed a 15-year struggle for power of Antioch, between Tripoli and Lesser Armenia. According to the rules of primogeniture Leo's great nephew Raymond-Roupen was the rightful heir of Antioch, and Leo's position was supported by the pope. On the other hand, however, the city commune of Antioch supported Bohemond IV of Antioch, on the grounds that he was the closest blood relative to the last ruling prince, Bohemond III. In 1207 Bohemond IV installed a Greek patriarch in Antioch, despite the East\u2013West Schism, under the help of Aleppo, Bohemond IV drove Leo out of Antioch.\nFifth Crusade.\nThe calling of the Fifth Crusade strengthened the support of Ayyubid Sultan al-Adil I who supported Raymond-Roupen's claims in Antioch. In 1216 Leo installed Raymond-Roupen as prince of Antioch, ending all military aspect of the struggle between Tripoli and Lesser Armenia, but the citizens again revolted against Raymond-Roupen in c.\u20091219 and Bohemond of Tripoli was recognised as prince. From 1233 onwards Antioch declined and appeared rarely in records for 30 years, and in 1254 the altercations of the past between Antioch and Armenia were laid to rest when Bohemond VI of Antioch married the then 17\u2011year\u2011old Sibylla of Armenia, and Bohemond VI became a vassal of the Armenian kingdom. Effectively, the Armenian kings ruled Antioch while the prince of Antioch resided in Tripoli. The Armenians drew up a treaty with the Mongols, who were now ravaging Muslim lands, and under protection they extended their territory into the lands of the Seljuq dynasty in the north and the Aleppo territory to the south. Antioch was part of this Armeno-Mongol alliance. Bohemond VI managed to retake Lattakieh and reestablished the land bridge between Antioch and Tripoli, while the Mongols insisted he install the Greek patriarch there rather than a Latin one as the Mongols wanted to strengthen ties to the Orthodox Byzantines.\nFall of Antioch.\nIn 1268, Baibars besieged Antioch, capturing the city on May 18. Baibars promised to spare the lives of the inhabitants, but broke his promise and razed the city, killing or enslaving nearly the entire population upon their surrender. Antioch's ruler, Prince Bohemond VI was then left with no territories except the County of Tripoli. Without any southern fortifications and with Antioch isolated it could not withstand the resurgent Muslim forces, and with the fall of the city, the remainder of northern Syria eventually capitulated, ending the Latin presence in Syria. The Mamluk armies killed or enslaved every Christian in Antioch. In 1355 it still had a considerable population, but by 1432 there were only about 300 inhabited houses within its walls, mostly occupied by Turcomans.\nOttoman period.\nAntioch was incorporated into the Ottoman Empire with the conquest of Syria in 1516. It formed a sub-province (\"sancak\") or tax collectorship (\"muhass\u0131ll\u0131k\") of the province of Aleppo (Aleppo Eyalet). Beginning in the mid-18th century, the district witnessed an influx of Alawite settlers coming from the Latakia area. The famous Barker family of British consuls had a summer home in Suwaydiyya (today's Samanda\u011f), at the mouth of the Orontes River, in the 19th century. Between 1831 and 1840, Antioch was the military headquarters of Ibrahim Pasha of Egypt during the Egyptian occupation of Syria, and served as a model site for the modernizing reforms he wished to institute.\nArchaeology.\nFew traces of the once great Roman city are visible today aside from the massive fortification walls that snake up the mountains to the east of the modern city, several aqueducts, and the Church of St Peter (St Peter's Cave Church, Cave-Church of St. Peter), said to be a meeting place of an early Christian community. The majority of the Roman city lies buried beneath deep sediments from the Orontes River, or has been obscured by recent construction.\nBetween 1932 and 1939, archaeological excavations of Antioch were undertaken under the direction of the \"Committee for the Excavation of Antioch and Its Vicinity\", which was made up of representatives from the Louvre Museum, the Baltimore Museum of Art, the Worcester Art Museum, Princeton University, Wellesley College, and later (1936) also the Fogg Art Museum at Harvard University and its affiliate Dumbarton Oaks. The excavation team failed to find the major buildings they hoped to unearth, including Constantine's Great Octagonal Church or the imperial palace. However, a great accomplishment of the expedition was the discovery of high-quality Roman mosaics from villas and baths in Antioch, Daphne and Seleucia Pieria.\nThe principal excavations by Princeton University in March 1932 recovered nearly 300 mosaics. Many of these mosaics were originally displayed as floor mosaics in private homes during the second through sixth centuries AD, while others were displayed in baths and other public buildings. The majority of the Antioch mosaics are from the fourth and fifth centuries, Antioch's golden age, though others from earlier times have survived as well. The mosaics depict a variety of images including animals, plants, and mythological beings, as well as scenes from the daily lives of people living in the area at the time. Each mosaic is bordered by intricate designs and contains bold, vibrant colors. One mosaic includes a border that depicts a walk from Antioch to Daphne, showing many ancient buildings along the way. The mosaics are now displayed in the Hatay Archaeology Museum in Antakya. A collection of mosaics on both secular and sacred subjects which were once in churches, private homes, and other public spaces now hang in the Princeton University Art Museum and museums of other sponsoring institutions. The non-Islamic coins from the excavations were published by Dorothy B. Waage.\nA statue in the Vatican and a number of figurines and statuettes perpetuate the type of its great patron goddess and civic symbol, the Tyche (Fortune) of Antioch\u00a0\u2013 a majestic seated figure, crowned with the ramparts of Antioch's walls and holding wheat stalks in her right hand, with the river Orontes as a youth swimming under her feet. According to William Robertson Smith the Tyche of Antioch was originally a young virgin sacrificed at the time of the founding of the city to ensure its continued prosperity and good fortune.\nThe northern edge of Antakya has been growing rapidly over recent years, and this construction has begun to expose large portions of the ancient city, which are frequently bulldozed and rarely protected by the local museum. In April 2016, archaeologists discovered a Greek mosaic showing a skeleton lying down with a wine pitcher and loaf of bread alongside a text that reads: \"Be cheerful, enjoy your life\", it is reportedly from the 3rd century BC. Described as the \"reckless skeleton\" or \"skeleton mosaic\", the mosaic is once thought to have belonged in the dining room of an upper-class home.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36901", "revid": "20611691", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36901", "title": "San Diego Zoo Safari Park", "text": "Zoo in San Diego, California\nThe San Diego Zoo Safari Park is a zoo and safari park in the San Pasqual Valley, in the northern part of the city of San Diego, California. Opened in 1972, the park operates as a sister location to the San Diego Zoo in Balboa Park; it features a more specific focus on animals from arid environments.\nThe park houses over 3,000 animals representing more than 300 species. It hosts a large array of wild and endangered animals from every continent except Antarctica. It also includes a botanical garden with over one million plants. In 2022, the park attracted over 1.6 million visitors.\nIts parent organization, the San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance, is a private nonprofit conservation organization, and has one of the largest zoological membership associations in the world. The San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance also operates the San Diego Zoo.\nHistory.\nThe San Diego Zoological Society became interested in developing a larger facility in 1964. The initial concept of the park was as a supplementary breeding facility for the San Diego Zoo, which would allow ample space for large animals and herding behaviors of ungulates.\nThe development proposed would differ significantly from that of a typical zoo in that animals would be exhibited in a naturalistic, spacious environment rather than in cages. In 1964, the park was assessed financially and then moved onto the next phase, with this resulting in three alternative developments\u2014a conservation farm, a game preserve, or a \u2018natural environment\u2019 zoo. The natural environment zoo development was chosen over the conservation farm and game preserve even though it was the most expensive option. The estimated initial cost was $1,755,430.\nThe main purposes of this zoo were to be species conservation, breeding of animals for the San Diego Zoo (as well as trading between zoos) and providing areas where exotic animals arriving to the state of California could be quarantined and monitored. When it came to naming the park, five titles were considered: San Diego Animal Land, San Diego Safari Land, San Diego Wild Animal Safari, or the San Diego Wildlife Park; ultimately, the name chosen was the San Diego Wild Animal Park.\nThe scheduled opening day of the park was set for April 1, 1972; however, the gates did not open until May 10, 1972. The general layout of the park, designed by Charles Faust, included a large lagoon with a jungle plaza, an African fishing village, an aviary at the entrance of the park and approximately 50,000 plants were to be included in the landscaping. Although the park was scheduled to open in three years from the time of the groundbreaking, the total development of the park was estimated to take ten years.\nThe first two species to arrive at the park were the nilgai (an antelope from India and Nepal) and the Grant's zebra, native to East Africa.\nSubsequent species to arrive at the park included the gemsbok, a type of oryx from Southern Africa and Namibia, in addition to Zambian sable antelope, greater kudu, southern and northern white rhinoceros subspecies (which were both in-danger of extinction), the one-horned Indian rhinoceros, as well as ten South African cheetahs, brought to the park for breeding purposes.\nWhen the park first opened, there were many cultural shows and programs, with groups invited from Africa and Asia. There were also many animal encounters and entertainment options available for guests to view various animal ambassador species.\nIn the summer of 2003, the San Diego Zoological Society and Lowry Park Zoo orchestrated the capture of 11 wild African elephants from the Hlane Royal National Park in Swaziland (since 2018 renamed to Eswatini). The zoos said the animals were scheduled to be killed due to overpopulation. However, In Defense of Animals disputes this, claiming that new fencing costing many times less than the capture and transport would have ended the need to remove any elephants from Swaziland, and that the Save Wild Elephants Coalition reported that there were three other sanctuaries in Africa that had offered to take the elephants. Five of these elephants are now at the park, and cumulatively, they have produced thirteen babies, as of 2013. In March 2012, five elephants were moved to the Reid Park Zoo in Tucson, Arizona, to form a new herd. A bull elephant, two cows, and two baby bulls were moved and, in return, two female elephants that had been together for years. Connie, an Asian elephant, and Shaba, an African elephant, were sent to the San Diego Zoo. Connie died from cancer in July 2012, just five months after the move. Shaba was slowly introduced into the herd in February 2013. On July 12, 2012, Ndulagave birth to Umzula. A male calf named Zuli was the largest elephant born at the park.\nThe California wildfire season in 2007, which officially started on October 21 that year, burned of native chaparral lands within the park and caused the park's temporarily closure. The park moved many of their endangered animals out of danger of the fire. The flames did not reach any of the main enclosures, and no animals were killed or burned by the fire, though the flames could be seen clearly from several of the exhibits. The incidental deaths of a clapper rail and kiang were attributed to indirect effects of the blaze.\nOn June 30, 2010, the San Diego Zoo board of trustees voted to change the name of the park from the San Diego Wild Animal Park to the San Diego Zoo Safari Park to clarify what it offers, since the difference between the zoo proper and the \"animal park\" was unclear to some visitors. The name \"safari\" is supposed to emphasize \"the park's spacious enclosures of free-ranging animals\" (as opposed to \"the closer quarters of the zoo\"), encouraging visits to both locations.\nIn July 2019, the park opened a new exhibit specifically for their rhinoceroses, the Nikhita Khan Rhino Centre (named after animal lover and lawyer Nikhita Khan), debuting as the home for six white rhinos. A few days after the center's opening, one of the rhinos (named Victoria) gave birth to Edward, a male calf, becoming the first rhinoceros in North America to be born via artificial insemination.\nIn April 2024, the Ellen Trout Zoo's male southern white rhinoceros, Bwana, permanently moved into this zoo to officially join its large crash. \nExhibits and attractions.\nAsian Savanna and African Plains.\nThe park's largest exhibits, covering over , are the open-range enclosures. Visitors view various plains habitats from Africa and Asia.\nAsian Savanna covers and displays Indian rhinoceros, Bactrian camels, banteng, gaur, urial, argali, dholes, and several species of Asian deer and antelope such as blackbuck, barasingha, North China sika deer, axis deer, Eld's deer, Indochinese sika deer P\u00e8re David's deer, nilgai, white-lipped deer, sambar deer, and Bactrian deer. A number of smaller enclosures visible only from the tram are home to Somali wild ass, Arabian oryx, Rhim gazelle, markhor, Soemmerring's gazelle, and Przewalski's horses.\nAfrican Plains represents many regions and habitats. East Africa displays African buffalo, southern white rhinoceros, Rothschild's giraffe, reticulated giraffe, fringe-eared oryx, waterbuck, Nile lechwe, red lechwe, impala, Grant's gazelle, Thomson's gazelle, and a lagoon with East African crowned cranes, pink-backed pelicans, Dalmatian pelicans, African sacred ibises and great white pelicans. The North Africa exhibit represents the Sahel and Sahara Desert that houses scimitar-horned oryx, Barbary stag, red-fronted gazelle, Barbary sheep, Dromedary camels, and Ankole-Watusi cattle. The Southern Africa field exhibits Gr\u00e9vy's zebras. The South Africa field exhibit holds Masai giraffes, common eland, sable antelope, gemsbok, springbok, blue wildebeest and ostrich. The Central Africa region features a wooded waterhole with an island for saddle-billed storks, spur-winged geese, Lappet-faced vultures, Goliath herons, Egyptian geese, and R\u00fcppell's vultures. On the shores of the lake are bongo antelope, red river hog, greater kudu, Ugandan kob, roan antelope, and other forest animals.\nSpecies of note in the open enclosures include two subspecies of giraffe, rhinos (it was the last New World zoo to have northern white rhinoceros), vultures, markhor, and many species of antelope, gazelle, and deer. The park houses the largest, most comprehensive collection of hoofed mammals (ungulates) in the world. However, the overall numbers of animals at the park have been greatly reduced.\nTiger Trail.\nThe Sumatran tigers, Denver and Rakan (male), Majel, Cathy, Debbie, and Diana, have three different exhibits, and there is a glass viewing window for visitors. After raising $19.6 million for the new exhibit ground was broken on December 12, 2012. The new exhibit is named the Tull Family Tiger Trail after movie producer Thomas Tull and his wife. Tiger Trail opened May 24, 2014. In August 2017, a Bengal tiger cub named Moka was rescued by border police from a car on the Mexican border and brought to the zoo. \nThe exhibits' matriarch, Delta, was euthanized on July 29, 2018, shortly after her birthday, due to old age. Her daughter, Joanna, succeeded her as the matriarch until June 30, 2021 when she was relocated to the Phoenix Zoo. \nOn July 12, 2023, Diana gave birth to two Sumatran tigers named Hutan and Puteri. Puteri means \"princess\" in Malay, the official language of Malaysia \u2014 one of few Asian territories where the Sumatran tigers can be found. Hutan is Malay for \u201cforest.\nNairobi Village and Gorilla Forest.\nOriginally a center for cultural events in the park, today Nairobi Village houses numerous exhibits for smaller animals. Among these are meerkats, Rodrigues fruit bats, an African aviary, ring-tailed lemurs, Chilean flamingos, pud\u00fa, fennec foxes Kirk's dik-diks, sand cats, yellow-backed duikers, red river hogs, West African crowned cranes, North Sulawesi babirusa, South American coatis, lesser hedgehog tenrecs, black-footed cats, pancake tortoises and white-fronted bee-eaters. A large lagoon is home to numerous species of waterfowl, both foreign and native. Lorikeet Landing and Hidden Jungle display feedable lories and lorikeets, and African birds, respectively. There is a nursery where visitors can watch baby animals being hand-reared as well as a nearby petting corral. Finally, a habitat houses a troop of western lowland gorillas. In 2014, Imami gave birth to Joanne despite a respiratory problem. She and Joanne were treated for 11 days.\nIn 2019 medical experts collaborated to do cataract surgery on a three-year-old gorilla, Leslie. This was the park's first cataract surgery on a gorilla.\nIn January 2021, two gorillas were reported to be the first known cases of COVID-19 transmission from humans to apes during the coronavirus pandemic. The gorillas recovered from the virus.\nHidden Jungle.\nLocated in Nairobi Village, this climate-controlled indoor exhibit opened in 1993 and displays tropical African birds and insects. The entrance to the building is a simulated earthen crevasse with displays for stick insects, spiders, scorpions, insects, millipedes, lizards, and snakes. The underground segment opens up to a room representing the rainforest understory, which leads to a second room representing the canopy. On display are long-tailed paradise whydah, purple grenadier, red-crested turaco, African pygmy goose, beautiful sunbird and other birds.\nHidden Jungle is the setting of the annual \"Butterfly Jungle\" event.\nLion Camp.\nOpened in October 2004, Lion Camp houses the park's six African lions, Izu, Mina, Oshana and Etosha in a exhibit. The park's two other lions, Ernest and Miss Ellen, were moved to the San Diego Zoo. One side of the enclosure is dominated by an artificial rock kopje which has a glass viewing window and heated rocks. The path continues along an acacia-studded ravine and leads to a replica observation tent. This has a smaller viewing window as well as a Land Rover for the lions to rest on.\nCondor Ridge.\nCondor Ridge displays endangered North American desert wildlife. The featured species are California condors and desert bighorn sheep. The park is noted for its breeding program; it was the key force in the recovery effort for the birds. It is one of the only places in the world where the public can see the species in captivity. Other species displayed include Aplomado falcons, San Clemente loggerhead shrikes, thick-billed parrots, ocelots, bald eagles, Harris's hawks, squirrels, burrowing owls, prairie dogs, black footed ferrets, magpies, and desert tortoises.\nAfrican Woods and African Outpost.\nFormerly known as Heart of Africa, these are two of the park's major exhibits. Visitors go down a trail which replicates habitats in Africa. The exhibit begins in African Woods with scrub animals - vultures, lesser kudu, and giant eland. It then progresses to the forest (okapi, red-flanked duikers, gerenuk, steenbok, demoiselle cranes, kori bustard, blue cranes, and wattled cranes). The path then leads to African Outpost, which features plains animals - bontebok, warthogs, bat-eared foxes, secretary birds, yellow-billed storks, ground hornbills, cheetahs, and nyala - against a backdrop of the open-range East Africa exhibit. A central lagoon has lesser and greater flamingos, waterfowl, an island with colobus monkeys, and an interpretive research camp on a separate island.\nTours and rides.\nThe park formerly operated a monorail line, the Wgasa Bush Line, which ran clockwise through the Wild Animal Park. The name of the monorail was originally chosen by chief designer Chuck Faust as a profane inside joke, with \"WGASA\" being an acronym for \"who gives a shit anyway\". Zoo officials later came up with a backronym for the name, saying that it stood for \"World\u2019s Greatest Animal Show Anywhere\".\nThe Monorail line has been retired, partially due to high maintenance costs, and in March 2007 the Journey into Africa attraction, now renamed Africa Tram, opened. The Africa Tram tour runs counterclockwise and brings visitors to the field exhibits to see wildlife from different parts of Africa. In addition, another route is planned to bring visitors through the Asian field exhibits and into eight new ones that will house a variety of African animals from rock hyrax to Hartmann's mountain zebras. The tour uses a wheeled tram that runs on biofuel instead of a monorail.\nAs well as the tram, the park has also added a tethered balloon ride that allows visitors to see the plains exhibits from (~21 giraffes) in the air. The balloon ride is not included in the entrance fee.\nGardens.\nThe park also has extensive botanical gardens, many of which are their own attractions separate from the animal exhibits.\nWalkabout Australia.\nWalkabout Australia is the park's only Australia exhibit. It is 3.6 acres and guests can go inside an exhibit which features western grey kangaroos, red-necked wallabies, Australian brushturkeys, radjah shelducks, freckled ducks and magpie geese. Walkabout Australia also has two southern cassowary exhibits, a Matschie's tree-kangaroo exhibit and an animal ambassador area where guests can meet the safari park's Australian animal ambassadors. Walkabout Australia also has a restaurant and a devil's marbles area. It is also home to the only two platypuses outside of Australia, Birrarung and Eve. The exhibit opened in 2018.\nConservation.\nThe park includes the world's largest veterinary hospital. Adjacent to the hospital is the Institute for Conservation Research, which houses the San Diego Zoo's and Safari Park's Frozen Zoo. The park is Southern California's quarantine center for zoo animals imported into the United States through San Diego. \nThe safari park was a major factor in the recovery of the California condor. Beginning in 1980, it worked with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the Los Angeles Zoo to start a captive breeding program. The last 22 condors were taken into captivity in 1987 To breed the condors quickly, the Safari Park would remove the eggs from the nests to induce the females to lay a second egg. The removed egg hatches in an incubator and is raised with a condor handpuppet to prevent human imprinting, while the second egg is raised by its parents. The first condor born through this process is Siscouc, a male condor, who was the patriarch of the flock (last chick, Kitwon). Now that title goes to Siwon. Captive-bred condors were reintroduced into the wild beginning in 1992, and today their population 500, with 200 in the wild as of November 2020.\nOn December 14, 2014, Angalifu, a 44-year-old male northern white rhinoceros, died of old age at the park. This left only five northern white rhinos left in the world, including one female at the Safari Park.\nOn November 22, 2015, the park's last northern white rhino, 41-year-old Nola, was euthanized due to bacterial infection and her health rapidly failing.\nIn June 2019, two young male African elephants named Ingadze and Lutsandvo were sent to Alabama's Birmingham Zoo as part of the Association of Zoos and Aquariums' Species Survival Plan.\nOn 28 July 2019, the zoo announced the birth of Edward, a male Southern White Rhinoceros, the first rhino in North America born through artificial insemination, born to Victoria and Maoto. The second rhino born through artificial insemination, Future, a female southern White rhinoceros, was also born in the park. On August 12, 2018, the zoo announced the birth of Zuli, a male elephant born to Ndula, the largest calf born at the zoo, of 299 pounds. The record was broken six weeks later by Kaia, a female elephant born to Umngani, at 320 pounds.\nAwards.\nThe Safari Park has received several awards for its breeding programs and conservation efforts.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36907", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36907", "title": "Moustapha Akkad", "text": "Syrian director (1930\u20132005)\nMoustapha al Akkad (; July 1, 1930 \u2013 November 11, 2005) was a Syrian-American film producer and director, best known for producing the original series of \"Halloween\" films and directing \"The Message\" and \"Lion of the Desert\". He was killed along with his daughter Rima Al Akkad Monla in the 2005 Amman bombings. He is also the cousin of television personality star Tareq Salahi.\nEarly life.\nAl Akkad was born on July 1, 1930, in Aleppo in the French Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon. He received his high school degree from the Aleppo American College. His father, then a customs officer, gave him $200 and a copy of the Quran before he left for the United States to study film direction and production at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Akkad spent a further three years studying for a Master's degree at the University of Southern California (USC), where he met the director Sam Peckinpah. Peckinpah became Akkad's mentor in Hollywood and hired him as a consultant for a film about the Algerian War that never made it to the big screen, but he continued to encourage him until he found a job as a producer at CBS.\nCareer.\nIn 1976, he produced and directed \"Mohammad, Messenger of God\" (released as \"The Message\" in 1977 in the United States), starring Anthony Quinn and Irene Papas. Akkad faced resistance from Hollywood, which forced him to make the film in Morocco.\nWhile creating \"Muhammad, Messenger of God\", he consulted Islamic clerics, he wanted and tried to be respectful towards Islam and its views on portraying Muhammad. He got the Approval from Al-Azhar University in Egypt but was rejected by the Muslim World League in Mecca, Saudi Arabia. The Governments of Kuwait, Libya and Morocco promised to support the film financially, and when it was rejected by the Muslim World League, Kuwait kept its financial support but stopped other kinds of supports. King Hassan II of Morocco gave his full support for the production of the film. The production took one year, Akkad filmed for 6 months in Morocco, but had to stop when the Saudi Government exerted great pressure on the government of Morocco to stop the production. Akkad went to Muammar Gaddafi of Libya for support in order to complete the project, Gaddafi allowed him to move the filming to Libya for the remaining 6 months until the film was finalized.\nAkkad saw the film as a way to bridge the gap between the Western and Muslim worlds, stating in a 1976 interview:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I did the film because it is a personal thing for me ... Being a Muslim myself who lived in the west I felt that it was my obligation my duty to tell the truth about Islam. It is a religion that has a 700 million following, yet it's so little known about which surprised me. I thought I should tell the story that will bring this [history] to the west.\nIn 1978, he helped make low-budget film history when he produced \"Halloween\". Akkad became best known for his key involvement in the first eight \"Halloween\" films, as an executive producer (the only producer to participate in all of these films). The series was highly profitable and hugely influential to subsequent horror films. \nIn 1980 he directed \"Lion of the Desert\", in which Quinn and Irene Papas were joined by Oliver Reed, Rod Steiger, and John Gielgud. It was about the real-life Bedouin leader Omar Mukhtar (Quinn), who fought Benito Mussolini's Italian troops in the deserts of Libya. The movie is now critically acclaimed, after initially receiving negative publicity in the West for being partially funded by Libya's Muammar Gaddafi, who invested $35 million in the movie. This negative publicity may have been the cause of its relatively poor performance at the box office. Clint Morris describes the movie as: \"A grand epic adventure that'll stand as a highpoint in the producing career of Moustapha Akkad.\" In 1985, his production company Trancas International Films had inked an agreement with Galaxy International releasing in order to release films for a seven-picture agreement worldwide.\nIn the United Kingdom, Akkad once tried to buy Pinewood Studios from The Rank Organisation and also had a studio at Twickenham. At the time of his death, he was in the process of producing an $80 million movie featuring Sean Connery about Saladin and the Crusades, for which he already had the script, that would be filmed in Jordan. Speaking of the film, he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Saladin exactly portrays Islam. Right now, Islam is portrayed as a terrorist religion. Because a few terrorists are Muslims, the whole religion has that image. If there ever was a religious war full of terror, it was the Crusades. But you can't blame Christianity because a few adventurers did this. That's my message.\nDeath.\nAkkad and his 34-year-old daughter, Rima Akkad Monla, were killed in the 2005 Amman bombings. They were both in the lobby at the Grand Hyatt Amman on November 9 when a bomb exploded; his daughter died instantly, and Akkad died of his injuries two days later in a hospital. He is buried in the Al-Jadidah Cemetery in Aleppo, Syria.\nAkkad was survived by his former wife, Patricia Al Akkad and their sons, Taric and Malek, who helped produce most of the \"Halloween\" movies, as well as his widow, Suha Ascha Akkad, and their son Zade.\nLegacy.\nHe was honoured by his native city of Aleppo, and the Aleppo City Council has renamed a school and a street after Moustapha Akkad. In 2008, a street in downtown Beirut was renamed after Moustapha Akkad. The 2007 remake of \"Halloween\" was dedicated to Moustapha Akkad. The 2018 film \"Halloween\", a direct sequel to the 1978 original film, also features a dedication to Akkad in the end credits.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36908", "revid": "6490875", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36908", "title": "Service club", "text": "Type of voluntary nonprofit organization\nA service club or service organization is a voluntary nonprofit organization where members meet regularly to perform charitable works either by direct hands-on efforts or by raising money for other organizations. A service club is defined firstly by its service mission and secondly by its membership benefits, such as social occasions, networking, and personal growth opportunities that encourage involvement.\nService organizations are not necessarily exclusive of ideological motives, although organizations with such defined motives are more likely to identify themselves through their association. Much like the historical religious organizations that formed the basis for many societal institutions, such as hospitals, service organizations perform many essential services for their community and other worthy causes. In the United States, some of these clubs usually also have a component club organization that is a tax exempt 501(c)(3) nonprofit organization.\nMany of today's service clubs started as social clubs for business networking, but quickly evolved into organizations devoted more to service than to networking, although networking may still be the primary reason many members decided to join.\nHistorically, most service clubs consist of community-based groups with the same name, goals, membership requirements, and meeting structure. Many of these clubs meet weekly, bi-weekly, or monthly on a recurring established day and time, commonly at mealtime. Most of these clubs started with a single club in a single city but then replicated themselves by organizing similar clubs in other communities. Many of the service club organizations have become worldwide movements, and have obtained official recognition by the United Nations and various governments as non-governmental organizations (NGO).\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36909", "revid": "44220063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36909", "title": "Melissa Sue Anderson", "text": "American-Canadian actress (born 1962)\nMelissa Sue Anderson (born September 26, 1962) is an American-Canadian actress. She began her career as a child actress after appearing in several commercials in Los Angeles. Anderson is known for her role as Mary Ingalls in the NBC drama series \"Little House on the Prairie\" (1974\u20131983), for which she received a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Drama Series.\nShe is also known for film roles that include Vivian in \"Midnight Offerings\" (1981), Ginny in the slasher film \"Happy Birthday to Me\" (1981), and Alex in the \"ABC Afterschool Special\", \"Which Mother Is Mine?\" (1979).\nAnderson became a naturalized citizen of Canada in 2007. In 2010, she published \"The Way I See It: A Look Back at My Life on Little House\", an autobiographical account of her years acting in \"Little House on the Prairie\".\nEarly life.\nAnderson was born on September 26, 1962, in Berkeley, California, the second of two daughters, to James and Marion Anderson. Her sister Maureen is 12 years her senior. When she was seven years old, Anderson's family relocated from the San Francisco Bay Area to Los Angeles. Her parents divorced when she was 13 years old, and she was raised Roman Catholic by her mother. As a young child, Anderson appeared in commercials for Mattel and Sears.\nCareer.\nAnderson's show-business career began when a dance teacher urged her parents to find an agent for her. After appearing in commercials, she was soon in demand for television roles. Another memorable early role was as Millicent, a girl who kissed Bobby in \"The Brady Bunch\". She also appeared in an episode of \"Shaft\" the same year.\nAt the age of 11, Anderson landed the role of Mary Ingalls in \"Little House on the Prairie\". She would go on to star in the series for eight seasons, beginning in 1974, and leaving after season seven; she later appeared in three episodes of season eight in late 1981.\nIn 1976, Michael Landon asked Anderson if she would appear in his autobiographical film \"The Loneliest Runner\". Anderson agreed to play Nancy Rizzi, the first girlfriend of John Curtis (based on Landon and played by Lance Kerwin), saying she was very thrilled to have been asked. In 1977, she once again co-starred as the love interest opposite Kerwin in the television film \"James at 15\".\nShe was nominated for a 1978 Primetime Emmy Award for Best Leading Actress in a Drama Series for her work on \"Little House on the Prairie\" and won the Emmy Award for her performance in \"Which Mother Is Mine?\", which aired as an \"ABC Afterschool Special\" in 1979. Also in 1979, she played the title role of Dana Lee Gilbert, a North Dakota transfer student to Los Angeles' San Fernando Valley, in CBS's television film \"Survival of Dana\".\nIn 1980, Anderson earned a 'TP de Oro' Award (considered to be Spain's most prestigious award for television) for 'Best Foreign Actress' for her role in \"Little House on the Prairie\". This followed a successful visit to Spain in 1979 to appear as a guest on 's program, \"625 Lineas\". In 1981, she earned a Young Artist Award nomination for her performance in the Canadian slasher film \"Happy Birthday to Me\". After leaving \"Little House\", she continued acting in television series like \"The Equalizer\", \"Alfred Hitchcock Presents\", \"CHiPs\", and \"Murder, She Wrote\", and was the associate producer for the penultimate television project Michael Landon made before dying: \"Where Pigeons Go to Die\" (1990).\nIn 1998, she was inducted into the Western Performers Hall of Fame at the National Cowboy &amp; Western Heritage Museum in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. In 1999, she starred alongside Heather Langenkamp in the short-lived television series \"Partners\". In 2014, Anderson had an uncredited appearance as Stosh's mother in the neo-noir mystery comedy drama film \"Veronica Mars\" (2014).\nBook.\nIn 2010, Anderson released an autobiography titled \"The Way I See It: A Look Back at My Life on Little House\". The book, which is primarily based on her life during her years as a child star in \"Little House on the Prairie\", contains behind-the-scenes stories and anecdotes about the show itself, its stars, guest stars, and crew members. The autobiography also covers her pre\u2013 and post\u2013\"Little House\" career, her side-projects during the \"Little House\" years and how her personal life was affected by her career.\nPersonal life.\nAnderson married television writer and producer Michael Sloan in 1990. They have two children, daughter Piper and son Griffin. The family moved to Montreal in 2002 and became naturalized Canadians on Canada Day in 2007. Sloan, who by now was living in New York City, died on August 13, 2025.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36911", "revid": "1659925", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36911", "title": "Antipater of Sidon", "text": "Ancient Greek poet; best known for his list of the Seven Wonders of the World\nAntipater of Sidon (Greek: \u1f08\u03bd\u03c4\u03af\u03c0\u03b1\u03c4\u03c1\u03bf\u03c2 \u1f41 \u03a3\u03b9\u03b4\u03ce\u03bd\u03b9\u03bf\u03c2, \"Antipatros ho Sidonios\") was an ancient Greek poet of the 2nd and 1st centuries BCE.\nCicero mentions him living in Rome during the time of Quintus Lutatius Catulus, and calls him a brilliant epigrammist, sometimes too fond of imitation. His poems, about 75 of which are preserved in the \"Greek Anthology\", are mostly epitaphs and ecphrastic poems. 96 poems in the \"Greek Anthology\" are attributed simply to \"Antipater\", without an indication of whether they are by Antipater of Sidon or the later Antipater of Thessalonica, and it is difficult to identify which are his.\nOne of his poems gives one of the earliest known lists of the Seven Wonders of the Ancient World.\nI have set eyes on the wall of lofty Babylon on which is a road for chariots, and the statue of Zeus by the Alpheus, and the hanging gardens, and the Colossus of the Sun, and the huge labour of the high pyramids, and the vast tomb of Mausolus; but when I saw the house of Artemis that mounted to the clouds, those other marvels lost their brilliancy, and I said, \"Lo, apart from Olympus, the Sun never looked on aught so grand.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36914", "revid": "50937336", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36914", "title": "Egg (disambiguation)", "text": "An egg is an organic vessel in which an embryo begins to develop.\nEgg, EGG or eggs may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36915", "revid": "20248368", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36915", "title": "Arabesque", "text": "Decorative pattern, characteristic of Muslim art\nThe arabesque is a form of artistic decoration consisting of \"surface decorations based on rhythmic linear patterns of scrolling and interlacing foliage, tendrils\" or plain lines, often combined with other elements. Another definition is \"Foliate ornament, used in the Islamic world, typically using leaves, derived from stylised half-palmettes, which were combined with spiralling stems\". It usually consists of a single design which can be 'tiled' or seamlessly repeated as many times as desired. Within the very wide range of Eurasian decorative art that includes motifs matching this basic definition, the term \"arabesque\" is used consistently as a technical term by art historians to describe only elements of the decoration found in two phases: Islamic art from about the 9th century onwards, and European decorative art from the Renaissance onwards. Interlace and scroll decoration are terms used for most other types of similar patterns.\nArabesques are a fundamental element of Islamic art. The past and current usage of the term in respect of European art is confused and inconsistent. Some Western arabesques derive from Islamic art, however others are closely based on ancient Roman decorations. In the West they are essentially found in the decorative arts, but because of the generally non-figurative nature of Islamic art, arabesque decoration is often a very prominent element in the most significant works, and plays a large part in the decoration of architecture.\nClaims are often made regarding the theological significance of the arabesque and its origin in a specifically Islamic view of the world; however, these are without support from written historical sources since, like most medieval cultures, the Islamic world has not left us documentation of their intentions in using the decorative motifs they did. At the popular level such theories often appear uninformed as to the wider context of the arabesque. In similar fashion, proposed connections between the arabesque and Arabic knowledge of geometry remains a subject of debate; not all art historians are persuaded that such knowledge had reached, or was needed by, those creating arabesque designs, although in certain cases there is evidence that such a connection did exist. The case for a connection with Islamic mathematics is much stronger for the development of the geometric patterns with which arabesques are often combined in art. Geometric decoration often uses patterns that are made up of straight lines and regular angles that somewhat resemble curvilinear arabesque patterns; the extent to which these too are described as arabesque varies between different writers.\nIslamic arabesque.\nThe Islamic arabesque was probably invented in Baghdad around the 10th century. It first appeared as a distinctive and original development in Islamic art in carved marble panels from around this time.\nWhat makes Islamic arabesque unique and distinct from vegetal decorations of other cultures is its infinite correspondence and the fact that it can be extended beyond its actual limits. The arabesque developed out of the long-established traditions of plant-based scroll ornament in the cultures taken over by the early Islamic conquests. Early Islamic art, for example in the famous 8th-century mosaics of the Great Mosque of Damascus, often contained plant-scroll patterns, in that case by Byzantine artists in their usual style. The plants most often used are stylized versions of the acanthus, with its emphasis on leafy forms, and the vine, with an equal emphasis on twining stems. The evolution of these forms into a distinctive Islamic type was complete by the 11th century, having begun in the 8th or 9th century in works like the Mshatta Facade. In the process of development the plant forms became increasingly simplified and stylized. The relatively abundant survivals of stucco reliefs from the walls of palaces (but not mosques) in Abbasid Samarra, the Islamic capital between 836 and 892, provide examples of three styles, Styles A, B, and C, though more than one of these may appear on the same wall, and their chronological sequence is not certain. \nThough the broad outline of the process is generally agreed, there is a considerable diversity of views held by specialist scholars on detailed issues concerning the development, categorization and meaning of the arabesque. The detailed study of Islamic arabesque forms was begun by Alois Riegl in his formalist study \"Stilfragen: Grundlegungen zu einer Geschichte der Ornamentik\" (\"Problems of style: foundations for a history of ornament\") of 1893, who in the process developed his influential concept of the \"Kunstwollen\". Riegl traced formalistic continuity and development in decorative plant forms from ancient Egyptian art and other ancient Near Eastern civilizations through the classical world to the Islamic arabesque. While the \"Kunstwollen\" has few followers today, his basic analysis of the development of forms has been confirmed and refined by the wider \"corpus\" of examples known today. Jessica Rawson has recently extended the analysis to cover Chinese art, which Riegl did not cover, tracing many elements of Chinese decoration back to the same tradition, the shared background helping make the assimilation of Chinese motifs into Persian art after the Mongol invasion harmonious and productive.\nMany arabesque patterns disappear at (or \"under\", as it often appears to a viewer) a framing edge without ending and thus can be regarded as infinitely extendable outside the space they actually occupy; this was certainly a distinctive feature of the Islamic form, though not without precedent. Most but not all foliage decoration in the preceding cultures terminated at the edge of the occupied space, although infinitely repeatable patterns in foliage are very common in the modern world in wallpaper and textiles.\nTypically, in earlier forms there is no attempt at realism; no particular species of plant is being imitated, and the forms are often botanically impossible or implausible. \"Leaf\" forms typically spring sideways from the stem, in what is often called a \"half-palmette\" form, named after its distant and very different looking ancestor in ancient Egyptian and Greek ornament. New stems spring from leaf-tips, a type often called honeysuckle, and the stems often have no tips, winding endlessly out of the space. The early Mshatta Facade is recognisably some sort of vine, with conventional leaves on the end of short stalks and bunches of grapes or berries, but later forms usually lack these. Flowers are rare until about 1500, after which they appear more often, especially in Ottoman art, and are often identifiable by species. In Ottoman art the large and feathery leaves called \"saz\" became very popular, and were elaborated in drawings showing just one or more large leaves. Eventually floral decoration mostly derived from Chinese styles, especially those of Chinese porcelain, replaces the arabesque in many types of work, such as pottery, textiles and miniatures.\nSignificance in Islam.\nThe arabesques and geometric patterns of Islamic art are often said to arise from the Islamic view of the world (see above). The depiction of animals and people is generally discouraged, which explains the preference for abstract geometric patterns.\nThere are two modes to arabesque art. The first mode recalls the principles that govern the order of the world. These principles include the bare basics of what makes objects structurally sound and, by extension, beautiful (i.e. the angle and the fixed/static shapes that it creates\u2014esp. the truss). In the first mode, each repeating geometric form has a built-in symbolism ascribed to it. For example, the square, with its four equilateral sides, is symbolic of the equally important elements of nature: earth, air, fire and water. Without any one of the four, the physical world, represented by a circle that inscribes the square, would collapse upon itself and cease to exist. The second mode is based upon the flowing nature of plant forms. This mode recalls the feminine nature of life giving. In addition, upon inspection of the many examples of Arabesque art, some would argue that there is in fact a third mode, the mode of Islamic calligraphy.\nInstead of recalling something related to the 'True Reality' (the reality of the spiritual world), Islam considers calligraphy a visible expression of the highest art of all; the art of the spoken word (the transmittal of thoughts and of history). In Islam, the most important document to be transmitted orally is the Qur'an. Proverbs and complete passages from the Qur'an can be seen today in Arabesque art. The coming together of these three forms creates the Arabesque, and this is a reflection of unity arising from diversity; a basic tenet of Islam.\nThe arabesque may be equally thought of as both art and science. The artwork is at the same time mathematically precise, aesthetically pleasing, and symbolic. Due to this duality of creation, the artistic part of this equation may be further subdivided into both secular and religious artwork. However, for many Muslims there is no distinction; all forms of art, the natural world, mathematics and science are seen to be creations of God and therefore reflections of the same thing: God's will expressed through his creation. In other words, man can discover the geometric forms that constitute the arabesque, but these forms always existed before as part of God's creation, as shown in this picture.\nThere is great similarity between arabesque artwork from very different geographic regions. In fact, the similarities are so pronounced that it is sometimes difficult for experts to tell where a given style of arabesque comes from. The reason for this is that the science and mathematics that are used to construct Arabesque artwork are universal. Therefore, for most Muslims, the best artwork that can be created by man for use in the Mosque is artwork that displays the underlying order and unity of nature. The order and unity of the material world, they believe, is a mere ghostly approximation of the spiritual world, which for many Muslims is the place where the only true reality exists. Discovered geometric forms, therefore, exemplify this perfect reality because God's creation has been obscured by the sins of man.\nMistakes in repetitions may be intentionally introduced as a show of humility by artists who believe only Allah can produce perfection, although this theory is disputed.\nArabesque art consists of a series of repeating geometric forms which are occasionally accompanied by calligraphy. Ettinghausen et al. describe the arabesque as a \"vegetal design consisting of full...and half palmettes [as] an unending continuous pattern...in which each leaf grows out of the tip of another.\" To the adherents of Islam, the Arabesque is symbolic of their united faith and the way in which traditional Islamic cultures view the world.\nTerminology and Western arabesque.\nArabesque is a French term derived from the Italian word \"arabesco\", meaning \"in the Arabic style\". The term was first used in Italian, where \"rabeschi\" was used in the 16th century as a term for \"pilaster ornaments featuring acanthus decoration\", specifically \"running scrolls\" that ran vertically up a panel or pilaster, rather than horizontally along a frieze.\nAccording to Ralph Nicholson Wornum in 1882: \"The western arabesque which appeared in the 15th century derived from Roman remains of the early time of the empire, not to any style derived from Arabian or Moorish work. Arabesque and Moresque are really distinct; the latter is from the Arabian style of ornament, developed by the Byzantine Greeks for their new masters, after the conquests of the followers of Mahomet; and the former is a term pretty well restricted to varieties of cinquecento decoration, which have nothing in common with any Arabian examples in their details, but are a development derived from Greek and Roman grotesque designs, such as we find them in the remains of ancient palaces at Rome, and in ancient houses at Pompeii. These were reproduced by Raphael and his pupils in the decoration of some of the corridors of the Loggie of the Vatican at Rome: grotesque is thus a better name for these decorations than Arabesque. This technical Arabesque, therefore, is much more ancient than any Arabian or Moorish decoration, and has really nothing in common with it except the mere symmetrical principles of its arrangement. Pliny and Vitruvius give us no name for the extravagant decorative wall-painting in vogue in their time, to which the early Italian revivers of it seem to have given the designation of grotesque, because it, was first discovered in the arched or underground chambers (grotte) of Roman ruins\u2014as in the golden house of Nero, or the baths of Titus. What really took place in the Italian revival was in some measure a supplanting of the Arabesque for the classical grotesque, still retaining the original Arabian designation, while the genuine Arabian art, the Saracenic, was distinguished as Moresque or Moorish.\"\nThe book \"Opera nuova che insegna a le donne a cuscire \u2026 laqual e intitolata Esempio di raccammi\" (A New Work that Teaches Women how to Sew \u2026 Entitled \"Samples of Embroidery\"), published in Venice in 1530, includes \"groppi moreschi e rabeschi\", Moorish knots and arabesques.\nFrom there it spread to England, where Henry VIII owned, according to an inventory of 1549, an agate cup with a \"fote and Couer of siluer and guilt enbossed with Rebeske worke\", and William Herne or Heron, Serjeant Painter from 1572 to 1580, was paid for painting Elizabeth I's barge with \"rebeske work\". The styles so described can only be guessed at, although the design by Hans Holbein for a covered cup for Jane Seymour in 1536 (see gallery) already has zones in both Islamic-derived arabesque/moresque style (see below) and classically derived acanthus volutes.\nAnother related term is moresque, meaning \"Moorish\"; Randle Cotgrave's \"A Dictionarie of the French and English Tongues\" of 1611 defines this as: \"a rude or anticke painting, or carving, wherin the feet and tayles of beasts, &amp;c, are intermingled with, or made to resemble, a kind of wild leaves, &amp;c.\" and \"arabesque\", in its earliest use cited in the OED (but as a French word), as \"Rebeske work; a small and curious flourishing\". In France \"arabesque\" first appears in 1546, and \"was first applied in the latter part of the 17th century\" to grotesque ornament, \"despite the classical origin of the latter\", especially if without human figures in it\u2014a distinction still often made, but not consistently observed.\nOver the following centuries, the three terms \"grotesque\", \"moresque\", and \"arabesque\" were used largely interchangeably in English, French, and German for styles of decoration derived at least as much from the European past as the Islamic world, with \"grotesque\" gradually acquiring its main modern meaning, related more to Gothic gargoyles and caricature than to either Pompeii-style Roman painting or Islamic patterns. Meanwhile, the word \"arabesque\" was now being applied to Islamic art itself, by 1851 at the latest, when John Ruskin uses it in \"The Stones of Venice\". Writers over the last decades have attempted to salvage meaningful distinctions between the words from the confused wreckage of historical sources.\nPeter Fuhring, a specialist in the history of ornament, says that (also in a French context): The ornament known as moresque in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries (but now more commonly called arabesque) is characterized by bifurcated scrolls composed of branches forming interlaced foliage patterns. These basic motifs gave rise to numerous variants, for example, where the branches, generally of a linear character, were turned into straps or bands. ... It is characteristic of the moresque, which is essentially a surface ornament, that it is impossible to locate the pattern's beginning or end. ... Originating in the Middle East, they were introduced to continental Europe via Italy and Spain ... Italian examples of this ornament, which was often used for bookbindings and embroidery, are known from as early as the late fifteenth century.\nFuhring notes that grotesques were \"confusingly called arabesques in eighteenth century France\", but in his terminology \"the major types of ornament that appear in French sixteenth century etchings and engraving ... can be divided into two groups. The first includes ornaments adopted from antiquity: grotesques, architectural ornaments such as the orders, foliage scrolls and self-contained elements such as trophies, terms and vases. A second group, far smaller than the first, comprises modern ornaments: moresques, interlaced bands, strapwork, and elements such as cartouches\"\u2014categories he goes on to discuss individually.\nThe moresque or arabesque style was especially popular and long-lived in the Western arts of the book: bookbindings decorated in gold tooling, borders for illustrations, and printer's ornaments for decorating empty spaces on the page. In this field the technique of gold tooling had also arrived in the 15th century from the Islamic world, and indeed much of the leather itself was imported from there. Small motifs in this style have continued to be used by conservative book designers up to the present day.\nAccording to Harold Osborne, in France, the \"characteristic development of the French arabesque combined bandwork deriving from the moresque with decorative acanthus foliage radiating from C-scrolls connected by short bars\". Apparently starting in embroidery, it then appears in garden design before being used in Northern Mannerist painted decorative schemes \"with a central medallion combined with acanthus and other forms\" by Simon Vouet and then Charles Lebrun who used \"scrolls of flat bandwork joined by horizontal bars and contrasting with ancanthus scrolls and palmette.\" More exuberant arabesque designs by Jean B\u00e9rain the Elder are an early \"intimation\" of the Rococo, which was to take the arabesque into three dimensions in reliefs.\nThe use of \"arabesque\" as an English noun first appears, in relation to painting, in William Beckford's novel \"Vathek\" in 1786. Arabesque is also used as a term for complex freehand pen flourishes in drawing or other graphic media. The \"Grove Dictionary of Art\" will have none of this confusion, and says flatly: \"Over the centuries the word has been applied to a wide variety of winding and twining vegetal decoration in art and meandering themes in music, but it properly applies only to Islamic art\", so contradicting the definition of 1888 still found in the \"Oxford English Dictionary\": \"A species of mural or surface decoration in colour or low relief, composed in flowing lines of branches, leaves, and scroll-work fancifully intertwined. Also fig[uratively]. As used in Moorish and Arabic decorative art (from which, almost exclusively, it was known in the Middle Ages), representations of living creatures were excluded; but in the arabesques of Raphael, founded on the ancient Gr\u00e6co-Roman work of this kind, and in those of Renaissance decoration, human and animal figures, both natural and grotesque, as well as vases, armour, and objects of art, are freely introduced; to this the term is now usually applied, the other being distinguished as Moorish Arabesque, or Moresque.\"\nPrinting.\nA major use of the arabesque style has been artistic printing, for example of book covers and page decoration. Repeating geometric patterns worked well with traditional printing, since they could be printed from metal type like letters if the type was placed together; as the designs have no specific connection to the meaning of a text, the type can be reused in many different editions of different works. Robert Granjon, a French printer of the sixteenth century, has been credited with the first truly interlocking arabesque printing, but other printers had used many other kinds of ornaments in the past. The idea was rapidly used by many other printers. After a period of disuse in the nineteenth century, when a more minimal page layout became popular with printers like Bodoni and Didot, the concept returned to popularity with the arrival of the Arts and Crafts movement, Many fine books from the period 1890\u20131960 have arabesque decorations, sometimes on paperback covers. Many digital serif fonts include arabesque pattern elements thought to be complementary to the mood of the font; they are also often sold as separate designs.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36916", "revid": "25511559", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36916", "title": "Theotokos", "text": "Title of Mary in Eastern Christianity\nTheotokos () is a title of Mary, mother of Jesus, used especially in Eastern Christianity. The usual Latin translations are or (approximately \"parent [] of God\"). Common English translations are \"Mother of God\" or \"God-bearer\" \u2013 but these both have different literal equivalents in , and respectively.\nThe title has been in use since the 3rd century, and in the Liturgy of Saint James (4th century). The Council of Ephesus in AD 431 decreed that Mary is the because her son Jesus is both God and man: one divine person from two natures (divine and human) intimately and hypostatically united.\nThe title of Mother of God () or Mother of Incarnate God, abbreviated (the first and last letter of main two words in Greek), is most often used in English, largely due to the lack of a satisfactory equivalent of the Greek . For the same reason, the title is often left untranslated, as , in Eastern liturgical usage of other languages.\n is also used as the term for an Eastern icon, or type of icon, of the Mother with Child (typically called a Madonna in the Western tradition), as in \"the \"Theotokos\" of Vladimir\" both for the original 12th-century icon and for icons that are copies or imitate its composition.\nEtymology.\n is an adjectival compound of two Greek words \u0398\u03b5\u03cc\u03c2 \"God\" and \u03c4\u03cc\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2 \"childbirth, parturition; offspring\". A close paraphrase would be \"[she] whose offspring is God\" or \"[she] who gave birth to one who was God\". The usual English translation is \"Mother of God\"; Latin uses or .\nThe Church Slavonic translation is (Russian/Serbian/Bulgarian ). The full title of Mary in Slavic Orthodox tradition is (), from Greek \"Our Most Holy Lady and Ever-Virgin Mary\". German has the translation (lit.\u2009'bearer of God'). In Arabic, there are two main terms which are widely used at the general level, first one is: ( lit.\u2009'Birther of God') and () or , (), lit.\u2009'Mother of God').\n\"Mother of God\" is the literal translation of a distinct title in Greek, (), a term which has an established usage of its own in traditional Orthodox and Catholic theological writing, hymnography, and iconography.\nIn an abbreviated form, (), it often is found on Eastern icons, where it is used to identify Mary. The Russian term is (also ).\nVariant forms are the compounds\nThese are found in patristic and liturgical texts.\nThe theological dispute over the term concerned the term \"God\" versus \"Christ\", and not (, \"bearer\") versus (, \"mother\"), and the two terms have been used as synonyms throughout Christian tradition. Both terms are known to have existed alongside one another since the early church, but it has been argued, including in modern times, that the term \"Mother of God\" is unduly suggestive of Godhead having its origin in Mary, imparting to Mary the role of a Mother Goddess. But this is an exact reiteration of the objection by Nestorius, resolved in the 5th century, to the effect that the term \"Mother\" expresses exactly the relation of Mary to the incarnate Son ascribed to Mary in Christian theology.\nTheology.\nTheologically, the terms \"Mother of God\", \"Mother of Incarnate God\" (and its variants) does not mean that Mary is the source of the divine nature of Jesus, who Christians believe existed with the Father from all eternity.\nWithin the Orthodox and Catholic tradition, Mother of God has not been understood, nor been intended to be understood, as referring to Mary as Mother of God from eternity \u2014 that is, as Mother of God the Father \u2014 but only with reference to the birth of Jesus, that is, the Incarnation.\nTo make it explicit, it is sometimes translated \"Mother of God Incarnate\".\nThe Niceno-Constantinopolitan Creed of 381 affirmed the Christian faith on \"one Lord Jesus Christ, the only-begotten Son of God, begotten of the Father before all worlds (\u00e6ons)\", that \"came down from heaven, and was incarnate by the Holy Ghost and of the Virgin Mary, and was made man\". Hence, the term affirms Jesus Christ's full divinity as God by referencing Mary as the \"Mother of [that] God\". In the Syriac tradition, the creed contains an addition of after mentioning the incarnation, where it reads \"...was incarnate by the Holy Spirit and of the Virgin Mary, Mother of God [.\"\nThe status of Mary as was a topic of theological dispute in the 4th and 5th centuries and was the subject of the decree of the Council of Ephesus of 431 to the effect that, in opposition to those who denied Mary the title (\"the one who gives birth to God\") but called her (\"the one who gives birth to Christ\"), Mary is because her son Jesus is one person who is both God and man, divine and human. This decree created the Nestorian Schism. Cyril of Alexandria wrote, \"I am amazed that there are some who are entirely in doubt as to whether the holy Virgin should be called or not. For if our Lord Jesus Christ is God, how is the holy Virgin who gave [Him] birth, not []?\" (Epistle 1, to the monks of Egypt; PG 77:13B). But the argument of Nestorius was that divine and human natures of Christ were distinct, and while Mary is evidently the (bearer of Christ), it could be misleading to describe her solely as the \"bearer of God\" without referencing the humanity. At issue is the interpretation of the Incarnation, and the nature of the hypostatic union of Christ's human and divine natures between Christ's conception and birth.\nWithin the Orthodox doctrinal teaching on the economy of salvation, Mary's identity, role, and status as is acknowledged as indispensable. For this reason, it is formally defined as official dogma. The only other Mariological teaching so defined is that of her virginity. Both of these teachings have a bearing on the identity of Jesus Christ. By contrast, certain other Marian beliefs which do not bear directly on the doctrine concerning the person of Jesus (for example, her sinlessness, the circumstances surrounding her conception and birth, her Presentation in the Temple, her continuing virginity following the birth of Jesus, and her death), which are taught and believed by the Orthodox Church (being expressed in the Church's liturgy and patristic writings), are not formally defined by the Church.\nHistory of use.\nEarly Church.\nThe term and similar titles were certainly in use before the 4th century. Ephrem the Syrian used it in 318, Alexander I of Alexandria in 321,Athanasius of Alexandria in 330, Gregory the Theologian in 370, John Chrysostom in 400, and Augustine all used .\nOrigen (d. 254) is often cited as the earliest author to use for Mary (Socrates, \"Ecclesiastical History\" 7.32 (PG 67, 812 B) citing Origen's \"Commentary on Romans\"), but the surviving texts do not contain it. It is also claimed that the term was used c. 250 by Dionysius of Alexandria, in an epistle to Paul of Samosata, but the epistle is a forgery of the 6th century.\nThe oldest preserved extant hymn dedicated to the Virgin Mary, (English: \"Beneath thy Compassion,\" ,) has been continually prayed and sung for at least sixteen centuries, in the original Koine Greek vocative, as . The oldest record of this hymn is a papyrus found in Egypt, mostly dated to after 450, but according to a suggestion by Henri de Villiers possibly older, dating to the mid-3rd century.\nJohn Cassian (360\u2013435) stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBasil of Caesarea (330\u2013378) stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAugustine of Hippo (354\u2013430) stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;An Angel speaks to Zacharias; fertility is given to the barren; the priest comes forth dumb from the place of incense; John bursts forth into speech while yet confined within his mother's womb; an Angel blesses Mary and promises that she, a virgin, shall be the mother of the Son of God.\nThird Ecumenical Council.\nThe use of was formally affirmed at the Third Ecumenical Council held at Ephesus in 431. It proclaimed that Mary truly became the Mother of God by the human conception of the Son of God in her womb:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Mother of God, not that the nature of the Word or his divinity received the beginning of its existence from the holy Virgin, but that, since the holy body, animated by a rational soul, which the Word of God united to himself according to the hypostasis, was born from her, the Word is said to be born according to the flesh.\nThe competing view, advocated by Patriarch Nestorius of Constantinople, was that Mary should be called , meaning \"Birth-giver of Christ,\" to restrict her role to the mother of Christ's humanity only and not his divine nature.\nNestorius' opponents, led by Cyril of Alexandria, alleged that this view, in conjunction with Nestorius's two-nature Christology, leads to two persons in Christ, which results in an incomplete incarnation and, by extension, incomplete salvation for mankind. The council accepted Cyril's reasoning and his one-nature Christology, affirmed the title for Mary, and anathematized Nestorianism as heresy.\nIn letters to Nestorius which were afterwards included among the council documents, Cyril explained his doctrine. He noted that \"the holy fathers... have ventured to call the holy Virgin , not as though the nature of the Word or his divinity received the beginning of their existence from the holy Virgin, but because from her was born his holy body, rationally endowed with a soul, with which the Word was united according to the hypostasis, and is said to have been begotten according to the flesh\" (Cyril's second letter to Nestorius).\nExplaining his rejection of Nestorius' preferred title for Mary (), Cyril wrote:\nNestorian schism.\nFollowing the decision of the Council of Ephesus to anathematize the two-nature formula and its adherents such as Ibas of Edessa, the followers of Nestorius (but not Nestorius himself) moved eastwards within the borders of the Sassanid Empire. There they spread their ideology, and eventually, their later student, Barsauma of Nisibis, is often credited with the official establishment of the Church of the East in 424. Other influential figures include Narsai, Babai the Great, and Babai of Seleucia-Ctesiphon The church accepts the teachings of Nestorius's mentor, Theodore of Mopsuestia, as official doctrine. Whether the Church of the East is truly \"Nestorian\" is a subject of debate, and modern research suggests that the Church of the East in China did not teach a doctrine of two distinct natures of Christ.\nReformation.\nLutheran tradition retained the title of \"Mother of God\" (, ), a term already embraced by Martin Luther; and officially confessed in the Formula of Concord (1577), accepted by the Lutheran World Federation.\nWhilst Calvin believed that Mary was theologically speaking rightly qualified as \"the mother of God\", he rejected common use of this as a title, saying, \"I cannot think such language either right, or becoming, or suitable. ... To call the Virgin Mary the mother of God can only serve to confirm the ignorant in their superstitions.\"\n20th century.\nIn 1994, Pope John Paul II and Patriarch of the Assyrian Church of the East Mar Dinkha IV signed an ecumenical declaration, mutually recognizing the legitimacy of the titles \"Mother of God\" and \"Mother of Christ.\" The declaration reiterates the Christological formulations of the Council of Chalcedon as a theological expression of the faith shared by both Churches, at the same time respecting the preference of each Church in using these titles in their liturgical life and piety.\nLiturgy.\n is often used in hymns to Mary in the Eastern Orthodox, Eastern Catholic and Oriental Orthodox churches. The most common is (\"It is truly meet\"), which is used in nearly every service.\nOther examples include , the \"Hail Mary\" in its Eastern form, and \"All creation rejoices\", which replaces at the Divine Liturgy on the Sundays of Great Lent.\n is a medieval Polish hymn, possibly composed by Adalbert of Prague (d. 997).\nThe Solemnity of Mary, Mother of God is a Roman Catholic feast day introduced in 1969, based on older traditions associating 1 January with the motherhood of Mary.\nIconography.\nOne of the two earliest known depictions of the Virgin Mary is found in the Catacomb of Priscilla (3rd century) showing the adoration of the Magi. Recent conservation work at the Catacombs of Priscilla revealed that what had been identified for decades as the earliest image of the Virgin and Child was actually a traditional funerary image of a Roman matron; the pointing figure with her, formerly identified as a prophet, was shown to have had its arm position adjusted and the star he was supposedly pointing to was painted in at a later date. The putative Annunciation scene at Priscilla is also now recognized as a Roman matron with accompanying figure and not the Virgin Mary. Recently another third-century image of the Virgin Mary was identified at the eastern Syrian site of Dura Europos in the baptistry room of the earliest known Christian Church. The scene shows the Annunciation to the Virgin.\nThe tradition of Marian veneration was greatly expanded only with the affirmation of her status as in 431. The mosaics in Santa Maria Maggiore in Rome, dating from 432 to 40, just after the council, does not yet show her with a halo. The iconographic tradition of the or Madonna (Our Lady), showing the Virgin enthroned carrying the infant Christ, is established by the following century, as attested by a very small number of surviving icons, including one at Saint Catherine's Monastery in Sinai, and Salus Populi Romani, a 5th or 6th-century Byzantine icon preserved in Rome. This type of depiction, with subtly changing differences of emphasis, has remained the mainstay of depictions of Mary to the present day. The roughly half-dozen varied icons of the Virgin and Child in Rome from the 6th to 8th centuries form the majority of the representations surviving from this period, as most early Byzantine icons were destroyed in the Byzantine Iconoclasm of the 8th and 9th century, notable exceptions being the 7th-century and .\nThe iconographic tradition is well developed by the early medieval period. The tradition of Luke the Evangelist being the first to have painted Mary is established by the 8th century.\nAn early icon of the Virgin as queen is in the church of Santa Maria in Trastevere in Rome, datable to 705\u2013707 by the kneeling figure of Pope John VII, a notable promoter of the cult of the Virgin, to whom the infant Christ reaches his hand.\nThe earliest surviving image in a Western illuminated manuscript of the Madonna and Child comes from the Book of Kells of about 800 (there is a similar carved image on the lid of St Cuthbert's coffin of 698).\nThe oldest Russian icons were imports from Byzantium, beginning in the 11th century.\nGallery.\nRussian icons\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36917", "revid": "44791718", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36917", "title": "Alain Prost", "text": "French racing driver (born 1955)\nAlain Marie Pascal Prost (; born 24 February 1955) is a French former racing driver and motorsport executive, who competed in Formula One from to . Nicknamed \"the Professor\", Prost won four Formula One World Drivers' Championship titles and\u2014at the time of his retirement\u2014held the records for most wins (51), fastest laps (41), and podium finishes (106).\nBorn in Lorette, Loire, Prost began karting aged 14, winning the junior direct-drive Karting World Cup four years later, and progressing to junior formulae in 1976. Prost won his first title at the Formula Renault National Championship that year, prior to winning the Challenge de Formule Renault Europe in 1977. Replaced by the French Formula Three Championship the following season, he successfully defended his titles in 1978 and 1979. His junior career culminated in his victory at the 1979 FIA European Formula 3 Championship with Oreca. Prost signed for McLaren in , making his Formula One debut at the Argentine Grand Prix, where he finished sixth. He moved to Renault in , taking his maiden victory at his home Grand Prix in France, with further wins in the Netherlands and Italy. Following multiple race wins in his campaign with Renault, Prost finished runner-up to Nelson Piquet in the 1983 World Drivers' Championship after retiring with a turbo failure in the title-decider. Prost was sacked by Renault two days later for his post-season comments and moved back to McLaren for , where he finished runner-up to teammate Niki Lauda by a record half-point.\nIn , Prost won his maiden title with McLaren, becoming the first World Drivers' Champion from France. He successfully defended his title the following season, amidst a close title battle with Piquet and Nigel Mansell. After winning several races in his campaign, Prost was partnered by Ayrton Senna. Together, they won all Grands Prix bar one in \u2014driving the Honda-powered MP4/4\u2014with Senna taking the title by three points. Their fierce rivalry culminated in title-deciding collisions at Suzuka in 1989 and 1990, despite Prost's move to Ferrari in the latter, with Prost winning the former championship and Senna taking the following. Amidst a winless campaign, he was sacked by Ferrari over comments made about the 643. After a year hiatus, Prost returned with Williams in , breaking several records on the way to his fourth championship and retiring at the end of the season. He returned to Formula One as the owner of Prost Grand Prix from to , having purchased Ligier. Prost held an advisory role at Renault\u2014later re-branded as Alpine\u2014from to .\nAfter retiring from Formula One, Prost was a race-winner in the 2005 FFSA GT Championship, and entered the Race of Champions in 2010, representing France alongside S\u00e9bastien Loeb. In ice racing, Prost is a three-time champion of the Andros Trophy, competing from 2003 to 2012. He was the co-owner of Renault e.dams in Formula E until 2018, winning three consecutive Teams' Championships from 2014\u201315 to 2016\u201317. Prost was inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame in 1999.\nEarly life.\nAlain Prost was born in the commune of Lorette near the town of Saint-Chamond, in the d\u00e9partement of Loire close to Saint-\u00c9tienne, France to Andr\u00e9 Prost and Marie-Rose Karatchian, born in France of Armenian descent. His father ran a furniture store. Prost had one older brother called Daniel, who died of cancer in September 1986. Prost was an active and athletic child, who enthusiastically took part in diverse sports, including wrestling, roller skating and football. In doing so he broke his nose several times. He considered careers as a gym instructor or a professional footballer before he discovered kart racing at the age of 14 while on a family holiday. This new sport quickly became his career of choice. At age 16, he bought his first kart with money he saved working for his father's shop.\nProst won several karting championships in his teens. In 1974, he became a full-time racer. He won the French senior karting championship in 1975.\nProst made the transition to open-wheel racing in 1976 and rapidly progressed through the junior categories. That year, he dominated French Formula Renault, winning the title and all but one race. In 1977, he won the Formula Renault European championship. In 1978, he won the French Formula Three championship while simultaneously competing in the European Formula Three category. Finally, in 1979, he won both the European and French Formula Three titles. He also made three guest appearances in European Formula Two in 1977 and 1978.\nProst's Formula Three wins drew interest from Formula One teams and sponsors. Before the final race of the 1979 season, Paddy McNally and John Hogan of Marlboro (McLaren's lead sponsor) offered to cover the costs of a third McLaren car so that Prost could make an early Formula One debut, but Prost declined the cameo appearance, reasoning that it would be a mistake to debut in Formula One without being fully prepared: \"I didn't know Watkins Glen and I didn't know the car. I said I thought it would be a better idea to organise a test.\"\nFormula One.\nMcLaren (1980).\nAfter winning the European Formula Three title, Prost was courted by Formula One teams McLaren, Brabham, and Ligier. After impressing McLaren team boss Teddy Mayer at a test drive, McLaren signed him for the 1980 season. He was paired with Ulsterman John Watson.\nProst's career started promisingly. On his debut in Buenos Aires, he accomplished the rare achievement of scoring in his first race, earning one point for finishing sixth. From 1973 to 1993, only two other drivers earned points in their maiden race (Johnny Herbert and Jean Alesi). However, Prost finished 15th in the Drivers' Championship with five points (one point behind the veteran Watson), scoring at Buenos Aires, Interlagos, Brands Hatch and Zandvoort. He had several accidents, breaking his wrist during practice at Kyalami and suffering a concussion during practice at Watkins Glen. He also retired from the previous round in Montreal a week earlier because of rear suspension failure.\nAt the end of the season, despite having two years remaining on his contract, he left McLaren and signed with Renault. Prost later explained that he left because the car frequently broke down and because he felt the team blamed him for several accidents. According to Watson, Mayer had initially wanted to sign Kevin Cogan but Marlboro insisted on Prost. Prost would not return to McLaren until 1984, after Ron Dennis assumed full control of the team.\nRenault (1981\u20131983).\nProst was partnered with fellow Frenchman Ren\u00e9 Arnoux for . Motor sports author Nigel Roebuck reports that there were problems between Prost and Arnoux from the start of the season, Prost being immediately quicker than his more experienced teammate He did not finish the first two Grands Prix, due to collisions with Andrea de Cesaris in Long Beach and Didier Pironi at Jacarepagu\u00e1, but scored his first podium finish at Buenos Aires. He also did not finish in the next four races, and then won his first Formula One race at his home Grand Prix in France at the fast Dijon circuit, finishing two seconds ahead of his old teammate John Watson.\nFor Prost, his debut victory was memorable mostly for the change it made in his mindset. \"Before, you thought you could do it,\" he said. \"Now you know you can.\" Prost led from the start the next 5 races, and won two more races during the season, took his first pole position in Germany and finished on the podium every time he completed a race distance. He won again in Holland and Italy, and finished fifth in the Drivers' Championship, seven points behind champion Nelson Piquet.\nProst won the first two Grands Prix of the 1982 season in South Africa, where Prost recovered from losing a wheel, and Brazil, where he finished 3rd but was awarded the win after Piquet (1st) and Keke Rosberg (2nd) were disqualified. He finished in the points on four other occasions, but did not win again. Despite retiring from seven races, Prost improved on his Drivers' Championship position, finishing in fourth, but with nine fewer points than the previous year. His relationship with Arnoux deteriorated further after the French Grand Prix. Prost believes that Arnoux, who won the race, went back on a pre-race agreement to support Prost during the race. His relationship with the French media was also poor. He has since commented that \"When I went to Renault the journalists wrote good things about me, but by 1982 I had become the bad guy. I think, to be honest, I had made the mistake of winning! The French don't really like winners.\" He added that \"It's hard to explain, but the French prefer martyrs who lose gloriously.\"\nIn November 1982, three years before it became a round of the F1 World Championship, Prost, along with fellow F1 drivers Jacques Laffite and Nelson Piquet, made the trip to Melbourne, Australia to drive in the non-championship 1982 Australian Grand Prix at the short (1.609\u00a0km (1.000\u00a0mi)) Calder Park Raceway. Driving a Formula Pacific spec Ralt RT4 powered by a 1.6 litre Ford engine, Prost sat on pole for the race with a time of 39.18. He then led every lap to win what would be the first of 3 Australian Grand Prix wins. He finished 15.32 seconds clear of Laffite, with 1981 Australian Grand Prix winner, young Brazilian driver Roberto Moreno finishing third.\nArnoux left Renault in and American Eddie Cheever replaced him as Prost's partner, allegedly because of Renault's desire to sell more road cars in North America (three of the season's 15 races were on the North American continent). Prost earned a further four victories for Renault during the season and finished second in the Drivers' Championship, two points behind Nelson Piquet. Piquet and the Brabham team overhauled Prost and Renault in the last few races of the season. Prost, who felt the team had been too conservative in developing the car, found himself increasingly at odds with Renault's management, who made him the scapegoat for failing to win a championship. In addition to that, the French fans recalled the bitter fight that had caused their favourite, Arnoux, to leave the team. Prost said in an interview with ESPN during the final race that his car was \"not competitive\" and that he \"didn't lose by my own fault\" Renault fired Prost only two days after the South African race. He re-signed for McLaren for the 1984 season within days and moved his family home to Switzerland after Renault factory workers burned the second of 2 of Prost's cars, one of them being a Mercedes-Benz.\nMcLaren (1984\u20131989).\n1984\u20131986.\nProst joined double world champion Niki Lauda at McLaren in , driving the John Barnard designed McLaren MP4/2 which used a 1.5 litre TAG-Porsche V6 engine. He lost the world championship to Lauda in the final race of the season in Portugal by half a point, despite winning seven races to Lauda's five, including winning in Portugal. The half point came from the Monaco Grand Prix, where Prost had been leading, albeit with Ayrton Senna (Toleman) and Stefan Bellof (Tyrrell) closing on him rapidly, when Clerk of the Course Jacky Ickx stopped the race at half distance due to heavy rain, which was controversial, for Ickx displayed the red flag without consulting the race officials. Under Formula One regulations, Prost received only half of the nine points normally awarded for a victory. Prost's seven wins in 1984 equalled the record set by Jim Clark in . Lauda's 0.5-point margin of victory is the closest title race in Formula One history.\nIn Prost became the first French Formula One World Champion. He won five of the sixteen Grands Prix during the season. He had also won the San Marino Grand Prix, but was disqualified after his car was found to be 2\u00a0kg underweight in post-race scrutineering. Prost finished 20 points ahead of his closest rival, Michele Alboreto. Prost's performance in 1985 earned him the L\u00e9gion d'honneur distinction in France. At the end of the season, Lauda retired; he would later credit Prost with sending him into retirement, explaining that \"I had this perfect car, and then this French pain-in-the-ass arrives and blows me away. If he hadn't turned up I'd have gone on for another few years.\"\nLauda was replaced at McLaren by World Champion Keke Rosberg for . Prost successfully defended his title, despite his car struggling against the Honda-powered Williams cars driven by Nelson Piquet and Nigel Mansell. Until the latter stages of the final race of the 1986 season, the Australian Grand Prix, Prost appeared set to finish second in the Championship, behind Mansell. Prost had the same number of wins as Piquet, but he had four second places to Piquet's three, thus placing him second before the final race. While running third behind Piquet, and directly behind Prost on the road (3rd was all he needed to win the title), Mansell suffered a rear tyre failure at and crashed out. The Williams team then pitted Piquet to change tyres as a safety precaution, while Prost had already pitted earlier due to a puncture and did not need to change his tyres again. He then held the lead ahead of a charging Piquet to the chequered flag and the championship. Prost became the first driver to retain the title since Jack Brabham in 1960.\nAnother memorable race that year for Prost was at the San Marino Grand Prix. He was cruising to victory when his car began to run out of fuel three corners from the chequered flag. Frantically weaving the car back and forth to slosh the last drops of fuel into the pickup, he managed to keep it running just long enough to creep over the line and win the race. Prost commented after the race that when his car started running dry he immediately thought to himself \"shit, I am going to lose this race again\", referring to his 1985 disqualification at Imola. It happened again at the German Grand Prix: while running in fourth position, Prost's car ran out of fuel on the finishing straight of the last lap. Instead of retiring at a time in the season when points were critical, Prost got out of his car and tried to push it to the finish, to great applause from the crowd. The finish line was too far, though, and he never reached it. He was eventually classified sixth in the race, as the seventh-placed car (the Brabham-BMW of Derek Warwick) was a lap behind. Prost also finished sixth at the Belgian Grand Prix, where he collided with Gerhard Berger in the Benetton. As a result, the car's front suspension and engine mountings were bent, which badly affected its handling. It would behave one way in left hand corners and a completely different way in right hand corners. McLaren Technical Director John Barnard said afterwards that the car was \"bent like a banana\" upon the teams' post-race inspection of the car.\n1987.\nWith Rosberg retiring from Formula One at the end of 1986 season, Swedish driver Stefan Johansson filled the McLaren seat alongside Prost for the season. Even though McLaren had introduced the new Steve Nichols designed MP4/3 after three seasons with the MP4/2 model (Barnard had departed for Ferrari), the TAG engines were not the force they had been previously, lagging behind in power and with unreliability previously unseen. He never gave up though and challenged Piquet and Mansell almost until the end, winning three races and breaking Jackie Stewart's record for race victories by winning for the 28th time at the Portuguese Grand Prix. \"People might not believe me,\" said Stewart at the time. \"But I'm glad to see Alain take my record. I am glad that he has done it because he's the one that deserves it. There is no doubt in my mind that he is the best race driver of his generation.\" Prost considers his win in the opening round in Brazil as his best and most rewarding race ever. The Williams-Hondas had been dominant during qualifying, and Prost started fifth on the grid with a time three seconds slower than Mansell's pole time. Knowing he didn't have the qualifying speed, he instead worked on his race set-up, and with everyone else going for a high-downforce set-up, he went the other way. The set-up meant less tyre wear, thanks to slower speeds in the corners while going fast down the straights. With his car having less tyre wear than his rivals, Prost was able to get through the 61 laps of the abrasive Jacarepagu\u00e1 Circuit with only two stops compared to the three or more by his rivals (Piquet pitted for tyres 3 times within the first 40 laps). Prost finished 40 seconds in front of Piquet, with Johansson a further 16 seconds back in third.\nWhen you win a race like this the feeling is very, very good. There have been times when I have been flat-out to finish sixth, but you can't see that from the outside. In I finished three or four times in seventh place. I pushed like mad, yet everyone was gathered around the winner and they were thinking that I was just trundling around. But that's motor racing. So in fact the only thing you can judge in this sport is the long term. You can judge a career or a season, but not one race.\nProst finished the 1987 season in fourth place in the championship behind Piquet, Mansell and Lotus driver Ayrton Senna. Prost finished 30 points behind champion Nelson Piquet. Other than his debut season in 1980 and , it was the furthest away he would finish a season from the championship lead.\nDespite a slightly disappointing 1987 season, nevertheless by the end of that year Prost had the honour of notching up his 4th consecutive No.1 driver of the year by the editor of the \"Autocourse\" annual, matching Niki Lauda's run of No.1's from 1975 to 1978 in the same annual. Writing in 1987, the \"Autocourse\" editor mentioned that despite driving a down on power engine (compared to the Honda's) \"Prost should have won at least 6 races in 1987 \u2013 but he won't moan about it. Despite being out of championship contention, 1987 was a memorable year for Prost. His win at Estoril was exceptional.\" In 1985, the \"Autocourse\" editor wrote of Prost: \"In the long run, Ayrton Senna may be the better driver, but in 1985 for speed and consistency Prost had no equal\", while in 1986, the \"Autocourse\" editor commented on Prost's season \"Alain had an almost faultless year. 1986 was a year of Prost's outstanding all round ability.\"\n1988.\nThe 1988 season proved to be a watershed moment for Formula One, as Honda ended its relationship with defending champion Williams and brought their all-conquering RA16 engines to Prost's McLaren. Going into 1988, it was understood that any team that wanted Honda engines would have to sign one of the two Brazilian drivers favored by Honda (which coveted the South American car market): three-time world champion Nelson Piquet, or rising star Ayrton Senna. When McLaren asked Prost for his opinion, Prost suggested Senna, citing his youth and talent. It was a decision he would come to regret.\nUpon signing Senna, McLaren announced that Prost and Senna would compete on equal terms. According to Dennis, \"Alain was fine with the competition, but deeply suspicious.\"\nThe McLaren-Honda partnership delivered Prost a legendarily fast car and two golden opportunities for a third Drivers' Championship, but it also kicked off one of Formula One's most famous rivalries. McLaren-Honda dominated the season, winning 15 out of 16 races \u2013 a record that stood until the 2023 season, when Red Bull-Honda won 21 out of 22 races. McLaren scored three times as many points as second-placed Ferrari. Reflecting the dominance of Honda power, Williams finished a distant seventh in the Constructors' Championship just one year after winning the title by 61 points.\nProst finished first or second in every race other than his two retirements at Silverstone and Monza. He won seven races and outscored his new teammate Senna by 11 points, despite Senna winning one more race than him. Although Prost would have been champion under the 1991 scoring system, Senna took the title by three points under the rules of the day \u2013 only the 11 best results from the season counted toward a driver's championship total, a rule that in practice valued Senna's wins over Prost's consistent podiums. Senna nearly shunted an overtaking Prost into the pit wall at Estoril, but other than that, the two competitors generally raced cleanly on track that year.\nOver the course of the 1988 season, Prost began to suspect that Honda was trying to make Senna McLaren's number one driver, in violation of McLaren's promise to treat the two drivers equally. He met with Honda F1 boss Nobuhiko Kawamoto at the end of the season to express these concerns. Kawamoto acknowledged that Honda's engineers were probably more excited to work with Senna than Prost, but said that he intended to deliver Prost equal machinery on race day. However, following the 1988 season, Kawamoto was promoted to a position at Honda headquarters.\n1989.\nMcLaren's domination continued throughout , and with no meaningful outside competition, Prost and Senna's title fight turned inwards. Prost accused Senna of dangerous driving and dishonorable behavior. After Imola, the two drivers were no longer on speaking terms.\nProst also accused Senna of receiving unwarranted favoritism from McLaren-Honda. His suspicions were inflamed when Honda sent McLaren an engine crate marked \"Special - For Ayrton.\" After Prost (who was in the last year of his contract with McLaren) threatened to join a rival team at the end of the season, Ron Dennis publicly backed Prost against Honda, \"declar[ing] that the team had found consistent differences\" between the engines that Honda assigned to Senna and Prost. To accommodate Prost's concerns, Dennis attempted to allocate engines on a random basis, such as a coin flip or drawing numbers from a hat. \nMatters came to a head at the Italian Grand Prix, where Prost burned his bridges with both McLaren and Honda. In advance of the Italian Grand Prix, he announced that he would drive for Ferrari in 1990. Following his announcement, McLaren provided full support to Senna's title chase. Although Prost was the championship leader and would have been the natural candidate for priority, at Monza McLaren gave Prost one car and four or five mechanics, while Senna received two cars and 20 assistants. In addition, while the new Honda F1 leadership publicly stated that Prost was getting the same equipment as Senna, Prost publicly rejected Honda's reassurances. After Senna outqualified Prost by a mammoth +1.790 seconds, Prost once again complained about Honda to the press. Insulted, Honda threatened to withdraw its engines from Prost's car unless Prost apologized, which he did. Ultimately, Prost won at Monza while Senna retired with an engine issue, giving Prost a commanding 20-point lead in the Drivers' Championship. Prost threw salt in the wound by dropping his winner's trophy into the crowd of cheering Ferrari fans who promptly tore it apart, causing Ron Dennis to storm out of the podium ceremony in anger. McLaren subsequently instituted a policy that all trophies were to be property of the team, with drivers permitted to request replicas. \nFollowing the tumult of the weekend, Senna opportunistically encouraged McLaren to fire Prost immediately, and Ferrari offered to accommodate the move by switching Prost with Ferrari's Gerhard Berger for the final four weeks of the season. Cooler heads prevailed, and McLaren allowed Prost to finish the season with the team in exchange for a public, written apology. This concession eliminated the possibility that Prost would clinch the 1989 title in a Ferrari car. Years later, Prost commissioned a replica of the Italian Grand Prix winner's trophy and gave it to Ron Dennis. \nProst clinched his third Drivers' Championship at the Japanese Grand Prix, the penultimate race of the season. Prost was 16 points ahead of Senna at the time, meaning that Senna needed to win the last two races. By contrast, Prost would automatically become the champion if Senna retired from either race, which was precisely what happened. Prost and Senna collided with seven laps to go, and Prost was widely blamed for causing the collision. (Prost was leading the race at the time and refused to leave a gap on the inside. Senna's normal practice was to line up his car for a crash and dare the other driver to back off, and as expected, Senna refused to yield and collided with Prost's car.) Senna managed to restart his car and win the race, but the FIA (led by Prost's countryman Jean-Marie Balestre, whom Senna disliked) disqualified him for missing the chicane, fined him US$100,000 for \"dangerous driving,\" and handed him a suspended six-month ban.\nFollowing the race, Prost admitted that \"I know everybody thinks I did it on purpose,\" but rationalized that \"Senna came behind me, I didn't see him come and I couldn't do anything to avoid him. I am very sorry to have to finish[ed] the championship on such an incident.\" He later said that he knew Senna would attempt to pass him at the chicane, and while \"I did not [crash] on purpose, I did not open the door.\" McLaren, now fully behind Senna, unsuccessfully appealed the disqualification, which \"Sports Illustrated\" characterized as Ron Dennis \"objecting to his [own] driver's winning the world title.\"\nFerrari (1990\u20131991).\nIn 1990, Prost became the first Ferrari driver to sign for the Scuderia after the death of team founder Enzo Ferrari in 1988. Ferrari had lured away several McLaren chassis designers over the years, including John Barnard and Steve Nichols. The 1990 Ferrari 641 was the first car to seriously threaten Honda's stranglehold on the Constructors' Championship, as Ferrari came within 11 points of the title. Prost won five races for Ferrari that year, in Brazil, Mexico, France, Britain and Spain. At Mexico, he accomplished one of his finest drives, winning the race after starting in 13th position. In both the Mexican and Spanish races, he led Mansell to Ferrari 1\u20132 finishes.\nThe championship once again came to the penultimate round of the season in Japan, but this time the roles were reversed, with Prost trailing McLaren-Honda's Senna by nine points. As in 1989, a controversial collision between the two settled the race. At the first corner of the first lap, Senna intentionally drove his car into Prost's, taking them both out of the race and sealing the title in his favour. Dennis immediately knew that Senna had purposely crashed Prost out of the race, but it took a year for Senna to admit that the crash was intentional; in 1991, he disclosed that he crashed into Prost in part to retaliate for Prost's actions in 1989. Although Prost complained loudly about Senna's manoeuvre, saying that \"What he did today was absolutely disgusting. ... He has no value [as a person],\" Senna was not penalized. Prost finished the season seven points behind Senna, and his Ferrari team were runners-up to McLaren in the Constructors' Championship.\nAt the end of the season, Mansell left the Scuderia to rejoin a resurgent Williams team, citing his unstable relationship with Prost. Although Mansell had supported Prost during the 1989 Prost-Honda controversy, as reigning world champion, Prost had joined Ferrari as the team's lead driver and was said to have played on this status. (According to Mansell, Ferrari contractually guaranteed him number one driver status, but once Prost became available, Ferrari paid Mansell to let Prost be the number one driver.) Mansell said that after watching him take pole in France with a purportedly superior chassis, Prost secretly demanded that Ferrari give him Mansell's car for the next race in Britain. Mansell was replaced by Frenchman Jean Alesi.\nThe season was not as kind to Ferrari, as the Ferrari 642 was not as reliable as the McLaren and Williams cars. Prost never finished a race lower than fifth, but won no races, scored only five podiums, and finished only eight races; similarly, Alesi finished only seven races. Reportedly, Ferrari's famous V12 engine was no longer competitive against the smaller, lighter and more fuel efficient V10s of its competitors, and the Ferrari chassis was likewise uncompetitive. (Barnard had left Ferrari in 1990, early enough to have input on the 1990 car but too late to help with the 1991 cars.) Although Ferrari upgraded the car to the Ferrari 643 in time for Prost's home race at Magny-Cours, in which Prost and Alesi finished second and fourth, the car was still unable to compete for the title over the course of the season. Adding insult to injury, Mansell's Williams-Renault clearly supplanted Ferrari as McLaren-Honda's main competition in 1991, and Mansell finished second in the Drivers' Championship that year.\nProst took out his frustrations on the team, publicly likening the car to a \"truck.\" Ferrari retaliated by firing him with one race left to go in the 1991 season. He was replaced by Italian driver Gianni Morbidelli for the 1991 Australian Grand Prix and by another Italian, Ivan Capelli, for the following season.\nWilliams (1993).\nProst spent the 1992 season on sabbatical. Ligier offered him a seat, and he eventually performed pre-season testing for the team in early 1992, but Ferrari paid him a significant amount of money to take the year off. During this season, Nigel Mansell put up record numbers in the Williams-Renault and won the title with five races remaining. The McLaren-Honda combination was waning: due to economic difficulties in Japan, Honda was not in position to outspend Renault on engine development. Honda opted to leave Formula One at season's end rather than carry on with a second-tier product. With no meaningful competition, a Williams driver was expected to cruise to the title again in 1993.\nProst quickly recognized the potential of the Williams car and began negotiating with Frank Williams for a 1993 ride no later than the second race of the 1992 season. He ultimately signed a two-year contract for 1993 and 1994. The Williams second driver, Riccardo Patrese, realized his seat was under threat so he signed for the Benetton team before the end of the year. Prost had expected to race alongside Mansell, but Mansell's contract negotiations fell through due to Mansell's increased financial demands as well as Williams suggesting that they were ready to sign Senna if Mansell hesitated. Senna was unable to make a deal with Williams, since Prost had negotiated a clause in his contract which prevented Senna from joining the team. Although Senna furiously accused Prost of cowardice, there was nothing he could do about it.\nProst won his fourth and final title in 1993, partnering with Damon Hill who had been promoted from test driver. Traditionally, the reigning driver's World Champion carried the number \"1\" on his car and his teammate took the number \"2\". Because Mansell, the 1992 champion, was not racing in Formula One in 1993, Williams as Constructors' Champion were given numbers \"0\" and \"2\", being assigned to Hill and Prost, respectively. That year, Williams-Renault fielded another dominant car and handily defended the Constructors' Championship, finishing with twice as many points as second-placed McLaren. Prost led the way, winning seven of the first ten races and taking pole in thirteen out of sixteen races. Although he was regularly challenged on track by teammate Hill and rival Senna, he finished 26 points ahead of the second-placed Senna and clinched the title in Portugal with two races to go. At season's end, the British government awarded Prost an OBE for his performances; he had won all four of his titles with British teams.\nShortly before securing the title, Prost announced he would retire at the end of the season. At the time, he stated that under the terms of his Williams contract, while he could block Senna from joining Williams in 1993, he could not do so for 1994. However, in an interview for Asif Kapadia's 2010 documentary \"Senna\", Prost revealed that the Senna clause did in fact extend to 1994, but Renault (Williams' engine supplier) pressured Frank Williams to ask Prost to waive the clause. As a compromise, the 38-year-old Prost agreed to retire after the 1993 season, provided that Williams paid him his agreed-upon salary for the 1994 season. This cleared the way for Senna to join Williams in 1994.\nProst finished on the podium in his final race (Adelaide 1993). Following the race, Senna embraced him, which Prost found surprising, as Senna had declined a handshake at the previous race. McLaren, having signed a deal with to use Peugeot engines, tempted Prost to unretire by offering him Senna's old seat for the 1994 season, but while Senna encouraged Prost to take the offer, Prost was unimpressed by a test-drive of the 1994 car and retired for good.\nHelmet.\nProst used a helmet design based on the three colours of the French flag, blue, white and red, with his name along the side. During his early career Prost used a basic design of white all over with some blue detail around the visor (blue helmet with a white 180\u00b0 flipped Y and red lines in the lower branch of the flipped Y and in the upper branch, surrounding the top). During Prost's time at Renault, he used more blue details, most notably around the rear of his helmet. Prost's helmet changed in 1985, as his helmet now had the blue detail around the front, surrounding the visor (with also a blue stripe on the side region, making the white area become a P) and a white ring with red lines surrounding the top (forming a white circle with a blue half in the rear of the top). Prost kept a similar design for his entry at Ferrari and Williams. Sometimes Prost used variants of his helmet design. In 2007 he used his original design, but with the circle top all red and a red line in the lower chin area. In 2010, he used a pearl white helmet with silver flames and a blue-white-red-white-blue stripe on the visor, designed by Kaos Design.\nCareer legacy.\nProst is widely regarded as one of Formula One's greatest-ever drivers. He is tied with Sebastian Vettel and Max Verstappen for the fourth-most Drivers' Championships of all time with four, behind only Lewis Hamilton, Michael Schumacher, and Juan Manuel Fangio. In addition, he was just 12.5 points away from an eight-title career. At his retirement, Prost held the record for most career Grand Prix victories (51), which stood for fourteen years. (Michael Schumacher broke Prost's record during the 2001 season. For his own part, Prost believed that had Ayrton Senna not died in 1994, he would have broken Prost's wins record first.) In addition, while Senna held the record for most career pole positions at Prost's retirement, Prost was superb on race day and held the record for most career fastest laps (41) until 2001, when Schumacher broke that record as well.\nProst currently shares the record for the highest percentage of races started from the front row in a single season (16 for 16 in ) with Ayrton Senna () and Damon Hill (). As of 2025[ [update]], he is the last Frenchman to have won his home Grand Prix.\nDriving style.\nDuring his career, Prost was nicknamed \"The Professor\" for his intellectual approach to competition. Though it was not a name he particularly cared for, he later admitted that the term appropriately characterized his driving style. Skilled at setting up his car for race conditions, Prost would often conserve his brakes and tyres early in a race, leaving them fresher for a challenge at the end. His mantra was to \"win as slowly as possible,\" a phrase he may have picked up from his teammate Niki Lauda, or Juan Manuel Fangio. Honda F1 boss Nobuhiko Kawamoto once told Prost that Ayrton Senna \"was more the samurai, and [Prost] was more the computer.\"\nIn contrast to Senna, who had a \"tendency to go flat out all the time,\" Prost employed a smooth, relaxed style behind the wheel, deliberately modelling himself on personal heroes like Jackie Stewart and Jim Clark. Although Prost may not have driven as stylishly as his contemporaries \u2013 Nigel Mansell once said that Prost merely \"chauffeur[ed]\" the best car on the grid \u2013 Stewart praised Prost for his silkiness behind the wheel, explaining, \"To some, that's boring; to me, it's artistry - and so much more difficult than just throwing a car about.\" Prost's calmness allowed him to get the most out of an engine without driving it to failure. Clive James wrote that Prost \"was considered uncanny even by the other drivers for the way his cars held together: it was as if he could hear what was going on in the engine. Prost was the car's friend. Other drivers treated the car no more tactfully than they treated women.\" However, his approach had some critics, including Ron Dennis, who was upset that Prost declined to go for the win at Spa in 1985. Prost responded that \"I've lost the championship at the last moment so many times I'm not taking any chances.\" Prost was stung by the criticism, which he summarized as \"when you win ... it's normal, when you lose, you're stupid.\"https://\nProst's smooth style sometimes masked his raw pace on track. Steve Nichols, Prost's car designer at McLaren and Ferrari, said that at the 1985 Belgian Grand Prix, he watched Prost calmly circle the track three times, and did not realize that Prost had taken pole position until after he went back to the garage. Nigel Roebuck told a similar story about a Prost pole position at Monaco. Adrian Newey, Prost's car designer at Williams, said that Prost sometimes frustrated him in testing because Prost rarely pushed the car to the limit, making it harder for Newey to figure out whether the car was quick enough. Newey added that \"when he wanted to, he could turn it on.\" Although Senna crushed Prost in qualifying during their 32 races together, taking 26 poles to Prost's 4, on race day Prost scored 12 fastest laps to Senna's 6.\nAlthough Senna outshone Prost's qualifying pace, Prost was also an underrated qualifier. Niki Lauda remarked that when Prost joined McLaren in 1984, Prost was so quick that Lauda quit trying to match Prost in qualifying and used his track time to set up his car for the race. Prost internalized those lessons and used them against Senna in 1988 and 1989.\nTeam moves.\nProst also understood the importance of racing in top machinery; McLaren's website comments that he \"built his long career on making the right move at the right time.\" However, once Prost found his way into a winning team, he was not always deft with his relationships with teams and engine suppliers. Formula One's website notes that while Prost \"made winning races [] look easy,\" he \"was less successful at the politics in which he was invariably embroiled,\" and he \"left teams acrimoniously on four occasions.\" \nProst's teammate at Ferrari, Nigel Mansell, recalls one incident where at the 1990 British Grand Prix, the car he drove did not handle the same as in the previous race where he had taken pole position. On confronting the mechanics, it transpired that Prost saw Mansell as having a superior car and as a result, they were swapped without telling Mansell. Prost also spoke fluent Italian, whereas Mansell's Italian was only conversational at best, gave Prost greater influence within the Maranello-based team. According to Prost, Mansell only attended two or three mechanical briefings throughout the season, preferring playing golf. Prost precipitated his 1991 firing from Ferrari by opening criticizing the handling of the car, and took the 1992 season off (by accepting a significant amount of money from Ferrari) rather than take up a drive with second-tier Ligier. \nBy the second race of the 1992 season Prost quickly recognized the potential of the Williams-Renault combination and negotiated a seat for the 1993 and 1994 seasons. Having announced his retirement effective at the end of the 1993 season (not wanting to partner Senna in 1994, with Williams agreeing to pay Prost's 1994 salary), Prost decided not to unretire after being unimpressed by a test-drive of the McLaren-Peugeot for the 1994 season. After Senna was killed at the 1994 San Marino Grand Prix, Prost was the obvious candidate to take up the vacant seat at Williams, but Prost said that out of respect to Senna he would not race in Formula One again.\nAppraisals by contemporaries.\nIn 2009, an \"Autosport\" survey taken by 217 Formula One drivers saw Prost voted as the fourth greatest Formula One driver of all time, behind Senna, Schumacher, and Fangio. Prost's teammate Keke Rosberg said that \"He's the best I've ever known, no question about it. As an all-round race driver he's head and shoulders clear of anyone else.\" Formula One CEO Bernie Ecclestone said that Prost was the greatest driver of all time, as Prost rarely enjoyed number one driver treatment, unlike Senna or Schumacher. In 2023, Ecclestone said that Max Verstappen had surpassed Prost. Jordan team boss Eddie Jordan shared Ecclestone's opinion, appreciating that Prost \"never minded who his teammate was\" (Senna being a notable exception). Formula One medical chief Sid Watkins said that Prost and Niki Lauda were the most intelligent drivers he had worked with, noting that he could recall only one dangerous auto accident involving Prost in his career.\nQuantitative ratings.\nVarious outlets have attempted to develop models that objectively measure driver skill relative to car quality. Prost generally places highly in these comparisons.\nRivalry with Ayrton Senna.\nProst's battles with Ayrton Senna were widely covered. The two drivers were intense competitors and contributed to several infamous on-track incidents:\nFollowing the 1991 Hockenheim incident, the FISA ordered a sit-down meeting between the two men to cool tensions and prevent further incidents.\nIn addition, the two drivers both found themselves chasing the same race seat after the 1992 season, as Ferrari's performance had declined and Honda left Formula One, leaving Williams-Renault as the unquestioned ruler of Formula One. In exchange for his signature with Williams, Prost infamously blocked the team from signing Senna, prompting Senna to publicly complain that Prost was \"behaving like a coward.\" Senna's Brazilian fans were so enraged by Prost's refusal to race with Senna on equal terms that Prost received a police escort for the 1993 Brazilian Grand Prix. Prost comfortably won the 1993 title and retired at season's end, allowing Senna to take the lead at Williams in 1994.\nOnce they were no longer competitors, the two rivals began mending their relationship. At Prost's last Grand Prix, the 1993 Australian Grand Prix, Senna pulled him onto the top step of the podium for an embrace. Only a couple of days before Senna's untimely death at Imola, when filming an in-car lap of Imola for French television channel TF1, he greeted Prost, by then a pundit on the channel: \"A special hello to my...to our dear friend, Alain. We all miss you Alain.\" Prost said that he was amazed and very touched by the comment. Prost was a pallbearer at Senna's funeral, and commented that when Senna died \"a part of himself had died also\", because their careers had been so closely bound together. Senna felt similarly, admitting to a close friend that after Prost retired, he realised how much of his motivation had come from fighting with Prost.\nLater life.\nDuring 1994 and 1995, Prost worked as a pundit for the French TV channel TF1. He also worked for Renault doing public relations and promotions. Prost went back to his old team McLaren, working as a technical adviser; he also completed L'\u00c9tape du Tour, an annual mass-participation bike ride that takes place on a stage of the Tour de France.\nIn 2024, Prost publicly expressed concerns about the growing trend of Formula One teams undergoing frequent name changes due to shifts in ownership and sponsorship. He argued that while commercial partnerships are an integral part of modern Formula One, the constant rebranding risks undermining the sport\u2019s sense of tradition and continuity. Citing the example of Sauber, which transitioned from Alfa Romeo to Stake and is scheduled to become Audi in 2026, as well as the rebranding of AlphaTauri into Visa Cash App RB, Prost suggested that such practices dilute the historic identity and emotional connection fans have with longstanding teams. He emphasized that Formula One\u2019s heritage is built not only on its drivers and manufacturers but also on the enduring legacies of its teams, and warned that prioritizing short-term commercial gains over stability could damage the sport\u2019s cultural fabric. \nProst Grand Prix.\nDuring 1989 Prost began to contemplate starting his own team, as his relationship with his McLaren teammate, Ayrton Senna, had turned sour. Prost and John Barnard, formerly chief designer at McLaren, came close to founding a team in 1990; but a lack of sponsorship meant that this was not possible, so Prost moved to Ferrari and Barnard left Ferrari to join Benetton. After falling out with the Italian team at the end of 1991, Prost found himself without a drive for 1992; after the failure of extensive negotiations with Guy Ligier about buying his Ligier team, Prost decided to join Williams for 1993. By 1995, when Prost was working for Renault, people had assumed that a Prost-Renault team would be formed. Renault refused Prost's request to supply engines for his team, ending the speculation.\nOn 13 February 1997, Prost bought the Ligier team from Flavio Briatore and renamed it \"Prost Grand Prix\". The day after he bought the team, Prost signed a three-year deal with French car manufacturer Peugeot, who would supply the team with engines from until . For the team's first season, Prost kept one of Ligier's 1996 drivers, Olivier Panis, who had won the Monaco Grand Prix the previous year; Japanese driver Shinji Nakano was signed to partner Panis. The team raced with the Mugen-Honda engines used by Ligier the previous season, while the car was actually the originally intended Ligier JS45, but was renamed the Prost JS45. Things looked promising at the start of the season, as the team picked up two points on its Grand Prix debut in Australia when Olivier Panis finished fifth. The team scored a further 13 points before Panis broke his leg in an accident during the Canadian Grand Prix. He was replaced by Minardi's Jarno Trulli. From there, things started to go downhill slightly, the team scored only five points during Panis's recovery. He came back at the end of the season to race in the last three Grands Prix. Prost GP finished sixth in the Constructors' Championship in its first season, with 21 points.\nProst became the president of Prost Grand Prix at the start of 1998. With Peugeot supplying the engines for Prost GP, Mugen-Honda decided to supply the Jordan team. Prost GP scored a single point during the season when Jarno Trulli finished sixth in Belgium.\n was a crucial year for Prost GP. Prost hired John Barnard as a technical consultant, Barnard's B3 Technologies company helping Loic Bigois with the design of the Prost AP02. Panis and Trulli agreed to stay on with the team for the season. The car was not a major concern but the Peugeot V10 engine proved to be heavy and unreliable.\nPeugeot's final year as Prost's engine supplier in 2000 saw some optimism. Prost hired his 1991 Ferrari teammate Jean Alesi to drive the lead car and German Nick Heidfeld, who had won the 1999 Formula 3000 championship, to partner him. The season proved to be yet another disastrous one: the AP03 proved to be unreliable and ill handling. Things weren't helped when the drivers collided with each other in the Austrian Grand Prix. Newly hired technical director Alan Jenkins was fired midway through the year. Prost restructured the team, hiring Joan Villadelprat as the managing director and replacing Jenkins with Henri Durand as the team's new technical director.\nIn Ferrari agreed to supply engines for the season. The money ran out at the start of the season and Prost was out of business, leaving debts of around $30 million.\nOther roles.\nDuring 2002, Prost spent time with his family and competed in eight bicycle races, finishing third in the \"Granite \u2013 Mont Loz\u00e8re\". The Frenchman raced in the Andros ice race series in 2003, finishing second in the championship behind Yvan Muller. In 2003 and 2004, Prost took part in the \u00c9tape du Tour. Prost also became an Ambassador for Uniroyal, a position he would keep until May 2006. Prost continued to compete in the Andros Trophy, winning the title with Toyota in 2006/07, 2007/08 and with Dacia in 2011/2012.\nFor the 2010 Formula One season, the Sporting Regulations were changed so that a former driver sits on the stewards' panel. Prost was the first such driver to take on this role, at the 2010 Bahrain Grand Prix. Prost also took part in the Race of Champions in 2010, a race organised for legends of motor sport to compete in equal machinery. In February 2012, Prost was named as Renault's new international ambassador, representing the company in sports demonstrations and at events organized or attended by Renault. Prost has finished the Absa Cape Epic, an eight-day 700\u00a0km mountain bike race in South Africa, twice. He first completed the race in 2012 with partner Sebastien di Pasqua and then again in 2013, and started but did not finish the race in 2014.\nIn October 2013, it was announced that Prost would join forces with Jean-Paul Driot's DAMS racing team to form e.dams, a team which would compete in the FIA Formula E Championship for electric racing cars from its commencement in September 2014. In June 2014, the team announced that its initial driver line-up would consist of Nicolas Prost and S\u00e9bastien Buemi. The team went on to win the inaugural Formula E teams championship. Prost was a pundit with Channel 4 F1 for the season.\nIn 2017, he was employed as a special adviser for the Renault Formula One Team. Since July 2019, he took up a non-executive director role with Renault Sport. During the 1000th Formula One race, the 2019 Chinese Grand Prix, Prost had the honour of waving the chequered flag as Mercedes driver Lewis Hamilton crossed the line to take his 75th career victory. Prost continued in his role within Renault Formula One Team, renamed \"Alpine F1 Team\" in 2021, until January 2022, when his departure from the team was announced.\nPersonal life.\nProst was married to Anne-Marie (born 14 February 1955), but they divorced sometime later. They have two sons, Nicolas (born 18 August 1981) and Sacha Prost (born 30 May 1990). Prost also has a daughter, Victoria, born in 1996 from his relationship with Bernadette Cottin. From 2014 to 2018, Nicolas raced in Formula E for e.dams Renault, a team partially run by his father. Prost lived in his hometown, Saint-Chamond, until he and his Renault team fell out in the early 1980s. In April 1983 the Prost family moved to Sainte-Croix, Switzerland, and shortly after to Yens, Switzerland. They moved to Switzerland after Renault workers went to Prost's house in France and burned his Mercedes-Benz and another one of his road cars. They lived there until November 1999, when they moved to Nyon in the same country. Through Nicolas, Prost has two grandsons named Kimi (born November 2015) and Mika (born December 2020). Through Sacha, he has another grandson named Liam\u00a0(born June 2018).\nIn 1986, Prost was awarded the L\u00e9gion d'honneur by the French President, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand; he was promoted from Chevalier to Officier rank in 1993. In addition, he was awarded an honorary British OBE in 1994, and the Brazilian Order of the Southern Cross in 1999. He was also inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame and the FIA Hall of Fame in 1999 and 2017 respectively.\nBesides his native French language, Prost also speaks fluent English and Italian.\nIn popular culture.\nProst voiced an animated depiction of himself in McLaren's \"Tooned\" cartoon series to commemorate McLaren's 50th anniversary. Episode 5 of the series' second season tells a fictionalized account of the 1984 Formula One season which attributes Prost's mechanical failures and final championship standing in the season to the actions of the character Professor M (voiced by Alexander Armstrong).\nRacing record.\nComplete Formula One World Championship results.\n\u2020 Did not finish, but was classified as he had completed more than 90% of the race distance.&lt;br&gt;\n\u2021 Race was stopped with less than 75% of laps completed, half points awarded.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "36918", "revid": "63", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36918", "title": "First Ecumenical Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "36919", "revid": "3145267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36919", "title": "Second Ecumenical Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "36920", "revid": "63", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36920", "title": "Seventh Ecumenical Council", "text": ""}
{"id": "36921", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36921", "title": "Al-Qur'an", "text": ""}
{"id": "36922", "revid": "24249560", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36922", "title": "Quran", "text": "Central religious text of Islam\nThe Quran (vocalized Arabic: , Quranic Arabic: ), also romanized Qur'an or Koran, is the central religious text of Islam, believed by Muslims to be a revelation directly from God (\"All\u0101h\"). It is organized in 114 chapters (, pl. ) which consist of individual verses (\"). Besides its religious significance, it is widely regarded as the finest work in Arabic literature, and has significantly influenced the Arabic language. It is the object of a modern field of academic research known as Quranic studies.\nMuslims believe the Quran was orally revealed by God to the final Islamic prophet Muhammad through the angel Gabriel incrementally over a period of some 23 years, beginning on the Laylat al-Qadr, when Muhammad was 40, and concluding in 632, the year of his death. Muslims regard the Quran as Muhammad's most important miracle, a proof of his prophethood, and the culmination of a series of divine messages starting with those revealed to the first Islamic prophet Adam, including the holy books of the Torah, Psalms, and Gospel in Islam.\nThe Quran is believed by Muslims to be God's own divine speech providing a complete code of conduct across all facets of life. This has led Muslim theologians to fiercely debate whether the Quran was \"created or uncreated\". According to tradition, several of Muhammad's companions served as scribes, recording the revelations. Shortly after Muhammad's death, the Quran was compiled on the order of the first caliph Abu Bakr (r.\u2009632\u00a0\u2013\u00a0634) by the companions, who had written down or memorized parts of it. Caliph Uthman (r.\u2009644\u00a0\u2013\u00a0656) established a standard version, now known as the Uthmanic codex, which is generally considered the archetype of the Quran known today. There are, however, variant readings, with some differences in meaning.\nThe Quran assumes the reader's familiarity with major narratives recounted in the Biblical and apocryphal texts. It summarizes some, dwells at length on others and, in some cases, presents alternative accounts and interpretations of events. The Quran describes itself as a book of guidance for humankind ( https://). It sometimes offers detailed accounts of specific historical events, and it often emphasizes the moral significance of an event over its narrative sequence.\nSupplementing the Quran with explanations for some cryptic Quranic narratives, and rulings that also provide the basis for Islamic law in most denominations of Islam, are hadiths\u2014oral and written traditions believed to describe words and actions of Muhammad. During prayers, the Quran is recited only in Arabic. Someone who has memorized the entire Quran is called a . Ideally, verses are recited with a special kind of prosody reserved for this purpose called . During the month of Ramadan, Muslims typically complete the recitation of the whole Quran during prayers. In order to extrapolate the meaning of a particular Quranic verse, Muslims rely on exegesis, or commentary rather than a direct translation of the text.\nEtymology and meaning.\nThe word appears about 70 times in the Quran itself, assuming various meanings. It is a verbal noun () of the Arabic verb () meaning 'he read' or 'he recited'. The Syriac equivalent is (), which refers to 'scripture reading' or 'lesson'. While some Western scholars consider the word to be derived from the Syriac, the majority of Muslim authorities hold the origin of the word is itself. Regardless, it had become an Arabic term by Muhammad's lifetime. An important meaning of the word is the 'act of reciting', as reflected in an early Quranic passage: \"It is for Us to collect it and to recite it ().\"\nIn other verses, the word refers to 'an individual passage recited [by Muhammad]'. Its liturgical context is seen in a number of passages, for example: \"So when is recited, listen to it and keep silent.\" The word may also assume the meaning of a codified scripture when mentioned with other scriptures such as the Torah and Gospel.\nThe term also has closely related synonyms that are employed throughout the Quran. Each synonym possesses its own distinct meaning, but its use may converge with that of in certain contexts. Such terms include ('book'), ('sign'), and ('scripture'); the latter two terms also denote units of revelation. In the large majority of contexts, usually with a definite article (), the word is referred to as the ('revelation'), that which has been \"sent down\" () at intervals. Other related words include: ('remembrance'), used to refer to the Quran in the sense of a reminder and warning; and ('wisdom'), sometimes referring to the revelation or part of it.\nThe Quran describes itself as 'the discernment' (), 'the mother book' (), 'the guide' (), 'the wisdom' (), 'the remembrance' (), and 'the revelation' (; 'something sent down', signifying the descent of an object from a higher place to lower place). Another term is ('The Book'), though it is also used in the Arabic language for other scriptures, such as the Torah and the Gospels. The term ('written work') is often used to refer to particular Quranic manuscripts but is also used in the Quran to identify earlier revealed books.\nHistory.\nProphetic era.\nIslamic tradition relates that Muhammad received his first revelation in 610 CE in the Cave of Hira on the Night of Power during one of his isolated retreats to the mountains. Thereafter, he received revelations over a period of 23 years. According to (traditions ascribed to Muhammad) and Muslim history, after Muhammad and his followers immigrated to Medina and formed an independent Muslim community, he ordered many of his companions to recite the Quran and to learn and teach the laws, which were revealed daily. It is related that some of the Quraysh who were taken prisoners at the Battle of Badr regained their freedom after they had taught some of the Muslims the simple writing of the time. Thus a group of Muslims gradually became literate. As it was initially spoken, the Quran was recorded on tablets, bones, and the wide, flat ends of date palm fronds. Most suras (also usually transliterated as Surah) were in use amongst early Muslims since they are mentioned in numerous sayings by both Sunni and Shia sources, relating Muhammad's use of the Quran as a call to Islam, the making of prayer and the manner of recitation. However, the Quran did not exist in book form at the time of Muhammad's death in 632 at age 61\u201362. There is agreement among scholars that Muhammad himself did not write down the revelation.\n narrates Muhammad describing the revelations as, \"Sometimes it is (revealed) like the ringing of a bell\" and A'isha reported, \"I saw the Prophet being inspired Divinely on a very cold day and noticed the sweat dropping from his forehead (as the Inspiration was over).\" Muhammad's first revelation, according to the Quran, was accompanied with a vision. The agent of revelation is mentioned as the \"one mighty in power,\" the one who \"grew clear to view when he was on the uppermost horizon. Then he drew nigh and came down till he was (distant) two bows' length or even nearer.\" The Islamic studies scholar Welch states in the \"Encyclopaedia of Islam\" that he believes the graphic descriptions of Muhammad's condition at these moments may be regarded as genuine, because he was severely disturbed after these revelations. According to Welch, these seizures would have been seen by those around him as convincing evidence for the superhuman origin of Muhammad's inspirations. However, Muhammad's critics accused him of being a possessed man, a soothsayer, or a magician since his experiences were similar to those claimed by such figures well known in ancient Arabia. Welch additionally states that it remains uncertain whether these experiences occurred before or after Muhammad's initial claim of prophethood.\nThe Quran describes Muhammad as \"\", which is traditionally interpreted as 'illiterate', but the meaning is more complex. Medieval commentators such as al-Tabari (d.\u2009923) maintained that the term induced two meanings: first, the inability to read or write in general; second, the inexperience or ignorance of the previous books or scriptures (but they gave priority to the first meaning). Muhammad's illiteracy was taken as a sign of the genuineness of his prophethood. For example, according to Fakhr al-Din al-Razi, if Muhammad had mastered writing and reading he possibly would have been suspected of having studied the books of the ancestors. Some scholars such as W. Montgomery Watt prefer the second meaning of \u2014they take it to indicate unfamiliarity with earlier sacred texts.\nThe final verse of the Quran was revealed on the 18th of the Islamic month of Dhu al-Hijjah in the year 10 A.H., a date that roughly corresponds to February or March 632. The verse was revealed after the Prophet finished delivering his sermon at Ghadir Khumm.\nAccording to Islamic tradition, the Quran was revealed to Muhammad in seven different (meaning letters; however, it could mean dialects, forms, styles or modes). Most Islamic scholars agree that these different are the same Quran revealed in seven different Arabic dialects and that they do not change the meaning of the Quran, the purpose of which was to make the Quran easy for recitation and memorization among the different Arab tribes. While Sunni Muslims believe in the seven , some Shia reject the idea of seven Quranic variants. A common misconception is that the seven and the are the same.\nCompilation and preservation.\nFollowing Muhammad's death in 632, a number of his companions who memorized the Quran were killed in the Battle of al-Yamama by Musaylima. The first caliph, Abu Bakr (r.\u2009632\u00a0\u2013\u00a0634), subsequently decided to collect the book in one volume so that it could be preserved. Zayd ibn Thabit (d.\u2009655) was the person to collect the Quran since \"he used to write the Divine Inspiration for Allah's Apostle\". Thus, a group of scribes, most importantly Zayd, collected the verses and produced a hand-written manuscript of the complete book. The manuscript according to Zayd remained with Abu Bakr until he died. Zayd's reaction to the task and the difficulties in collecting the Quranic material from parchments, palm-leaf stalks, thin stones (collectively known as , any written work containing divine teachings) and from men who knew it by heart is recorded in earlier narratives. In 644, Muhammad's widow Hafsa bint Umar was entrusted with the manuscript until the third caliph, Uthman (r.\u2009644\u00a0\u2013\u00a0656), requested the standard copy from her. According to historian Michael Cook, early Muslim narratives about the collection and compilation of the Quran sometimes contradict themselves: \"Most ... make Uthman little more than an editor, but there are some in which he appears very much a collector, appealing to people to bring him any bit of the Quran they happen to possess.\" Some accounts also \"suggest that in fact the material\" Abu Bakr worked with \"had already been assembled\", which since he was the first caliph, would mean they were collected when Muhammad was still alive.\nAround the 650s, the Islamic expansion beyond the Arabian Peninsula and into Persia, the Levant and North Africa, as well as the use of the seven , had caused some confusion and differences in the pronunciation of the Quran, and conflict was arising between different Arab tribes due to some claiming to be more superior to other Arab tribes and non-Arabs based on dialect, which Uthman noticed. In order to preserve the sanctity of the text, he ordered a committee headed by Zayd to use Abu Bakr's copy and prepare a standard text of the Quran. Thus, within 20 years of Muhammad's death in 632, the complete Quran was committed to written form as the Uthmanic codex. That text became the model from which copies were made and promulgated throughout the urban centers of the Muslim world, and other versions are believed to have been destroyed. and the six other of the Quran fell out of use. The present form of the Quran text is accepted by Muslim scholars to be the original version compiled by Abu Bakr.\nQira'at which is a way and method of reciting the Quran was developed sometime afterwards. There are ten canonical recitations and they are not to be confused with ahruf. Shias recite the Quran according to the of Hafs on authority of \u2018Asim, which is the prevalent in the Islamic world and believe that the Quran was gathered and compiled by Muhammad during his lifetime. It is claimed that the Shia had more than 1,000 hadiths ascribed to the Shia Imams which indicate the distortion of the Quran and according to Etan Kohlberg, this belief about Quran was common among Shiites in the early centuries of Islam. In his view, Ibn Babawayh was the first major Twelver author \"to adopt a position identical to that of the Sunnis\" and the change was a result of the \"rise to power of the Sunni 'Abbasid caliphate,\" whence belief in the corruption of the Quran became untenable vis-a-vis the position of Sunni \"orthodoxy\". Alleged distortions have been carried out to remove any references to the rights of Ali, the Imams and their supporters and the disapproval of enemies, such as Umayyads and Abbasids.\nOther personal copies of the Quran might have existed including Ibn Mas'ud's and Ubay ibn Ka'b's codex, none of which exist today.\nAcademic research.\nStudies on the Quran rarely went beyond textual criticism. Until the early 1970s, non-Muslim scholars of Islam \u2014while not accepting traditional explanations for divine intervention\u2014 accepted the above-mentioned traditional origin story in most details.\nUniversity of Chicago professor Fred Donner states that:[T]here was a very early attempt to establish a uniform consonantal text of the Qur\u02be\u0101n from what was probably a wider and more varied group of related texts in early transmission.\u2026 After the creation of this standardized canonical text, earlier authoritative texts were suppressed, and all extant manuscripts\u2014despite their numerous variants\u2014seem to date to a time after this standard consonantal text was established.Although most variant readings of the text of the Quran have ceased to be transmitted, some still are. There has been no critical text produced on which a scholarly reconstruction of the Quranic text could be based.\nIn 1972, in a mosque in the city of Sana'a, Yemen, manuscripts \"consisting of 12,000 pieces\" were discovered that were later proven to be the oldest Quranic text known to exist at the time. The Sana'a manuscripts contain palimpsests, manuscript pages from which the text has been washed off to make the parchment reusable again\u2014a practice which was common in ancient times due to the scarcity of writing material. However, the faint washed-off underlying text () is still barely visible. Studies using radiocarbon dating indicate that the parchments are dated to the period before 671 CE with a 99 percent probability. The German scholar Gerd R. Puin has been investigating these Quran fragments for years. His research team made 35,000 microfilm photographs of the manuscripts, which he dated to the early part of the 8th century. Puin has noted unconventional verse orderings, minor textual variations, and rare styles of orthography, and suggested that some of the parchments were palimpsests which had been reused. Puin believed that this implied an evolving text as opposed to a fixed one.\nIt is also possible that the content of the Quran itself may provide data regarding the date and probably nearby geography of writing of the text. Sources based on some archaeological data give the construction date of Masjid al-Haram, an architectural work mentioned 16 times in the Quran, as 78 AH an additional finding that sheds light on the evolutionary history of the Quranic texts mentioned, which is known to continue even during the time of Hajjaj, in a similar situation that can be seen with al-Aksa, though different suggestions have been put forward -contrary to some of the hadiths of Muhammad's ascension, which indicate that these places are architectural structures- to explain. These structures, -expected to be somewhere near Muhammad- which were placed in cities like Mecca and Jerusalem, which are thousands of kilometers apart today, with interpretations based on narrations and miracles, were a miracle performed under a night's journey according to the outward and literal meaning of the verse.Surah Al-Isra https:// (See also:Bakkah)\nIn 2015, a single folio of a very early Quran, dating back to 1370 years earlier, was discovered in the library of the University of Birmingham, England. According to the tests carried out by the Oxford University Radiocarbon Accelerator Unit, \"with a probability of more than 95%, the parchment was from between 568 and 645\". The manuscript is written in Hijazi script, an early form of written Arabic. This possibly was one of the earliest extant exemplars of the Quran, but as the tests allow a range of possible dates, it cannot be said with certainty which of the existing versions is the oldest. Saudi scholar Saud al-Sarhan has expressed doubt over the age of the fragments as they contain dots and chapter separators that are believed to have originated later. The Birmingham manuscript caused excitement amongst believers because of its potential overlapping with the dominant tradition over the lifetime of Muhammad c.\u2009570 to 632 CE and used as evidence to support conventional wisdom and to refute the revisionists' views that expresses findings and views different from the traditional approach to the early history of the Quran and Islam.\nContents.\nThe Quranic content is concerned with basic Islamic beliefs including the existence of God and the resurrection. Narratives of the early prophets, ethical and legal subjects, historical events of Muhammad's time, charity and prayer also appear in the Quran. The Quranic verses contain general exhortations regarding right and wrong and historical events are related to outline general moral lessons. The style of the Quran has been called \"allusive\", with commentaries needed to explain what is being referred to\u2014\"events are referred to, but not narrated; disagreements are debated without being explained; people and places are mentioned, but rarely named.\" While tafsir in Islamic sciences expresses the effort to understand the implied and implicit expressions of the Quran, fiqh refers to the efforts to expand the meaning of expressions, especially in the verses related to the provisions, as well as understanding it. \nQuranic studies state that, in the historical context, the content of the Quran is related to Rabbinic, Jewish-Christian, Syriac Christian and Hellenic literature, as well as pre-Islamic Arabia.\nMany places, subjects and mythological figures in the culture of Arabs and many nations in their historical neighbourhoods, especially Judeo-Christian stories, are included in the Quran with small allusions, references or sometimes small narratives such as jann\u0101t \u02bfadn, jahannam, Seven Sleepers, Queen of Sheba etc. The stories of Yusuf and Zulaikha, Moses, Family of Amram (parents of Mary according to the Quran) and mysterious hero Dhul-Qarnayn (\"the man with two horns\") who built a barrier against Gog and Magog that will remain until the end of time are more detailed and longer stories. Apart from semi-historical events and characters such as King Solomon and David, about Jewish history as well as the exodus of the Israelites from Egypt, tales of the hebrew prophets accepted in Islam, such as Creation, the Flood, struggle of Abraham with Nimrod, sacrifice of his son occupy a wide place in the Quran. \nSome philosophers and scholars such as Mohammed Arkoun, who emphasize the mythological content of the Quran, are met with rejectionist attitudes in Islamic circles. In response to the fact that the people mentioned do not correspond to historically known figures, some modern commentators have suggested that these figures should be understood as representative figures portraying certain characters, rather than real ones.\nCreation and God.\nThe central theme of the Quran is monotheism. God is depicted as living, eternal, omniscient and omnipotent (see, e.g., Quran https://, https://, https://). God's omnipotence appears above all in his power to create. He is the creator of everything, of the heavens and the earth and what is between them (see, e.g., Quran https://, https://, https://, etc.). All human beings are equal in their utter dependence upon God, and their well-being depends upon their acknowledging that fact and living accordingly. The Quran uses cosmological and contingency arguments in various verses without referring to the terms to prove the existence of God. Therefore, the universe is originated and needs an originator, and whatever exists must have a sufficient cause for its existence. Besides, the design of the universe is frequently referred to as a point of contemplation: \"It is He who has created seven heavens in harmony. You cannot see any fault in God's creation; then look again: Can you see any flaw?\"\nEven though Muslims do not doubt about the existence and unity of God, they may have adopted different attitudes that have changed and developed throughout history regarding his nature (attributes), names and relationship with creation. Rabb is an Arabic word to refers to God meaning Lord and the Quran cites in several places as in the Al-Fatiha; \"All Praise and Gratitude is due to God, \"Lord\" of all the Universe\". Mustafa \u00d6zt\u00fcrk points out that the first Muslims believed that this god lived in the sky with the following words of Ahmad Ibn Hanbal: \"Whoever says that Allah is everywhere is a heretic, an infidel. He should be invited to repent, but if he does not, be killed.\" This understanding changes later and gives way to the understanding that \"God cannot be assigned a place and He is everywhere.\" Also actions and attributes such as coming, going, sitting, satisfaction, anger and sadness etc. similar to humans used for this God in the Quran were considered \u2014\"no one knows its interpretation except God\" (Quran https://)\u2014by later scholars stating that God was free from resemblance to humans in any way.\nProphetic stories.\nIn Islam, God speaks to people called prophets through a kind of revelation called \"wahy\", or through angels. ( https://) \"nubuwwah\" ( 'prophethood') is seen as a duty imposed by God on individuals who have some characteristics such as intelligence, honesty, fortitude and justice: \"Nothing is said to you that was not said to the messengers before you, that your lord has at his Command forgiveness as well as a most Grievous Penalty.\"\nIslam regards Abraham as a link in the chain of prophets that begins with Adam and culminates in Muhammad via Ishmael and mentioned in 35 chapters of the Quran, more often than any other biblical personage apart from Moses. Muslims regard him as a \"hanif\", an archetype of the perfect Muslim, and revered prophet and builder of the Kaaba in Mecca. The Quran consistently refers to Islam as 'the religion of Abraham' (). In Islam, Eid-al-Adha is celebrated to commemorate Abraham's attempt to sacrifice his son by surrendering in line with his dream,(As-Saaffat; 100\u2013107) which he accepted as the will of God.\nIn Islam, Moses is a prominent prophet and messenger of God and the most frequently mentioned individual in the Quran, with his name being mentioned 136 times and his life being narrated and recounted more than that of any other prophet. Unlike the hundreds of references in the Quran to the stories of prophets such as Moses and Jesus, it provides very little information about Muhammad himself, his companions, or his contemporaries. The individuals to whom the expressions used in Quranic polemics belong and the contexts in which they were used are merely notes made in commentaries written in later centuries. An exception is his slave/adopted son Zayd, whose name is mentioned in the verses (Al-A\u1e25z\u0101b;37) in the context of his -divorced- wife being taken into Muhammad's marriages. Probably the clearest biographical account of Muhammad in the Quran is the brief mention of his followers' settlement in Yathrib after their expulsion by the Quraysh, and of military encounters such as the Muslim victory at Badr.\nStories of the prophets in the Quran often revolve around a certain pattern, according to which a prophet is sent to a group of people, who then reject or attack him, and ultimately suffer extinction as God's punishment. However, the Quran, given its paraenetic character, does not offer a full narrative; but rather offers a parabolic reference to the doom of previous generations, assuming the audience is familiar with the told stories.\nEthico-religious concepts.\nWhile belief in God and obedience to the prophets are the main emphasis in the prophetic stories, there are also non-prophetic stories in the Quran that emphasize the importance of humility and having profound-inner knowledge (hikmah) besides trusting in God. This is the main theme in the stories of Khidr, Luqman and Dhul Qarnayn. According to the later ascriptions to these stories, it is possible for those with this knowledge and divine support to teach the prophets (Khidr-Moses story ) and employ jinn (Dhul Qarnayn). Those who \"spend their wealth\" on people who are in need because they devoted their lives to the way of Allah and whose situation is unknown because they are ashamed to ask, will be rewarded by Allah. (Al Baqara; 272-274) In the story of Q\u0101r\u016bn, the person who avoids searching for the afterlife with his wealth and becomes arrogant will be punished, arrogance befits only God. (Al Mutakabbir) Characters of the stories can be closed-mythical, (Khidr) demi-mythologic or combined characters, and it can also be seen that they are Islamized. While some believe he was a prophet, some researchers equate Luqman with the Alcmaeon of Croton or Aesop.\n\"Commanding ma\u2019ruf and forbidding munkar\" (Ar. \u0671\u0644\u0652\u0623\u064e\u0645\u0652\u0631\u064f \u0628\u0650\u0671\u0644\u0652\u0645\u064e\u0639\u0652\u0631\u064f\u0648\u0641\u0650 \u0648\u064e\u0671\u0644\u0646\u064e\u0651\u0647\u0652\u064a\u064f \u0639\u064e\u0646\u0650 \u0671\u0644\u0652\u0645\u064f\u0646\u0652\u0643\u064e\u0631\u0650) is repeated or referred to in nearly 30 verses in different contexts in the Quran and is an important part of Islamist / jihadist indoctrination today, as well as Shiite teachings.\nAlthough a common translation of the phrase is \"Enjoining good and forbidding evil\", the words used by Islamic philosophy determining good and evil in discourses are \"husn\" and \"qubh\". The word ma\u2019ruf literally means \"known\" or what is approved because of its familiarity for a certain society and its antithesis munkar means what is disapproved because it is unknown and extraneous.\nThe Quran is one of the fundamental sources of Islamic law (\"sharia\"). Some formal religious practices receive significant attention in the Quran including the \"salat\" and fasting in the month of Ramadan. As for the manner in which the prayer is to be conducted, the Quran refers to prostration. The term chosen for charity, \"zakat\", literally means purification implies that it is a self-purification. In fiqh, the term fard is used for clear imperative provisions based on the Quran. However, it is not possible to say that the relevant verses are understood in the same way by all segments of Islamic commentators; For example, Hanafis accept 5 daily prayers as fard. However, some religious groups such as Quranists and Shiites, who do not doubt that the Quran existing today is a religious source, infer from the same verses that it is clearly ordered to pray two or three times, not five times. About six verses address the way a woman should dress when in public; Some Muslim scholars consider this verse referring to the Hijab while others to clothings in general.\nResearch shows that the rituals in the Quran, along with laws such as qisas and tax (zakat), developed as an evolution of pre-Islamic Arabian rituals. Arabic words meaning pilgrimage (hajj), prayer (sal\u0101t) and charity (zak\u0101t) can be seen in pre-Islamic Safaitic-Arabic inscriptions, and this continuity can be observed in many details, especially in hajj and umrah.\nAs a source of law and judgment.\nA small number of verses in the Quran are about general rules of governance, inheritance, marriage, crime and punishment. Although the Quran does not impose a specific legal-management system, it emphasizes custom in nearly 40 verses and commands justice. (An-Nahl; 90) The practices prescribed in the Quran are considered as reflections of contextual legal understandings, as can be clearly seen in some examples such as Qisas and Diya. The following statement in the Quran is thought to be the general rule of testimony in Islamic jurisprudence, except for crime and punishment - for example, debt, shopping, etc.; O believers! When you contract a loan for a fixed period of time, commit it to writing...with justice. Call upon two of your men to witness. If two men cannot be found, then one man and two women of your choice will witness so if one of the women forgets the other may remind her.[Quran https://]\nAs a different example, in the necklace story of Aisha, called Asbab al-Nuzul for surah An-Nur :11-20 four witnesses were required for the accusation of adultery. In addition, those who made accusations that did not meet the specified conditions would be punished with 80 lashes. The jurisprudence of later periods stipulates that witnesses must be men, covering all hadd crimes and people who did not have credibility and honesty in society (slaves, non-adl; sinners, infidels) could not testify against believers. In addition, the Islamic judiciary did not require proof of the issues defined as tazir. The statement in the Quran that determines the status of slaves in community is; \"Ma malakat aymanuhum\" meaning \"those whom your right hands possess\". The widespread use of slavery in the Islamic world continued until the last century, and the unrestricted sexual use of female slaves, with a few exceptions such as they couldn't be loaned out in traditional islamic jurisprudence while stated today often that sharia provides many rights to slaves and aims to eradicate slavery over time.\nSharia is a collection of laws and rules created by scholars' interpretations on the Quran and hadith collections, and has been developed over the centuries, changing according to different geographies and societies. Fiqh sects are schools of understanding that try to determine the actions that people should do or avoid based on the Quran and hadiths. The place of hadiths in legislation is controversial; for example, in the Hanafi sect, in order to claim that something is obligatory, that issue must be clearly expressed in the Quran. Some of these results may also indicate exaggeration of statements, generalizations taken out of context, and imperative broadening of scope. Of the few criminal cases listed as crimes in the Quran, only a few of them are punished by the classical books of sharia as determined by the verses of the Quran and are called hudud laws. How the verse Al-Ma'idah 33, which describes the crime of hirabah, should be understood is a matter of debate even today. The verse talks about the punishment of criminals by killing, hanging, having their hands and feet cut off on opposite sides, and being exiled from the earth, in response to an -abstract- crime such as \"fighting against Allah and His Messenger\". Expanding or narrowing the conditions and scope of this crime according to new situations and universal legal standards are issues that continue to be discussed today such as punishing in addition to rebellion against the legitimate government on \"concrete sequential criminal acts\" ie massacre, robbery and rape as preconditions.\nAlthough the constitutions of most Muslim-majority states contain references to sharia, its rules are largely preserved only in family law and criminal law in some. The Islamic revival of the late 20th century brought calls by Islamic movements for the full implementation of sharia, including corporal punishment such as stoning for adultery, through a variety of propaganda methods, from civic political activities to terrorism.\nEschatology.\nThe doctrine of the last day and eschatology (the final fate of the universe) may be considered the second great doctrine of the Quran. It is estimated that approximately one-third of the Quran is eschatological, dealing with the afterlife in the next world and with the day of judgment at the end of time. The Quran does not assert a natural immortality of the human soul, since man's existence is dependent on the will of God: when he wills, he causes man to die; and when he wills, he raises him to life again in a bodily resurrection.\nIn the Quran belief in the afterlife is often referred in conjunction with belief in God: \"Believe in God and the last day\" emphasizing what is considered impossible is easy in the sight of God. A number of suras such as 44, 56, 75, 78, 81 and 101 are directly related to the afterlife and warn people to be prepared for the \"imminent\" day referred to in various ways. It is 'the Day of Judgment,' 'the Last Day,' 'the Day of Resurrection,' or simply 'the Hour.' Less frequently it is 'the Day of Distinction', 'the Day of the Gathering' or 'the Day of the Meeting'.\nWhen the time of the apocalypse comes -which is told in a poetic form- the sun is rolled up, the stars fall down, seas are set on fire, mountains are moved people run away in fear and pregnant women miscarry.(At-Takwir 1-7) Then a square is set up and the king or lord of the day;(\"m\u0101liki yawmi-d-d\u012bn\") comes and shows his shin; the looks are fearful, those gathered in the square are invited to prostrate;(Al-Qalam 42-43) the question asked is why the innocent female children were killed.(At-Takwir 8-9)\nText and arrangement.\nThe Quran consists of 114 chapters of varying lengths, known as a \"s\u016brah\". Each s\u016brah consists of verses, known as \"\u0101y\u0101t\", which originally means a 'sign' or 'evidence' sent by God. The number of verses differs from s\u016brah to s\u016brah. An individual verse may be just a few letters or several lines. The total number of verses in the most popular Hafs Quran is 6,236; however, the number varies if the \"bismillahs\" are counted separately. According to one estimate the Quran consists of 77,430 words, 18,994 unique words, 12,183 stems, 3,382 lemmas and 1,685 roots.\nChapters are classified as Meccan or Medinan, depending on whether the verses were revealed before or after the migration of Muhammad to the city of Medina on traditional account. However, a s\u016brah classified as Medinan may contain Meccan verses in it and vice versa. S\u016brah names are derived from a name or a character in the text, or from the first letters or words of the s\u016brah. Chapters are not arranged in chronological order, rather the chapters appear to be arranged roughly in order of decreasing size. Each s\u016brah except the ninth starts with the \"Bismillah\" (), an Arabic phrase meaning 'In the name of God.' There are, however, still 114 occurrences of the \"Bismillah\" in the Quran, due to its presence in Quran https:// as the opening of Solomon's letter to the Queen of Sheba.\nThe \"Muqatta\u02bfat\" ( , 'disjoined letters, disconnected letters'; also 'mysterious letters') are combinations of between one and five Arabic letters figuring at the beginning of 29 out of the 114 chapters of the Quran just after the basmala. The letters are also known as \"faw\u0101tih\" (), or 'openers', as they form the opening verse of their respective suras. Four surahs are named for their : \"\u1e6c\u0101\u02be-H\u0101\u02be\", \"Y\u0101\u02be-S\u012bn\", \"\u1e62\u0101d\", and \"Q\u0101f\". Various theories have been put forward; they were a secret communication language between Allah and Muhammad, abbreviations of various names or attributes of Allah, symbols of the versions of the Quran belonging to different companions, elements of a secret coding system, or expressions containing esoteric meanings. Some researchers associate them with hymns used in Syrian Christianity. The phrases must have been part of these hymns or abbreviations of frequently repeated introductory phrases. Some of them, such as Nun, were used in symbolic meanings.\nIn addition of the division into chapters, there are various ways of dividing Quran into parts of approximately equal length for convenience in reading. The 30 \"juz\"' (plural ) can be used to read through the entire Quran in a month. A is sometimes further divided into two \"\u1e25izb\" (plural ), and each subdivided into four . The Quran is also divided into seven approximately equal parts, \"manzil\" (plural ), for it to be recited in a week. A different structure is provided by semantic units resembling paragraphs and comprising roughly ten each. Such a section is called a \"ruku\".\nLiterary style.\nThe Quran's message is conveyed with various literary structures and devices. In the original Arabic, the suras and verses employ phonetic and thematic structures that assist the audience's efforts to recall the message of the text. Muslims assert (according to the Quran itself) that the Quranic content and style is inimitable.\nThe language of the Quran has been described as \"rhymed prose\" as it partakes of both poetry and prose; however, this description runs the risk of failing to convey the rhythmic quality of Quranic language, which is more poetic in some parts and more prose-like in others. Rhyme, while found throughout the Quran, is conspicuous in many of the earlier Meccan suras, in which relatively short verses throw the rhyming words into prominence. The effectiveness of such a form is evident for instance in Sura 81, and there can be no doubt that these passages impressed the conscience of the hearers. Frequently a change of rhyme from one set of verses to another signals a change in the subject of discussion. Later sections also preserve this form but the style is more expository.\nThe Quranic text seems to have no beginning, middle, or end, its nonlinear structure being akin to a web or net. The textual arrangement is sometimes considered to exhibit lack of continuity, absence of any chronological or thematic order and repetitiousness. Michael Sells, citing the work of the critic Norman O. Brown, acknowledges Brown's observation that the seeming disorganization of Quranic literary expression\u2014its scattered or fragmented mode of composition in Sells's phrase\u2014is in fact a literary device capable of delivering profound effects as if the intensity of the prophetic message were shattering the vehicle of human language in which it was being communicated. Sells also addresses the much-discussed repetitiveness of the Quran, seeing this, too, as a literary device. Another group of researchers explores the irregularities and repetitions mentioned in the Quranic text in a way that refutes the traditional claim that it was preserved by memorization alongside writing. According to them, an oral period shaped the Quran as a text and order, and mentioned repetitions and irregularities were remnants of this period.\nA text is self-referential when it speaks about itself and makes reference to itself. According to Stefan Wild, the Quran demonstrates this metatextuality by explaining, classifying, interpreting and justifying the words to be transmitted. Self-referentiality is evident in those passages where the Quran refers to itself as revelation (), remembrance (\"dhikr\"), news (), criterion () in a self-designating manner (explicitly asserting its Divinity, \"And this is a blessed Remembrance that We have sent down; so are you now denying it?\"), or in the frequent appearance of the \"Say\" tags, when Muhammad is commanded to speak (e.g., \"Say: 'God's guidance is the true guidance'\", \"Say: 'Would you then dispute with us concerning God?'\"). According to Wild the Quran is highly self-referential. The feature is more evident in early Meccan suras.\nInimitability.\nIn Islam, (), \"inimitability challenge\" of the Quran in sense of fe\u1e63\u0101\u1e25a and belagha (both eloquence and rhetoric) is the doctrine which holds that the Quran has a miraculous quality, both in content and in form, that no human speech can match. According to this, the Quran is a miracle and its inimitability is the proof granted to Muhammad in authentication of his prophetic status. The literary quality of the Quran has been praised by Muslim scholars and by many non-Muslim scholars. The doctrine of the miraculousness of the Quran is further emphasized by Muhammad's illiteracy since the unlettered prophet could not have been suspected of composing the Quran.\nThe Quran is widely regarded as the finest work in Arabic literature. The emergence of the Quran was an oral and aural poetic experience; the aesthetic experience of reciting and hearing the Quran is often regarded as one of the main reasons behind conversion to Islam in the early days. Pre-Islamic Arabic poetry was an element of challenge, propaganda and warfare, and those who incapacitated their opponents from doing the same in fe\u1e63\u0101\u1e25a and Belagha socially honored, as could be seen on Mu'allaqat poets. The etymology of the word \"sh\u0101'ir; (poet)\" connotes the meaning of a man of inspirational knowledge, of unseen powers. `To the early Arabs poetry was \u1e63ihr \u1e25al\u0101l and the poet was a genius who had supernatural communications with the jinn or spirits, the muses who inspired him.\u2019 Although pre-Islamic Arabs gave poets status associated with suprahuman beings, soothsayers and prophecies were seen as persons of lower status. Contrary to later hurufic and recent scientific prophecy claims, traditional miracle statements about the Quran hadn't focused on prophecies, with a few exceptions like the Byzantine victory over the Persians in wars that continued for hundreds of years with mutual victories and defeats.\nThe first works about the of the Quran began to appear in the 9th century in the Mu'tazila circles, which emphasized only its literary aspect, and were adopted by other religious groups. According to grammarian Al-Rummani the eloquence contained in the Quran consisted of tashb\u012bh, isti\u02bf\u0101ra, ta\u01e7\u0101nus, mub\u0101la\u0121a, concision, clarity of speech (bay\u0101n), and tal\u0101\u02beum. He also added other features developed by himself; the free variation of themes (ta\u1e63r\u012bf al-ma\u02bf\u0101n\u012b), the implication content (ta\u1e0dm\u012bn) of the expressions and the rhyming closures (faw\u0101\u1e63il). The most famous works on the doctrine of inimitability are two medieval books by the grammarian Al Jurjani (d. 1078 CE), \"Dala\u2019il al-i'jaz\" ('the Arguments of Inimitability') and \"Asraral-balagha\" ('the Secrets of Eloquence'). Al Jurjani believed that Quran's eloquence must be a certain special quality in the manner of its stylistic arrangement and composition or a certain special way of joining words. Angelika Neuwirth lists the factors that led to the emergence of the doctrine of : The necessity of explaining some challenging verses in the Quran; In the context of the emergence of the theory of \"proofs of prophecy\" (d\u00e2'il an-nubuwwa) in Islamic theology, proving that the Quran is a work worthy of the emphasized superior place of Muhammad in the history of the prophets, thus gaining polemical superiority over Jews and Christians; Preservation of Arab national pride in the face of confrontation with the Iranian Shu'ubiyya movement, etc. Orientalist scholars Theodor N\u00f6ldeke, Friedrich Schwally and John Wansbrough, pointing out linguistic defects, held similar opinions on the Quranic text as careless and imperfect.\nSignificance in Islam.\nQuran says, \"We have sent down the Quran in truth, and with the truth it has come down\" and frequently asserts in its text that it is divinely ordained. The Quran speaks of a written pre-text that records God's speech before it is sent down, the \"preserved tablet\" that is the basis of the belief in fate also, and Muslims believe that the Quran was sent down or started to be sent down on the Laylat al-Qadr.\nRevered by pious Muslims as \"the holy of holies\", whose sound moves some to \"tears and ecstasy\", it is the physical symbol of the faith, the text often used as a charm on occasions of birth, death, marriage. Traditionally, before starting to read the Quran, ablution is performed, one seeks refuge in Allah from the accursed Satan, and the reading begins by mentioning the names of Allah, Rahman and Rahim together known as basmala. Consequently, \n It must never rest beneath other books, but always on top of them, one must never drink or smoke when it is being read aloud, and it must be listened to in silence. It is a talisman against disease and disaster.\nAccording to Islam, the Quran is the word of God (). Its nature and whether it was created became a matter of fierce debate among religious scholars; and with the involvement of the political authority in the discussions, some Muslim religious scholars who stood against the political stance faced religious persecution during the caliph al-Ma'mun period and the following years.\nMuslims believe that the present Quranic text corresponds to that revealed to Muhammad, and according to their interpretation of Quran https://, it is protected from corruption (\"Indeed, it is We who sent down the Quran and indeed, We will be its guardians\"). Muslims consider the Quran to be a sign of the prophethood of Muhammad and the truth of the religion. For this reason, in traditional Islamic societies, great importance was given to children memorizing the Quran, and those who memorized the entire Quran were honored with the title of hafiz. Even today, \"millions and millions of people refer to the Koran daily to explain their actions and to justify their aspirations\" or see it as the source of scientific knowledge, though this has been criticized as pseudoscientific.\nMuslims believe the Quran to be God's literal words, a complete code of life, the final revelation to humanity, a work of divine guidance revealed to Muhammad through the angel Gabriel. On the other hand it is believed in Muslim community that full understanding of it can only be possible with the depths obtained in the basic and religious sciences that the ulema (imams in shia) might access, as \"heirs of the prophets\". For this reason, direct reading of the Quran or applications based on its literal translations are considered problematic except for some groups such as Quranists thinking that the Quran is a complete and clear book; and tafsir / fiqh are brought fore to correct understandings in it. With a classical approach, scholars will discuss verses of the Quran in context called asbab al-nuzul in islamic literature, as well as language and linguistics; will pass it through filters such as muhkam and mutashabih, nas\u0131kh and abrogated; will open the closed expressions and try to guide the believers. There is no standardization in Quran translations, and interpretations range from traditional scholastic, to literalist-salafist understandings to Esoteric-Sufist, to modern and secular exegesis according to the personal scientific depth and tendencies of scholars.\nIn worship.\nSurah Al-Fatiha, the first chapter of the Quran, is recited in full in every rakat of salah and on other occasions. This sura, which consists of seven verses, is the most often recited surah of the Quran:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Quran https://\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014\"Sahih International\" English translation\nOther sections of the Quran of choice are also read in daily prayers. Sura Al-Ikhl\u0101\u1e63 is second in frequency of Quran recitation, for according to many early authorities, Muhammad said that \"Ikhl\u0101\u1e63\" is equivalent to one-third of the whole Quran.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Verse translation/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\u2014Surah Al-Ikhl\u0101\u1e63 https://\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Screen reader-only/styles.css\" /&gt;Translation:\u2014\"The Clear Quran\" English translation\nRespect for the written text of the Quran is an important element of religious faith by many Muslims, and the Quran is treated with reverence. Based on tradition and a literal interpretation of Quran https:// (\"none shall touch but those who are clean\"), some Muslims believe that they must perform a ritual cleansing with water (wudu or ghusl) before touching a copy of the Quran, although this view is not universal.\nWorn-out and old copies of the Quran are wrapped in a cloth and stored indefinitely in a safe place, buried in a mosque or a Muslim cemetery, or burned and the ashes buried or scattered over water. While praying, the Quran is only recited in Arabic.\nIn Islam, most intellectual disciplines, including Islamic theology, philosophy, mysticism and jurisprudence, have been concerned with the Quran or have their foundation in its teachings. Muslims believe that the preaching or reading of the Quran is rewarded with divine rewards variously called , \"thawab\", or .\nIn Islamic art.\nThe Quran also inspired Islamic arts and specifically the so-called Quranic arts of calligraphy and illumination. The Quran is never decorated with figurative images, but many Qurans have been highly decorated with decorative patterns in the margins of the page, or between the lines or at the start of suras. Islamic verses appear in many other media, on buildings and on objects of all sizes, such as mosque lamps, metal work, pottery and single pages of calligraphy for muraqqas or albums.\nInterpretation.\n\"Tafsir\" ( ; ) refers to an exegesis, or commentary, of the Quran. An author of a \"tafsir\" is a \"\" (; plural: ). A Quranic \"tafsir\" attempts to provide elucidation, explanation, interpretation, context or commentary for clear understanding and conviction of God's will in Islam. In the classical approach, the exegesis of the Qur'an is built on the 7th verse of Al Imran-7;\n\"He is the one who has sent down to you the Book. In it are verses that are sound (muhkamat), which are the foundation of the Book, and others that are assimilated (mutashabihat; resembling one another).\" In classical approach verses that speak of Allah's \"hand,\" \"throne\" (arsh), or His \"sitting on throne\" (istiwa) are considered mutashabih. These expressions are not believed to refer to a physical organ or action but are seen as metaphorical expressions symbolizing Allah's power, knowledge, or majesty.\nPrincipally, a \"tafsir\" deals with the issues of linguistics, jurisprudence, and theology. In terms of perspective and approach, \"tafsir\" can be broadly divided into two main categories, namely \"tafsir bi-al-ma'thur\" (lit. received tafsir), which is transmitted from the early days of Islam through the Islamic prophet Muhammad and his companions, and \"tafsir bi-al-ra'y\" (lit. \"tafsir\" by opinion), which is arrived through personal reflection or independent rational thinking.\nKnowledge of context / Asbab al-Nuzul; a scholar must understand the reasons and circumstances of a revelation in order to interpret the text correctly. If a verse is isolated without knowing the context, it can be misinterpreted. The Syro-Aramaic Reading of the Koran offers a new and compelling approach to understanding the implications of the Qur'an, based on linguistic and geographical-cultural knowledge that also coincides with the findings of historical research of the revisionist school.\nThere are different characteristics and traditions for each of the \"tafsirs\" representing respective schools and doctrines, such as Sunni Islam, Shia Islam, and Sufism. There are also general distinctions between classic \"tafsirs\" compiled by authoritative figures of Muslim scholarship during the formative ages of Islam, and modern \"tafsir\" which seeks to address a wider audience, including the common people.\nExoteric and Esoteric interpretations (\"ta'wil\").\nCommentaries dealing with the \"zahir\" ('outward aspects') of the text are called , (explanation) and hermeneutic and esoteric commentaries dealing with the \"batin\" are called \"ta'wil\" ('interpretation'). Commentators with an esoteric slant believe that the ultimate meaning of the Quran is known only to God. Esoteric or Sufi interpretation relates Quranic verses to the inner or esoteric (\"batin\") and metaphysical dimensions of existence and consciousness. According to Sands, esoteric interpretations are more suggestive than declarative, and are allusions () rather than explanations (\"tafsir\"). They indicate possibilities as much as they demonstrate the insights of writers.\nShias and Sunnis as well as some Muslim philosophers believe the meaning of the Quran is not restricted to the literal aspect. In contrast, Quranic literalism, followed by Salafis and Zahiris, is the belief that the Quran should only be taken at its apparent meaning. Henry Corbin narrates a hadith that goes back to Muhammad:\nThe Quran possesses an external appearance and a hidden depth, an exoteric meaning and an esoteric meaning. This esoteric meaning in turn conceals an esoteric meaning. So it goes on for seven esoteric meanings.\nAccording to esoteric interpreters, the inner meaning of the Quran does not eradicate or invalidate its outward meaning. Rather, it is like the soul, which gives life to the body. Corbin considers the Quran to play a part in Islamic philosophy, because Gnosiology itself goes hand in hand with prophetology.\nTranslations.\nTranslating the Quran has always been problematic and difficult. Many argue that the Quranic text cannot be reproduced in another language or form. An Arabic word may have a range of meanings depending on the context, making an accurate translation difficult. Moreover, one of the biggest difficulties in understanding the Quran for those who do not know its language in the face of shifts in linguistic usage over the centuries is semantic translations (meanings) that include the translator's contributions to the relevant text instead of literal ones. Although the author's contributions are often bracketed and shown separately, the author's individual tendencies may also come to the fore in making sense of the main text. These studies contain reflections and even distortions caused by the region, sect, education, ideology and knowledge of the people who made them, and efforts to reach the real content are drowned in the details of volumes of commentaries. These distortions can manifest themselves in many areas of belief and practices.\nIslamic tradition also holds that translations were made for Negus of Abyssinia and Byzantine Emperor Heraclius, as both received letters by Muhammad containing verses from the Quran. In early centuries, the permissibility of translations was not an issue, but whether one could use translations in prayer. The Quran has been translated into most African, Asian, and European languages. The first translator of the Quran was Salman the Persian, who translated surat \"al-Fatiha\" into Persian during the seventh century. Another translation of the Quran was completed in 884 in Alwar (Sindh, India, now Pakistan) by the orders of Abdullah bin Umar bin Abdul Aziz on the request of the Hindu Raja Mehruk.\nThe first fully attested complete translations of the Quran were done between the 10th and 12th centuries in Persian. The Samanid king, Mansur I (961\u2013976), ordered a group of scholars from Khorasan to translate the Tafsir al-Tabari, originally in Arabic, into Persian. Later in the 11th century, one of the students of Abu Mansur Abdullah al-Ansari wrote a complete \"tafsir\" of the Quran in Persian. In the 12th century, Najm al-Din Abu Hafs al-Nasafi translated the Quran into Persian. The manuscripts of all three books have survived and have been published several times. In 1936, translations in 102 languages were known. In 2010, the \"H\u00fcrriyet Daily News and Economic Review\" reported that the Quran was presented in 112 languages at the 18th International Quran Exhibition in Tehran.\nRobert of Ketton's 1143 translation of the Quran for Peter the Venerable, \"Lex Mahumet pseudoprophete\", was the first into a Western language (Latin).\nAlexander Ross offered the first English version in 1649, from the French translation of (1647) by Andre du Ryer. In 1734, George Sale produced the first scholarly translation of the Quran into English; another was produced by Richard Bell in 1937, and yet another by Arthur John Arberry in 1955. While all these translators were non-Muslims, there have been numerous translations by Muslims: popular modern English translations by Muslims include The Oxford World Classics translation by Muhammad Abdel Haleem, The Clear Quran by Mustafa Khattab, Sahih International's translation, among various others. As with translations of the Bible, the English translators have sometimes favored archaic English words and constructions over their more modern or conventional equivalents; for example, two widely read translators, Abdullah Yusuf Ali and Marmaduke Pickthall, use the plural and singular \"ye\" and \"thou\" instead of the more common \"you\".\nThe oldest Gurmukhi translation of the Quran Sharif has been found in village Lande of Moga district of Indian Punjab which was printed in 1911.\nRecitation.\nRules of recitation.\nThe proper recitation of the Quran is the subject of a separate discipline named \"tajwid\" which determines in detail how the Quran should be recited, how each individual syllable is to be pronounced, the need to pay attention to the places where there should be a pause, to elisions, where the pronunciation should be long or short, where letters should be sounded together and where they should be kept separate, etc. It may be said that this discipline studies the laws and methods of the proper recitation of the Quran and covers three main areas: the proper pronunciation of consonants and vowels (the articulation of the Quranic phonemes), the rules of pause in recitation and of resumption of recitation, and the musical and melodious features of recitation.\nIn order to avoid incorrect pronunciation, reciters follow a program of training with a qualified teacher. The two most popular texts used as references for rules are Matn al-Jazariyyah by Ibn al-Jazari and Tuhfat al-Atfal by Sulayman al-Jamzuri.\nThe recitations of a few Egyptian reciters, like El Minshawy, Al-Hussary, Abdul Basit, Mustafa Ismail, were highly influential in the development of current styles of recitation. Southeast Asia is well known for world-class recitation, evidenced in the popularity of the woman reciters such as Maria Ulfah of Jakarta. Today, crowds fill auditoriums for public Quran recitation competitions.\nThere are generally two types of recitation (based on pace of recitation):\nVariant readings.\nThe variant readings of the Quran are one type of textual variant. According to Melchert (2008), the majority of disagreements have to do with vowels to supply, most of them in turn not conceivably reflecting dialectal differences and about one in eight disagreements has to do with whether to place dots above or below the line. Nasser categorizes variant readings into various subtypes, including internal vowels, long vowels, gemination (\"shaddah\"), assimilation and alternation.\nIt is generally stated that there are small differences between readings. However, these small changes may also include differences that may lead to serious differences in Islam, ranging from the definition of God to practices such as the formal conditions of ablution.\nThe first Quranic manuscripts lacked marks, enabling multiple possible recitations to be conveyed by the same written text. The 10th-century Muslim scholar from Baghdad, Ibn Muj\u0101hid, is famous for establishing seven acceptable textual readings of the Quran. He studied various readings and their trustworthiness and chose seven 8th-century readers from the cities of Mecca, Medina, Kufa, Basra and Damascus. Ibn Mujahid did not explain why he chose seven readers, rather than six or ten, but this may be related to a prophetic tradition (Muhammad's saying) reporting that the Quran had been revealed in seven \"ahruf\". Today, the most popular readings are those transmitted by \u1e24af\u1e63 (d. 796) and Warsh (d. 812) which are according to two of Ibn Mujahid's reciters, Aasim ibn Abi al-Najud (Kufa, d. 745) and Nafi\u02bd al-Madani (Medina, d. 785), respectively. The influential standard Quran of Cairo uses an elaborate system of modified vowel-signs and a set of additional symbols for minute details and is based on \u02bbAsim's recitation, the 8th-century recitation of Kufa. This edition has become the standard for modern printings of the Quran. Occasionally, an early Quran shows compatibility with a particular reading. A Syrian manuscript from the 8th century is shown to have been written according to the reading of Ibn Amir ad-Dimashqi. Another study suggests that this manuscript bears the vocalization of himsi region.\nAccording to Ibn Taymiyyah vocalization markers indicating specific vowel sounds (\"tashkeel\") were introduced into the text of the Quran during the lifetimes of the last Sahabah.\nWriting and printing.\nWriting.\nBefore printing was widely adopted in the 19th century, the Quran was transmitted in manuscripts made by calligraphers and copyists. The earliest manuscripts were written in \"\u1e24ij\u0101z\u012b\"-typescript. The \"Hijazi\" style manuscripts nevertheless confirm that transmission of the Quran in writing began at an early stage. Probably in the ninth century, scripts began to feature thicker strokes, which are traditionally known as \"Kufic\" scripts. Toward the end of the ninth century, new scripts began to appear in copies of the Quran and replace earlier scripts. The reason for discontinuation in the use of the earlier style was that it took too long to produce and the demand for copies was increasing. Copyists would therefore choose simpler writing styles. Beginning in the 11th century, the styles of writing employed were primarily the \"naskh\", \"muhaqqaq\", \"ray\u1e25\u0101n\u012b\" and, on rarer occasions, the \"thuluth\" script. \"Naskh\" was in very widespread use. In North Africa and Iberia, the \"Maghrib\u012b\" style was popular. More distinct is the \"Bihari\" script which was used solely in the north of India. \"Nasta\u02bbl\u012bq\" style was also rarely used in Persian world.\nIn the beginning, the Quran was not written with dots or tashkeel. These features were added to the text during the lifetimes of the last of the Sahabah. Since it would have been too costly for most Muslims to purchase a manuscript, copies of the Quran were held in mosques in order to make them accessible to people. These copies frequently took the form of a series of 30 parts or \"juz\u02bc\". In terms of productivity, the Ottoman copyists provide the best example. This was in response to widespread demand, unpopularity of printing methods and for aesthetic reasons.\nWhilst the majority of Islamic scribes were men, some women also worked as scholars and copyists; one such woman who made a copy of this text was the Moroccan jurist, Amina, bint al-Hajj \u02bfAbd al-Latif.\nPrinting.\nWood-block printing of extracts from the Quran is on record as early as the 10th century.\nArabic movable type printing was ordered by Pope Julius II (r.\u20091503\u00a0\u2013\u00a01512) for distribution among Middle Eastern Christians. The first complete Quran printed with movable type was produced in Venice in 1537\u20131538 for the Ottoman market by Paganino Paganini and Alessandro Paganini. But this Quran was not used as it contained a large number of errors. Two more editions include the Hinckelmann edition published by the pastor Abraham Hinckelmann in Hamburg in 1694, and the edition by the Italian priest Ludovico Maracci in Padua in 1698 with Latin translation and commentary.\nPrinted copies of the Quran during this period met with strong opposition from Muslim legal scholars: printing anything in Arabic was prohibited in the Ottoman empire between 1483 and 1726\u2014initially, even on penalty of death. The Ottoman ban on printing in Arabic script was lifted in 1726 for non-religious texts only upon the request of Ibrahim Muteferrika, who printed his first book in 1729. Except for books in Hebrew and European languages, which were unrestricted, very few books, and no religious texts, were printed in the Ottoman Empire for another century.\nIn 1786, Catherine the Great of Russia, sponsored a printing press for \"Tatar and Turkish orthography\" in Saint Petersburg, with one Mullah Osman Ismail responsible for producing the Arabic types. A Quran was printed with this press in 1787, reprinted in 1790 and 1793 in Saint Petersburg, and in 1803 in Kazan. The first edition printed in Iran appeared in Tehran (1828), a translation in Turkish was printed in Cairo in 1842, and the first officially sanctioned Ottoman edition was finally printed in Constantinople between 1875 and 1877 as a two-volume set, during the First Constitutional Era.\nGustav Fl\u00fcgel published an edition of the Quran in 1834 in Leipzig, which remained authoritative in Europe for close to a century, until Cairo's Al-Azhar University published an edition of the Quran in 1924. This edition was the result of a long preparation, as it standardized Quranic orthography, and it remains the basis of later editions.\nCriticism.\nRegarding the claim of divine origin, critics refer to pre-existing sources, not only taken from the Bible, supposed to be older revelations of God, but also from heretic, Apocryphic and talmudic sources, such as the Syriac Infancy Gospel and Gospel of James. The Quran acknowledges that accusations of borrowing popular ancient fables were being made against Muhammad.\nRelationship with other literature.\nSome non-Muslim groups such as the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith and Druze view the Quran as holy. In the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, the Quran is accepted as authentic revelation from God along with the revelations of the other world religions, Islam being viewed as a stage within the divine process of progressive revelation. Bah\u00e1'u'll\u00e1h, the Prophet-Founder of the Bah\u00e1\u02bc\u00ed Faith, wrote about the Quran. Unitarian Universalists may also seek inspiration from the Quran. It has been suggested that the Quran has some narrative similarities to the Diatessaron, Protoevangelium of James, Infancy Gospel of Thomas, Gospel of Pseudo-Matthew and the Arabic Infancy Gospel. One scholar has suggested that the Diatessaron, as a gospel harmony, may have led to the conception that the Christian Gospel is one text.\nRelationship with The Bible.\nThe Quran attributes its relationship with former books (the Torah and the Gospels) to their unique origin, saying all of them have been revealed by the God, through it asserts that Jews and Christians have corrupted it through falsification and alteration (\"Ta\u1e25r\u012bf\").\nAccording to Christoph Luxenberg (in \"The Syro-Aramaic Reading of the Koran\") the Quran's language was similar to the Syriac language. The Quran recounts stories of many of the people and events recounted in Jewish and Christian sacred books (Tanakh, Bible) and devotional literature (Apocrypha, Midrash), although it differs in many details. Adam, Enoch, Noah, Eber, Shelah, Abraham, Lot, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, Job, Jethro, David, Solomon, Elijah, Elisha, Jonah, Aaron, Moses, Zechariah, John the Baptist and Jesus are mentioned in the Quran as prophets of God (see Prophets of Islam). In fact, Moses is mentioned more in the Quran than any other individual. Jesus is mentioned more often in the Quran than Muhammad (by name\u2014Muhammad is often alluded to as \"The Prophet\" or \"The Apostle\"), while Mary is mentioned in the Quran more than in the New Testament.\nRelationship with Arab writing.\nAfter the Quran, and the general rise of Islam, the Arabic alphabet developed rapidly into an art form. The Arabic grammarian Sibawayh wrote one of the earliest books on Arabic grammar, referred to as \"Al-Kitab\", which relied heavily on the language in the Quran. Wadad Kadi, Professor of Near Eastern Languages and Civilizations at University of Chicago, and Mustansir Mir, Professor of Islamic studies at Youngstown State University, state that the Quran exerted a particular influence on Arabic literature's diction, themes, metaphors, motifs and symbols and added new expressions and new meanings to old, pre-Islamic words that would become ubiquitous.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36926", "revid": "41195652", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36926", "title": "Life coaching", "text": ""}
{"id": "36934", "revid": "41294494", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36934", "title": "Network", "text": "Network, networking and networked may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36937", "revid": "47988270", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36937", "title": "Television broadcaster", "text": "Telecom network for TV programming\nA television broadcaster or television network is a telecommunications network for the distribution of television content, where a central operation provides programming to many television stations, pay television providers or, in the United States, multichannel video programming distributors. Until the mid-1980s, broadcast programming on television in most countries of the world was dominated by a small number of terrestrial networks. Many early television networks such as the BBC, CBC, PBS, PTV, NBC or ABC in the US and in Australia evolved from earlier radio networks.\nOverview.\nIn countries where most networks broadcast identical, centrally originated content to all of their stations, and where most individual television transmitters therefore operate only as large \"repeater stations\", the terms \"television network\", \"television channel\" (a numeric identifier or radio frequency) and \"television station\" have become mostly interchangeable in everyday language, with professionals in television-related occupations continuing to make a differentiation between them. Within the industry, a tiering is sometimes created among groups of networks based on whether their programming is simultaneously originated from a central point, and whether the network master control has the technical and administrative capability to take over the programming of their affiliates in real-time when it deems this necessary \u2013 the most common example being during national breaking news events.\nIn North America in particular, many television networks available via cable and satellite television are branded as \"channels\" because they are somewhat different from traditional networks in the sense defined above, as they are singular operations \u2013 they have no affiliates or component stations, but instead are distributed to the public via cable or direct-broadcast satellite providers. Such networks are commonly referred to by terms such as \"specialty channels\" in Canada or \"cable networks\" in the U.S.\nA network may or may not produce all of its own programming. If not, production companies (such as Warner Bros. Television, Universal Television, Sony Pictures Television and TriStar Television) can distribute their content to the various networks, and it is common that a certain production firm may have programs that air on two or more rival networks. Similarly, some networks may import television programs from other countries, or use archived programming to help complement their schedules.\nSome stations have the capability to interrupt the network through the local insertion of television commercials, station identifications and emergency alerts. Others completely break away from the network for their own programming, a method known as regional variation. This is common where small networks are members of larger networks. The majority of commercial television stations are self-owned, even though a variety of these instances are the property of an owned-and-operated television network. The commercial television stations can also be linked with a noncommercial educational broadcasting agency. Some countries have launched national television networks, so that individual television stations can act as common repeaters of nationwide programs.\nOn the other hand, television networks also undergo the impending experience of major changes related to cultural varieties. The emergence of cable television has made available in major media markets, programs such as those aimed at American bi-cultural Latinos. Such a diverse captive audience presents an occasion for the networks and affiliates to advertise the best programming that needs to be aired.\nThis is explained by author Tim P. Vos in his abstract \"A Cultural Explanation of Early Broadcast\", where he determines targeted group/non-targeted group representations as well as the cultural specificity employed in the television network entity. Vos notes that policymakers did not expressly intend to create a broadcast order dominated by commercial networks. In fact, legislative attempts were made to limit the network's preferred position.\nAs to individual stations, modern network operations centers usually use broadcast automation to handle most tasks. These systems are not only used for programming and for video server playout, but use exact atomic time from Global Positioning Systems or other sources to maintain perfect synchronization with upstream and downstream systems, so that programming appears seamless to viewers.\nGlobal.\nA major international television broadcaster is the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC), which is perhaps most-well known for its news agency BBC News. Owned by the Crown, the BBC funds itself in two ways. UK services branded under BBC are funded by the television license paid by British residents, as a result no advertising appears on these services. The advertising-funded arm (BBC Studios) employs 23,000 people worldwide including the operation of broadcaster UKTV in the UK itself. Experimental television broadcasts were started in 1929, using an electromechanical 30-line system developed by John Logie Baird. Limited regular broadcasts using this system began in 1934 and an expanded service (now known as BBC Television) started from Alexandra Palace in November 1936.\nHistory.\nElectronic television was made and demonstrated in San Francisco, on September 7, 1927, it was designed by Philo Taylor Fransworth who has been working on it since 1920.\nUnited States.\nTelevision in the United States had long been dominated by the Big Three television networks, the American Broadcasting Company (ABC), CBS (formerly the Columbia Broadcasting System) and the National Broadcasting Company (NBC); however, the Fox Broadcasting Company (Fox), which launched in October 1986, has gained prominence and is now considered part of the \"Big Four\". The Big Three provide a significant number of programs to each of their affiliates, including newscasts, prime time, daytime and sports programming, but still reserve periods during each day where their affiliate can air local programming, such as local news or syndicated programs. Since the creation of Fox, the number of American television networks has increased, though the amount of programming they provide is often much less: for example, The CW only provides fifteen hours of primetime programming each week (along with three hours on Saturdays), while MyNetworkTV only provides ten hours of primetime programming each week, leaving their affiliates to fill time periods where network programs are not broadcast with a large amount of syndicated programming. Other networks are dedicated to specialized programming, such as religious content or programs presented in languages other than English, particularly Spanish.\nThe largest television network in the United States, however, is the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS), a non-profit, publicly owned, non-commercial educational service. In comparison to the commercial television networks, there is no central unified arm of broadcast programming, meaning that each PBS member station has a significant amount of freedom to schedule television shows as they consent to. Some public television outlets, such as PBS, carry separate digital subchannel networks through their member stations (for example, Georgia Public Broadcasting; in fact, some programs airing on PBS were branded on other channels as coming from GPB Kids and PBS World).\nThis works as each network sends its signal to many local affiliated television stations across the country. These local stations then carry the \"network feed\", which can be viewed by millions of households across the country. In such cases, the signal is sent to as many as 200+ stations or as little as just a dozen or fewer stations, depending on the size of the network.\nWith the adoption of digital television, television networks have also been created specifically for distribution on the digital subchannels of television stations (including networks focusing on classic television series and films operated by companies like Weigel Broadcasting (owners of Movies! and Me-TV) and Nexstar Media Group (owners of Rewind TV and Antenna TV), along with networks focusing on music, sports and other niche programming).\nCable and satellite providers pay the networks a certain rate per subscriber (the highest charge being for ESPN, in which cable and satellite providers pay a rate of more than $5.00 per subscriber to ESPN). The providers also handle the sale of advertising inserted at the local level during national programming, in which case the broadcaster and the cable/satellite provider may share revenue. Networks that maintain a home shopping or infomercial format may instead pay the station or cable/satellite provider, in a brokered carriage deal. This is especially common with low-power television stations, and in recent years, even more so for stations that used this revenue stream to finance their conversion to digital broadcasts, which in turn provides them with several additional channels to transmit different programming sources.\nHistory.\nTelevision broadcasting in the United States was heavily influenced by radio. Early individual experimental radio stations in the United States began limited operations in the 1910s. In November 1920, Westinghouse signed on \"the world's first commercially licensed radio station\", KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Other companies built early radio stations in Detroit, Boston, New York City and other areas. Radio stations received permission to transmit through broadcast licenses obtained through the Federal Radio Commission (FRC), a government entity that was created in 1926 to regulate the radio industry. With some exceptions, radio stations east of the Mississippi River received official call signs beginning with the letter \"W\"; those west of the Mississippi were assigned calls beginning with a \"K\". The number of programs that these early stations aired was often limited, in part due to the expense of program creation. The idea of a network system which would distribute programming to many stations simultaneously, saving each station the expense of creating all of their own programs and expandingus transmitted from station to station to listeners across the United States. Other companies, including CBS and the Mutual Broadcasting System, soon followed suit, each network signed hundreds of individual stations on as affiliates: stations which agreed to broadcast programs from one of the networks.\nAs radio prospered throughout the 1920s and 1930s, experimental television stations, which broadcast both an audio and a video signal, began sporadic broadcasts. Licenses for these experimental stations were often granted to experienced radio broadcasters, and thus advances in television technology closely followed breakthroughs in radio technology. As interest in television grew, and as early television stations began regular broadcasts, the idea of networking television signals (sending one station's video and audio signal to outlying stations) was born. However, the signal from an electronic television system, containing much more information than a radio signal, required a broadband transmission medium. Transmission by a nationwide series of radio relay towers would be possible but extremely expensive.\nResearchers at AT&amp;T subsidiary Bell Telephone Laboratories patented coaxial cable in 1929, primarily as a telephone improvement device. Its high capacity (transmitting 240 telephone calls simultaneously) also made it ideal for long-distance television transmission, where it could handle a frequency band of 1\u00a0MHz. German television first demonstrated such an application in 1936 by relaying televised telephone calls from Berlin to Leipzig, away, by cable.\nAT&amp;T laid the first L-carrier coaxial cable between New York City and Philadelphia, with automatic signal booster stations every , and in 1937 it experimented with transmitting televised motion pictures over the line. Bell Labs gave demonstrations of the New York\u2013Philadelphia television link in 1940 and 1941. AT&amp;T used the coaxial link to transmit the Republican National Convention in June 1940 from Philadelphia to New York City, where it was televised to a few hundred receivers over the NBC station W2XBS (which evolved into WNBC) as well as seen in Schenectady, New York via W2XB (which evolved into WRGB) via off-air relay from the New York station.\nNBC had earlier demonstrated an inter-city television broadcast on 1 February 1940, from its station in New York City to another in Schenectady, New York by General Electric relay antennas, and began transmitting some programs on an irregular basis to Philadelphia and Schenectady in 1941. Wartime priorities suspended the manufacture of television and radio equipment for civilian use from 1 April 1942 to 1 October 1945, temporarily shutting down expansion of television networking. However, in 1944 a short film, \"Patrolling the Ether\", was broadcast simultaneously over three stations as an experiment.\nAT&amp;T made its first postwar addition in February 1946, with the completion of a cable between New York City and Washington, D.C., although a blurry demonstration broadcast showed that it would not be in regular use for several months. The DuMont Television Network, which had begun experimental broadcasts before the war, launched what \"Newsweek\" called \"the country's first permanent commercial television network\" on 15 August 1946, connecting New York City with Washington. Not to be outdone, NBC launched what it called \"the world's first regularly operating television network\" on 27 June 1947, serving New York City, Philadelphia, Schenectady and Washington. Baltimore and Boston were added to the NBC television network in late 1947. DuMont and NBC would be joined by CBS and ABC in 1948.\nIn the 1940s, the term \"chain broadcasting\" was used when discussing network broadcasts, as the television stations were linked together in long chains along the East Coast. But as the television networks expanded westward, the interconnected television stations formed major networks of connected affiliate stations. In January 1949, with the sign-on of DuMont's WDTV in Pittsburgh, the Midwest and East Coast networks were finally connected by coaxial cable (with WDTV airing the best shows from all four networks). By 1951, the four networks stretched from coast to coast, carried on the new microwave radio relay network of AT&amp;T Long Lines. Only a few local television stations remained independent of the networks.\nEach of the four major television networks originally only broadcast a few hours of programs a week to their affiliate stations, mostly between 8:00 and 11:00\u00a0p.m. Eastern Time, when most viewers were watching television. Most of the programs broadcast by the television stations were still locally produced. As the networks increased the number of programs that they aired, however, officials at the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) grew concerned that local television might disappear altogether. Eventually, the federal regulator enacted the Prime Time Access Rule, which restricted the amount of time that the networks could air programs; officials hoped that the rules would foster the development of quality local programs, but in practice, most local stations did not want to bear the burden of producing many of their own programs, and instead chose to purchase programs from independent producers. Sales of television programs to individual local stations are done through a method called \"broadcast syndication\", and today nearly every television station in the United States obtains syndicated programs in addition to network-produced fare.\nLate in the 20th century, cross-country microwave radio relays were replaced by fixed-service satellites. Some terrestrial radio relays remained in service for regional connections.\nAfter the failure and shutdown of DuMont in 1956, several attempts at new networks were made between the 1950s and the 1970s, with little success. The Fox Broadcasting Company, founded by the Rupert Murdoch-owned News Corporation (now owned by Fox Corporation), was launched on 9 October 1986 after the company purchased the television assets of Metromedia; it would eventually ascend to the status of the fourth major network by 1994. Two other networks launched within a week of one another in January 1995: The WB Television Network, a joint venture between Time Warner and the Tribune Company, and the United Paramount Network (UPN), formed through a programming alliance between Chris-Craft Industries and Paramount Television (whose parent, Viacom, would later acquire half and later all of the network over the course of its existence). In September 2006, The CW was launched as a \"merger\" of The WB and UPN (in actuality, a consolidation of each respective network's higher-rated programs onto one schedule); MyNetworkTV, a network formed from affiliates of UPN and The WB that did not affiliate with The CW, launched at the same time.\nRegulation.\nFCC regulations in the United States restricted the number of television stations that could be owned by any one network, company or individual. This led to a system where most local television stations were independently owned, but received programming from the network through a franchising contract, except in a few major cities that had owned-and-operated stations (O&amp;O) of a network and independent stations. In the early days of television, when there were often only one or two stations broadcasting in a given market, the stations were usually affiliated with multiple networks and were able to choose which programs would air. Eventually, as more stations were licensed, it became common for each station to be exclusively affiliated with only one network and carry all of the \"prime-time\" programs that the network offered. Local stations occasionally break from regularly scheduled network programming however, especially when a breaking news or severe weather situation occurs in the viewing area. Moreover, when stations return to network programming from commercial breaks, station identifications are displayed in the first few seconds before switching to the network's logo.\nCanada.\nA number of different definitions of \"network\" are used by government agencies, industry, and the general public. Under the Broadcasting Act, a network is defined as \"any operation where control over all or any part of the programs or program schedules of one or more broadcasting undertakings is delegated to another undertaking or person\", and must be licensed by the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC).\nOnly three national over-the-air television networks are currently licensed by the CRTC: government-owned CBC Television (English) and Ici Radio-Canada T\u00e9l\u00e9 (French), French-language private network TVA, and APTN, a network focused on Indigenous peoples in Canada. A third French-language service, Noovo (formerly V), is licensed as a provincial network within Quebec, but is not licensed or locally distributed (outside of carriage on the digital tiers of pay television providers) on a national basis.\nCurrently, licensed national or provincial networks must be carried by all cable providers (in the country or province, respectively) with a service area above a certain population threshold, as well as all satellite providers. However, they are no longer necessarily expected to achieve over-the-air coverage in all areas (APTN, for example, only has terrestrial coverage in parts of northern Canada).\nIn addition to these licensed networks, the two main private English-language over-the-air services, CTV and Global, are also generally considered to be \"networks\" by virtue of their national coverage, although they are not officially licensed as such. CTV was previously a licensed network, but relinquished this license in 2001 after acquiring most of its affiliates, making operating a network license essentially redundant (per the above definition).\nSmaller groups of stations with common branding are often categorized by industry watchers as television systems, although the public and the broadcasters themselves will often refer to them as \"networks\" regardless. Some of these systems, such as CTV 2 and the now-defunct E!, essentially operate as mini-networks, but have reduced geographical coverage. Others, such as Omni Television or the Crossroads Television System, have similar branding and a common programming focus, but schedules may vary significantly from one station to the next. Citytv originally began operating as a television system in 2002 when CKVU-TV in Vancouver started to carry programs originating from CITY-TV in Toronto and adopted that station's \"Citytv\" branding, but gradually became a network by virtue of national coverage through expansions into other markets west of Atlantic Canada between 2005 and 2013.\nMost local television stations in Canada are now owned and operated directly by their network, with only a small number of stations still operating as affiliates.\nEurope, Asia, Africa and South America.\nMost television services outside North America are national networks, some of them established by publicly funded broadcasters, and others by commercial broadcasters. Most nations established television networks in a similar way: the first television service in each country was operated by a public broadcaster, often funded by a television licensing fee, and most of them later established a second or even third station providing a greater variety of content. Commercial television services also became available when private companies applied for television broadcasting licenses. Often, each new network would be identified with their channel number, so that individual stations would often be numbered \"One\", \"Two\", \"Three\" and so forth.\nUnited Kingdom.\nThe first television network in the United Kingdom was operated by the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC). On 2 November 1936 the BBC opened the world's first regular high-definition television service, from a 405 lines transmitter at Alexandra Palace. The BBC remained dominant until eventually on 22 September 1955, commercial broadcasting was established to create a second television network. Rather than creating a single network with local channels owned and operated by a single company (as is the case with the BBC), each local area had a separate television channel that was independently owned and operated, although most of these channels shared a number of programmes, particularly during peak evening viewing hours. These channels formed the ITV network.\nWhen the advent of UHF broadcasting allowed a greater number of television channels to broadcast, the BBC launched a second channel, BBC2 (with the original service being renamed BBC1). A second national commercial network was launched Channel 4, although Wales instead introduced a Welsh-language service, S4C. These were later followed by the launch of a third commercial network, Channel 5. Since the introduction of digital television, the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 each introduced a number of digital-only channels. Sky operates a large number of channels, as does UKTV.\nSweden.\nSweden had only one television network from 1956 until the early-1990s: the public broadcaster Sveriges Television (SVT). Commercial companies such as Modern Times Group, TV4, Viasat, and SBS Discovery have established TV networks since the 1980s although they initially aired exclusively on satellite. In 1991, TV4 became Sweden's first commercial television network to air terrestrially. Most television programming in Sweden is centralised except for local news updates that air on SVT2 and TV4.\nNetherlands.\nUntil 1989, the Dutch public broadcasting system was the only television network in the Netherlands, with three stations, Nederland 1, Nederland 2 and Nederland 3. Rather than having a single production arm, there are a number of public broadcasting organizations in this system that create programming for each of the three stations, each working relatively independently. Since 1989, there is also commercial broadcasting in the Netherlands, currently operated by two networks, RTL Nederland and Talpa TV, which together own ten commercial stations.\nItaly.\nAfter some early tests in the 1930s, Italy experimented first regular electronic television transmissions from July 1939 to May 1940, through the state-owned EIAR. After the war, the state-owned RAI was established and regular transmissions began on 3 January 1954. At the end of the 1970s, local private television networks began broadcasting, among which the ones from Silvio Berlusconi's Fininvest emerged in the 1980s, creating a holding that controls three major channels (Rete 4, Canale 5 and Italia 1), opposed still today to the three ones from the RAI itself.\nRussia.\nSoviet era.\nThe first television network in the Soviet Union launched on 7 July 1938 when Petersburg \u2013 Channel 5 of Leningrad Television became a unionwide network.\nThe second television network in the Soviet Union launched on 22 March 1951 when Channel One of USSR Central Television became a unionwide network. Until 1989, there were six television networks, all owned by the USSR Gosteleradio. This changed during Mikhail Gorbachev's Perestroika program, when the first independent television network, 2\u00d72, was launched.\n1990s.\nFollowing the breakup of the Soviet Union, USSR Gosteleradio ceased to exist as well as its six networks. Only Channel One had a smooth transition and survived as a network, becoming Ostankino Channel One. The other five networks were operated by Ground Zero. This free airwave space allowed many private television networks like NTV and TV-6 to launch in the mid-1990s.\n2000s.\nThe 2000s were marked by the increased state intervention in Russian television. On 14 April 2001 NTV experienced management changes following the expulsion of former oligarch and NTV founder Vladimir Gusinsky. As a result, most of the prominent reporters featured on NTV left the network. Later on 22 January 2002, the second largest private television network TV-6, where the former NTV staff took refuge, was shut down allegedly because of its editorial policy. Five months later on 1 June, TVS was launched, mostly employing NTV/TV-6 staff, only to cease operations the following year. Since then, the four largest television networks (Channel One, Russia 1, NTV and Russia 2) have been state-owned.\nStill, the 2000s saw a rise of several independent television networks such as REN (its coverage increased vastly allowing it to become a federal network), Petersburg \u2013 Channel Five (overall the same), the relaunched 2\u00d72. The Russian television market is mainly shared today by five major companies: Channel One, Russia 1, NTV, TNT and CTC.\nBrazil.\nThe major commercial television network in Brazil is TV Globo, which was founded in 1965. It grew to become the largest and most successful media conglomerate in the country, having a dominating presence in various forms of media including television, radio, print (newspapers and magazines) and the Internet.\nOther networks include Band, Record, SBT, RedeTV!, TV Cultura, and TV Brasil.\nAustralia.\nAustralia has two national public networks, ABC Television and SBS. The ABC operates eight stations as part of its main network ABC TV, one for each state and territory, as well as three digital-only networks, ABC Kids / ABC TV Plus, ABC Me and ABC News. SBS currently operates six stations, SBS, SBS Viceland, SBS World Movies, SBS Food, NITV and SBS WorldWatch.\nThe first commercial networks in Australia involved commercial stations that shared programming in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Adelaide and later Perth, with each network forming networks based on their allocated channel numbers: TCN-9 in Sydney, GTV-9 in Melbourne, QTQ-9 in Brisbane, NWS-9 in Adelaide and STW-9 in Perth together formed the Nine Network; while their equivalents on VHF channels 7 and 10 respectively formed the Seven Network and Network 10. Until 1989, areas outside these main cities had access to only a single commercial station, and these rural stations often formed small networks such as Prime Television. Beginning in 1989, however, television markets in rural areas began to aggregate, allowing these rural networks to broadcast over a larger area, often an entire state, and become full-time affiliates to one specific metropolitan network.\nAs well as these free-to-air channels, there are others on Australia's Pay television network Foxtel.\nNew Zealand.\nNew Zealand has one public network, Television New Zealand (TVNZ), which consists of two main networks: TVNZ 1 is the network's flagship network which carries news, current affairs and sports programming as well as the majority of the locally produced shows broadcast by TVNZ and imported shows. TVNZ's second network, TV2, airs mostly imported shows with some locally produced programs such as \"Shortland Street\". TVNZ also operates a network exclusive to pay television services, TVNZ Heartland, available on providers such as Sky. TVNZ previously operated a non-commercial public service network, TVNZ 7, which ceased operations in June 2012 and was replaced by the timeshift channel TV One Plus 1. The network operated by Television New Zealand has progressed from operating as four distinct local stations within the four main centers in the 1960s, to having the majority of the content produced from TVNZ's Auckland studios at present.\nNew Zealand also has several privately owned television networks with the largest being operated by MediaWorks. MediaWorks' flagship network is TV3, which competes directly with both TVNZ broadcast networks. MediaWorks also operates a second network, FOUR, which airs mostly imported programmes with children's shows airing in the daytime and shows targeted at teenagers and adult between 15 and 39 years of age during prime time. MediaWorks also operates a timeshift network, TV3 + 1, and a 24-hour music network, C4.\nAll television networks in New Zealand air the same programming across the entire country with the only regional deviations being for local advertising; a regional news service existed in the 1980s, carrying a regional news programme from TVNZ's studios in New Zealand's four largest cities, Auckland, Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin.\nIn the 1960s, the service operated at the time by the New Zealand Broadcasting Corporation was four separate television stations \u2013 AKTV2 in Auckland, WNTV1 in Wellington, CHTV3 in Christchurch and DNTV2 in Dunedin \u2013 which each ran their own newscast and produced some in-house programmes, with other shows being shared between the stations. Programmes and news footage were distributed via mail, with a programme airing in one region being mailed to another region for broadcast the following week. A network was finally established in 1969, with the same programmes being relayed to all regions simultaneously. From the 1970s to the 1990s, locally produced programmes that aired on TV One and TV2 were produced out of one of the four main studios, with TVNZ's network hub based in Wellington. Today, most locally produced programmes that are aired by both TVNZ and other networks are not actually produced in-house, instead they are often produced by a third party company (for example, the TV2 programme \"Shortland Street\" is produced by South Pacific Pictures). The networks produce their own news and current affairs programs, with most of the content filmed in Auckland.\nNew Zealand also operates several regional television stations, which are only available in individual markets. The regional stations will typically air a local news programme, produce some shows in-house and cover local sports events; the majority of programming on the regional stations will be imported from various sources.\nPhilippines.\nIn the Philippines, in practice, the terms \"network\", \"station\" and \"channel\" are used interchangeably as programming lineups are mostly centrally planned from the networks' main offices, and since provincial/regional stations usually just relay the broadcast from their parent network's flagship station (usually based in the Mega Manila area). As such, networks made up of VHF stations are sometimes informally referred to by their over-the-air channel number in the Mega Manila area (for example, Channel 4 or \"Kwatro\" for People's Television Network, Channel 2 or \"Dos\" for ABS-CBN, Channel 9 or \"Nueve\" for Radio Philippines Network, Channel 7 or \"Siyete\" for GMA Network, Channel 13 or \"Trese\" for IBC and Channel 5 or \"Singko\" for TV5), while some incorporate their channel numbers in the network's name (for example, TV5, Studio 23 and Net 25, which respectively broadcast on VHF channel 5, and UHF channels 23 and 25).\nUnlike the United States, where networks receive programmes produced by various production companies, the two largest networks in the Philippines produce all of their prime time programmes. Other networks adopt block-time programming, which uses programming arrangements similar to the relationship between a U.S. network and station.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36938", "revid": "217538", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36938", "title": "Columbia", "text": "Columbia most often refers to:\nColumbia may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "36940", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36940", "title": "Alkanna tinctoria", "text": "Species of flowering plant\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAlkanna tinctoria, the dyer's alkanet or simply alkanet, is a herbaceous flowering plant in the borage family Boraginaceae. Its roots are used to produce a red dye. The plant is also known as dyers' bugloss, orchanet, Spanish bugloss, or Languedoc bugloss. It is native to the Mediterranean region. \"A. tinctoria\" has 30 chromosomes and is regarded as a dysploid at the tetraploid level (4x + 2).\n\"A. tinctoria\" has a bright blue flower. The plant has a root of blackish appearance externally, but blue-red inside, with a whitish core. The root produces a fine red colouring material, which has been used as a dye in the Mediterranean region since antiquity. The dyestuff in its roots is soluble in alcohol, ether, and oils, but is insoluble in water. It is used to give colour to wines and alcoholic tinctures, to vegetable oils, and to varnishes.\nPowdered and mixed with oil, the alkanet root is used as a wood stain. When mixed into an oily environment, it imparts a crimson color to the oil, which when applied to wood moves the wood's color towards dark-red-brown (resembling that of rosewood), and accentuates the grain of the wood.\nAlkanet is also traditionally used in Indian food under the name \"ratan jot\", and lends its red colour to some versions of the curry dish \"rogan josh\". In Australia, alkanet is approved for use as a food colouring, but in the European Union, it is not.\nIt has been used as colorant for lipstick and rouge.\nIn alkaline environments, alkanet dye is blue; in the presence of acids it gradually changes to crimson. The colour is red at pH 6.1, purple at 8.8 and blue at pH 10. \nThe colouring agent in \"A. tinctoria\" root has been chemically isolated and named alkannin.\nIn folk medicine, it is also used to treat abscesses and inflammations.\nIn English in the late medieval era, the name alkanet meant \"A. tinctoria\". In the centuries since then, the name has come to be used informally for some botanically related other plants; see Alkanet.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution"}
{"id": "36941", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36941", "title": "Laplace's equation", "text": "Second-order partial differential equation\nIn mathematics and physics, Laplace's equation is a second-order partial differential equation named after Pierre-Simon Laplace, who first studied its properties in 1786. This is often written as\nformula_1 or formula_2\nwhere formula_3 is the Laplace operator, formula_4 is the divergence operator (also symbolized \"div\"), formula_5 is the gradient operator (also symbolized \"grad\"), and formula_6 is a twice-differentiable real-valued function. The Laplace operator therefore maps a scalar function to another scalar function.\nIf the right-hand side is specified as a given function, formula_7, we have\nformula_8\nThis is called Poisson's equation, a generalization of Laplace's equation. Laplace's equation and Poisson's equation are the simplest examples of elliptic partial differential equations. Laplace's equation is also a special case of the Helmholtz equation.\nThe general theory of solutions to Laplace's equation is known as potential theory. The twice continuously differentiable solutions of Laplace's equation are the harmonic functions, which are important in multiple branches of physics, notably electrostatics, gravitation, and fluid dynamics. In the study of heat conduction, the Laplace equation is the steady-state heat equation. In general, Laplace's equation describes situations of equilibrium, or those that do not depend explicitly on time.\nForms in different coordinate systems.\nIn rectangular coordinates,\nformula_9\nIn cylindrical coordinates,\nformula_10\nIn spherical coordinates, using the formula_11 convention,\nformula_12\nMore generally, in arbitrary curvilinear coordinates (\u03be\"i\"),\nformula_13\nor \nformula_14\nwhere \"g\"\"ij\" is the Euclidean metric tensor relative to the new coordinates and \u0393 denotes its Christoffel symbols.\nBoundary conditions.\nThe Dirichlet problem for Laplace's equation consists of finding a solution \"\u03c6\" on some domain D such that \"\u03c6\" on the boundary of D is equal to some given function. Since the Laplace operator appears in the heat equation, one physical interpretation of this problem is as follows: fix the temperature on the boundary of the domain according to the given specification of the boundary condition. Allow heat to flow until a stationary state is reached in which the temperature at each point on the domain does not change anymore. The temperature distribution in the interior will then be given by the solution to the corresponding Dirichlet problem.\nThe Neumann boundary conditions for Laplace's equation specify not the function \"\u03c6\" itself on the boundary of D but its normal derivative. Physically, this corresponds to the construction of a potential for a vector field whose effect is known at the boundary of \"D\" alone. For the example of the heat equation it amounts to prescribing the heat flux through the boundary. In particular, at an adiabatic boundary, the normal derivative of \"\u03c6\" is zero.\nSolutions of Laplace's equation are called harmonic functions; they are all analytic within the domain where the equation is satisfied. If any two functions are solutions to Laplace's equation (or any linear homogeneous differential equation), their sum (or any linear combination) is also a solution. This property, called the principle of superposition, is very useful. For example, solutions to complex problems can be constructed by summing simple solutions.\nIn two dimensions.\nLaplace's equation in two independent variables in rectangular coordinates has the form \nformula_15\nAnalytic functions.\nThe real and imaginary parts of a complex analytic function both satisfy the Laplace equation. That is, if \"z\" = \"x\" + \"iy\", and if \nformula_16\nthen the necessary condition that \"f\"(\"z\") be analytic is that \"u\" and \"v\" be differentiable and that the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations be satisfied:\nformula_17\nwhere \"ux\" is the first partial derivative of \"u\" with respect to x.\nIt follows that \nformula_18\nTherefore \"u\" satisfies the Laplace equation. A similar calculation shows that \"v\" also satisfies the Laplace equation. \nConversely, given a harmonic function, it is the real part of an analytic function, \"f\"(\"z\") (at least locally). If a trial form is\nformula_19\nthen the Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations will be satisfied if we set\nformula_20\nThis relation does not determine \"\u03c8\", but only its increments:\nformula_21\nThe Laplace equation for \"\u03c6\" implies that the integrability condition for \"\u03c8\" is satisfied:\nformula_22\nand thus \"\u03c8\" may be defined by a line integral. The integrability condition and Stokes' theorem implies that the value of the line integral connecting two points is independent of the path. The resulting pair of solutions of the Laplace equation are called conjugate harmonic functions. This construction is only valid locally, or provided that the path does not loop around a singularity. For example, if r and \u03b8 are polar coordinates and\nformula_23\nthen a corresponding analytic function is\nformula_24\nHowever, the angle \u03b8 is single-valued only in a region that does not enclose the origin.\nThe close connection between the Laplace equation and analytic functions implies that any solution of the Laplace equation has derivatives of all orders, and can be expanded in a power series, at least inside a circle that does not enclose a singularity. This is in sharp contrast to solutions of the wave equation, which generally have less regularity.\nThere is an intimate connection between power series and Fourier series. If we expand a function \"f\" in a power series inside a circle of radius R, this means that\nformula_25\nwith suitably defined coefficients whose real and imaginary parts are given by \nformula_26\nTherefore\nformula_27\nwhich is a Fourier series for \"f\". These trigonometric functions can themselves be expanded, using multiple angle formulae.\nFluid flow.\nLet the quantities \"u\" and \"v\" be the horizontal and vertical components of the velocity field of a steady incompressible, irrotational flow in two dimensions. The continuity condition for an incompressible flow is that \nformula_28\nand the condition that the flow be irrotational is that\nformula_29\nIf we define the differential of a function \"\u03c8\" by\nformula_30\nthen the continuity condition is the integrability condition for this differential: the resulting function is called the stream function because it is constant along flow lines. The first derivatives of \"\u03c8\" are given by\nformula_31\nand the irrotationality condition implies that \"\u03c8\" satisfies the Laplace equation. The harmonic function \"\u03c6\" that is conjugate to \"\u03c8\" is called the velocity potential. The Cauchy\u2013Riemann equations imply that\nformula_32\nThus every analytic function corresponds to a steady incompressible, irrotational, inviscid fluid flow in the plane. The real part is the velocity potential, and the imaginary part is the stream function.\nElectrostatics.\nAccording to Maxwell's equations, an electric field (\"u\", \"v\") in two space dimensions that is independent of time satisfies\nformula_33\nand\nformula_34\nwhere \"\u03c1\" is the charge density. The first Maxwell equation is the integrability condition for the differential\nformula_35\nso the electric potential \"\u03c6\" may be constructed to satisfy\nformula_36\nThe second of Maxwell's equations then implies that \nformula_37\nwhich is the Poisson equation. The Laplace equation can be used in three-dimensional problems in electrostatics and fluid flow just as in two dimensions.\nIn three dimensions.\nFundamental solution.\nA fundamental solution of Laplace's equation satisfies\nformula_38\nwhere the Dirac delta function \"\u03b4\" denotes a unit source concentrated at the point (\"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032). No function has this property: in fact it is a distribution rather than a function; but it can be thought of as a limit of functions whose integrals over space are unity, and whose support (the region where the function is non-zero) shrinks to a point (see weak solution). It is common to take a different sign convention for this equation than one typically does when defining fundamental solutions. This choice of sign is often convenient to work with because \u2212\u0394 is a positive operator. The definition of the fundamental solution thus implies that, if the Laplacian of \"u\" is integrated over any volume that encloses the source point, then\nformula_39\nThe Laplace equation is unchanged under a rotation of coordinates, and hence we can expect that a fundamental solution may be obtained among solutions that only depend upon the distance r from the source point. If we choose the volume to be a ball of radius a around the source point, then Gauss's divergence theorem implies that\nformula_40\nIt follows that \nformula_41\non a sphere of radius r that is centered on the source point, and hence\nformula_42\nNote that, with the opposite sign convention (used in physics), this is the potential generated by a point particle, for an inverse-square law force, arising in the solution of Poisson equation. A similar argument shows that in two dimensions\nformula_43\nwhere log(\"r\") denotes the natural logarithm. Note that, with the opposite sign convention, this is the potential generated by a pointlike sink (see point particle), which is the solution of the Euler equations in two-dimensional incompressible flow.\nGreen's function.\nA Green's function is a fundamental solution that also satisfies a suitable condition on the boundary S of a volume V. For instance, \nformula_44\nmay satisfy\nformula_45 \nformula_46\nNow if \"u\" is any solution of the Poisson equation in V:\nformula_47\nand \"u\" assumes the boundary values \"g\" on S, then we may apply Green's identity, (a consequence of the divergence theorem) which states that\nformula_48\nThe notations \"un\" and \"Gn\" denote normal derivatives on \"S\". In view of the conditions satisfied by \"u\" and \"G\", this result simplifies to\nformula_49\nThus the Green's function describes the influence at (\"x\"\u2032, \"y\"\u2032, \"z\"\u2032) of the data \"f\" and \"g\". For the case of the interior of a sphere of radius \"a\", the Green's function may be obtained by means of a reflection : the source point \"P\" at distance \"\u03c1\" from the center of the sphere is reflected along its radial line to a point \"P\"' that is at a distance\nformula_50\nNote that if \"P\" is inside the sphere, then \"P\u2032\" will be outside the sphere. The Green's function is then given by\nformula_51\nwhere R denotes the distance to the source point \"P\" and \"R\"\u2032 denotes the distance to the reflected point \"P\"\u2032. A consequence of this expression for the Green's function is the Poisson integral formula. Let \u03c1, \u03b8, and \u03c6 be spherical coordinates for the source point \"P\". Here \u03b8 denotes the angle with the vertical axis, which is contrary to the usual American mathematical notation, but agrees with standard European and physical practice. Then the solution of the Laplace equation with Dirichlet boundary values \"g\" inside the sphere is given by \nformula_52 \nwhere\nformula_53\nis the cosine of the angle between (\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") and (\"\u03b8\"\u2032, \"\u03c6\"\u2032). A simple consequence of this formula is that if \"u\" is a harmonic function, then the value of \"u\" at the center of the sphere is the mean value of its values on the sphere. This mean value property immediately implies that a non-constant harmonic function cannot assume its maximum value at an interior point.\nLaplace's spherical harmonics.\nLaplace's equation in spherical coordinates is:\nformula_54\nConsider the problem of finding solutions of the form \"f\"(\"r\", \"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") = \"R\"(\"r\") \"Y\"(\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\"). By separation of variables, two differential equations result by imposing Laplace's equation:\nformula_55\nThe second equation can be simplified under the assumption that \"Y\" has the form \"Y\"(\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") = \u0398(\"\u03b8\") \u03a6(\"\u03c6\"). Applying separation of variables again to the second equation gives way to the pair of differential equations\nformula_56\nformula_57\nfor some number \"m\". A priori, \"m\" is a complex constant, but because \u03a6 must be a periodic function whose period evenly divides 2\"\u03c0\", \"m\" is necessarily an integer and \u03a6 is a linear combination of the complex exponentials \"e\"\u00b1\"im\u03c6\". The solution function \"Y\"(\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") is regular at the poles of the sphere, where \"\u03b8\" = 0, \"\u03c0\". Imposing this regularity in the solution \u0398 of the second equation at the boundary points of the domain is a Sturm\u2013Liouville problem that forces the parameter \"\u03bb\" to be of the form \"\u03bb\" = \"\u2113\" (\"\u2113\" + 1) for some non-negative integer with \"\u2113\" \u2265 |\"m\"|; this is also explained below in terms of the orbital angular momentum. Furthermore, a change of variables \"t\" = cos \"\u03b8\" transforms this equation into the Legendre equation, whose solution is a multiple of the associated Legendre polynomial \"P\u2113m\"(cos \"\u03b8\") . Finally, the equation for \"R\" has solutions of the form \"R\"(\"r\") = \"A r\u2113\" + \"B r\"\u2212\"\u2113\" \u2212 1; requiring the solution to be regular throughout R3 forces \"B\" = 0.\nHere the solution was assumed to have the special form \"Y\"(\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") = \u0398(\"\u03b8\") \u03a6(\"\u03c6\"). For a given value of \"\u2113\", there are 2\"\u2113\" + 1 independent solutions of this form, one for each integer \"m\" with \u2212\"\u2113\" \u2264 \"m\" \u2264 \"\u2113\". These angular solutions are a product of trigonometric functions, here represented as a complex exponential, and associated Legendre polynomials:\nformula_58\nwhich fulfill\nformula_59\nHere \"Y\u2113m\" is called a spherical harmonic function of degree \u2113 and order m, \"P\u2113m\" is an associated Legendre polynomial, \"N\" is a normalization constant, and \u03b8 and \u03c6 represent colatitude and longitude, respectively. In particular, the colatitude \u03b8, or polar angle, ranges from 0 at the North Pole, to \"\u03c0\"/2 at the Equator, to \"\u03c0\" at the South Pole, and the longitude \u03c6, or azimuth, may assume all values with 0 \u2264 \"\u03c6\" &lt; 2\"\u03c0\". For a fixed integer \u2113, every solution \"Y\"(\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") of the eigenvalue problem\nformula_60\nis a linear combination of \"Y\u2113m\". In fact, for any such solution, \"r\u2113 Y\"(\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") is the expression in spherical coordinates of a homogeneous polynomial that is harmonic (see below), and so counting dimensions shows that there are 2\"\u2113\" + 1 linearly independent such polynomials.\nThe general solution to Laplace's equation in a ball centered at the origin is a linear combination of the spherical harmonic functions multiplied by the appropriate scale factor \"r\u2113\",\nformula_61\nwhere the \"f\u2113m\" are constants and the factors \"r\u2113 Y\u2113m\" are known as solid harmonics. Such an expansion is valid in the ball\nformula_62\nFor formula_63, the solid harmonics with negative powers of formula_64 are chosen instead. In that case, one needs to expand the solution of known regions in Laurent series (about formula_65), instead of Taylor series (about formula_66), to match the terms and find formula_67.\nElectrostatics and magnetostatics.\nLet formula_68 be the electric field, formula_69 be the electric charge density, and formula_70 be the permittivity of free space. Then Gauss's law for electricity (Maxwell's first equation) in differential form states\nformula_71\nNow, the electric field can be expressed as the negative gradient of the electric potential formula_72,\nformula_73\nif the field is irrotational, formula_74. The irrotationality of formula_68 is also known as the electrostatic condition.\nformula_76\nformula_77\nPlugging this relation into Gauss's law, we obtain Poisson's equation for electricity,\nformula_78\nIn the particular case of a source-free region, formula_79 and Poisson's equation reduces to Laplace's equation for the electric potential.\nIf the electrostatic potential formula_72 is specified on the boundary of a region formula_81, then it is uniquely determined. If formula_81 is surrounded by a conducting material with a specified charge density formula_69, and if the total charge formula_84 is known, then formula_72 is also unique.\nFor the magnetic field, when there is no free current, formula_86We can thus define a magnetic scalar potential, \"\u03c8\", as \nformula_87With the definition of H:\nformula_88\nit follows that\nformula_89\nSimilar to electrostatics, in a source-free region, formula_90 and Poisson's equation reduces to Laplace's equation for the magnetic scalar potential ,\nformula_91\nA potential that does not satisfy Laplace's equation together with the boundary condition is an invalid electrostatic or magnetic scalar potential.\nGravitation.\nLet formula_92 be the gravitational field, formula_69 the mass density, and formula_94 the gravitational constant. Then Gauss's law for gravitation in differential form is\nformula_95\nThe gravitational field is conservative and can therefore be expressed as the negative gradient of the gravitational potential:\nformula_96\nUsing the differential form of Gauss's law of gravitation, we have\nformula_97\nwhich is Poisson's equation for gravitational fields.\nIn empty space, formula_98 and we have\nformula_99\nwhich is Laplace's equation for gravitational fields.\nIn the Schwarzschild metric.\nS. Persides solved the Laplace equation in Schwarzschild spacetime on hypersurfaces of constant t. Using the canonical variables r, \u03b8, \u03c6 the solution is\nformula_100\nwhere \"Yl\"(\"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\") is a spherical harmonic function, and\nformula_101\nHere \"Pl\" and \"Ql\" are Legendre functions of the first and second kind, respectively, while \"rs\" is the Schwarzschild radius. The parameter l is an arbitrary non-negative integer.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36942", "revid": "2666701", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36942", "title": "Christopher Tolkien", "text": "British book editor (1924\u20132020)\nChristopher John Reuel Tolkien (21 November 1924 \u2013 16 January 2020) was an English and naturalised French academic editor and writer. The son of the author and academic J. R. R. Tolkien, Christopher edited 24 volumes based on his father's posthumously published work, including \"The Silmarillion\" and the 12-volume series \"The History of Middle-Earth\", a task that took 45 years. He also drew the original maps for his father's fantasy novel \"The Lord of the Rings\".\nOutside his father's unfinished works, Christopher edited three tales by Geoffrey Chaucer (with Nevill Coghill) and his father's translation of \"Sir Gawain and the Green Knight\". Tolkien scholars have remarked that he used his skill as a philologist, demonstrated in his editing of those medieval works, to research, collate, edit, and comment on his father's Middle-earth writings exactly as if they were real-world legends. The effect is both to frame his father's works and to insert himself as a narrator. They have further noted that his additions to \"The Silmarillion\", such as to fill in gaps, and his composition of the text in his own literary style, place him as an author as well as an editor of that book.\nEarly life and education.\nChristopher Tolkien was born on 21 November 1924 in Leeds, England, the third of four children and the youngest son of J. R. R. and Edith Tolkien (\"n\u00e9e\" Bratt). He was educated at the Dragon School in Oxford, and later at the Roman Catholic Oratory School near Reading.\nHe won a place to study English at Trinity College, Oxford, still aged 17, but after a year and a half there he received his call-up papers for military service. He joined the Royal Air Force in July 1943 and at the start of 1944 was sent to South Africa for flight training. He gained his \"wings\" as a fighter pilot and was commissioned in January 1945. He was given a posting back in England in February 1945, at Market Drayton in Shropshire. In June 1945 he switched to the Fleet Air Arm. While still in the service, he resumed his degree in April 1946; he was demobilised at the end of that year. He took his B.A. in 1948, and his B.Litt. in 1953 under the philologist Gabriel Turville-Petre.\nCareer.\nTolkien was for a long time part of the critical audience for his father's fiction, first as a child listening to tales of Bilbo Baggins (published as \"The Hobbit\"), and then as a teenager and young adult offering feedback on \"The Lord of the Rings\" throughout its 15-year gestation. He also redrew his father's working maps for inclusion in \"The Lord of the Rings\". His father invited him to join the Inklings, a literary discussion group, when Christopher was 21 years old. His father called this \"a quite unprecedented honour\". He became a lecturer in English language at St Catherine's Society, Oxford in 1954.\nAway from his father's writings, he published \"The Saga of King Heidrek the Wise\": \"Translated from the Icelandic with Introduction, Notes and Appendices by Christopher Tolkien\" in 1960. Later, he followed in his father's footsteps, becoming a lecturer and tutor in English language at New College, Oxford in 1963. \nIn 1967 his father named him as his literary executor, and more specifically as his co-author of \"The Silmarillion\". After his father's death in 1973, he took a large quantity of legendarium manuscripts to his Oxfordshire home, where he converted a barn into a workspace. He and the young Guy Gavriel Kay started work on the documents, discovering by 1975 how complex the task was likely to be. In September 1975 he resigned from New College to work exclusively on editing his father's writings. He moved to France and continued this task for 45 years. In all, he edited and published 24 volumes of his father's writings, most of them to do with the Middle-earth legendarium.\nIn 2016 Christopher won a Bodley Medal, an award that recognises outstanding contributions to literature, culture, science, and communication.\nHe served as chairman of the Tolkien Estate, the entity formed to handle the business side of his father's literary legacy, and as a trustee of the Tolkien Charitable Trust. He resigned as director of the estate in 2017.\nEditorial work.\nThe challenge of the legendarium.\nTolkien wrote a great deal of material in the Middle-earth legendarium that remained unpublished in his lifetime. He had originally intended to publish \"The Silmarillion\" alongside \"The Lord of the Rings\" in the 1950s, but it was rejected by his publisher. Parts of it were in a finished state when he died in 1973, but the project was incomplete. He once called his son his \"chief critic and collaborator\", and named him his literary executor. Christopher organised the masses of his father's unpublished writings, some of them written on odd scraps of paper half a century earlier. Much of the material was handwritten; frequently a fair draft was written over a half-erased first draft, and names of characters routinely changed between the beginning and the end of the same draft. He explained:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;By the time of my father's death the amount of writing in existence on the subject of the Three Ages was huge in quantity (since it extended over a lifetime), disordered, more full of beginnings than of ends, and varying in content from heroic verse in the ancient English alliterative metre to severe historical analysis of his own extremely difficult languages: a vast repository and labyrinth of story, of poetry, of philosophy, and of philology ... To bring it into publishable form was a task at once utterly absorbing and alarming in its responsibility toward something that is unique.\nFrom \"The Silmarillion\" to \"The History of Middle-earth\".\nChristopher and Kay produced a single-volume edition of \"The Silmarillion\" for publication in 1977. Its success led to the publication of \"Unfinished Tales\" in 1980, and then to the far larger project of \"The History of Middle-earth\" in 12 volumes between 1983 and 1996. Most of the original source-texts that Christopher used to construct \"The Silmarillion\" were published in this way. Charles Noad comments that the 12-volume \"History\" had done something that a putative single-volume edition of \"The Silmarillion\" with embedded commentary could not have achieved: it had changed people's perspective on Tolkien's Middle-earth writings, from being centred on \"The Lord of the Rings\" to what it had always been in Tolkien's mind: \"Silmarillion\"-centred. Noad adds that \"The whole series of \"The History of Middle-earth\" is a tremendous achievement and makes a worthy and enduring testament to one man's creative endeavours and to another's explicatory devotion. It reveals far more about Tolkien's invented world than any of his readers in pre-\"Silmarillion\" days could ever have imagined or hoped for.\"\n\"Great Tales\" of the \"Elder Days\".\nIn April 2007, he published \"The Children of H\u00farin\", whose story his father had brought to a relatively complete stage between 1951 and 1957, but then abandoned. This was one of his father's earliest stories, its first version dating back to 1918; several versions are published in \"The Silmarillion\", \"Unfinished Tales\", and \"The History of Middle-earth\". \"The Children of H\u00farin\" is a synthesis of these and other sources. It, along with \"Beren and L\u00fathien\", published in 2017, and \"The Fall of Gondolin\", published in 2018, constituted what J. R. R. Tolkien called the three \"Great Tales\" of the \"Elder Days\".\nMedieval works.\nChristopher edited some works by his father that were unconnected to the Middle-earth legendarium. \"The Legend of Sigurd and Gudr\u00fan\" appeared in May 2009, a verse retelling of the Norse V\u00f6lsung cycle, followed by \"The Fall of Arthur\" in May 2013, and by \"\" in May 2014.\nOpinions.\nEditor or author.\nVincent Ferr\u00e9 comments that early in the process of editing his father's unpublished writings, \"the real nature of Christopher Tolkien's work was a matter of debate, before a more simplistic consensus began to prevail.\" Christopher Tolkien explained in \"The Silmarillion\"'s foreword in 1977 \"I set myself therefore to work out a single text, selecting and arranging in such a way as seemed to me to produce the most coherent and internally self-consistent narrative.\" In Ferr\u00e9's opinion, \"This choice remains one of his [most] distinctive marks on the book\", noting that J. R. R. Tolkien had foreseen in a 1963 letter that the presentation of the stories \"will need a lot of work ... the legends have to be worked over ... and made consistent ... and they have to be given some progressive shape.\"\nIn 1981, the scholar of literature Randel Helms, taking that statement as definitive of Christopher Tolkien's editorial, indeed authorial, intentions: stated in terms that \"\"The Silmarillion\" in the shape that we have it [a single-volume narrative] is the invention of the son not the father\". \nChristopher Tolkien disagreed, stating in the foreword to the 1983 \"The Book of Lost Tales\", that the outcome of his work had been \"to add a further dimension of obscurity to \"The Silmarillion\", ... about the age of the work ... and about the degree of editorial intrusion and manipulation (or even invention), is a stumbling-block and a source of much misapprehension.\" In the same foreword, while rebuffing Helms but without explaining why Helms's opinion was wrong, Christopher Tolkien admitted that the wisdom of publishing \"The Silmarillion\" with (unlike \"The Lord of the Rings\") no frame story, \"no suggestion of what it is and how (within the imagined world) it came to be\", was \"certainly debatable\". He added \"This I now think to have been an error.\" He noted, too, that the philologist and Tolkien scholar Tom Shippey, in his book \"The Road to Middle-earth\", was \"clearly reluctant to see [\"The Silmarillion\"] as other than a 'late' work, even the latest work of its author\", i.e. that its text owes as much to Christopher Tolkien as to his father.\nFerr\u00e9 records that, much later, in 2012, Christopher Tolkien admitted \"I had had to invent some passages\", that he had had a dream that his father was anxiously searching for something, and that he had \"realized in horror that it was \"The Silmarillion\".\" In Ferr\u00e9's view, he should be thought of as \"a writer in his own right, and not only as an 'editor' of his father's manuscripts\". He gives two reasons for this: that \"The Silmarillion\" reveals his own writing style and \"the choices he made in 'constructing'\" the narrative; and that he had to devise parts of the story, both to fill gaps and when \"threads were impossible to weave together\".\nChristopher Tolkien's editing of the 12 volumes of \"The History of Middle-earth\", using his skill as a philologist, created an editorial frame for his father's legendarium, and for the books derived from it. Ferr\u00e9 comments that this presented his father's writings as historical, a real set of legends from the past, in just the same way that his editing of \"The Monsters and the Critics, and Other Essays\" presented his father's essays as scholarly work.\nReaction to filmed versions.\nIn 2001 Christopher Tolkien expressed doubts over \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy directed by Peter Jackson, questioning the viability of a film interpretation that retained the essence of the work, but stressed that this was just his opinion. In a 2012 interview with \"Le Monde,\" he criticised the films, saying: \"They gutted the book, making an action film for 15 to 25-year-olds.\" In 2008 he commenced legal proceedings against New Line Cinema, which he claimed owed his family \u00a380 million in unpaid royalties. In September 2009, he and New Line reached an undisclosed settlement, and he withdrew his legal objection to \"The Hobbit\" films.\nPersonal life.\nTolkien was married twice. He had two sons and one daughter. His first marriage in 1951 was to the sculptor Faith Lucy Tilly Faulconbridge (1928\u20132017). They separated in 1964, and divorced in 1967. Her work is featured in the National Portrait Gallery. Their son Simon Mario Reuel Tolkien is a barrister and novelist.\nHe married Baillie Klass in 1967; they had two children, Adam and Rachel. In 1975 they moved to the south of France, where she edited her father-in-law's \"The Father Christmas Letters\" for posthumous publication.\nIn the wake of a dispute surrounding the making of \"The Lord of the Rings\" film trilogy, he is said to have disapproved of the views of his son Simon. He felt that \"The Lord of the Rings\" was \"peculiarly unsuitable for transformation into visual dramatic form\", whilst his son became involved as an advisor with the series. They later reconciled, and Simon dedicated one of his novels to his father.\nTolkien died on 16 January 2020, at the age of 95, in Draguignan, Var, France.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36944", "revid": "37052726", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36944", "title": "Pierre Simon Laplace", "text": ""}
{"id": "36945", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36945", "title": "Laplace", "text": ""}
{"id": "36947", "revid": "990344", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36947", "title": "Indemnity", "text": "Contractual obligation to compensate for losses incurred by the other party\nIn contract law, an indemnity is a contractual obligation of one party (the \"indemnitor\") to compensate the loss incurred by another party (the \"indemnitee\") due to the relevant acts of the indemnitor or any other party. The duty to indemnify is usually, but not always, coextensive with the contractual duty to \"hold harmless\" or \"save harmless\". In contrast, a \"guarantee\" is an obligation of one party (the \"guarantor\") to another party to perform the promise of a relevant other party if that other party defaults.\nIndemnities form the basis of many insurance contracts; for example, a car owner may purchase different kinds of insurance as an indemnity for various kinds of loss arising from operation of the car, such as damage to the car itself, or medical expenses following an accident. In an agency context, a principal may be obligated to indemnify their agent for liabilities incurred while carrying out responsibilities under the relationship. While the events giving rise to an indemnity may be specified by contract, the actions that must be taken to compensate the injured party are largely unpredictable, and the maximum compensation is often expressly limited.\nEnglish common law.\nIndemnity clauses.\nUnder section 4 of the Statute of Frauds (1677), a \"guarantee\" (an undertaking of secondary liability; to answer for another's default) must be evidenced in writing. No such formal requirement exists in respect of indemnities (involving the assumption of primary liability; to pay irrespective of another's default) which are enforceable even if made orally.\nUnder current English law, indemnities must be clearly and precisely worded in the contract in order to be enforceable. The Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 stated that a consumer cannot be made to unreasonably indemnify another for their breach of contract or negligence, though this section was replaced by section 65 of the Consumer Rights Act 2015.\nContract award.\nIn England and Wales an \"indemnity\" monetary award may form part of rescission during an action of \"restitutio in integrum\". The property and funds are exchanged, but indemnity may be granted for costs necessarily incurred to the innocent party pursuant to the contract. The leading case is \"Whittington v Seale-Hayne\", in which a contaminated farm was sold. The contract made the buyers renovate the real estate and, the contamination incurred medical expenses for their manager, who had fallen ill. Once the contract was rescinded, the buyer could be indemnified for the cost of renovation as this was necessary to the contract, but not the medical expenses as the contract did not require them to hire a manager. Were the sellers at fault, damages would clearly be available.\nThe distinction between indemnity and damages is subtle and may be differentiated by considering the roots of the law of obligations: how can money be paid if the defendant is not at fault? The contract before rescission is voidable but not void, so, for a period of time, there is a legal contract. During that time, both parties have legal obligation. If the contract is to be voided \"ab initio\" the obligations performed must also be compensated. Therefore, the costs of indemnity arise from the (transient and performed) obligations of the claimant rather than a breach of obligation by the defendant.\nDistinction from guarantees.\nAn indemnity is distinct from a guarantee, which is the promise of a third party to honor the obligation of a party to a contract should that party be unable or unwilling to do so (usually a guarantee is limited to an obligation to pay a debt). This distinction between indemnity and guarantee was discussed as early as the eighteenth century in \"Birkmyr v Darnell\". In that case, concerned with a guarantee of payment for goods rather than payment of rent, the presiding judge explained that a guarantee effectively says \"Let him have the goods; if he does not pay you, I will.\"\nDistinction from warranties.\nAn indemnity is distinct from a warranty in that:\nUnited States contracts.\nMany private contracts and terms of service in the United States require one party (indemnitor, typically a customer) to pay (indemnify) the other side's costs for legal claims arising from the relationship. They are particularly common in online services.\nThe US government publishes special Terms of Service, which it has negotiated with many companies, to exclude indemnification for official US government work. US law \"is violated by any indemnification agreement that, without statutory authorization, imposes on the United States an open-ended, potentially unrestricted liability.\"\n The Attorney General says federal agencies \"should renegotiate the terms of service to revise or eliminate the indemnification clause or cancel the [government]'s enrollments in social media applications when their operators insist on such a clause.\"\nState variations.\nUnder US law, interpretation of indemnification clauses varies by state. For example, in California indemnification clauses do not cover certain risks unless the risks are listed in the contract, but in New York, the brief clause, \"X shall defend and indemnify Y for all claims arising from the Product\" makes X responsible for all claims against Y. Indemnity can be extremely costly since X's liability insurance typically does not cover claims against Y, but X still has to cover them.\nIn 2017, the Utah Supreme Court stated, \"By statute, a contractual provision requiring a purchaser of a product to indemnify a manufacturer is 'void and unenforceable' in certain circumstances. Utah Code \u00a7 78B-6-707.\"\nIn 2012\u20132014, a New Jersey woman had to pay a lawyer to get out of an indemnity payment for injury at a storage unit. When someone slipped on ice in 2012 while going to a unit, Public Storage sued in court to make the woman who rented the unit pay for the injury. She tried to ignore the case and so state court ruled that she had to pay. She then retained a lawyer and went to court. In 2014, the US District Court decided that the specific indemnity clause was unenforceable in New Jersey because it covered Public Storage's own negligence without explicitly saying so, contrary to New Jersey law (other states differ).\nA 2013 decision in New Jersey upheld a broad indemnity clause since it was followed by another sentence: \"indemnity agreement is intended to be as broad and inclusive as is permitted by the law of the State of New Jersey.\" The judge said, \"It is true that a consumer, unfamiliar with the laws of New Jersey, would not be able to state with certainty how far the waiver extends.\"\nIn 2010, the Colorado Supreme Court required a flower shop to indemnify its shopping center for a customer who slipped on the icy parking lot, though of no fault of the flower shop, because the tenant was there to visit that shop, and the shop's lease had a broad indemnity clause.\nIn 1999, the United States District Court for the District of Wyoming did not require a customer to indemnify a whitewater rafting company for injury to his wife since the wording may have applied only to him and his children, and clauses cannot be enforced in Wyoming to indemnify a company for its own negligence.\nIn 1979, the Minnesota Supreme Court ruled that a subcontractor must indemnify the builder for damages that it caused, according to an indemnification clause in their purchase order.\nIn 1966, the Supreme Court of California ruled that The Hertz Corporation could not enforce its clause requiring renters to indemnify Hertz's insurer.\nWith negotiations.\nIndemnities can be expensive enough to bankrupt a company that pays them: \"If manufacturers\u00a0... are to survive, they will need liability insurance, as well as favorable contracts with retailers. If you look at a big retailers, such as Trader Joe's or Costco or Walmart or Randalls, very often there will be an indemnity provision providing that, if you want to sell a product in our stores, and if it gets someone sick or if it has to be recalled, and it's your fault, you must pay us back for that.\"\nWhen a contract is \"negotiable,\" the indemnitor negotiates to control those legal costs. It will not let the indemnified party (indemnitee) overspend: \"An arrangement in which the indemnitee makes decisions about how to defend and settle the claim while the indemnitor writes the checks presents a moral hazard. Knowing that its defense and settlement costs are being borne by the indemnitor, the indemnitee may be encouraged to engage a more expensive legal team or pursue a riskier defense strategy than it would otherwise. For this reason, most indemnitors are unwilling to indemnify against claims when they do not control the defense of the claim.\"\nThe American Bar Association has published advice on negotiations of construction contracts: that (1) owners try to get contractors to indemnify as much as possible and for (2) contractors (a) indemnify only for their own negligence and (b) \"establish a right but not a duty for the contractor to defend under an indemnification claim.\"\nAn example of letting the indemnitor control costs is in the case of a contractor for a homeowners' association (HOA) in which \"Contractor shall indemnify, defend (by counsel reasonably acceptable to Association) and hold harmless the Association.\" Companies and HOAs also use indemnity to protect directors since few would serve as directors if their risks were not indemnified. Negotiation is important for both parties. \"Just about all homeowner association management contracts have a provision which states that the HOA shall indemnify the manager under certain circumstances\u00a0... There are several ways the indemnification clause can be drafted and both management and HOA must take into account what protects each the best.\"\nIf indemnitors can negotiate a limit on liability in their contract, that limits the cost of a potential indemnity if they \"make clear in the agreement that any limitations of liability (whether in the form of caps or exclusions of certain types of damages\u00a0\u2013 e.g., consequential) apply to the\u00a0... indemnification.\"\nWithout negotiations.\nWhen a contract is not negotiable (adhesion contract), the wording often lets the indemnitee decide what to spend on legal costs and bill the indemnitor. Most clauses are quite broad. The following are examples of indemnity requirements from a range of businesses. The last one, Angie's List, limits issues to the user's fault, but decisions and costs are still controlled by the indemnitee (Angie's List).\nInsurance.\nIndemnity insurance compensates the beneficiaries of the policies for their actual economic losses, up to the limiting amount of the insurance policy. It generally requires the insured to prove the amount of its loss before it can recover. Recovery is limited to the amount of the provable loss even if the face amount of the policy is higher. This is in contrast to, for example, life insurance, where the amount of the beneficiary's economic loss is irrelevant. The death of the person whose life is insured for reasons not excluded from the policy obligate the insurer to pay the entire policy amount to the beneficiary.\nMost business interruption insurance policies contain an Extended Period of Indemnity Endorsement, which extends coverage beyond the time that it takes to physically restore the property. This provision covers additional expenses that allow the business to return to prosperity and help the business restore revenues to pre-loss levels.\nIndemnity agreement for board members.\nAs part of the appointment of officers, the board will often approve indemnification agreements with the officer. Such agreements provide for indemnification of officers for personal liability for actions taken on behalf of the corporation. The board will also approve separate resolutions that approve indemnification for decisions made by directors. Indemnity agreements are included in the post-incorporation processes of companies.\nHistorical examples.\nFreeing of slaves and indentured servants.\nSlave owners were considered to have suffered a loss whenever their slaves were granted their freedom.\nWhen the slaves of Zanzibar were freed in 1897, it was by compensation since the prevailing opinion was that the slave owners suffered the loss of an asset whenever a slave was freed.\nIn the 1860s in the United States, U.S. President Abraham Lincoln had requested many millions of dollars from Congress with which to compensate slave owners for the loss of their slaves. On 9 July 1868, dismissed all of the claims that slave owners had been injured by the freeing of the slaves.\nIn 1807\u20131808, in Prussia, statesman Baron Heinrich vom Stein introduced a series of reforms, the principal of which was the abolition of serfdom with indemnification to territorial lords.\nHaiti was required to pay an indemnity of 150,000,000 francs to France in order to atone for the loss suffered by the French slave owners.\nIn Peru, Antonio Salinas y Casta\u00f1eda (1810\u20131874), a wealthy Peruvian landowner and conservative politician, led the meeting of the main landowners of the country for an indemnity after slavery abolition and ruled the commission who promoted the immigration of Asians to replace former slaves as a workforce during Ram\u00f3n Castilla government.\nCosts of war.\nThe nation that wins a war may insist on being paid compensations for the costs of the war, even after having been the instigator of the war. \nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36948", "revid": "29311473", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36948", "title": "Giuseppe Mazzini", "text": "Italian activist, politician, journalist and philosopher (1805\u20131872)\nGiuseppe Mazzini (, ; ; 22 June 1805 \u2013 10 March 1872) was an Italian politician, journalist, and activist for the unification of Italy (Risorgimento) and spearhead of the Italian revolutionary movement. His efforts helped bring about the independent and unified Italy in place of the several separate states, many dominated by foreign powers, that existed until the 19th century. An Italian nationalist in the historical radical tradition and a proponent of a republicanism of social-democratic inspiration, Mazzini helped define \"Europeanism\" for popular democracy in a republican state.\nMazzini's thoughts influenced the Italian and European republican movements, the Constitution of Italy, and Europeanism, as well as politicians of a later period, including Fascist Dictator Benito Mussolini, American president Woodrow Wilson, British prime minister David Lloyd George, Indian independence movement figures Mahatma Gandhi, Vinayak Damodar Savarkar &amp; Jawaharlal Nehru, and Former President of China Sun Yat-sen. \nBiography.\nEarly years.\nMazzini was born in Genoa, which had recently been annexed by the First French Empire. His father Giacomo Mazzini, originally from Chiavari, was a university professor who had adhered to Jacobin ideology, while his mother Maria Drago was renowned for her beauty and religious Jansenist fervour. From a very early age, Mazzini showed good learning qualities as well as a precocious interest in politics and literature. He was admitted to university at the age of 14, graduating in law in 1826 and initially practised as a \"poor man's lawyer\". Mazzini also hoped to become a historical novelist or a dramatist and in the same year wrote his first essay, \"Dell'amor patrio di Dante\" (\"On Dante's Patriotic Love\"), published in 1827, and inspired by feelings of Romanticism. In 1828\u20131829, he collaborated with the Genoese newspaper \"L'Indicatore Genovese\" which was soon closed by the Piedmontese authorities. He then became one of the leading authors of \"L'Indicatore Livornese\", published at Livorno by Francesco Domenico Guerrazzi, until this paper was closed down by the authorities.\nAn admirer of Foscolo and Byron, he was part of a circle of Romantic writers, participating in the debate of the time against the classicists.\nIn 1827, Mazzini travelled to Tuscany, where he became a member of the Carbonari, a secret association with political purposes. On 31 October 1830, he was arrested at Genoa and interned at Savona. In early 1831, he was released from prison, but confined to a small hamlet. He chose exile instead, moving to Geneva, Switzerland.\nFailed insurrections.\nIn 1831, Mazzini went to Marseille, where he became a popular figure among the Italian exiles. He was a frequent visitor to the apartment of Giuditta Bellerio Sidoli, a Modenese widow who became his lover. In August 1832 Giuditta Sidoli gave birth to a boy, almost certainly Mazzini's son, whom she named Joseph D\u00e9mosth\u00e8ne Adolpe Aristide after members of the family of D\u00e9mosth\u00e8ne Ollivier, with whom Mazzini was staying. The Olliviers took care of the child in June 1833 when Giuditta and Mazzini left for Switzerland. The child died in February 1835.\nMazzini organized a new political society called Young Italy. It was a secret society formed to promote Italian unification: \"One, free, independent, republican nation.\" Mazzini believed that a popular uprising would create a unified Italy, and would touch off a European-wide revolutionary movement. The group's motto was \"God and the People\", and its basic principle was the unification of the several states and kingdoms of the peninsula into a single republic as the only true foundation of Italian liberty. The new nation had to be \"One, Independent, Free Republic\".\nMazzini's political activism met some success in Tuscany, Abruzzi, Sicily, Piedmont, and his native Liguria, especially among several military officers. Young Italy counted about 60,000 adherents in 1833, with branches in Genoa and other cities. In that year Mazzini first attempted insurrection, which would spread from Chamb\u00e9ry (then part of the Kingdom of Sardinia), Alessandria, Turin, and Genoa. However, the Savoy government discovered the plot before it could begin and many revolutionaries (including Vincenzo Gioberti) were arrested. The repression was ruthless: 12 participants were executed, while Mazzini's best friend and director of the Genoese section of the \"Giovine Italia\", Jacopo Ruffini, killed himself. Mazzini was tried in absentia and sentenced to death.\nDespite this setback, whose victims later created numerous doubts and psychological strife in Mazzini, he organized another uprising for the following year. A group of Italian exiles were to enter Piedmont from Switzerland and spread the revolution there, while Giuseppe Garibaldi, who had recently joined Young Italy, was to do the same from Genoa. However, the Piedmontese troops easily crushed the new attempt. Denis Mack Smith writes:\nIn the spring of 1834, while at Bern, Mazzini and a dozen refugees from Italy, Poland, and Germany founded a new association with the grandiose name of Young Europe. Its basic, and equally grandiose idea, was that, as the French Revolution of 1789 had enlarged the concept of individual liberty, another revolution would now be needed for national liberty, and his vision went further because he hoped that in the no doubt distant future free nations might combine to form a loosely federal Europe with some kind of federal assembly to regulate their common interests. ... His intention was nothing less than to overturn the European settlement agreed in 1815 by the Congress of Vienna, which had reestablished an oppressive hegemony of a few great powers and blocked the emergence of smaller nations. ... Mazzini hoped, but without much confidence, that his vision of a league or society of independent nations would be realized in his own lifetime. In practice, Young Europe lacked the money and popular support for more than a short-term existence. Nevertheless, he always remained faithful to the ideal of a united continent for which the creation of individual nations would be an indispensable preliminary.\nOn 28 May 1834, Mazzini was arrested at Solothurn, and exiled from Switzerland. He moved to Paris, where he was again imprisoned on 5 July. He was released only after promising he would move to England. Mazzini, together with a few Italian friends, moved in January 1837 to live in London in very poor economic conditions.\nExile in London.\nOn 30 April 1840, Mazzini reformed the \"Giovine Italia\" in London, and on 10 November of the same year, he began issuing the \"Apostolato popolare\" (\"Apostleship of the People\").\nA succession of failed attempts at promoting further uprisings in Sicily, Abruzzi, Tuscany, and Lombardy-Venetia discouraged Mazzini for a long period, which dragged on until 1840. He was also abandoned by Sidoli, who had returned to Italy to rejoin her children. The help of his mother pushed Mazzini to create several organizations aimed at the unification or liberation of other nations, in the wake of \"Giovine Italia\": \"Young Germany\", \"Young Poland\", and \"Young Switzerland\", which were under the aegis of \"Young Europe\" (\"Giovine Europa\"). He also created an Italian school for poor people active from 10 November 1841 at 5 Greville Street, London. From London he also wrote an endless series of letters to his agents in Europe and South America and made friends with Thomas Carlyle and his wife Jane. The \"Young Europe\" movement also inspired a group of young Turkish army cadets and students who, later in history, named themselves the \"Young Turks\".\nIn 1843, he organized another riot in Bologna, which attracted the attention of two young officers of the Austrian Navy, Attilio and Emilio Bandiera. With Mazzini's support, they landed near Cosenza (Kingdom of Naples) but were arrested and executed. Mazzini accused the British government of having passed information about the expeditions to the Neapolitans, and the question was raised in the British Parliament. When it was admitted that his private letters had indeed been opened, and its contents revealed by the Foreign Office to the Austrian and Neapolitan governments, Mazzini gained popularity and support among the British liberals, who were outraged by such a blatant intrusion of the government into his private correspondence.\nIn 1847, he moved again to London, where he wrote a long \"open letter\" to Pope Pius IX, whose apparently liberal reforms had gained him a momentary status as a possible paladin of the unification of Italy, but The Pope did not reply. He also founded the People's International League. By 8 March 1848, Mazzini was in Paris, where he launched a new political association, the \"Associazione Nazionale Italiana\". In apologising for not being able to attend the first annual celebration of the Leeds Redemption Society (a communitarian experiment) on 7 January 1847 he offered to become a subscriber.\n1848\u20131849 revolts.\nOn 7 April 1848, Mazzini reached Milan, whose population had rebelled against the Austrian garrison and established a provisional government. The First Italian War of Independence, started by the Piedmontese king Charles Albert to exploit the favourable circumstances in Milan, turned into a total failure. Mazzini, who had never been popular in the city because he wanted Lombardy to become a republic instead of joining Piedmont, abandoned Milan. He joined Garibaldi's irregular force at Bergamo, moving to Switzerland with him. Mazzini was one of the founders and leaders of the Action Party, the first organized party in the history of Italy.\nOn 9 February 1849, a republic was declared in Rome, with Pius IX already having been forced to flee to Gaeta the preceding November. On the same day the Republic was declared, Mazzini reached the city. He was appointed, together with Carlo Armellini and Aurelio Saffi, as a member of the triumvirate of the new republic on 29 March, becoming soon the true leader of the government and showing good administrative capabilities in social reforms. However, the French troops called by the Pope made clear that the resistance of the Republican troops, led by Garibaldi, was in vain. On 12 July 1849, Mazzini set out for Marseille, from where he moved again to Switzerland.\nLate activities.\nMazzini spent all of 1850 hiding from the Swiss police. In July he founded the association \"Amici di Italia\" (\"Friends of Italy\") in London, to attract consensus towards the Italian liberation cause. Failed riots in Mantua (1852) and the abortive Milan Uprising (1853) were a crippling blow for the Mazzinian organization, whose prestige never recovered. He later opposed the alliance signed by Savoy with Austria for the Crimean War. Also in vain was the expedition of Felice Orsini in Carrara of 1853\u20131854.\nIn 1856, he returned to Genoa to organize a series of uprisings: the only serious attempt was that of Carlo Pisacane in Calabria, which again met a disappointing end. Mazzini managed to escape the police but was condemned to death by default. From this moment on, Mazzini was more of a spectator than a protagonist of the Italian Risorgimento, whose reins were now strongly in the hands of the Savoyard monarch Victor Emmanuel II and his skilled prime minister, Camillo Benso, Conte di Cavour. The latter defined him as \"Chief of the Assassins\".\nIn 1858, he founded another journal in London called \"Pensiero e azione\" (\"Thought and Action\"). On 21 February 1859, together with 151 republicans, he signed a manifesto against the alliance between Piedmont and the Emperor of France which resulted in the Second War of Italian Independence and the conquest of Lombardy. On 2 May 1860, he tried to reach Garibaldi, who was going to launch his famous Expedition of the Thousand in southern Italy. In the same year, he released \"Doveri dell'uomo\" (\"Duties of Man\"), a synthesis of his moral, political and social thoughts. In mid-September, he was in Naples, then under Garibaldi's dictatorship, but was invited by the local vice-dictator Giorgio Pallavicino to move away.\nThe new Kingdom of Italy was created in 1861 under the Savoy monarchy. In 1862, Mazzini joined Garibaldi in his failed attempt to free Rome. In 1866, Italy joined the Austro-Prussian War and gained Venetia. At this time, Mazzini frequently spoke out against how the unification of his country was being achieved. In 1867, he refused a seat in the Italian Chamber of Deputies. In 1870, he tried to start a rebellion in Sicily and was arrested and imprisoned in Gaeta. In October, he was freed in the amnesty declared after the Kingdom finally took Rome and returned to London in mid-December.\nMazzini died of pleurisy at the house known now as Domus Mazziniana in Pisa in 1872, aged 66. His body was embalmed by Paolo Gorini. His funeral was held in Genoa, with 100,000 people taking part in it.\nIdeology.\nAn Italian nationalist, Mazzini was a fervent advocate of republicanism and envisioned a united, free and independent Italy. Unlike his contemporary Giuseppe Garibaldi, who was also a republican, Mazzini refused to swear an oath of allegiance to the House of Savoy until after the Capture of Rome. He and his followers were sensitive to the question of social justice, starting a dialogue with socialism, and Mazzini in particular finding many affinities with the Saint-Simonians. At the same time, Mazzini was vigorously opposed to Marxism, which for him was \"a dreadful perversion of utilitarianism because of its insistence on class interests, especially class struggle, a conflictual vision that could not harmonize with Mazzini's unitarianism\". Mazzini also rejected the classical liberal principles of the Age of Enlightenment based on the doctrine of individualism, which he criticized as \"presupposing either metaphysical materialism or political atheism\". In the first volume of Carl Landauer's \"European Socialism\", Mazzini is mentioned alongside Garibaldi as outstanding \"Italian revolutionaries\". Albert Charles Brouse argued that \"socialism is found in its entirety in the doctrine of Mazzini\", his republicanism being both \"democratic and social\".\nIn 1871, Mazzini condemned the radical, anti-religious and revolutionary socialist revolt in France that led to the creation of the short-lived Paris Commune. This caused Karl Marx to refer to Mazzini as a reactionary after 1848. It also prompted anarchist Mikhail Bakunin to write \"The Political Theology of Mazzini and the International\", whose \"defence of the International and the Paris Commune caused a stir in Italy and provoked many renunciations of Mazzini and declarations of support for the International in the press\", even leading to \"the first nationwide increase in membership in the organisation\". In an interview by R. Landor from 1871, Marx stated that Mazzini's ideas represented \"nothing better than the old idea of a middle-class republic\". Marx believed that Mazzini's point of view, especially after the Revolutions of 1848 and the Paris Commune, had become reactionary and the proletariat had nothing to do with it.\nIn another interview, Marx described Mazzini as \"that everlasting old ass\". In turn, Mazzini described Marx as \"a destructive spirit whose heart was filled with hatred rather than love of mankind\" and declared that \"[d]espite the communist egalitarianism which [Marx] preaches, he is the absolute ruler of his party, admittedly he does everything himself, but he is also the only one to give orders and he tolerates no opposition\". While Mazzini saw the Paris Commune as \"a socially divisive mistake\", many other radicals \"followed the socialist lead and mythologised the Commune as a social revolution ('the glorius harbinger of a new society' in Karl Marx's words)\". This event \"allowed a significant section of the radical left, especially a younger generation of radicals led by the poet and satirist Felice Cavallotti and grouped around the newspaper \"Il Gazzettino Rosa\", to break openly and decisively with both Mazzini and the principles and methods of Mazzinian politics. While \"Il Gazzettino Rosa\" praised Mazzini as \"the 'saviour' and teacher of Italy\", it insisted:\nWe have no more idols, we don't accept abstruse, incomprehensible formulas. ... What we object to in Mazzini is not his opinion in itself, as much as his opinion erected into a system and a political dogma. We are materialists, but we don't make a political school out of our materialism. To us it does not matter if one believes or does not believe in God. ... [I]nstead Mazzini wants to impose a new religion on us.\nAccording to Lucy Riall, \"the emphasis by younger radicals on the 'social question' was paralleled by an increase in what was called 'internationalist' or socialist activity (mostly Bakuninist anarchism) throughout northern and southern Italy, which was given a big boost by the Paris Commune.\" The rise of this socialism \"represented a genuine challenge to Mazzini and the Mazzinian emphasis on politics and culture, and Mazzinis' death early in 1872 only served to underline the prevailing sense that his political era was over. Garibaldi now broke definitively with Mazzini, and this time he moved to the left of him. He came out entirely in favour of the Paris Commune and internationalism, and his stance brought him much closer to the younger radicals, ... and gave him a new lease on political life. From his support was born an initiative to relaunch a broad party of the radical left.\"\nFor Seamus Flahert, Henry Hyndman, who was an admirer of Mazzini, thought that \"Mazzini's greatness ... was obscured for younger socialists by his 'opposition to Marx in the early days of the 'International', and his vigorous condemnation a little later of the Paris Commune\", insisting that \"Mazzini's conception of the conduct of human life' had been 'a high and noble one'\", praising the \"No duties without rights\" mention in the \"General Rules\" that Marx composed and passed as \"a concession Marx made to Mazzini's followers within the organisation\". In his two-volume autobiography, Hyndman spoke at length about Mazzini, even comparing him to Marx.\nChristopher Bayly wrote that Mazzini \"had arrived at similar conclusions\", referring to \"the Saint-Simonian ideas of association and Charles Fourier's 'law of attraction'\", but \"through an emotive process that owed little to rationalisation\". As with the Christian socialist George D. Herron, Mazzini's socialism was \"essentially a religious and moral revival\". Mazzini rejected the Marxist doctrines of class struggle and materialism, stressing the need for class collaboration. Nonetheless, there was a more radical, socialist interpretation of Mazzini's doctrine within the Italian Republican Party, a Mazzinian party, where \"there were many who believed the teachings of the Genoese patriot could be compatible with the Marxist doctrine and ... considered an alliance with the left-wing to be legitimate and desirable\".\nMazzini's Italian nationalism has been described as \"cosmopolitan patriotism\". In \"Socialism: National or International\", first published in 1942, Franz Borkenau described Mazzini as \"that impressive Genoese\" and \"leader of the Italian underground democratic and unitarian movement\". About Mazzini and the underground movement, Borkenau further wrote:\nMazzini did a great deal to organize and united this underground movement, known under the name of \"Young Italy\". He conceived the idea of parallel organizations in other European countries, which should all of them join in a \"Young Europe\" movement. The plan had only incipient success and Italy remained the sole stronghold of this underground movement. But the idea, though not its practical execution, caught on in other European countries. One reason of Mazzini's partial failure was the emergence of socialism in France and England. France, at any rate, had a strong underground movement, much stronger under Louis-Philippe than previously under the Bourbon restoration. But this movement gradually evolved towards the left. Ordinary democrats of the Mazzini type were no longer persecuted in France after 1830. But to the left of them arose more advanced movements.\nWhen he was a socialist, Benito Mussolini harshly criticized Mazzini, \"the religious Mazzini in particular\", being \"particularly opposed to Mazzini's 'sanctification'\". After advocating interventionism in World War I and enlisting, Mussolini \"found himself immersed in a patriotic atmosphere permeated by Mazzinian references\".\nReligion.\nInfluenced by his Jansenist upbringing, Mazzini's thought is characterized by a strong religious fervour and a deep sense of spirituality. A deist who believed in divine providence, Mazzini described himself as a Christian and emphasized the necessity of faith and a relationship with God while vehemently denouncing atheism and rationalism. His motto was \"Dio e Popolo\" (\"God and People\"). Mazzini regarded patriotism as a duty and love for the fatherland as a divine mission, stating that the fatherland was \"the home wherein God has placed us, among brothers and sisters linked to us by the family ties of a common religion, history, and language\". According to A. James Gregor, \"Mazzini's creed for the New Age thus radically distinguished itself from the orthodox Marxism of the nineteenth century. His Socialism was alive with moral purpose, rather than class identity, infused with exalted intent and specifically inspired by a sense of national, rather than class, mission. It saw itself, unabashedly, as a new religion, a 'climb through \"philosophy\" to \"faith\"'. It was a religion predicated on a 'living faith in one God, one Law, general and immutable ... and one End.\"\nIn his 1835 publication \"Fede e avvenire\" (\"Faith and the Future\"), Mazzini wrote: \"We must rise again as a religious party. The religious element is universal and immortal. ... The initiators of a new world, we are bound to lay the foundations of a moral unity, a Humanitarian Catholicism.\" However, Mazzini's relationship with the Catholic Church and the Papacy was not always a kind one. While he initially supported Pope Pius IX upon his election, writing an open letter to him in 1847, Mazzini later published a scathing attack against the pope in his \"Sull'Enciclica di Papa Pio IX\" (\"On the Encyclical of Pope Pius IX\") in 1849. Although some of his religious views were at odds with the Catholic Church and the Papacy, with his writings often tinged with anti-clericalism, Mazzini also criticized Protestantism, stating that it is \"divided and subdivided into a thousand sects, all founded on the rights of individual conscience, all eager to make war on one another, and perpetuating that anarchy of beliefs which is the sole true cause of the social and political disturbances that torment the peoples of Europe\".\nThought and action.\nMazzini rejected the concept of the \"rights of man\" which had developed during the Age of Enlightenment, arguing instead that individual rights were a duty to be won through hard work, sacrifice and virtue, rather than \"rights\" which were intrinsically owed to man. Mazzini outlined his thought in his \"Doveri dell'uomo\" (\"Duties of Man\"), published in 1860. Similarly, Mazzini formulated a concept known as \"thought and action\" in which thought and action must be joined together and every thought must be followed by action, therefore rejecting intellectualism and the notion of divorcing theory from practice.\nWomen's rights.\nIn \"Duties of Man\", Mazzini called for recognition of women's rights. After his many encounters with political philosophers in England, France and across Europe, Mazzini had decided that the principle of equality between men and women was fundamental to building a truly democratic Italian nation. He called for the end of women's social and judicial subordination to men. Mazzini's vigorous position heightened attention to gender among European thinkers who were already considering democracy and nationalism. He helped intellectuals see women's rights not merely as a peripheral topic, but rather as a fundamental goal necessary for the regeneration of old nations and the rebirth of new ones. Mazzini admired Jessie White Mario, who was described by Giuseppe Garibaldi as the \"Bravest Woman of Modern Time\". Mario joined Garibaldi's Redshirts for the 1859\u20131860 campaign during the Second Italian War of Independence. As a correspondent for the \"Daily News\", she witnessed almost every fight that had brought on the unification of Italy.\nLegacy.\nMazzini's socio-political thought has been referred to as Mazzinianism and his worldview as the Mazzinian conception, terms that were later used by Mussolini and Italian fascists, such as Giovanni Gentile, to describe their political ideology and spiritual conception of life. \nIn the first volume of his \"Reminiscences\", Carl Schurz gives a biographical sketch of Mazzini and recalls two meetings he had with him when they were both in London in 1851. While the book \"10,000 Famous Freemasons\" by William R. Denslow lists Mazzini as a Mason and even a Past Grand Master of the Grand Orient of Italy, articles on the Grand Orient of Italy's own website question whether he was ever a regular Mason and do not list him as a Past Grand Master.\nThe antifascist Mazzini Society, founded in the United States in 1939 by Italian political refugees, took his name and served Italy from exile, as he had.\nIn London, Mazzini resided at 155 North Gower Street, near Euston Square, which is now marked with a commemorative blue plaque. A plaque on Laystall Street in Clerkenwell, London's Little Italy during the 1850s, also pays tribute to Mazzini, calling him \"The Apostle of Modern Democracy\". Mazzini was an important influence on British idealists such as Thomas Hill Green, and other important figures at the University of Oxford (e.g., Benjamin Jowett and Algernon Swinburne) and the University of Cambridge (e.g., Henry Sidgwick). A bust of Mazzini is in New York's Central Park between 67th and 68th streets just west of the West Drive. The 1973\u20131974 academic year at the College of Europe was named in his honour.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36951", "revid": "34706848", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36951", "title": "Ritual Entertainment", "text": "Former video game developer\nRitual Entertainment was an American video game developer established in 1996 by Robert Atkins, Mark Dochtermann, Jim Dos\u00e9, Richard 'Levelord' Gray, Michael Hadwin, Harry Miller, and Tom Mustaine. Based in Dallas, Texas, Ritual Entertainment was formerly known as Hipnotic Interactive, during which period they began development of their signature video game \"SiN\".\nHistory.\nMembers of the Ritual Entertainment development team have contributed assets to other games such as \"American McGee's Alice\", ', ', and \"25 to Life\", and are also the creators of \"\u00dcbertools\" for id Tech 3, which has been licensed for a number of other games.\nShortly after signing Hipnotic, publisher Activision claimed that Hipnotic had been at the core of the \"Duke Nukem 3D\" development team. \"Duke Nukem 3D\" developer 3D Realms vigorously denied this, stating that only five members of Hipnotic Interactive were former staff of 3D Realms, and of these five only three had a significant role in making \"Duke Nukem 3D\".\nIn late 1997, Hipnotic changed their name to Ritual Entertainment in order to avoid a trademark conflict with another video-game developer, Hypnotix.\nOn January 24, 2007, developer MumboJumbo announced the acquisition of Ritual Entertainment. With this acquisition, Ritual's focus on traditional action-oriented games was changed to casual games, essentially \"stalling\" Ritual's latest game series, \"SiN Episodes\", after releasing only one episode out of a planned nine.\nThe purchase followed months of departures of several key employees, including chief executive officer Steve Nix, who became director of business development at id Software, vice president and co-founder Tom Mustaine, who left to found Escalation Studios. Several months after the acquisition, community relations manager Steve Hessel left the company to join Splash Damage.\nPrior to the announcement, on December 6, 2006, Ritual announced the appointment of Ken Harward as the company's new studio director.\nFollowing the company's closure, many of the developers have left to other companies such as id Software, Gearbox Software, Nerve Software, Escalation Studios, and the now-defunct Paradigm Entertainment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36954", "revid": "57939", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36954", "title": "SPARC", "text": "RISC instruction set architecture\nSPARC (Scalable Processor ARChitecture) is a reduced instruction set computer (RISC) instruction set architecture originally developed by Sun Microsystems. Its design was strongly influenced by the experimental Berkeley RISC system developed in the early 1980s. First developed in 1986 and released in 1987, SPARC was one of the most successful early commercial RISC systems, and its success led to the introduction of similar RISC designs from many vendors through the 1980s and 1990s. After acquiring Sun, Oracle Corporation ended SPARC development in 2017.\nDescription.\nBy the mid-1980s the computer industry's consensus was that RISC had a much better price/performance ratio than traditional CISC architecture. Workstation vendor Sun Microsystems decided to move to RISC as fast as possible from the Motorola 68000 series of processors.\nThe first implementation of the original 32-bit architecture (SPARC V7) was used in Sun's Sun-4 computer workstation and server systems, replacing their earlier Sun-3 systems based on the Motorola 68000 series. SPARC V8 added a number of improvements that were part of the SuperSPARC series of processors released in 1992. SPARC V9, released in 1993, introduced a 64-bit architecture and was first released in Sun's UltraSPARC processors in 1995. Later, SPARC processors were used in symmetric multiprocessing (SMP) and non-uniform memory access (CC-NUMA) servers produced by Sun, Solbourne, and Fujitsu, among others.\nThe design was turned over to the SPARC International trade group in 1989, and since then its architecture has been developed by its members. SPARC International is also responsible for licensing and promoting the SPARC architecture, managing SPARC trademarks (including SPARC, which it owns), and providing conformance testing. SPARC International was intended to grow the SPARC architecture to create a larger ecosystem; SPARC has been licensed to several manufacturers, including Atmel, Bipolar Integrated Technology, Cypress Semiconductor, Fujitsu, Matsushita and Texas Instruments. Due to SPARC International, SPARC is fully open, non-proprietary and royalty-free.\nAs of 2024, the latest commercial high-end SPARC processors are Fujitsu's SPARC64 XII (introduced in September 2017 for its SPARC M12 server) and Oracle's SPARC M8 introduced in September 2017 for its high-end servers.\nOn September 1, 2017, after a round of layoffs that started in Oracle Labs in November 2016, Oracle terminated SPARC design after completing the M8. Much of the processor core development group in Austin, Texas, was dismissed, as were the teams in Santa Clara, California, and Burlington, Massachusetts.\nFujitsu will also discontinue their SPARC production (has already shifted to producing their own ARM-based CPUs), after one \"enhanced\" versions of Fujitsu's older SPARC M12 server in 2020\u201322 (formerly planned for 2021), end-of-sale in 2029, of UNIX servers and a year later for their mainframe and end-of-support in 2034 \"to promote customer modernization\".\nFeatures.\nThe SPARC architecture was heavily influenced by the earlier RISC designs, including the Berkeley RISC I and II from the University of California, Berkeley and the IBM 801. These original RISC designs were minimalist, including as few features or op-codes as possible and aiming to execute instructions at a rate of almost one instruction per clock cycle. This made them similar to the MIPS architecture in many ways, including the lack of instructions such as multiply or divide. Another feature of SPARC influenced by this early RISC movement is the branch delay slot.\nThe SPARC processor usually contains as many as 160 general-purpose registers. According to the \"Oracle SPARC Architecture 2015\" specification an \"implementation may contain from 72 to 640 general-purpose 64-bit\" registers. At any point, only 32 of them are immediately visible to software\u00a0\u2014 8 are a set of global registers (one of which, g0, is hard-wired to zero, so only seven of them are usable as registers) and the other 24 are from the stack of registers. These 24 registers form what is called a register window, and at function call/return, this window is moved up and down the register stack. Each window has eight local registers and shares eight registers with each of the adjacent windows. The shared registers are used for passing function parameters and returning values, and the local registers are used for retaining local values across function calls.\nThe \"scalable\" in SPARC comes from the fact that the SPARC specification allows implementations to scale from embedded processors up through large server processors, all sharing the same core (non-privileged) instruction set. One of the architectural parameters that can scale is the number of implemented register windows; the specification allows from three to 32 windows to be implemented, so the implementation can choose to implement all 32 to provide maximum call stack efficiency, or to implement only three to reduce cost and complexity of the design, or to implement some number between them. Other architectures that include similar register file features include Intel i960, IA-64, and AMD 29000.\nThe architecture has gone through several revisions. It gained hardware multiply and divide functionality in version 8. 64-bit (addressing and data) were added to the version 9 SPARC specification published in 1994.\nIn SPARC version 8, the floating-point register file has 16 double-precision registers. Each of them can be used as two single-precision registers, providing a total of 32 single-precision registers. An odd\u2013even number pair of double-precision registers can be used as a quad-precision register, thus allowing 8 quad-precision registers. SPARC Version 9 added 16 more double-precision registers (which can also be accessed as 8 quad-precision registers), but these additional registers can not be accessed as single-precision registers. No SPARC CPU implements quad-precision operations in hardware as of 2024.\nTagged add and subtract instructions perform adds and subtracts on values checking that the bottom two bits of both operands are 0 and reporting overflow if they are not. This can be useful in the implementation of the run time for ML, Lisp, and similar languages that might use a tagged integer format.\nThe endianness of the 32-bit SPARC V8 architecture is purely big-endian. The 64-bit SPARC V9 architecture uses big-endian instructions, but can access data in either big-endian or little-endian byte order, chosen either at the application instruction (load\u2013store) level or at the memory page level (via an MMU setting). The latter is often used for accessing data from inherently little-endian devices, such as those on PCI buses.\nHistory.\nv7 \u2192 v8 \u2192 v9 (64-bit) \u2192 JPS1 \u2192 JPS2 (multicore) \u2192 UA2005 (sun4v) \u2192 UA2007 \u2192 OSA2011 \u2192 OSA2015 \u2192 OSA2017\nThere have been three major revisions of the architecture. The first published version was the 32-bit \"SPARC version 7\" (V7) in 1986. \"SPARC version 8\" (V8), an enhanced SPARC architecture definition, was released in 1990. The main differences between V7 and V8 were the addition of integer multiply and divide instructions, and an upgrade from 80-bit \"extended-precision\" floating-point arithmetic to 128-bit \"quad-precision\" arithmetic. SPARC V8 served as the basis for IEEE Standard 1754-1994, an IEEE standard for a 32-bit microprocessor architecture.\n\"SPARC version 9\" (V9), the 64-bit SPARC architecture, was released by SPARC International in 1993. It was developed by the SPARC Architecture Committee consisting of Amdahl Corporation, Fujitsu, ICL, LSI Logic, Matsushita, Philips, Ross Technology, Sun Microsystems, and Texas Instruments. Newer specifications always remain compliant with the full SPARC V9 Level 1 specification.\nIn 2002, the SPARC \"Joint Programming Specification 1\" (JPS1) was released by Fujitsu and Sun, describing processor functions which were identically implemented in the CPUs of both companies (\"Commonality\"). The first CPUs conforming to JPS1 were the UltraSPARC III by Sun and the SPARC64 V by Fujitsu. Functionalities which are not covered by JPS1 are documented for each processor in \"Implementation Supplements\".\nAt the end of 2003, \"Joint Programming Specification 2\" (JPS2) was released to support multicore CPUs. The first CPUs conforming to JPS2 were the UltraSPARC IV by Sun and the SPARC64 VI by Fujitsu.\nIn early 2006, Sun released an extended architecture specification, \"UltraSPARC Architecture 2005\" (UA2005). This includes not only the non-privileged and most of the privileged portions of SPARC V9, but also all the architectural extensions developed through the processor generations of UltraSPARC III, IV, and IV+, as well as \"Chip Multithreading Technology\" (\"CMT\") extensions starting with the UltraSPARC T1 implementation:\nIn 2007, Sun released an updated specification, \"UltraSPARC Architecture 2007\" (UA2007), to which the UltraSPARC T2 implementation complied.\nIn December 2007, Sun also made the UltraSPARC T2 processor's RTL available via the OpenSPARC project. It was also released under the GNU General public license v2. OpenSPARC T2 is 8 cores, 16 pipelines with 64 threads.\nIn August 2012, Oracle Corporation made available a new specification, \"Oracle SPARC Architecture 2011\" (OSA2011), which besides the overall update of the reference, adds the VIS 3 instruction set extensions and hyperprivileged mode to the 2007 specification.\nIn October 2015, Oracle released SPARC M7, the first processor based on the new \"Oracle SPARC Architecture 2015\" (OSA2015) specification. This revision includes VIS 4 instruction set extensions and hardware-assisted encryption and silicon secured memory (SSM).\nIn September 2017, Oracle released SPARC M8, the first processor based on the new \"Oracle SPARC Architecture 2017\" (OSA2017) specification.\nSPARC architecture has provided continuous application binary compatibility from the first SPARC V7 implementation in 1987 through the Sun UltraSPARC Architecture implementations.\nAmong various implementations of SPARC, Sun's SuperSPARC and UltraSPARC-I were very popular, and were used as reference systems for SPEC CPU95 and CPU2000 benchmarks. The 296\u00a0MHz UltraSPARC-II is the reference system for the SPEC CPU2006 benchmark.\nArchitecture.\nSPARC is a load\u2013store architecture (also known as a \"register\u2013register architecture\"); except for the load/store instructions used to access memory, all instructions operate on the registers, in accordance with the RISC design principles.\nA SPARC processor includes an integer unit (IU) that performs integer load, store, and arithmetic operations.9 It may include a floating-point unit (FPU) that performs floating-point operations9 and, for SPARC V8, may include a co-processor (CP) that performs co-processor-specific operations; the architecture does not specify what functions a co-processor would perform, other than load and store operations.9\nRegisters.\nThe SPARC architecture has an overlapping register window scheme. At any instant, 32 general-purpose registers are visible. A Current Window Pointer (\"CWP\") variable in the hardware points to the current set. The total size of the register file is not part of the architecture, allowing more registers to be added as the technology improves, up to a maximum of 32 windows in SPARC V7 and V8 as \"CWP\" is 5 bits and is part of the \"PSR\" register.\nIn SPARC V7 and V8 \"CWP\" will usually be decremented by the SAVE instruction (used by the SAVE instruction during the procedure call to open a new stack frame and switch the register window), or incremented by the RESTORE instruction (switching back to the call before returning from the procedure). Trap events (interrupts, exceptions or TRAP instructions) and RETT instructions (returning from traps) also change the \"CWP\". For SPARC V9, CWP register is decremented during a RESTORE instruction, and incremented during a SAVE instruction. This is the opposite of PSR.CWP's behavior in SPARC V8. This change has no effect on nonprivileged instructions.\nSPARC registers are shown in the figure above.\nThere is also a non-windowed Y register, used by the multiply-step, integer multiply, and integer divide instructions.32\nA SPARC V8 processor with an FPU includes 32 32-bit floating-point registers, each of which can hold one single-precision IEEE 754 floating-point number. An even\u2013odd pair of floating-point registers can hold one double-precision IEEE 754 floating-point number, and a quad-aligned group of four floating-point registers can hold one quad-precision IEEE 754 floating-point number.10\nA SPARC V9 processor with an FPU includes:\nThe registers are organized as a set of 64 32-bit registers, with the first 32 being used as the 32-bit floating-point registers, even\u2013odd pairs of all 64 registers being used as the 64-bit floating-point registers, and quad-aligned groups of four floating-point registers being used as the 128-bit floating-point registers.\nFloating-point registers are not windowed; they are all global registers.\nInstruction formats.\nAll SPARC instructions occupy a full 32-bit word and start on a word boundary. Four formats are used, distinguished by the first two bits. All arithmetic and logical instructions have 2 source operands and 1 destination operand. RD is the \"destination register\", where the output of the operation is deposited. The majority of SPARC instructions have at least this register, so it is placed near the \"front\" of the instruction format. RS1 and RS2 are the \"source registers\", which may or may not be present, or replaced by a constant.\nInstructions.\nLoads and stores.\nLoad and store instructions have a three-operand format, in that they have two operands representing values for the address and one operand for the register to read or write to. The address is created by adding the two address operands to produce an address. The second address operand may be a constant or a register. Loads take the value at the address and place it in the register specified by the third operand, whereas stores take the value in the register specified by the first operand and place it at the address. To make this more obvious, the assembler language indicates address operands using square brackets with a plus sign separating the operands, instead of using a comma-separated list. Examples:\n ld [%L1+%L2],%L3 !load the 32-bit value at address %L1+%L2 and put the value into %L3\n ld [%L1+8],%L2 !load the value at %L1+8 into %L2\n ld [%L1],%L2 !as above, but no offset, which is the same as +%G0\n st %L1,[%I2] !store the value in %L1 into the location stored in %I2\n st %G0,[%I1+8] !clear the memory at %I1+8\nDue to the widespread use of non-32-bit data, such as 16-bit or 8-bit integral data or 8-bit bytes in strings, there are instructions that load and store 16-bit half-words and 8-bit bytes, as well as instructions that load 32-bit words. During a load, those instructions will read only the byte or half-word at the indicated location and then either fill the rest of the target register with zeros (unsigned load) or with the value of the uppermost bit of the byte or half-word (signed load). During a store, those instructions discard the upper bits in the register and store only the lower bits. There are also instructions for loading double-precision values used for floating-point arithmetic, reading or writing eight bytes from the indicated register and the \"next\" one, so if the destination of a load is L1, L1 and L2 will be set. The complete list of load and store instructions for the general-purpose registers in 32-bit SPARC is , , (unsigned byte), (signed byte), (unsigned half-word), (signed half-word), (load double), (store byte), (store half-word), (store double).\nIn SPARC V9, registers are 64-bit, and the instruction, renamed , clears the upper 32 bits in the register and loads the 32-bit value into the lower 32 bits, and the instruction, renamed , discards the upper 32 bits of the register and stores only the lower 32 bits. The new instruction sets the upper bits in the register to the value of the uppermost bit of the word and loads the 32-bit value into the lower bits. The new instruction loads a 64-bit value into the register, and the instruction stores all 64 bits of the register.\nThe , , and instructions load a single-precision, double-precision, or quad-precision value from memory into a floating-point register; the , , and instructions store a single-precision, double-precision, or quad-precision floating-point register into memory.\nThe memory barrier instruction, MEMBAR, serves two interrelated purposes: it articulates order constraints among memory references and facilitates explicit control over the completion of memory references. For example, all effects of the stores that appear prior to the MEMBAR instruction must be made visible to all processors before any loads following the MEMBAR can be executed.\nALU operations.\nArithmetic and logical instructions also use a three-operand format, with the first two being the operands and the last being the location to store the result. The middle operand can be a register or a 13-bit signed integer constant; the other operands are registers. Any of the register operands may point to G0; pointing the result to G0 discards the results, which can be used for tests. Examples include:\n add %L1,%L2,%L3 !add the values in %L1 and %L2 and put the result in %L3\n add %L1,1,%L1 !increment %L1\n add %G0,%G0,%L4 !clear any value in %L4\nThe list of mathematical instructions is , , , , , and negated versions , , and . One quirk of the SPARC design is that most arithmetic instructions come in pairs, with one version setting the NZVC condition code bits in the status register, and the other not setting them, with the default being \"not\" to set the codes. This is so that the compiler has a way to move instructions around when trying to fill delay slots. If one wants the condition codes to be set, this is indicated by adding to the instruction:\n subcc %L1,10,%G0 !compare %L1 to 10 and ignore the result, but set the flags\nadd and sub also have another modifier, X, which indicates whether the operation should set the carry bit:\n addx %L1,100,%L1 !add 100 to the value in %L1 and track carry\nSPARC V7 does not have multiplication or division instructions, but it does have , which does one step of a multiplication testing one bit and conditionally adding the multiplicand to the product. This was because can complete over one clock cycle in keeping with the RISC philosophy. SPARC V8 added (unsigned multiply), (signed multiply), (unsigned divide), and (signed divide) instructions, with both versions that do not update the condition codes and versions that do. and the multiply instructions use the Y register to hold the upper 32 bits of the product; the divide instructions use it to hold the upper 32 bits of the dividend. The instruction reads the value of the Y register into a general-purpose register; the instruction writes the value of a general-purpose register to the Y register.32 SPARC V9 added , which multiplies two 64-bit values and produces a 64-bit result, , which divides a 64-bit signed dividend by a 64-bit signed divisor and produces a 64-bit signed quotient, and , which divides a 64-bit unsigned dividend by a 64-bit unsigned divisor and produces a 64-bit signed quotient; none of those instructions use the Y register.199\nBranching.\nConditional branches test condition codes in a status register, as seen in many instruction sets such the IBM System/360 architecture and successors and the x86 architecture. This means that a test and branch is normally performed with two instructions; the first is an ALU instruction that sets the condition codes, followed by a branch instruction that examines one of those flags. The SPARC does not have specialized test instructions; tests are performed using normal ALU instructions with the destination set to %G0. For instance, to test if a register holds the value 10 and then branch to code that handles it, one would:\n subcc %L1,10,%G0 !subtract 10 from %L1, setting the zero flag if %L1 is 10\n be WASEQUAL !if the zero flag is set, branch to the address marked WASEQUAL\nIn a conditional branch instruction, the icc or fcc field specifies the condition being tested. The 22-bit displacement field is the address, relative to the current PC, of the target, in words, so that conditional branches can go forward or backward up to 8 megabytes. The \"ANNUL\" (A) bit is used to get rid of some delay slots. If it is 0 in a conditional branch, the delay slot is executed as usual. If it is 1, the delay slot is only executed if the branch is taken. If it is not taken, the instruction following the conditional branch is skipped.\nThere are a wide variety of conditional branches: (branch always, essentially a jmp), (branch never), (equals), (not equals), (less than), (less or equal), (less or equal, unsigned), (greater), (greater or equal), (greater unsigned), (positive), (negative), (carry clear), (carry set), (overflow clear), (overflow set).\nThe FPU and CP have sets of condition codes separate from the integer condition codes and from each other; two additional sets of branch instructions were defined to test those condition codes. Adding an F to the front of the branch instruction in the list above performs the test against the FPU's condition codes, while, in SPARC V8, adding a C tests the flags in the otherwise undefined CP.\nThe (jump to subroutine) instruction uses a 30-bit program counter-relative \"word\" offset. As the target address is specifying the start of a word, not a byte, 30-bits is all that is needed to reach any address in the 4 gigabyte address space. The CALL instruction deposits the return address in register R15, also known as output register O7.\nThe (jump and link) instruction is a three-operand instruction, with two operands representing values for the target address and one operand for a register in which to deposit the return address. The address is created by adding the two address operands to produce a 32-bit address. The second address operand may be a constant or a register.\nLarge constants.\nAs the instruction opcode takes up some bits of the 32-bit instruction word, there is no way to load a 32-bit constant using a single instruction. This is significant because addresses are manipulated through registers and they are 32-bits. To ease this, the special-purpose instruction copies its 22-bit immediate operand into the high-order 22 bits of any specified register, and sets each of the low-order 10 bits to 0. In general use, SETHI is followed by an or instruction with only the lower 10 bits of the value set. To ease this, the assembler includes the and macros. For example:\n sethi %hi(0x89ABCDEF),%L1 !sets the upper 22 bits of L1\n or %L1,%lo(0x89ABCDEF),%L1 !sets the lower 10 bits of L1 by ORing\nThe hi and lo macros are performed at assembly time, not runtime, so it has no performance hit yet makes it clearer that L1 is set to a single value, not two unrelated ones. To make this even easier, the assembler also includes a \"synthetic instruction\", , that performs these two operations in a single line:\n set 0x89ABCDEF,% L1\nThis outputs the two instructions above if the value is larger than 13 bits, otherwise it will emit a single with the value.\nSynthetic instructions.\nAs noted earlier, the SPARC assembler uses \"synthetic instructions\" to ease common coding tasks. Additional examples include (among others):\nSPARC architecture licensees.\nIntel was the 80386's only producer, which made it very expensive and caused the industry to be wary of sole sourced CPUs. When Sun announced SPARC in 1987, the company stated that it would be available from multiple sources. Fujitsu was the first SPARC vendor, and Cypress Semiconductor was the second licensee; as of \u00a01989[ [update]] their SPARC CPUs were available, as was Texas Instruments's FPU. The following organizations have licensed the SPARC architecture:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nImplementations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:row hover highlight/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Sort under/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOperating system support.\nSPARC machines have generally used Sun's SunOS, Solaris, JavaOS, or OpenSolaris including derivatives illumos and OpenIndiana, but other operating systems have also been used, such as NeXTSTEP, RTEMS, FreeBSD, OpenBSD, NetBSD, and Linux.\nIn 1993, Intergraph announced a port of Windows NT to the SPARC architecture, but it was later cancelled.\nIn October 2015, Oracle announced a \"Linux for SPARC reference platform\".\nOpen source implementations.\nSeveral fully open source implementations of the SPARC architecture exist:\nA fully open source simulator for the SPARC architecture also exists:\nSupercomputers.\nFor HPC loads Fujitsu builds specialized SPARC64 fx processors with a new instruction extensions set, called HPC-ACE (High Performance Computing \u2013 Arithmetic Computational Extensions).\nFujitsu's K computer ranked No.\u202f1 in the TOP500 June 2011 and November 2011 lists. It combines 88,128 SPARC64 VIIIfx CPUs, each with eight cores, for a total of 705,024 cores\u2014almost twice as many as any other system in the TOP500 at that time. The K Computer was more powerful than the next five systems on the list combined, and had the highest performance-to-power ratio of any supercomputer system. It also ranked No.\u202f6 in the Green500 June 2011 list, with a score of 824.56 MFLOPS/W. In the November 2012 release of TOP500, the K computer ranked No.\u202f3, using by far the most power of the top three. It ranked No.\u202f85 on the corresponding Green500 release. Newer HPC processors, IXfx and XIfx, were included in recent PRIMEHPC FX10 and FX100 supercomputers.\nTianhe-2 (TOP500 No.\u202f1 as of November 2014) has a number of nodes with Galaxy FT-1500 OpenSPARC-based processors developed in China. However, those processors did not contribute to the LINPACK score.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36955", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36955", "title": "Ireland, Republic of", "text": ""}
{"id": "36956", "revid": "44318890", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36956", "title": "Cappuccino", "text": "Drink made with espresso coffee and steamed milk\nCappuccino (, ; from German ) is an espresso-based coffee drink traditionally prepared with steamed milk, including a layer of milk foam.\nVariations of the drink involve the use of cream instead of milk, using non-dairy milk substitutes and flavoring with cocoa powder (in Europe and Australasia) or cinnamon (in the United States and South Korea). It is typically smaller in volume than that of a caff\u00e8 latte, and topped with a thick layer of foam rather than being made with microfoam.\nThe name comes from the Capuchin friars, referring to the color of their habits, and in this context, referring to the color of the beverage when milk is added in small portion to dark, brewed coffee (today mostly espresso). The physical appearance of a modern cappuccino with espresso crema and steamed milk is a result of a long evolution of the drink. \nThe Viennese bestowed the name , possibly in the 18th century, on an early version that included whipped cream and spices. Later, the was introduced in northern Italy during the period of Austrian domination, and Italians started to use it for the beverage as well as the friar dress. It is sometimes said to have been served in the coffeehouses of Trieste and other Italian areas of the Austro-Hungarian Empire in the early 20th century, spreading throughout the Kingdom of Italy after World War I. However, the existence in central Italy of a coffee drink mixed with milk named is already documented in the 19th century.\nDefinition and etymology.\nDefinition.\nA cappuccino is a coffee drink that today is typically composed of a single, double, or triple espresso shot and hot milk, with the surface topped with foamed milk. Cappuccinos are most often prepared with an espresso machine. The espresso is poured into the bottom of the cup, followed by a similar amount of hot milk which is prepared by heating and texturing the milk using the espresso machine steam wand. The top third of the drink consists of milk foam which is also made using the steam wand. The drink may then be topped with powdered chocolate or cocoa powder.\nIn a traditional cappuccino, as served in Europe and artisan coffeehouses in the United States, the total of espresso and milk/foam make up between approximately . Commercial coffee restaurant chains in the US more often serve the cappuccino as a drink or larger. In Italy, a cappuccino consists of of espresso; the rest of the cup is filled with equal parts of milk and foam.\nA cappuccino is traditionally served in a small cup with a handle (180\u00a0ml maximum) with a thick layer of foam, while a caff\u00e8 latte is espresso and milk (200\u2013300\u00a0ml), with the milk steamed to be hot and to form microfoam, and is usually served in a large glass.\nThe World Barista Championships have been arranged annually since 2000, and during the course of the competition, the competing barista must produce\u2014for four sensory judges\u2014among other drinks four cappuccinos, defined in WBC Rules and Regulations as \"[...] a coffee and milk beverage that should produce a harmonious balance of rich, sweet milk and espresso [...] The cappuccino is prepared with one (1) single shot of espresso, textured milk and foam (\"textured milk\" is milk that has been aerated to its proper foam level). A minimum of 1 centimeter of foam depth [...] A cappuccino is a beverage between 150\u00a0ml and 180\u00a0ml in total volume [...].\"\nEtymology.\n comes from Latin , later borrowed in German/Austrian and modified into . It is the diminutive form of in Italian, meaning 'hood' or something that covers the head, thus literally means 'small capuchin'.\nThe coffee beverage has its name not from the \"hood\" but from the \"color\" of the hooded robes worn by friars and nuns of the Capuchin order. This color is quite distinctive, and \"capuchin\" was a common description of the color of red-brown in 17th-century Europe. The Capuchin friars chose the particular design of their orders' robes both in color and shape of the hood back in the 16th century, inspired by Francis of Assisi's preserved 13th-century vestments. The long and pointed hood was characteristic and soon gave the brothers the nickname \"capuchins\" (hood-wearing). It was, however, the choice of red-brown as the order's vestment color that, as early as the 17th century, saw \"capuchin\" used also as a term for a specific color. While Francis of Assisi used uncolored and unbleached wool for his robes, the Capuchins colored their vestments to differ from Augustinians, Benedictines, Franciscans, and other orders.\nThe word , in its Italian form, appears in Italian writings in the 19th century and is described as \"black coffee with a few drops of milk or cream which give it the color the tunic of the Capuchins, from which it takes its name\".\nHistory and evolution.\nThe consumption of coffee in Europe was initially based on the traditional Ottoman preparation of the drink, by bringing to boil the mixture of coffee and water together, sometimes adding sugar. The British seem to have already started filtering and steeping coffee in the second half of the 18th century.\nAdding milk to coffee was already mentioned by Europeans in the 1700s.\n showed up in coffee house menus all over the Habsburg monarchy around the late 1700s.\n took its name from the color of coffee with a few drops of cream, so nicknamed because the Capuchin friars in Vienna and elsewhere wore vestments of this color. Another popular coffee was , with more cream, referring to the somewhat lighter brown of the tunics of the Franciscan order. coffee spread throughout Central Europe, including the Italian-speaking parts of the Habsburg monarchy. The main port of the empire, the city of Trieste, already had many Viennese coffee houses. According to a popular but unverified legend, cappuccino was named after the Italian Capuchin friar Marco d'Aviano, who contributed to the victory of the Battle of Vienna.\nThe use of fresh milk in coffee in caf\u00e9s and restaurants is a newer phenomenon (from the 20th century), introduced when refrigeration became common. The use of full cream is known much further back in time (but not in the use as whipped cream [chantilly]), as this was a product more easily stored and frequently used also in cooking and baking. Thus, a was prepared with a very small amount of cream to get the capuchin color. Today, is still served in Viennese traditional caf\u00e9s, comprising still black coffee with only a few drops of cream (in some establishments developed into a dollop of whipped cream), or frothed milk instead of cream.\n as written today (in Italian) is first mentioned in the 19th century and is described as \"black coffee with a few drops of milk or cream\". The modern Italian cappuccino evolved and developed in the following decades: the steamed milk on top is a later addition, and in the US a slight misunderstanding has led to the naming of this \"cap\" of milk foam \"monk's head\", although it originally had nothing to do with the name of the beverage.\nEspresso machines were introduced at the beginning of the 20th century.\nBy the end of the World War II, Italians launched the \"age of crema\" as the new coffee machines could create a higher pressure, leading to a finer grind and the now classic crema.\nIn the United Kingdom, espresso coffee initially gained popularity in the form of cappuccino, influenced by the British custom of drinking coffee with milk, the desire for a longer drink to preserve the caf\u00e9 as a destination, and the exotic texture of the beverage.\nIn the United States, cappuccino spread alongside espresso in Italian American neighborhoods, such as Boston's North End, New York's Little Italy, and San Francisco's North Beach. New York City's Caffe Reggio (founded in 1927) claims to have introduced cappuccino to the United States, while San Francisco's Caffe Trieste (founded in 1956) claims to have introduced it to the west coast; the earlier Tosca Cafe in San Francisco (founded in 1919) served a \"cappuccino\" earlier, but this was without coffee, and instead consisted of chocolate, steamed milk, and brandy.\nPopularity.\nIn Italy and throughout continental Europe, cappuccino is traditionally consumed in the morning, usually as part of breakfast, often with some type of pastry. Italians generally do not drink cappuccino with meals other than breakfast, although they often drink espresso after lunch or dinner. In Italy, cappuccino is usually consumed up to 11:00am, since cappuccinos are milk-based and considered too heavy to drink later in the day. Instead, espresso is usually ordered after a meal due to the belief that the lack of milk aids in digestion. In North America, cappuccinos have become popular concurrent with the boom in the American coffee industry through the late 1990s and early 2000s, especially in the urban Pacific Northwest. In South Korea, espresso and its variants (cappuccino, latte, and \"caff\u00e8 mocha\") became popular in 2000.\nCappuccino is traditionally served in cups. By the start of the 21st century, a modified \"short-cut\" version was being served by fast-food chains in servings up to .\nPreparation.\nTraditional.\nAlthough size is what varies most among cappuccinos served in different regions, the traditional way of preparing cappuccino is to add equal proportions of the ingredients: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 espresso, &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 steamed milk and &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u20443 milk foam. The drink may often be topped with a dusting of chocolate or cocoa powder. Instead of pouring the steamed milk and then adding the foam, some baristas may instead prepare an extra foamy milk with the steam wand and then pour in this mixture of hot milk and foam as one, as this saves time compared to separately pouring the hot milk and then layering on the foam.\n\"Freddo cappuccino\".\nIn Greece and Cyprus, a cold cappuccino is widespread known as \"freddo cappuccino\", as opposed to \"cappuccino freddo\". Despite its Italian name, the drink both tastes and is prepared differently from its Italian counterpart, and is uncommon outside of Greece. \"Freddo cappuccino\" is topped with a cold milk-based foam known as \"afr\u00f3gala\" (Greek: ), which is created by blending cold milk using an electric frother. These frothers are commonplace in Greek coffee shops due to their usage during the preparation of frapp\u00e9 coffee. The foam is then added to espresso poured over ice.\nAlong with the \"freddo espresso\", they were conceived in Greece in 1991 and are in higher demand during summer. Outside Greece and Cyprus, \"freddo cappuccino\" or \"cappuccino freddo\" is mostly found in coffee shops and delis catering to the Greek expat community. In 2017, Starbucks added \"cappuccino freddo\" to branch menus in Europe.\nSimilar drinks.\nOther milk and espresso drinks similar to the cappuccino include:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36960", "revid": "37850770", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36960", "title": "Kenneth Williams", "text": "British actor and comedian (1926\u20131988)\nKenneth Charles Williams (22 February 1926\u00a0\u2013 15 April 1988) was a British actor and comedian. He was best known for his comedy roles and in later life as a raconteur and diarist. He was one of the main ensemble in 26 of the 31 \"Carry On\" films, and appeared in many British television programmes and radio comedies, including series with Tony Hancock and Kenneth Horne, as well as being a frequent panellist on BBC Radio 4's comedy panel show \"Just a Minute\" from its second series in 1968 until his death 20 years later.\nWilliams grew up in Central London in a working-class family; he said his father spoke Cockney. He served in the Royal Engineers during World War II, where he first became interested in becoming an entertainer. After a short spell in repertory theatre as a serious actor, he turned to comedy and achieved national fame in \"Hancock's Half Hour\". He sustained continued success throughout the 1960s and 1970s with his regular appearances in \"Carry On\" films, and subsequently kept himself in the public eye with chat shows and other television work.\nWilliams was fondly regarded in the entertainment industry; in his private life, however, he suffered from depression. He kept a series of diaries throughout his life that achieved posthumous acclaim.\nEarly life and education.\nKenneth Charles Williams was born on 22 February 1926 in Bingfield Street, King's Cross, London. His parents were Charles George Williams, who managed a hairdresser's in the Kings Cross area, and Louisa Alexandra (\"n\u00e9e\" Morgan), who worked in the salon. Charles was a Methodist who had \"a hatred of loose morals and effeminacy\", according to Barry Took, Williams's biographer. Charles thought the theatre immoral and effeminate, although his son aspired to be involved in the profession from an early age. Between 1935 and 1956, Williams lived with his parents in a flat above his father's barber shop at 57 Marchmont Street, Bloomsbury. Williams had a half-sister, Alice Patricia \"Pat\", born to his mother in 1923 before she had met Charles and three years before Kenneth was born.\nHe was educated at The Lyulph Stanley Boys' Central Council School, a state-owned Central school, in Camden Town, North London, and subsequently became apprenticed as a draughtsman to a mapmaker. His apprenticeship was interrupted by the Blitz, and he was evacuated to the home of a bachelor veterinary surgeon in Bicester, Oxfordshire. It provided his first experience of an educated, middle-class life. He returned to London with a new, vowel-elongated accent. In 1944, aged 18, he was called up to the British Army. He became a sapper in the Royal Engineers Survey Section, doing much the same work that he did as a civilian. When the war ended he was in Ceylon and he opted to transfer to the Combined Services Entertainment Unit, which put on revue shows. While in that unit he met Stanley Baxter, Peter Vaughan, Peter Nichols and John Schlesinger.\nBoth of Williams' parents were born in London, but with a Welsh heritage extending for several generations. Williams sometimes described himself as Welsh, noting his parents' surnames and origins in his diaries and in interviews.108: In 1968, during the filming of \"Carry On Up the Khyber\" in Snowdonia National Park, Williams stated that \"I always like being back in Wales. I always feel a \"hiraeth\", it always comes back to you, once you step back into the place where you have atavistic memories.\" A year later, Williams would describe a debate in Ireland when he was told he had some nerve showing his \"English face in Dublin\". Williams dramatically responded with a \"very slow take and riposted 'Wanna get your facts right, dear, I'm Welsh'\" before rising to his feet and reciting \"The Bard. A Pindaric Ode\" by Thomas Gray. Williams noted that this performance was cut short by applause, for which he was grateful as he did not know any more of the poem. Two years before his death, Williams guest hosted the \"Wogan\" chatshow; drawing the audience's attention to a display of red roses, Williams commented, \"It's St George's Day today and the rose is the symbol of St George, the patron saint of England. I wouldn't know anything about it. I'm not English, I'm Welsh.\" before proclaiming \"Mymryn bach o Gymru, Cymru fydd, Cymru sydd \u2013 Cymru am byth!\" (\"A little bit of Wales, Wales will be, Wales is \u2013 Wales forever!\")\nCareer.\nEarly career.\nWilliams's professional career began in 1948 in repertory theatre. Failure to become a serious dramatic actor disappointed him, but his potential as a comic performer gave him his break when he was spotted playing the Dauphin in Bernard Shaw's \"St Joan\" in the West End, in 1954 by radio producer Dennis Main Wilson. Main Wilson was casting \"Hancock's Half Hour\", a radio series starring Tony Hancock. Playing mostly funny voice roles, Williams stayed in the series almost to the end, five years later. His nasal, whiny, camp-cockney inflections (epitomised in his \"Stop messing about\u00a0... !\" catchphrase) became popular with listeners. Despite the success and recognition the show brought him, Williams considered theatre, film and television to be superior forms of entertainment. In 1955 he appeared in Orson Welles's London stage production \"Moby Dick\u2014Rehearsed\". The pair fell out after Williams became annoyed with Welles's habit of repeatedly changing the script.\nWhen Hancock steered his show away from what he considered gimmicks and silly voices, Williams found he had less to do. Tiring of this reduced status, he joined Kenneth Horne in \"Beyond Our Ken\" (1958\u20131964), and its sequel, \"Round the Horne\" (1965\u20131968). His roles in \"Round the Horne\" included Rambling Syd Rumpo, the eccentric folk singer; Dr Chou En Ginsberg, MA (failed), Oriental criminal mastermind; J. Peasemold Gruntfuttock, telephone heavy breather and dirty old man; and Sandy of the camp couple Julian and Sandy (Julian was played by Hugh Paddick). Their double act was characterised by double entendres and Polari, the homosexual argot.\nWilliams also appeared in West End revues including \"Share My Lettuce\" with Maggie Smith, written by Bamber Gascoigne, and \"Pieces of Eight\" with Fenella Fielding. The latter included material specially written for him by Peter Cook, then a student at Pembroke College, Cambridge. Cook's \"One Leg Too Few\" and \"Interesting Facts\" were part of the show and became routines in his own performances. Williams's last revue, in 1961, was \"One Over The Eight\" at the Duke of York's Theatre, with Sheila Hancock.\n\"Carry On\" films.\nWilliams worked regularly in British film during the late 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, mainly in the \"Carry On\" series (1958\u20131978) with its double entendre humour; and appeared in the series more than any other actor. The films were commercially successful but Williams claimed the cast were poorly paid. In his diaries, Williams wrote that he earned more in a St Ivel advert than for any \"Carry On\" film, although he was still earning the average Briton's annual salary in a year for the latter. He often privately criticised and \"dripped vitriol\" upon the films, considering them beneath him, even though he continued to appear in them. This became the case with many of the films and shows in which he appeared. He was quick to find fault with his own work, and also that of others. Despite this, he spoke fondly of the \"Carry On\"s in interviews. Peter Rogers, producer of the series, recollected, \"Kenneth was worth taking care of because, while he cost very little\u2014\u00a35,000 a film, he made a great deal of money for the franchise.\"\nRadio and television shows.\nWilliams was a regular on the BBC Radio impromptu-speaking panel game \"Just a Minute\" from its second series in 1968 until his death. He frequently got into arguments with host Nicholas Parsons and other guests on the show. (Russell Davies, editor of \"The Kenneth Williams Letters\", explains that Williams's \"famous tirades on the programme occurred when his desire to entertain was fuelled by his annoyance.\") He was also remembered for such phrases as \"I've come all the way from Great Portland Street\" (i.e. one block away) and \"They shouldn't have women on the show!\" (directed at Sheila Hancock, Aimi MacDonald and others). He once talked for almost a minute about a supposed Austrian psychiatrist called Heinrich Swartzberg, correctly guessing that the show's creator, Ian Messiter, had just made the name up. Williams was also a regular on the BBC Radio comedy show \"Round the Horne,\" playing, alongside Hugh Paddick, the characters Julian and Sandy who spoke in a comedic version of Polari.\nOn television, he co-hosted his own TV variety series on BBC2 with the Young Generation entitled \"Meanwhile, On BBC2\", which ran for ten episodes from 17 April 1971. He was a frequent contributor to the 1973\u201374 revival of \"What's My Line?\", hosted the weekly entertainment show \"International Cabaret\" and was a regular reader on the children's storytelling series \"Jackanory\" on BBC1, hosting 69 episodes. He also narrated and provided all of the voices for the BBC children's cartoon \"Willo the Wisp\" (1981).\nIn 1983, Williams was the subject of an episode of the BBC series \"Comic Roots\", in which he revisited the places in London where he grew up and went to school.\nPersonal life and death.\nOn 14 October 1962, Williams' father, Charlie Williams, was taken to hospital after drinking carbon tetrachloride that had been stored in a cough-mixture bottle. He died the following day. An hour after being given the news, Williams went on stage in the West End. Williams was later denied a visa to the United States when it emerged that Scotland Yard had suspected him of poisoning his father. The coroner's court recorded a verdict of accidental death due to corrosive poisoning by carbon tetrachloride. Williams said he believed his father had committed suicide, because the circumstances leading to the poisoning seemed unlikely to have happened by misfortune.\nAs a younger man, Williams was a communist, but came to move in a more conservative direction and espoused Toryism.\nWilliams often said that he was asexual and celibate, and his diaries appear to substantiate his claims\u2014at least from his early forties onwards. He lived alone all his adult life and had few close companions apart from his mother, and no significant romantic relationships. His diaries contain references to unconsummated or barely consummated homosexual dalliances, which he describes as \"traditional matters\" or \"tradiola\". He befriended gay playwright Joe Orton, who wrote the role of Inspector Truscott in \"Loot\" (1965) for him. Williams went on holidays to Morocco with Orton and his partner, Kenneth Halliwell. Other close friends included Stanley Baxter, Gordon Jackson and his wife Rona Anderson, Sheila Hancock, and Maggie Smith and her playwright husband, Beverley Cross. Williams was also fond of fellow \"Carry On\" regulars Barbara Windsor, Bernard Bresslaw, Peter Butterworth, Kenneth Connor, Hattie Jacques and Joan Sims.\nFrom the mid-1950s, Williams lived in a succession of small rented flats in central London. After his father had died, his mother Louisa lived near him, and then in the flat next to his. His last home was in a block of flats called Marlborough House on Osnaburgh Street in Bloomsbury (since demolished).\nWilliams rarely revealed details of his private life, although, in two half-hour documentary programmes in 1977 on BBC Radio London entitled \"Carry On Kenneth\", he spoke openly to Owen Spencer-Thomas about his loneliness, despondency and sense of underachievement.\nHe died on 15 April 1988 in his flat. His last words, recorded in his diary, were \"Oh, what's the bloody point?\" and the cause of death was an overdose of barbiturates. An inquest recorded an open verdict, because it was not possible to establish whether his death was suicide or an accident. His diaries reveal that he had often had suicidal thoughts, and some of his earliest diaries record periodic feelings that there was no point in living. His authorised biography argues that Williams did not take his own life but died of an accidental overdose. He had doubled his dosage of antacid without discussing it with his doctor. That, combined with the mixture of medication, is the widely accepted cause of death. He had a stock of painkilling tablets and it is argued that he would have taken more of them if he had been intending suicide. He was cremated at East Finchley Cemetery, and his ashes were scattered in the memorial gardens. Williams left an estate worth just under \u00a3540,000 (approximately ).\nLegacy.\nDiaries and biographies.\nIn April 2008 Radio 4 broadcast the two-part \"The Pain of Laughter: The Last Days of Kenneth Williams\". The programmes were researched and written by Wes Butters and narrated by Rob Brydon. Butters purchased a collection of Williams's personal belongings from the actor's godson, Robert Chidell, to whom they had been bequeathed.\nThe first of the programmes said that, towards the end of his life and struggling with depression and ill health, Williams abandoned Christianity following discussions with the poet Philip Larkin. Williams had been brought up as a Methodist in the Wesleyan Methodist Church (which united with the Primitive Methodist Church and the United Methodist Church in 1932 to form the Methodist Church of Great Britain), though he spent much of his life struggling with Christianity's teachings on homosexuality.\n\"Kenneth Williams Unseen\" by Wes Butters and Russell Davies, the first Williams biography in 15 years, was published by HarperCollins in October 2008.\nAn authorised biography, \"Born Brilliant: The Life of Kenneth Williams\", by Christopher Stevens, was published in October 2010. This drew for the first time on the full Williams archive of diaries and letters, which had been stored in a London bank for 15 years following publication of edited extracts. The biography notes that Williams used a variety of handwriting styles and colours in his journals, switching between different hands on the page.\nSeptember 2025 saw the publication of \"Beyond Our Kenneth\", a work of imagination continuing Kenneth Williams' diaries as if he had not died in 1988.\nPortrayals.\nDavid Benson's 1996 Edinburgh Fringe show \"Think No Evil of Us: My Life with Kenneth Williams\" saw Benson playing Williams; after touring, the show ran in London's West End. Benson reprised his performance at the 2006 Edinburgh Fringe and continues to tour.\nWilliams was played by Adam Godley in Terry Johnson's play \"Cleo, Camping, Emmanuelle and Dick\", which premiered at the National Theatre in 1998. Godley reprised the role in the subsequent film adaptation, \"Cor, Blimey!\"\nIn 2006, Williams' life was the subject of the television play \"\" Michael Sheen portrayed Williams.\nRecognition.\nA flat in the Osnaburgh Street block in which Williams lived from 1972 until his death was bought by Rob Brydon and Julia Davis for the writing of their comedy series \"Human Remains\". The building was demolished in 2007.\nWilliams is commemorated by a blue plaque at the address of his father's barber shop, 57 Marchmont Street, London, where he lived from 1935 to 1956. The plaque was unveiled on 11 October 2009 by Leslie Phillips, Bill Pertwee and Nicholas Parsons, with whom Williams performed.\nOn 22 February 2014, on what would have been Williams' 88th birthday, an English Heritage blue plaque was unveiled at Farley Court off Marylebone Road, where Williams lived between 1963 and 1970. Speaking at the ceremony, his \"Carry On\" co-star Barbara Windsor said: \"Kenny was a one-off, a true original\".\nPerformances.\nStage.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe Newquay Repertory Players (1948)\nin order of performance:\nThe Dolphin Players (1948)\nin order of performance:\nOther plays:\nRadio.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nFilms.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nTelevision.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nRecordings.\nThere are also several recordings of \"Round the Horne\" and \"Just a Minute\" that include Williams.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36961", "revid": "50676467", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36961", "title": "Pion", "text": "Subatomic particle; lightest meson\n&lt;/math&gt;\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt; \n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n &lt;templatestyles src=\"Plainlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn particle physics, a pion (, ) or pi meson, denoted with the Greek letter pi (), is any of three subatomic particles: , , and . Each pion consists of a quark and an antiquark and is therefore a meson. Pions are the lightest mesons and, more generally, the lightest hadrons. They are unstable, with the charged pions and decaying after a mean lifetime of 26.033\u00a0nanoseconds (\u00a0seconds), and the neutral pion decaying after a much shorter lifetime of 85\u00a0attoseconds (\u00a0seconds). Charged pions most often decay into muons and muon neutrinos, while neutral pions generally decay into gamma rays.\nThe exchange of virtual pions, along with vector, rho and omega mesons, provides an explanation for the residual strong force between nucleons. Pions are not produced in radioactive decay, but commonly are in high-energy collisions between hadrons. Pions also result from some matter\u2013antimatter annihilation events. All types of pions are also produced in natural processes when high-energy cosmic-ray protons and other hadronic cosmic-ray components interact with matter in Earth's atmosphere. In 2013, the detection of characteristic gamma rays originating from the decay of neutral pions in two supernova remnants has shown that pions are produced copiously after supernovas, most probably in conjunction with production of high-energy protons that are detected on Earth as cosmic rays.\nThe pion also plays a crucial role in cosmology, by imposing an upper limit on the energies of cosmic rays surviving collisions with the cosmic microwave background, through the Greisen\u2013Zatsepin\u2013Kuzmin limit.\nHistory.\nTheoretical work by Hideki Yukawa in 1935 had predicted the existence of mesons as the carrier particles of the strong nuclear force. From the range of the strong nuclear force (inferred from the radius of the atomic nucleus), Yukawa predicted the existence of a particle having a mass of about . Initially after its discovery in 1936, the muon (initially called the \"mu meson\") was thought to be this particle, since it has a mass of . However, later experiments showed that the muon did not participate in the strong nuclear interaction. In modern terminology, this makes the muon a lepton, and not a meson. However, some communities of astrophysicists continue to call the muon a \"mu-meson\". The pions, which turned out to be examples of Yukawa's proposed mesons, were discovered later: the charged pions in 1947, and the neutral pion in 1950.\nIn 1947, the first true mesons, the charged pions, were found by the collaboration led by Cecil Powell at the University of Bristol, in England. The discovery article had four authors: C\u00e9sar Lattes, Giuseppe Occhialini, Hugh Muirhead and Powell. Since the advent of particle accelerators had not yet come, high-energy subatomic particles were only obtainable from atmospheric cosmic rays. Photographic emulsions based on the gelatin-silver process were placed for long periods of time in sites located at high-altitude mountains, first at Pic du Midi de Bigorre in the Pyrenees, and later at Chacaltaya in the Andes Mountains, where the plates were struck by cosmic rays.\nAfter development, the photographic plates were inspected under a microscope by a team of about a dozen women. Marietta Kurz was the first person to detect the unusual \"double meson\" tracks, characteristic for a pion decaying into a muon, but they were too close to the edge of the photographic emulsion and deemed incomplete. A few days later, Irene Roberts observed the tracks left by pion decay that appeared in the discovery paper. Both women are credited in the figure captions in the article.\nIn 1948, Lattes, Eugene Gardner, and their team first artificially produced pions at the University of California's cyclotron in Berkeley, California, by bombarding carbon atoms with high-speed alpha particles. Further advanced theoretical work was carried out by Riazuddin, who in 1959 used the dispersion relation for Compton scattering of virtual photons on pions to analyze their charge radius.\nSince the neutral pion is not electrically charged, it is more difficult to detect and observe than the charged pions are. Neutral pions do not leave tracks in photographic emulsions or Wilson cloud chambers. The existence of the neutral pion was inferred from observing its decay products from cosmic rays, a so-called \"soft component\" of slow electrons with photons. The was identified definitively at the University of California's cyclotron in 1949 by observing its decay into two photons. Later in the same year, they were also observed in cosmic-ray balloon experiments at Bristol University.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nPossible applications.\nThe use of pions in medical radiation therapy, such as for cancer, was explored at a number of research institutions, including the Los Alamos National Laboratory's Meson Physics Facility, which treated 228\u00a0patients between 1974 and 1981 in New Mexico, and the TRIUMF laboratory in Vancouver, British Columbia.\nTheoretical overview.\nIn the standard understanding of the strong force interaction as defined by quantum chromodynamics, pions are loosely portrayed as Goldstone bosons of spontaneously broken chiral symmetry. That explains why the masses of the three kinds of pions are considerably less than that of the other mesons, such as the scalar or vector mesons. If their current quarks were massless particles, it could make the chiral symmetry exact and thus the Goldstone theorem would dictate that all pions have a zero mass.\nIn fact, it was shown by Gell-Mann, Oakes and Renner (GMOR) that the square of the pion mass is proportional to the sum of the quark masses times the quark condensate: \nformula_1 \nwith B the quark condensate: \nformula_2 \nThis is often known as the GMOR relation and it explicitly shows that formula_3 in the massless quark limit. The same result also follows from light-front holography.\nEmpirically, since the light quarks actually have minuscule nonzero masses, the pions also have nonzero rest masses. However, those masses are \"almost an order of magnitude smaller\" than that of the nucleons, roughly formula_4 45\u00a0MeV, where \"m\"q are the relevant current quark masses, around .\nThe pion is one of the particles that mediate the residual strong interaction between a pair of nucleons. This interaction is attractive: it pulls the nucleons together. Written in a non-relativistic form, it is called the Yukawa potential. The pion, being spinless, has kinematics described by the Klein\u2013Gordon equation. In the terms of quantum field theory, the effective field theory Lagrangian describing the pion-nucleon interaction is called the Yukawa interaction.\nThe nearly identical masses of and indicate that there must be a symmetry at play: this symmetry is called the SU(2) flavour symmetry or isospin. The reason that there are three pions, , and , is that these are understood to belong to the triplet representation or the adjoint representation 3 of SU(2). By contrast, the up and down quarks transform according to the fundamental representation 2 of SU(2), whereas the anti-quarks transform according to the conjugate representation 2*.\nWith the addition of the strange quark, the pions participate in a larger, SU(3), flavour symmetry, in the adjoint representation, 8, of SU(3). The other members of this octet are the four kaons and the eta meson.\nPions are pseudoscalars under a parity transformation. Pion currents thus couple to the axial vector current and so participate in the chiral anomaly.\nBasic properties.\nPions, which are mesons with zero spin, are composed of first-generation quarks. In the quark model, an up quark and an anti-down quark make up a , whereas a down quark and an anti-up quark make up the , and these are the antiparticles of one another. The neutral pion is a combination of an up quark with an anti-up quark, or a down quark with an anti-down quark. The two combinations have identical quantum numbers, and hence they are only found in superpositions. The lowest-energy superposition of these is the , which is its own antiparticle. Together, the pions form a triplet of isospin. Each pion has overall isospin (\"I\" \n 1) and third-component isospin equal to its charge (\"I\"z \n +1, 0, \u22121).\nCharged pion decays.\nThe mesons have a mass of and a mean lifetime of . They decay due to the weak interaction. The primary decay mode of a pion, with a branching fraction of 0.999877, is a leptonic decay into a muon and a muon neutrino:\nformula_5\nThe second most common decay mode of a pion, with a branching fraction of 0.000123, is also a leptonic decay into an electron and the corresponding electron antineutrino. This \"electronic mode\" was discovered at CERN in 1958:\nformula_6\nThe suppression of the electronic decay mode with respect to the muonic one is given approximately (up to a few percent effect of the radiative corrections) by the ratio of the half-widths of the pion\u2013electron and the pion\u2013muon decay reactions,\nformula_7\nand is a spin effect known as helicity suppression.\nIts mechanism is as follows: The negative pion has spin zero; therefore the lepton and the antineutrino must be emitted with opposite spins (and opposite linear momenta) to preserve net zero spin (and conserve linear momentum). However, because the weak interaction is sensitive only to the left chirality component of fields, the antineutrino has always left chirality, which means it is right-handed, since for massless anti-particles the helicity is opposite to the chirality. This implies that the lepton must be emitted with spin in the direction of its linear momentum (i.e., also right-handed). If, however, leptons were massless, they would only interact with the pion in the left-handed form (because for massless particles helicity is the same as chirality) and this decay mode would be prohibited. Therefore, suppression of the electron decay channel comes from the fact that the electron's mass is much smaller than the muon's. The electron is relatively massless compared with the muon, and thus the electronic mode is greatly suppressed relative to the muonic one, virtually prohibited.\nAlthough this explanation suggests that parity violation is causing the helicity suppression, the fundamental reason lies in the vector-nature of the interaction which dictates a different handedness for the neutrino and the charged lepton. Thus, even a parity conserving interaction would yield the same suppression.\nMeasurements of the above ratio have been considered for decades to be a test of lepton universality. Experimentally, this ratio is .\nBeyond the purely leptonic decays of pions, some structure-dependent radiative leptonic decays (that is, decay to the usual leptons plus a gamma ray) have also been observed.\nAlso observed, for charged pions only, is the very rare \"pion beta decay\" (with branching fraction of about 10\u22128) into a neutral pion, an electron and an electron antineutrino (or for positive pions, a neutral pion, a positron, and electron neutrino).\nformula_8\nThe rate at which pions decay is a prominent quantity in many sub-fields of particle physics, such as chiral perturbation theory. This rate is parametrized by the pion decay constant (\"f\"\u03c0), related to the wave function overlap of the quark and antiquark, which is about .\nNeutral pion decays.\nThe meson has a mass of and a mean lifetime of . It decays via the electromagnetic force, which explains why its mean lifetime is much smaller than that of the charged pion (which can only decay via the weak force). \nThe dominant decay mode, with a branching ratio of BR\u03b3\u03b3 = 0.98823, is into two photons:\nformula_9\nThe decay (as well as decays into any odd number of photons) is forbidden by the C-symmetry of the electromagnetic interaction: The intrinsic C-parity of the is +1, while the C-parity of a system of n photons is (\u22121)\"n\".\nThe second largest decay mode (BR \n 0.01174) is the Dalitz decay (named after Richard Dalitz), which is a two-photon decay with an internal photon conversion resulting in a photon and an electron-positron pair in the final state:\nformula_10\nThe third largest established decay mode () is the double-Dalitz decay, with both photons undergoing internal conversion which leads to further suppression of the rate:\nformula_11\nThe fourth largest established decay mode is the loop-induced and therefore suppressed (and additionally helicity-suppressed) leptonic decay mode (BR = 6.46\u00d710-8):\nformula_12\nThe neutral pion has also been observed to decay into positronium with a branching fraction on the order of 10-9. No other decay modes have been established experimentally. The branching fractions above are the PDG central values, and their uncertainties are omitted, but available in the cited publication.\n[a] &lt;templatestyles src=\"Citation/styles.css\"/&gt;^ The quark composition of the is not exactly divided between up and down quarks, due to complications from non-zero quark masses.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36965", "revid": "43252809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36965", "title": "Embeded computer", "text": ""}
{"id": "36966", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36966", "title": "Testerone", "text": ""}
{"id": "36967", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36967", "title": "Capatalism", "text": ""}
{"id": "36968", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36968", "title": "Beef", "text": "Meat from cattle\nBeef is the culinary name for meat from cattle (\"Bos taurus\"). Beef can be prepared in various ways; cuts are often used for steak, which can be cooked to varying degrees of doneness, while trimmings are often ground or minced, as found in most hamburgers. Beef contains protein, iron, and vitamin B12. Along with other kinds of red meat, high consumption is associated with an increased risk of colorectal cancer and cardiovascular disease, especially when processed. Beef has a high environmental impact, being a primary driver of deforestation with the highest greenhouse gas emissions of any agricultural product.\nIn prehistoric times, humans hunted aurochs and later domesticated them. Since that time, numerous breeds of cattle have been bred specifically for the quality or quantity of their meat. Today, beef is the third most widely consumed meat in the world, after pork and poultry. As of 2018, the United States, Brazil, and China were the largest producers of beef.\nSome religions and cultures prohibit beef consumption, especially Indian religions like Hinduism. Buddhists are also against animal slaughtering, but they do not have a wrongful eating doctrine.\nEtymology.\nThe word \"beef\" is from the Latin word \"b\u014ds\", in contrast to \"cow\" which is from Middle English \"cou\" (both words have the same Indo-European root ). \nThis is one example of the common English dichotomy between the words for animals (with largely Germanic origins) and their meat (with Romanic origins) that is also found in such English word-pairs as \"pig/pork\", \"deer/venison\", \"sheep/mutton\", and \"chicken/poultry\" (also the less common \"goat/chevon\"). \"Beef\" is cognate with \"bovine\" through the Late Latin \"bov\u012bnus\". The rarely used plural form of beef is \"beeves\".\nHistory.\nPeople have eaten the flesh of bovines since prehistoric times. The aurochs, the ancestor of modern domestic cattle, is known to have been hunted and consumed by Neanderthals. Some of the earliest known cave paintings, such as those of Lascaux, show aurochs in hunting scenes. People domesticated cattle to provide ready access to beef, milk, and leather. Cattle have been domesticated at least twice over the course of evolutionary history. The first domestication event occurred around 10,500 years ago with the evolution of \"Bos taurus\". The second was more recent, around 7,000 years ago, with the evolution of \"Bos indicus\" in the Indian subcontinent. There is a possible third domestication event 8,500 years ago, with a potential third species \"Bos africanus\" arising in Africa.\nIn the United States, the growth of the beef business was largely due to expansion in the Southwest. Upon the acquisition of grasslands through the Mexican\u2013American War of 1848, and later the expulsion of the Plains Indians from this region and the Midwest, the American livestock industry began, starting primarily with the taming of feral and semi-feral Longhorn cattle. Chicago and New York City were the first to benefit from these developments in their stockyards and in their meat markets.\nProduction.\nBeef cattle are raised and fed using a variety of methods, including feedlots, free range, ranching, backgrounding and intensive animal farming. Concentrated Animal Feeding Operations (CAFOs), commonly referred to as factory farms, are commonly used to meet the demand of beef production. CAFOs supply 70.4% of cows in the US market and 99% of all meat in the United States supply. Cattle CAFOs can also be a source of \"E. coli\" contamination in the food supply due to the prevalence of manure in CAFOs. These \"E. coli\" contaminations include one strain, \"E. coli\" O157:H7, which can be toxic to humans, because cattle typically hold this strain in their digestive system. Another consequence of unsanitary conditions created by high-density confinement systems is increased use of antibiotics in order to prevent illness. An analysis of FDA sales data by the Natural Resources Defense Council found 42% of medically important antibiotic use in the U.S. was on cattle, posing concerns about the development of antibiotic resistant bacteria. In 2023 production was forecast to peak by 2035.\nEnvironmental impact.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Bar chart/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe consumption of beef poses numerous threats to the natural environment. Of all agricultural products, beef requires some of the most land and water, and its production results in the greatest amount of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, air pollution, and water pollution. A 2021 study added up GHG emissions from the entire lifecycle, including production, transportation, and consumption, and estimated that beef contributed about 4 billion tonnes (9%) of anthropogenic greenhouse gases in 2010. Cattle populations graze around 26% of all land on Earth, not including the large agricultural fields that are used to grow cattle feed. According to FAO, \"Ranching-induced deforestation is one of the main causes of loss of some unique plant and animal species in the tropical rainforests of Central and South America as well as carbon release in the atmosphere.\" Beef is also the primary driver of deforestation in the Amazon, with around 80% of all converted land being used to rear cattle. 91% of Amazon land deforested since 1970 has been converted to cattle ranching. 41% of global deforestation from 2005 to 2013 has been attributed to the expansion of beef production. This is due to the higher ratio of net energy of gain to net energy of maintenance where metabolizable energy intake is higher. The ratio of feed required to produce an equivalent amount of beef (live weight) has been estimated at 7:1 to 43:1, compared with about 2:1 for chicken. However, assumptions about feed quality are implicit in such generalizations. For example, production of a kilogram of beef cattle live weight may require between 4 and 5 kilograms of feed high in protein and metabolizable energy content, or more than 20 kilograms of feed of much lower quality. A simple exchange of beef to soy beans (a common feed source for cattle) in Americans' diets would, according to one estimate, result in meeting between 46 and 74 percent of the reductions needed to meet the 2020 greenhouse gas emission goals of the United States as pledged in 2009. A 2021 CSIRO trial concluded that feeding cattle a 3% diet of the seaweed \"Asparagopsis taxiformis\" could reduce the methane component of their emissions by 80%. While such feed options are still experimental, even when looking at the most widely used feeds around the globe, there is high variability in efficiency. One study found that shifting compositions of current feeds, production areas, and informed land restoration could enable greenhouse gas emissions reductions of 34\u201385% annually (612\u20131,506\u2009MtCO2e\u2009yr\u22121) without increasing costs to global beef production.\nSome scientists claim that the demand for beef is contributing to significant biodiversity loss as it is a significant driver of deforestation and habitat destruction; species-rich habitats, such as significant portions of the Amazon region, are being converted to agriculture for meat production. The 2019 IPBES \"Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services\" also concurs that the beef industry plays a significant role in biodiversity loss. Around 25% to nearly 40% of global land surface is being used for livestock farming, which is mostly cattle.\nCertifications.\nSome kinds of beef may receive special certifications or designations based on criteria including their breed (Certified Angus Beef, Certified Hereford Beef), origin (Kobe beef, Carne de \u00c1vila, Belgian Blue), or the way the cattle are treated, fed or slaughtered (organic, grass-fed, Kosher, or Halal beef). Some countries regulate the marketing and sale of beef by observing criteria post-slaughter and classifying the observed quality of the meat.\nGlobal statistics.\nIn 2018, the United States, Brazil, and China produced the most beef with 12.22 million tons, 9.9 million tons, and 6.46 million tons respectively. The top 3 beef exporting countries in 2019 were Australia (14.8% of total exports), the United States (13.4% of total exports), and Brazil (12.6% of total exports). Beef production is also important to the economies of Japan, Argentina, Uruguay, Canada, Paraguay, Mexico, Belarus and Nicaragua.\nTop 5 cattle and beef exporting countries.\nAs per 2020, Brazil was the largest beef exporter in the world followed by Australia, United States, India (Includes Carabeef only) and Argentina. Brazil, Australia, the United States and India accounted for roughly 61% of the world's beef exports.\nTop 10 cattle and beef producing countries.\nThe world produced 60.57 million metric tons of beef in 2020, down 950K metric tons from the prior year. Major decline for production of beef was from India up to 510k and Australia down to 309K metric tons from the prior year.\nPreparation.\nCuts.\nMost beef can be used as is by merely cutting into certain parts, such as roasts, short ribs or steak (filet mignon, sirloin steak, rump steak, rib steak, rib eye steak, hanger steak, and others), while other cuts are processed (corned beef or beef jerky). Trimmings, on the other hand, which are usually mixed with meat from older, leaner (therefore tougher) cattle, are ground, minced or used in sausages. The blood is used in some varieties called blood sausage. Other parts that are eaten include other muscles and offal, such as the oxtail, liver, tongue, tripe from the reticulum or rumen, glands (particularly the pancreas and thymus, referred to as sweetbread), the heart, the brain (although forbidden where there is a danger of bovine spongiform encephalopathy, BSE, commonly referred to as mad cow disease), the kidneys, and the tender testicles of the bull (known in the United States as \"calf fries\", \"prairie oysters\", or \"Rocky Mountain oysters\"). Some intestines are cooked and eaten as is, but are more often cleaned and used as natural sausage casings. The bones are used for making beef stock. Meat from younger cows (calves) is called veal. Beef from steers and heifers is similar.\nBeef is first divided into primal cuts, large pieces of the animal initially separated by butchering. These are basic sections from which steaks and other subdivisions are cut. The term \"primal cut\" is quite different from \"prime cut\", used to characterize cuts considered to be of higher quality. Since the animal's legs and neck muscles do the most work, they are the toughest; the meat becomes more tender as distance from \"hoof and horn\" increases. Different countries and cuisines have different cuts and names, and sometimes use the same name for a different cut; for example, the cut described as \"brisket\" in the United States is from a significantly different part of the carcass than British brisket.\nAging and tenderization.\nTo improve tenderness of beef, it is often aged (i.e., stored refrigerated) to allow endogenous proteolytic enzymes to weaken structural and myofibrillar proteins. Wet aging is accomplished using vacuum packaging to reduce spoilage and yield loss. Dry aging involves hanging primals (usually ribs or loins) in humidity-controlled coolers. Outer surfaces dry out and can support growth of molds (and spoilage bacteria, if too humid), resulting in trim and evaporative losses.\nEvaporation concentrates the remaining proteins and increases flavor intensity; the molds can contribute a nut-like flavor. After two to three days there are significant effects. The majority of the tenderizing effect occurs in the first 10 days. Boxed beef, stored and distributed in vacuum packaging, is, in effect, wet aged during distribution. Premium steakhouses dry age for 21 to 28 days or wet age up to 45 days for maximum effect on flavor and tenderness.\nMeat from less tender cuts or older cattle can be mechanically tenderized by forcing small, sharp blades through the cuts to disrupt the proteins. Also, solutions of exogenous proteolytic enzymes (papain, bromelin or ficin) can be applied or injected to augment the endogenous enzymes; this can be done with purified enzyme or by using a marinade including ingredients that naturally contain the enzyme (e.g. papaya for papain or pineapple for bromelin). Similarly, solutions of salt and sodium phosphates can be injected to soften and swell the myofibrillar proteins. This improves juiciness and tenderness. Salt can improve the flavor, but phosphate can contribute a soapy flavor.\nCooking methods.\nThese methods are applicable to all types of meat and some other foodstuffs.\nDry heat.\nInternal temperature.\nBeef can be cooked to various degrees, from very rare to well done. The degree of cooking corresponds to the temperature in the approximate center of the meat, which can be measured with a meat thermometer. Beef can be cooked using the sous-vide method, which cooks the entire steak to the same temperature, but when cooked using a method such as broiling or roasting it is typically cooked such that it has a \"bulls eye\" of doneness, with the least done (coolest) at the center and the most done (warmest) at the outside.\nFrying.\nMeat can be cooked in boiling oil, typically by shallow frying, although deep frying may be used, often for meat enrobed with breadcrumbs as in milanesas or finger steaks. Larger pieces such as steaks may be cooked this way, or meat may be cut smaller as in stir frying, typically an Asian way of cooking: cooking oil with flavorings such as garlic, ginger and onions is put in a very hot wok. Then small pieces of meat are added, followed by ingredients which cook more quickly, such as mixed vegetables. The dish is ready when the ingredients are 'just cooked'.\nMoist heat.\nMoist heat cooking methods include braising, pot roasting, stewing and sous-vide. These techniques are often used for cuts of beef that are tougher, as these longer, lower-temperature cooking methods have time to dissolve connecting tissue which otherwise makes meat remain tough after cooking.\nsimmering meat, whole or cut into bite-size pieces, in a water-based liquid with flavorings. This technique may be used as part of pressure cooking.\ncooking meats, in a covered container, with small amounts of liquids (usually seasoned or flavored). Unlike stewing, braised meat is not fully immersed in liquid, and usually is browned before the oven step.\nSous-vide, French for \"under vacuum\", is a method of cooking food sealed in airtight plastic bags in a water bath for a long time\u201472 hours is not unknown\u2014at an accurately determined temperature much lower than normally used for other types of cooking. The intention is to maintain the integrity of ingredients and achieve very precise control of cooking. Although water is used in the method, only moisture in or added to the food bags is in contact with the food.\nMeat has usually been cooked in water which is just simmering, such as in stewing; higher temperatures make meat tougher by causing the proteins to contract. Since thermostatic temperature control became available, cooking at temperatures well below boiling, (sous-vide) to (slow cooking), for prolonged periods has become possible; this is just hot enough to convert the tough collagen in connective tissue into gelatin through hydrolysis, with minimal toughening.\nWith the adequate combination of temperature and cooking time, pathogens, such as bacteria will be killed, and pasteurization can be achieved. Because browning (Maillard reactions) can only occur at higher temperatures (above the boiling point of water), these moist techniques do not develop the flavors associated with browning. Meat will often undergo searing in a very hot pan, grilling or browning with a torch before moist cooking (though sometimes after).\nThermostatically controlled methods, such as sous-vide, can also prevent overcooking by bringing the meat to the exact degree of doneness desired, and holding it at that temperature indefinitely. The combination of precise temperature control and long cooking duration makes it possible to be assured that pasteurization has been achieved, both on the surface and the interior of even very thick cuts of meat, which can not be assured with most other cooking techniques. (Although extremely long-duration cooking can break down the texture of the meat to an undesirable degree.)\nBeef can be cooked quickly at the table through several techniques. In hot pot cooking, such as shabu-shabu, very thinly sliced meat is cooked by the diners at the table by immersing it in a heated pot of water or stock with vegetables. In fondue bourguignonne, diners dip small pieces of beef into a pot of hot oil at the table. Both techniques typically feature accompanying flavorful sauces to complement the meat.\nRaw beef.\nSteak tartare is a French dish made from finely chopped or ground (minced) raw meat (often beef). More accurately, it is scraped so as not to let even the slightest of the sinew fat get into the scraped meat. It is often served with onions, capers, seasonings such as fresh ground pepper and Worcestershire sauce, and sometimes raw egg yolk.\nThe Belgian or Dutch dish \"filet am\u00e9ricain\" is also made of finely chopped ground beef, though it is seasoned differently, and either eaten as a main dish or can be used as a dressing for a sandwich. \"Kibbeh nayyeh\" is a similar Lebanese and Syrian dish. And in Ethiopia, a ground raw meat dish called \"tire siga\" or \"kitfo\" is eaten (upon availability).\n\"Carpaccio\" of beef is a thin slice of raw beef dressed with olive oil, lemon juice and seasoning. Often, the beef is partially frozen before slicing to allow very thin slices to be cut.\n\"Yukhoe\" is a variety of \"hoe\", raw dishes in Korean cuisine which is usually made from raw ground beef seasoned with various spices or sauces. The beef part used for \"yukhoe\" is tender rump steak. For the seasoning, soy sauce, sugar, salt, sesame oil, green onion, and ground garlic, sesame seed, black pepper and juice of \"bae\" (Korean pear) are used. The beef is mostly topped with the yolk of a raw egg.\nCured, smoked, and dried beef.\n\"Bresaola\" is an air-dried, salted beef that has been aged about two to three months until it becomes hard and a dark red, almost purple, colour. It is lean, has a sweet, musty smell and is tender. It originated in Valtellina, a valley in the Alps of northern Italy's Lombardy region. B\u00fcndnerfleisch is a similar product from neighbouring Switzerland. Chipped beef is an American industrially produced air-dried beef product, described by one of its manufacturers as being \"similar to bresaola, but not as tasty.\"\nBeef jerky is dried, salted, smoked beef popular in the United States.\nBiltong is a cured, salted, air dried beef popular in South Africa.\nPastrami is often made from beef; raw beef is salted, then partly dried and seasoned with various herbs and spices, and smoked.\nCorned beef is a cut of beef cured or pickled in a seasoned brine. The corn in \"corned beef\" refers to the grains of coarse salts (known as corns) used to cure it. The term \"corned beef\" can denote different styles of brine-cured beef, depending on the region. Some, like American-style corned beef, are highly seasoned and often considered delicatessen fare.\nSpiced beef is a cured and salted joint of round, topside, or silverside, traditionally served at Christmas in Ireland. It is a form of salt beef, cured with spices and saltpetre, intended to be boiled or broiled in Guinness or a similar stout, and then optionally roasted for a period after. There are various other recipes for pickled beef. Sauerbraten is a German variant.\nConsumption.\nBeef is the third most widely consumed meat in the world, accounting for about 25% of meat production worldwide, after pork and poultry at 38% and 30% respectively.\nNutritional content.\nBeef is a source of complete protein and it is a rich source (20% or more of the Daily Value, DV) of niacin, vitamin B12, iron and zinc. It contains high amounts of saturated fat. Red meat is the most significant dietary source of carnitine and, like any other meat (pork, fish, veal, lamb etc.), is a source of creatine. Creatine is converted to creatinine during cooking.\nHealth impact.\nCancer, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes.\nAccording to the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), unprocessed red meat probably causes cancer, particularly colorectal cancer. Studies have also linked red meat with higher risks of cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes.\nIf meat is processed, such as by salting, curing, or smoking, health risks further increase. The IARC found \"convincing\" evidence that processed meat causes cancer in humans. The World Cancer Research Fund recommends limiting red meat to no more than three servings per week.\nA 2010 meta-analysis found that processed red meat (and all processed meat) was correlated with a higher risk of coronary heart disease, although based on studies that separated the two, this meta-analysis found that red meat intake was not associated with higher incidence of coronary heart disease. As of 2020, there is substantial evidence for a link between high consumption of red meat and coronary heart disease.\nDioxins.\nSome cattle raised in the United States feed on pastures fertilized with sewage sludge. Elevated dioxins may be present in meat from these cattle.\n\"E. coli\" recalls.\nGround beef has been subject to recalls in the United States, due to \"Escherichia coli\" (\"E. coli\") contamination:\nMad cow disease.\nIn 1984, the use of meat and bone meal in cattle feed resulted in the world's first outbreak of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE or, colloquially, mad cow disease) in the United Kingdom.\nSince then, other countries have had outbreaks of BSE:\nIn 2010, the EU, through the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), proposed a roadmap to gradually lift the restrictions on the feed ban. In 2013, the ban on feeding mammal-based products to cattle, was amended to allow for certain milk, fish, eggs, and plant-fed farm animal products to be used.\nRestrictions.\nReligious and cultural prohibitions.\nMost Indic religions reject the killing and eating of cows. Hinduism prohibits the consumption of cow beef, known as \"gom\u0101\u1e43sa\" in Sanskrit. Bovines have a sacred status in India especially the cow, due to their provision of sustenance for families. Bovines are generally considered to be integral to the landscape. However, they do not consider the cow to be a god.\nMany of India's rural economies depend on cattle farming; hence they have been revered in society. Since the Vedic period, cattle, especially cows, were venerated as a source of milk, and dairy products, and their relative importance in transport services and farming like ploughing, row planting, ridging. Veneration grew with the advent of Jainism and the Gupta period. In medieval India, Maharaja Ranjit Singh issued a proclamation on stopping cow slaughter. Conflicts over cow slaughter often have sparked religious riots that have led to loss of human life and in one 1893 riot alone, more than 100 people were killed for the cause.\nFor religious reasons, the ancient Egyptian priests also refrained from consuming beef. Buddhists and Sikhs are also against wrongful slaughtering of animals, but they do not have a wrongful eating doctrine.\nIn ancient China, the killing of cattle and consumption of beef was prohibited, as they were valued for their role in agriculture. This custom is still followed by a few Chinese families across the world.\nDuring the season of Lent, Orthodox Christians and Catholics periodically give up meat and poultry (and sometimes dairy products and eggs) as a religious act. Observant Jews and Muslims may not eat any meat or poultry which has not been slaughtered and treated in conformance with religious laws.\nLegal prohibition.\nIndia.\nMost of the North Indian states prohibit the killing of cow and consumption of beef for religious reasons. Certain Hindu castes and sects continue to avoid beef from their diets. Article 48 of the Constitution of India mandates the state may take steps for preserving and improving the bovine breeds, and prohibit the slaughter, of cows and calves and other milch and draught cattle. Article 47 of the Constitution of India provides states must raise the level of nutrition and the standard of living and to improve public health as among its primary duties, based on this a reasonableness in slaughter of common cattle was instituted, if the animals ceased to be capable of breeding, providing milk, or serving as draught animals. The overall mismanagement of India's common cattle is dubbed in academic fields as \"India's bovine burden.\" \nIn 2017, a rule against the slaughter of cattle and the eating of beef was signed into law by presidential assent as a modified version of Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960. The original act, however, did permit the humane slaughter of animals for use as food. Existing meat export policy in India prohibits the export of beef (meat of cow, oxen and calf). Bone-in meat, a carcass, or half carcass of buffalo is also prohibited from export. Only the boneless meat of buffalo, meat of goat and sheep and birds is permitted for export. In 2017, India sought a total \"beef ban\" and Australian market analysts predicted that this would create market opportunities for leather traders and meat producers there and elsewhere. Their prediction estimated a twenty percent shortage of beef and a thirteen percent shortage of leather in the world market.\nNepal.\nThe cow is the national animal of Nepal, and slaughter of cattle is prohibited by law.\nCuba.\nIn 2003, Cuba banned cow slaughter due to severe shortage of milk and milk products. On 14 April 2021, the ban was loosened, allowing ranchers to do as they wish as long as state quotas were met and the health of the herd could be ensured.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36969", "revid": "39457116", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36969", "title": "Bread", "text": "Food made of flour and water\nBread is a baked food product made from water, flour, and often yeast. It is a staple food across the world, particularly in Europe and the Middle East. Throughout recorded history and around the world, it has been an important part of many cultures' diets. It is one of the oldest human-made foods, having been of significance since the dawn of agriculture, and plays an essential role in both religious rituals and secular culture.\nBread may be leavened by naturally occurring microbes (e.g. sourdough), chemicals (e.g. baking soda), industrially produced yeast, or high-pressure aeration, which creates the gas bubbles that fluff up bread. Bread may also be unleavened. In many countries, mass-produced bread often contains additives to improve flavor, texture, color, shelf life, nutrition, and ease of production.\nEtymology.\nThe Old English word for bread was ( in Gothic: modern English \"loaf\") which appears to be the oldest Teutonic name. Old High German and modern German derive from this Proto-Germanic word, which was borrowed into some Slavic (, , Russian: ) and Finnic (, ) languages as well.\nThe Middle and Modern English word bread appears in other Germanic languages, such as , , , , and Norwegian and ; it may be related to \"brew\" or perhaps to \"break\", originally meaning \"broken piece\", \"morsel\".\nHistory.\nBread is one of the oldest prepared foods. Evidence from 30,000 years ago in Europe and Australia revealed starch residue on rocks used for pounding plants. It is possible that during this time, starch extract from the roots of plants, such as cattails and ferns, was spread on a flat rock, placed over a fire and cooked into a primitive form of flatbread. The oldest evidence of bread-making has been found in a 14,500-year-old Natufian site in Jordan's northeastern desert. Around 10,000 BC, with the dawn of the Neolithic age and the spread of agriculture, grains became the mainstay of making bread. Yeast spores are ubiquitous, including on the surface of cereal grains, so any dough left to rest leavens naturally.\nAn early leavened bread was baked as early as 6000 BC in southern Mesopotamia, cradle of the Sumerian civilization, who may have passed on the knowledge to the Egyptians around 3000 BC. The Egyptians refined the process and started adding yeast to the flour. The Sumerians were already using ash to supplement the dough as it was baked.\nThere were multiple sources of leavening available for early bread. Airborne yeasts could be harnessed by leaving uncooked dough exposed to air for some time before cooking. Pliny the Elder reported that the Gauls and Iberians used the foam skimmed from beer, called barm, to produce \"a lighter kind of bread than other peoples\" such as barm cake. Parts of the ancient world that drank wine instead of beer used a paste composed of grape juice and flour that was allowed to begin fermenting, or wheat bran steeped in wine, as a source for yeast. The most common source of leavening was to retain a piece of dough from the previous day to use as a form of sourdough starter, as Pliny also reported.\nThe ancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans all considered the degree of refinement in the bakery arts as a sign of civilization.\nThe Chorleywood bread process was developed in 1961; it uses the intense mechanical working of dough to dramatically reduce the fermentation period and the time taken to produce a loaf. The process, whose high-energy mixing allows for the use of grain with a lower protein content, is now widely used around the world in large factories. As a result, bread can be produced very quickly and at low costs to the manufacturer and the consumer. However, there has been some criticism of the effect on nutritional value.\nTypes.\nBread is the staple food of the Middle East, Central Asia, North Africa, Europe, and in European-derived cultures such as those in the Americas, Australia, and Southern Africa. This is in contrast to parts of South and East Asia, where rice or noodles are the staple. Bread is usually made from a wheat-flour dough that is cultured with yeast, allowed to rise, and baked in an oven. Carbon dioxide and ethanol vapors produced during yeast fermentation result in bread's air pockets. Owing to its high levels of gluten (which give the dough sponginess and elasticity), common or bread wheat is the most common grain used for the preparation of bread, which makes the largest single contribution to the world's food supply of any food.\nBread is also made from the flour of other wheat species (including spelt, emmer, einkorn and kamut). Non-wheat cereals including rye, barley, maize (corn), oats, sorghum, millet and rice have been used to make bread, but, with the exception of rye, usually in combination with wheat flour as they have less gluten.\nGluten-free breads are made using flours from a variety of ingredients such as almonds, rice, sorghum, corn, legumes such as beans, and tubers such as cassava. Since these foods lack gluten, dough made from them may not hold its shape as the loaves rise, and their crumb may be dense with little aeration. Additives such as xanthan gum, guar gum, hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC), corn starch, or eggs are used to compensate for the lack of gluten.\nProperties.\nPhysical-chemical composition.\nIn wheat, phenolic compounds are mainly found in hulls in the form of insoluble bound ferulic acid, where it is relevant to wheat resistance to fungal diseases.\nRye bread contains phenolic acids and ferulic acid dehydrodimers.\nThree natural phenolic glucosides, secoisolariciresinol diglucoside, p-coumaric acid glucoside and ferulic acid glucoside, can be found in commercial breads containing flaxseed.\nGlutenin and gliadin are functional proteins found in wheat bread that contribute to the structure of bread. Glutenin forms interconnected gluten networks within bread through interchain disulfide bonds. Gliadin binds weakly to the gluten network established by glutenin via intrachain disulfide bonds. Structurally, bread can be defined as an elastic-plastic foam (same as styrofoam). The glutenin protein contributes to its elastic nature, as it is able to regain its initial shape after deformation. The gliadin protein contributes to its plastic nature, because it demonstrates non-reversible structural change after a certain amount of applied force. Because air pockets within this gluten network result from carbon dioxide production during leavening, bread can be defined as a foam, or a gas-in-solid solution.\nAcrylamide, like in other starchy foods that have been heated higher than 120\u00a0\u00b0C (248\u00a0\u00b0F), has been found in recent years to occur in bread. Acrylamide is neurotoxic, has adverse effects on male reproduction and developmental toxicity and is carcinogenic. A study has found that more than 99 percent of the acrylamide in bread is found in the crust.\nA study by the University of Hohenheim found that industrially produced bread typically has a high proportion of FODMAP carbohydrates due to a short rising time (often only one hour). The high proportion of FODMAP carbohydrates in such bread then causes flatulence. This is particularly problematic in intestinal diseases such as irritable bowel syndrome. While in traditional bread making the dough rises for several hours, industrial breads rise for a much shorter time, usually only one hour. However, a sufficiently long rising time is important to break down the indigestible FODMAP carbohydrates. Some flours (for example, spelt, emmer and einkorn) contain fewer FODMAPs, but the difference between grain types is relatively small (between 1 and 2 percent by weight). Instead, 90% of the FODMAPs that cause discomfort can be broken down during a rising time of four hours. In the study, whole-grain yeast doughs were examined after different rising times; the highest level of FODMAPs was present after one hour in each case and decreased thereafter. The study thus shows that it is essentially the baking technique and not the type of grain that determines whether a bread is well tolerated or not. A better tolerance of bread made from original cereals can therefore not be explained by the original cereal itself, but rather by the fact that traditional, artisanal baking techniques are generally used when baking original cereals, which include a long dough process. The study also showed that a long rising time also breaks down undesirable phytates more effectively, flavors develop better, and the finished bread contains more biologically accessible trace elements.\nCulinary uses.\nBread can be served at many temperatures; once baked, it can subsequently be toasted. It is most commonly eaten with the hands, either by itself or as a carrier for other foods. Bread can be spread with butter, dipped into liquids such as gravy, olive oil, or soup; it can be topped with various sweet and savory spreads, or used to make sandwiches containing meats, cheeses, vegetables, and condiments.\nBread is used as an ingredient in other culinary preparations, such as the use of breadcrumbs to provide crunchy crusts or thicken sauces; toasted cubes of bread, called croutons, are used as a salad topping; seasoned bread is used as stuffing inside roasted turkey; sweet or savoury bread puddings are made with bread and various liquids; egg and milk-soaked bread is fried as French toast; and bread is used as a binding agent in sausages, meatballs and other ground meat products.\nNutritional significance.\nBread is a good source of carbohydrates and micronutrients such as magnesium, iron, selenium, and B vitamins. Whole grain bread is a good source of dietary fiber and all breads are a common source of protein in the diet, though not a rich one.\nCrust and crumb.\nThe mass of bread consists of two primary components: the \"crust\" and \"crumb\".\nBread crust is formed from surface dough during the cooking process. It is hardened and browned through the Maillard reaction using the sugars and amino acids due to the intense heat at the bread surface. The crust of most breads is harder, and more complexly and intensely flavored, than the rest. Old wives' tales suggest that eating the bread crust makes a person's hair curlier. Additionally, the crust is rumored to be healthier than the remainder of the bread. Some studies have shown that this is true as the crust has more dietary fiber and antioxidants such as pronyl-lysine.\nBread crumb is the internal porous material consisting of bubbles with elastic walls. As the bread ages (becomes stale), the crumb becomes more firm.\nPreparation.\nDoughs are usually baked, but in some cuisines breads are steamed (e.g., mantou), fried (e.g., puri), or baked on an unoiled frying pan (e.g., tortillas). It may be leavened or unleavened (e.g. matzo). Salt, fat and leavening agents such as yeast and baking soda are common ingredients, though bread may contain other ingredients, such as milk, egg, sugar, spice, fruit (such as raisins), vegetables (such as onion), nuts (such as walnut) or seeds (such as poppy).\nMethods of processing dough into bread include the straight dough process, the sourdough process, the Chorleywood bread process and the sponge and dough process.\nFormulation.\nProfessional bread recipes are stated using the baker's percentage notation. The amount of flour is denoted to be 100%, and the other ingredients are expressed as a percentage of that amount by weight. Measurement by weight is more accurate and consistent than measurement by volume, particularly for dry ingredients. The proportion of water to flour is the most important measurement in a bread recipe, as it affects texture and crumb the most. Hard wheat flours absorb about 62% water, while softer wheat flours absorb about 56%. Common table breads made from these doughs result in a finely textured, light bread. Most artisan bread formulas contain anywhere from 60 to 75% water. In yeast breads, the higher water percentages result in more CO2 bubbles and a coarser crumb.\nDough recipes commonly call for 500 grams (about 1.1 pounds) of flour, which yields a single loaf of bread or two baguettes.\nCalcium propanoate is commonly added by commercial bakeries to retard the growth of molds.\nFlour.\nFlour is grain ground into a powder. Flour provides the primary structure, starch and protein to the final baked bread. The protein content of the flour is the best indicator of the quality of the bread dough and the finished bread. While bread can be made from all-purpose wheat flour, a specialty bread flour, containing more protein (12\u201314%), is recommended for high-quality bread. If one uses a flour with a lower protein content (9\u201311%) to produce bread, a shorter mixing time is required to develop gluten strength properly. An extended mixing time leads to oxidization of the dough, which gives the finished product a whiter crumb, instead of the cream color preferred by most artisan bakers.\nWheat flour, in addition to its starch, contains three water-soluble protein groups (albumin, globulin, and proteoses) and two water-insoluble protein groups (glutenin and gliadin). When flour is mixed with water, the water-soluble proteins dissolve, leaving the glutenin and gliadin to form the structure of the resulting bread. When relatively dry dough is worked by kneading, or wet dough is allowed to rise for a long time (see no-knead bread), the glutenin forms strands of long, thin, chainlike molecules, while the shorter gliadin forms bridges between the strands of glutenin. The resulting networks of strands produced by these two proteins are known as gluten. Gluten development improves if the dough is allowed to autolyse.\nFortification.\nProcessing of flours usually involves removal of the outer layers, which contain important nutrients. Such flours, and bread made from them, may be fortified by adding nutrients. Fortification with added calcium, iron, thiamine (Vitamin B1) and niacin (Vitamin B3) is a legal requirement in the UK (wholemeal flours, from which the nutrients have not been stripped, are exempt). The unregulated term \"wheatmeal\" is used to describe flour containing some but not all of the outer covering and central part of the wheat grain.\nLiquids.\nWater, or some other liquid, is used to form the flour into a paste or dough. The weight or ratio of liquid required varies between recipes, but a ratio of three parts liquid to five parts flour is common for yeast breads. Recipes that use steam as the primary leavening method may have a liquid content in excess of one part liquid to one part flour. Instead of water, recipes may use liquids such as milk or other dairy products (including buttermilk or yogurt), fruit juice, or eggs. These contribute additional sweeteners, fats, or leavening components, as well as water.\nFats or shortenings.\nFats, such as butter, vegetable oils, lard, or that contained in eggs, affect the development of gluten in breads by coating and lubricating the individual strands of protein. They also help to hold the structure together. If too much fat is included in a bread dough, the lubrication effect causes the protein structures to divide. A fat content of approximately 3% by weight is the concentration that produces the greatest leavening action. In addition to their effects on leavening, fats also serve to tenderize breads and preserve freshness.\nBread improvers.\nBread improvers and dough conditioners are often used in producing commercial breads to reduce the time needed for rising and to improve texture and volume and to give antistaling effects. The substances used may be oxidising agents to strengthen the dough or reducing agents to develop gluten and reduce mixing time, emulsifiers to strengthen the dough or to provide other properties such as making slicing easier, or enzymes to increase gas production.\nSalt.\nSalt (sodium chloride) is very often added to enhance flavor and restrict yeast activity. It also affects the crumb and the overall texture by stabilizing and strengthening the gluten. Some artisan bakers forego early addition of salt to the dough, whether wholemeal or refined, and wait until after a 20-minute rest to allow the dough to autolyse.\nMixtures of salts are sometimes employed, such as employing potassium chloride to reduce the sodium level, and monosodium glutamate to give flavor (umami).\nLeavening.\nLeavening is the process of adding gas to a dough before or during baking to produce a lighter, more easily chewed bread. Most bread eaten in the West is leavened.\nChemicals.\nA simple technique for leavening bread is the use of gas-producing chemicals. There are two common methods. The first is to use baking powder or a self-raising flour that includes baking powder. The second is to include an acidic ingredient such as buttermilk and add baking soda; the reaction of the acid with the soda produces gas. Chemically leavened breads are called \"quick breads\" and \"soda breads\". This method is commonly used to make muffins, pancakes, American-style biscuits, and quick breads such as banana bread.\nYeast.\nMany breads are leavened by yeast. The yeast most commonly used for leavening bread is \"Saccharomyces cerevisiae\", the same species used for brewing cereal-based alcoholic beverages. This yeast ferments some of the sugars producing carbon dioxide. Commercial bakers often leaven their dough with commercially produced baker's yeast. Baker's yeast has the advantage of producing uniform, quick, and reliable results, because it is obtained from a pure culture. Many artisan bakers produce their own yeast with a growth culture. If kept in the right conditions, it provides leavening for many years.\nThe baker's yeast and sourdough methods follow the same pattern. Water is mixed with flour, salt and the leavening agent. Other additions (spices, herbs, fats, seeds, fruit, etc.) are not needed to bake bread, but are often used. The mixed dough is then allowed to rise one or more times (a longer rising time results in more flavor, so bakers often \"punch down\" the dough and let it rise again), loaves are formed, and (after an optional final rising time) the bread is baked in an oven.\nMany breads are made from a \"straight dough\", which means that all of the ingredients are combined in one step, and the dough is baked after the rising time; others are made from a \"pre-ferment\" in which the leavening agent is combined with some of the flour and water a day or so ahead of baking and allowed to ferment overnight. On the day of baking, the rest of the ingredients are added, and the process continues as with straight dough. This produces a more flavorful bread with better texture. Many bakers see the starter method as a compromise between the reliable results of baker's yeast and the flavor and complexity of a longer fermentation. It also allows the baker to use only a minimal amount of baker's yeast, which was scarce and expensive when it first became available. Most yeasted pre-ferments fall into one of three categories: \"poolish\" or \"pouliche\", a loose-textured mixture composed of roughly equal amounts of flour and water (by weight); \"biga\", a stiff mixture with a higher proportion of flour; and \"p\u00e2te ferment\u00e9e\", which is a portion of dough reserved from a previous batch.\nSourdough.\nSourdough is a type of bread produced by a long fermentation of dough using naturally occurring yeasts and lactobacilli. It usually has a mildly sour taste because of the lactic acid produced during anaerobic fermentation by the lactobacilli. Longer fermented sourdoughs can also contain acetic acid, the main non-water component of vinegar.\nSourdough breads are made with a sourdough starter. The starter cultivates yeast and lactobacilli in a mixture of flour and water, making use of the microorganisms already present on flour; it does not need any added yeast. A starter may be maintained indefinitely by regular additions of flour and water. Some bakers have starters many generations old, which are said to have a special taste or texture. At one time, all yeast-leavened breads were sourdoughs. Recently there has been a revival of sourdough bread in artisan bakeries.\nTraditionally, peasant families throughout Europe baked on a fixed schedule, perhaps once a week. The starter was saved from the previous week's dough. The starter was mixed with the new ingredients, the dough was left to rise, and then a piece of it was saved to be the starter for next week's bread.\nSteam.\nThe rapid expansion of steam produced during baking leavens the bread, which is as simple as it is unpredictable. Steam-leavening is unpredictable since the steam is not produced until the bread is baked. Steam leavening happens regardless of the raising agents (baking soda, yeast, baking powder, sour dough, beaten egg white) included in the mix. The leavening agent either contains air bubbles or generates carbon dioxide. The heat vaporises the water from the inner surface of the bubbles within the dough. The steam expands and makes the bread rise. This is the main factor in the rising of bread once it has been put in the oven. CO2 generation, on its own, is too small to account for the rise. Heat kills bacteria or yeast at an early stage, so the CO2 generation is stopped.\nBacteria.\nSalt-rising bread does not use yeast. Instead, it is leavened by \"Clostridium perfringens\", one of the most common sources of food-borne illness.\nAeration.\nAerated bread is leavened by carbon dioxide being forced into dough under pressure. From the mid-19th to mid-20th centuries, bread made this way was somewhat popular in the United Kingdom, made by the Aerated Bread Company and sold in its high-street tearooms. The company was founded in 1862, and ceased independent operations in 1955.\nThe Pressure-Vacuum mixer was later developed by the Flour Milling and Baking Research Association for the Chorleywood bread process. It manipulates the gas bubble size and optionally the composition of gases in the dough via the gas applied to the headspace.\nCultural significance.\nBread has a significance beyond mere nutrition in many cultures because of its history and contemporary importance. Bread is also significant in Christianity as one of the elements (alongside wine) of the Eucharist, and in other religions including Paganism.\nIn many cultures, bread is a metaphor for basic necessities and living conditions in general. For example, a \"bread-winner\" is a household's main economic contributor and has little to do with actual bread-provision. This is also seen in the phrase \"putting bread on the table\". The Roman poet Juvenal satirized superficial politicians and the public as caring only for \"panem et circenses\" (bread and circuses). In Russia in 1917, the Bolsheviks promised \"peace, land, and bread.\" The term \"breadbasket\" denotes an agriculturally productive region. In parts of Northern, Central, Southern and Eastern Europe bread and salt is offered as a welcome to guests. In India, life's basic necessities are often referred to as \"roti, kapra aur makan\" (bread, clothes, and house).\nWords for bread, including \"dough\" and \"bread\" itself, are used in English-speaking countries as synonyms for money. A remarkable or revolutionary innovation may be called the best thing since \"sliced bread\". The expression \"to break bread with someone\" means \"to share a meal with someone\". The English word \"lord\" comes from the Anglo-Saxon \"hl\u0101fweard\", meaning \"bread keeper.\"\nBread is sometimes referred to as \"the staff of life\", although this term can refer to other staple foods in different cultures: the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" defines it as \"bread (or similar staple food)\". This is sometimes thought to be a biblical reference, but the nearest wording is in Leviticus 26 \"when I have broken the staff of your bread\". The term has been adopted in the names of bakery firms.\nFraud.\nBread has been subject to food fraud and adulteration with fillers. In medieval times, sand was used as a filler.\nThe Russo-Ukrainian War has made sourcing wheat flour more challenging and raised concerns of bread flour fraud.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "36971", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36971", "title": "Arctic", "text": "Polar region of the Earth's northern hemisphere\nThe Arctic (; from grc \" \"\" ()\"\u00a0'bear') is the polar region of Earth that surrounds the North Pole, lying north of the Arctic Circle. The Arctic region, from the IERS Reference Meridian travelling east, consists of parts of northern Norway (Nordland, Troms, Finnmark, Svalbard and Jan Mayen), northernmost Sweden (V\u00e4sterbotten, Norrbotten and Lappland), northern Finland (North Ostrobothnia, Kainuu and Lappi), Russia (Murmansk, Siberia, Nenets Okrug, Novaya Zemlya), the United States (Alaska), Canada (Yukon, Northwest Territories, Nunavut), Danish Realm (Greenland), and northern Iceland (Gr\u00edmsey and Kolbeinsey), along with the Arctic Ocean and adjacent seas.\nLand within the Arctic region has seasonally varying snow and ice cover, with predominantly treeless permafrost under the tundra. Arctic seas contain seasonal sea ice in many places.\nThe Arctic region is a unique area among Earth's ecosystems. The cultures in the region and the Arctic indigenous peoples have adapted to its cold and extreme conditions. Life in the Arctic includes zooplankton and phytoplankton, fish and marine mammals, birds, land animals, plants, and human societies. Arctic land is bordered by the subarctic.\nDefinition and etymology.\nThe word Arctic comes from the Greek word \"arktikos\" \"near the Bear, northern\" and from the word \"arktos\" meaning \"bear\" for either to the constellation known as Ursa Major, the \"Great Bear\", which is prominent in the northern portion of the celestial sphere, or the constellation Ursa Minor, the \"Little Bear\", which contains the celestial north pole (currently very near Polaris, the current north Pole Star, or North Star).\nThere are several definitions of what area is contained within the Arctic. The area can be defined as north of the Arctic Circle (about 66\u00b0 34'N), the approximate southern limit of the midnight sun and the polar night. Another definition of the Arctic, which is popular with ecologists, is the region in the Northern Hemisphere where the average temperature for the warmest month (July) is below ; the northernmost tree line roughly follows the isotherm at the boundary of this region.\nClimate.\nThe climate of the Arctic region is characterized by cold winters and cool summers. Its precipitation mostly comes in the form of snow and is low, with most of the area receiving less than . High winds often stir up snow, creating the illusion of continuous snowfall. Average winter temperatures can go as low as , and the coldest recorded temperature is approximately . Coastal Arctic climates are moderated by oceanic influences, having generally warmer temperatures and heavier snowfalls than the colder and drier interior areas. The Arctic is affected by current global warming, leading to climate change in the Arctic, including Arctic sea ice decline, diminished ice in the Greenland ice sheet, and Arctic methane emissions as the permafrost thaws. The melting of Greenland's ice sheet is linked to polar amplification.\nDue to the poleward migration of the planet's isotherms (about per decade during the past 30 years as a consequence of global warming), the Arctic region (as defined by tree line and temperature) is currently shrinking. Perhaps the most alarming result of this is Arctic sea ice shrinkage. There is a large variance in predictions of Arctic sea ice loss, with models showing near-complete to complete loss in September from 2035 to sometime around 2067.\nFlora and fauna.\nArctic life is characterized by adaptation to short growing seasons with long periods of sunlight, and cold, dark, snow-covered winter conditions.\nPlants.\nArctic vegetation is composed of plants such as dwarf shrubs, graminoids, herbs, lichens, and mosses, which all grow relatively close to the ground, forming tundra. An example of a dwarf shrub is the bearberry. As one moves northward, the amount of warmth available for plant growth decreases considerably. In the northernmost areas, plants are at their metabolic limits, and small differences in the total amount of summer warmth make large differences in the amount of energy available for maintenance, growth, and reproduction. Colder summer temperatures cause the size, abundance, productivity, and variety of plants to decrease. Trees cannot grow in the Arctic, but in its warmest parts, shrubs are common and can reach in height; sedges, mosses and lichens can form thick layers. In the coldest parts of the Arctic, much of the ground is bare; non-vascular plants such as lichens and mosses predominate, along with a few scattered grasses and forbs (like the Arctic poppy).\nAnimals.\nHerbivores on the tundra include the Arctic hare, lemming, muskox, and reindeer (caribou). They are preyed on by the snowy owl, Arctic fox, grizzly bear, and Arctic wolf. The polar bear is also a predator, though it prefers to hunt for marine life from the ice. There are also many and marine species endemic to the colder regions. Other terrestrial animals include wolverines, moose, Dall sheep, ermines, and Arctic ground squirrels. Marine mammals include seals, walruses, and several species of cetacean\u2014baleen whales and also narwhals, orcas, and belugas.\nNatural resources.\nThere are copious natural resources in the Arctic (oil, gas, minerals, freshwater, fish, and, if the subarctic is included, forest) to which modern technology and the economic opening up of Russia have given significant new opportunities. The interest in the tourism industry is also on the increase.\nThe Arctic contains some of the last and most extensive continuous wilderness areas in the world, and its significance in preserving biodiversity and genotypes is considerable. The increasing presence of humans fragments vital habitats. The Arctic is particularly susceptible to the abrasion of groundcover and to the disturbance of the rare breeding grounds of the animals that are characteristic of the region. The Arctic also holds 1/5 of the Earth's water supply.\nPaleontology.\nDuring the Cretaceous period, the Arctic still had seasonal snows, though only a light dusting and not enough to permanently hinder plant growth. Animals such as the \"Chasmosaurus\", \"Hypacrosaurus\", \"Troodon\", and \"Edmontosaurus\" may have all migrated north to take advantage of the summer growing season, and migrated south to warmer climes when winter came. A similar situation may also have been found amongst dinosaurs that lived in Antarctic regions, such as the \"Muttaburrasaurus\" of Australia.\nHowever, others claim that dinosaurs lived year-round at very high latitudes, such as near the Colville River, which is now at about 70\u00b0\u00a0 N but at the time (70 million years ago) was 10\u00b0 further north.\nIndigenous population.\nThe earliest inhabitants of North America's central and eastern Arctic are referred to as the Arctic small tool tradition (AST) and existed c.\u20092500 BCE. AST consisted of several Paleo-Eskimo cultures, including the Independence cultures and Pre-Dorset cultures. The Dorset culture (Inuktitut: \"Tuniit\" or \"Tunit\") refers to the next inhabitants of central and eastern Arctic. The Dorset culture evolved because of technological and economic changes during 1050\u2013550 BCE. With the exception of the Quebec / Labrador peninsula, the Dorset culture vanished around 1500 CE. Supported by genetic testing, evidence shows that descendants of the Dorset culture, known as the Sadlermiut, survived in Aivilik, Southampton and Coats Islands, until the beginning of the 20th century.\nThe Dorset / Thule culture transition dates around the ninth\u201310th centuries CE. Scientists theorize that there may have been cross-contact between the two cultures with the sharing of technology, such as fashioning harpoon heads, or the Thule may have found Dorset remnants and adapted their ways with the predecessor culture. The evidence suggested that Inuit descend from the Birnirk of Siberia, through the Thule culture expanded into northern Canada and Greenland, where they genetically and culturally completely replaced the Indigenous Dorset people sometime after 1300 CE. The question of why the Dorset disappeared so completely has led some to suggest that Thule invaders wiped out the Dorset people in \"an example of prehistoric genocide.\"\nBy 1300 CE, the Inuit, present-day Arctic inhabitants and descendants of Thule culture, had settled in west Greenland and moved into east Greenland over the following century (Inughuit, Kalaallit and Tunumiit are modern Greenlandic Inuit groups descended from Thule). Over time, the Inuit have migrated throughout the Arctic regions of Eastern Russia, the United States, Canada, and Greenland.\nOther Circumpolar North indigenous peoples include the Chukchi, Evenks, I\u00f1upiat, Khanty, Koryaks, Nenets, S\u00e1mi, Yukaghir, Gwich\u02bcin, and Yupik.\nInternational cooperation and politics.\nThe eight Arctic nations (Canada, Kingdom of Denmark [Greenland &amp; The Faroe Islands], Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Russia, and US) are all members of the Arctic Council, as are organizations representing six indigenous populations (The Aleut International Association, Arctic Athabaskan Council, Gwich'in Council International, Inuit Circumpolar Council, Russian Association of Indigenous Peoples of the North, and Saami Council). The council operates on a consensus basis, mostly dealing with environmental treaties and not addressing boundary or resource disputes.\nThough Arctic policy priorities differ, every Arctic nation is concerned about sovereignty/defense, resource development, shipping routes, and environmental protection. Much work remains on regulatory agreements regarding shipping, tourism, and resource development in Arctic waters. Arctic shipping is subject to some regulatory control through the International Code for Ships Operating in Polar Waters, adopted by the International Maritime Organization on 1 January 2017 and applies to all ships in Arctic waters over 500 tonnes.\nResearch in the Arctic has long been a collaborative international effort, evidenced by the International Polar Year. The International Arctic Science Committee, hundreds of scientists and specialists of the Arctic Council, and the Barents Euro-Arctic Council are more examples of collaborative international Arctic research.\nTerritorial claims.\nWhile there are several ongoing territorial claims in the Arctic, no country owns the geographic North Pole or the region of the Arctic Ocean surrounding it. The surrounding six Arctic states that border the Arctic Ocean\u2014Canada, the Kingdom of Denmark (with Greenland), Iceland, Norway, Russia, and the United States\u2014are limited to a exclusive economic zone (EEZ) off their coasts. Two Arctic states (Finland and Sweden) do not have direct access to the Arctic Ocean.\nUpon ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, a country has ten years to make claims to an extended continental shelf beyond its 200 nautical mile zone. Due to this, Norway (which ratified the convention in 1996), Russia (ratified in 1997), Canada (ratified in 2003) and the Kingdom of Denmark (ratified in 2004) launched projects to establish claims that certain sectors of the Arctic seabed should belong to their territories.\nOn 2 August 2007, two Russian bathyscaphes, MIR-1 and MIR-2, for the first time in history descended to the Arctic seabed beneath the North Pole and placed there a Russian flag made of rust-proof titanium alloy. The flag-placing, during Arktika 2007, generated commentary on and concern for a race for control of the Arctic's vast hydrocarbon resources.\nForeign ministers and other officials representing Canada, the Kingdom of Denmark, Norway, Russia, and the United States met in Ilulissat, Greenland on 28 May 2008 at the Arctic Ocean Conference and announced the Ilulissat Declaration, blocking any \"new comprehensive international legal regime to govern the Arctic Ocean,\" and pledging \"the orderly settlement of any possible overlapping claims.\"\nAs of 2012, the Kingdom of Denmark is claiming the continental shelf based on the Lomonosov Ridge between Greenland and over the North Pole to the northern limit of the exclusive economic zone of Russia.\nThe Russian Federation is also claiming a large swath of seabed along the Lomonosov Ridge but, unlike Denmark, confined its claim to its side of the Arctic region. In August 2015, Russia made a supplementary submission for the expansion of the external borders of its continental shelf in the Arctic Ocean, asserting that the eastern part of the Lomonosov Ridge and the Mendeleyev Ridge is an extension of the Eurasian continent. In August 2016, the UN Commission on the Limits of the Continental Shelf began to consider Russia's submission.\nCanada claims the Northwest Passage as part of its internal waters belonging to Canada, while the United States and most maritime nations regards it as an international strait, which means that foreign vessels have right of transit passage.\nExploration.\nSince 1937, the larger portion of the Asian-side Arctic region has been extensively explored by Soviet and Russian crewed drifting ice stations. Between 1937 and 1991, 88 international polar crews established and occupied scientific settlements on the drift ice and were carried thousands of kilometers by the ice flow. Modern day scientists now rely more heavily on unmanned buoys and ice-tethered observatories than crewed stations for Arctic research and exploration\nPollution.\nThe Arctic is comparatively clean, although there are certain ecologically difficult localized pollution problems that present a serious threat to people's health living around these pollution sources. Due to the prevailing worldwide sea and air currents, the Arctic area is the fallout region for long-range transport pollutants, and in some places, the concentrations exceed the levels of densely populated urban areas. An example of this is the phenomenon of Arctic haze, which is commonly blamed on long-range pollutants. Another example is with the bioaccumulation of PCBs (polychlorinated biphenyls) in Arctic wildlife and people.\nPreservation.\nThere have been many proposals to preserve the Arctic over the years. Most recently a group of states at the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development, on 21 June 2012, proposed protecting the Arctic, similar to the Antarctic Treaty System. The initial focus of the campaign will be a UN resolution creating a global sanctuary around the pole, and a ban on oil drilling and unsustainable fishing in the Arctic.\nThe Arctic has climate change rates that are amongst the highest in the world. Due to the major impacts to the region from climate change the near climate future of the region will be extremely different under all scenarios of warming.\nClimate change.\nThe effects of climate change in the Arctic include rising temperatures, loss of sea ice, and melting of the Greenland ice sheet. The Arctic near-surface temperature is increasing at a rate that is 2\u20133 times faster than the global average, which is referred to as Arctic amplification. Potential methane release from the region, especially through the thawing of permafrost and methane clathrates, is also a concern. Because of the amplified response of the Arctic to global warming, it is often seen as a leading indicator of global warming. The melting of Greenland's ice sheet is linked to polar amplification.\nThe Arctic region is especially vulnerable to the effects of any climate change, as has become apparent with the reduction of sea ice in recent years. Climate models predict much greater climate change in the Arctic than the global average, resulting in significant international attention to the region. In particular, there are concerns that Arctic shrinkage, a consequence of melting glaciers and other ice in Greenland, could soon contribute to a substantial rise in sea levels worldwide.\nThe current Arctic warming is leading to ancient carbon being released from thawing permafrost, leading to methane and carbon dioxide production by micro-organisms. Release of methane and carbon dioxide stored in permafrost could cause abrupt and severe global warming, as they are potent greenhouse gases.\nClimate change is also predicted to have a large impact on tundra vegetation, causing an increase of shrubs, and having a negative impact on bryophytes and lichens.\nApart from concerns regarding the detrimental effects of warming in the Arctic, some potential opportunities have gained attention. The melting of the ice is making the Northwest Passage, shipping routes through the northernmost latitudes, more navigable, raising the possibility that the Arctic region will become a prime trade route. One harbinger of the opening navigability of the Arctic took place in the summer of 2016 when the Crystal Serenity successfully navigated the Northwest Passage, a first for a large cruise ship.\nIn addition, it is believed that the Arctic seabed may contain substantial oil fields which may become accessible if the ice covering them melts. These factors have led to recent international debates as to which nations can claim sovereignty or ownership over the waters of the Arctic.\nArctic waters.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "36972", "revid": "42002101", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=36972", "title": "Tony Hancock", "text": "English comedian and actor (1924\u20131968)\nAnthony John Hancock (12 May 1924 \u2013 25 June 1968) was an English comedian and actor.\nHigh-profile during the 1950s and early 1960s, he had a major success with his BBC series \"Hancock's Half Hour\", first broadcast on radio from 1954, then on television from 1956, in which he soon formed a strong professional and personal bond with comic actor Sid James. Although Hancock's decision to cease working with James, when it became known in early 1960, disappointed many at the time, his last BBC series in 1961 contains some of his best-remembered work (including \"The Blood Donor\" and \"The Radio Ham\"). After breaking with his scriptwriters Ray Galton and Alan Simpson later that year, his career declined.\nAcross his career, Hancock twice won the BAFTA Award for Light Entertainment Artist in 1958 and 1960. He was later nominated for the BAFTA Award for Most Promising Newcomer to Leading Film Roles for his performance in \"The Rebel\" (1961).\nEarly life and career.\nHancock was born in Southam Road, Hall Green, Birmingham, the second of three sons.&lt;ref name=\"birminghammail/47052\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \nHis father, Jack, worked for a shipping firm while his mother, Lily, was the daughter of a printer who served 21 years as a director of Birmingham City Football Club.&lt;ref name=\"thefreelibrary/a062103596\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; \nIn April 1927, in an effort to improve his health, Jack moved to Bournemouth with his family. There they bought the Mayo Hygienic Laundry in Winton but the next year they moved to the Railway Hotel in Holdenhurst Road of which Jack had become the licensee.&lt;ref name=\"bournemouthecho/18042831\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nIn 1933, Hancock's parents bought \"Swanmore Villa and Lodge\" in Gervis Road, which they renamed to the Durlston Court Hotel, after Durlston Court Preparatory School, now called the Celebrity Hotel.&lt;ref name=\"bournemouthecho/9000829\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; After his father's death in 1934, Hancock and his brothers (Colin and Roger Thomas) lived there with their mother and stepfather Robert Gordon Walker \nThe young Anthony was sent to board at Durlston Court School, Swanage, from 1936. He learned typing and shorthand at Bournemouth Municipal College at the Lansdowne and later applied to be a newspaper reporter in Birmingham.&lt;ref name=\"bournemouthecho/1874058\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nHancock attended Summerbee Infants, Saugeen Preparatory School in Derby Road, Durlston Court Preparatory School, part of Durlston boarding school near Swanage (the name of which his parents adopted for their hotel) and Bradfield College in Reading, Berkshire, but left school at the age of fourteen.\nHe made his stage debut in the hall of the Church of the Sacred Heart on Richmond Hill in 1940, billed as \"Anthony Hancock - The Confidential Comic\".\nIn 1940, Hancock made his first professional appearance at \"The Labour Halls\" (now the \"Avon Social Club\"), in Avon Road, Springbourne, in Bournemouth.\nDuring the war, Hancock was billeted to the Hotel Metropole in Holdenhurst Road while attached to the Royal Canadian Air Force photographic interpretation unit.\nIn 1942, during the Second World War, Hancock joined the RAF Regiment. Following failed auditions for the Entertainments National Service Association (ENSA), he joined the Gang Shows, travelling around Europe entertaining troops. After the war, he joined the \"Ralph Reader Gang Show\" touring production of \"Wings\". He later worked in a double act with musician Derek Scott at the Windmill Theatre, a venue which helped to launch the careers of many comedians at the time. A favourable press review of his work at the Windmill was seen in July 1948. \"But mention must made of a new young comedian\u2026who with a piano partner, gives some brilliant thumbnail impressions of a \u201cdud\u201d concert party.\" He took part in radio shows such as \"Workers' Playtime\" and \"Variety Bandbox\". In July 1949, he was praised for his work in the summer presentation of \"Flotsam's Follies\" at the Esplanade Concert Hall, Bognor Regis. Christmas 1949 saw him in the part of \"Buttons\" in the Cinderella pantomime at the Royal Artillery, Woolwich. In June 1950, he opened in the \"Ocean Revue\" at the Ocean, Clacton Pier which ran for three months. In December 1950, Hancock was in the \"Red Riding Hood\" pantomime at the Theatre Royal Nottingham playing the part of Jolly Jenkins, the Baron's page.\nIn 1951\u20131952, for one series beginning on August 3, 1951, Hancock was a cast member of \"Educating Archie\", in which he mainly played the tutor (or foil) to the nominal star, a ventriloquist's dummy. His appearance in this radio show brought him national recognition, and a catchphrase he used frequently in the show, \"Flippin' kids!\", became popular parlance. The same year, he began to make regular appearances on BBC Television's light entertainment show \"Kaleidoscope\", and almost starred in his own series to be written by Larry Stephens, Hancock's best man at his first wedding. In 1954, he was given his own eponymous BBC radio show, \"Hancock's Half Hour\".\nPeak years.\nWorking with scripts from Ray Galton and Alan Simpson, \"Hancock's Half Hour\" lasted for seven years and over a hundred episodes in its radio form, and, from 1956, ran concurrently with an equally successful BBC television series with the same name. The show starred Hancock as \"Anthony Aloysius St John Hancock\", living in the shabby \"23 Railway Cuttings\" in East Cheam. Most episodes portrayed his everyday life as a struggling comedian with aspirations toward straight acting. Some episodes, however, changed this to show him as being a successful actor and/or comedian, or occasionally as having a different career completely, such as a struggling (and incompetent) barrister. Radio episodes were prone to more surreal storylines, which would have been impractical on television, such as in 'The Pet Dog', (1955), in which Hancock buying a puppy that grows to be as tall as himself\nSid James featured in both the radio and TV versions, while the radio version also included regulars Bill Kerr, Kenneth Williams and, successively, Moira Lister, Andr\u00e9e Melly and Hattie Jacques. The series rejected the variety format then dominant in British radio comedy and instead used a form drawn more from everyday life: the situation comedy, with the humour coming from the characters and the circumstances in which they find themselves. Owing to a contractual wrangle with producer Jack Hylton, Hancock had an ITV series, \"The Tony Hancock Show\", during this period, which ran in 1956\u201357.\nDuring the run of his BBC radio and television series, Hancock became an enormous star in Britain. Unlike most other comedians at the time, he was able to clear the streets while families gathered together to listen to the eagerly awaited episodes. His character changed slightly over the series, but even in the earliest episodes the key facets of \"the lad himself\" were evident. \"Sunday Afternoon at Home\" and \"The Wild Man of the Woods\" were top-rating shows and were later released on an LP record.\nAs an actor with considerable experience in films, Sid James became more important to the show when the television version began. The regular cast was reduced to just the two men, allowing the humour to come from the interaction between them. James's character was the most real of the two, puncturing Hancock's pretensions. His character would often be dishonest and exploit Hancock's apparent gullibility during the radio series, but in the television version there appeared to be a more genuine friendship between them. Hancock's highly-strung personality made the demands of live broadcasts a constant worry, with the result that, starting from the autumn 1959 series, all episodes of the series were recorded before transmission. Up until then, every British television comedy show had been performed live, owing to the technical limitations of the time. He was also the first performer to receive a \u00a31,000 fee for his performances in a half-hour show.\nHancock became anxious that his work with James was turning them into a double act, and he told close associates in late 1959, just after the fifth television series had finished being recorded, that he would end his professional association with Sid James after a final series. Hancock left others to tell James. His last BBC series in 1961, retitled simply \"Hancock\", was without James. Two episodes are among his best-remembered: \"The Blood Donor\", in which he goes to a clinic to give blood, contains some famous lines, including \"I don't mind giving a reasonable amount, but a pint! That's very nearly an armful!\"; in \"The Radio Ham\", Hancock plays an amateur radio enthusiast who receives a mayday call from a yachtsman in distress, but his incompetence prevents him from taking his position. Both of these programmes were re-recorded a few months later for a commercial 1961 LP, produced in the same manner as the radio episodes.\nReturning home with his wife from recording \"The Bowmans\", an episode based around a parody of \"The Archers\", Hancock was involved in a car accident and was thrown through the windscreen. He was not badly hurt, but suffered concussion and was unable to learn his lines for \"The Blood Donor\", the next show due to be recorded. The result was that his performance depended on the use of teleprompters, and he is seen looking away from other actors when delivering lines. From this time onwards, Hancock came to rely on teleprompters instead of learning scripts whenever he had career difficulties.\nIntrospection.\nIn early 1960, Hancock appeared on the BBC's \"Face to Face\", a half-hour in-depth interview programme conducted by former Labour MP John Freeman. Freeman asked Hancock many soul-searching questions about his life and work. Hancock, who deeply admired his interviewer, often appeared uncomfortable with the questions, but answered them frankly and honestly. Hancock had always been highly self-critical, and it is often argued that this interview heightened this tendency, contributing to his later difficulties. According to Roger, his brother, \"It was the biggest mistake he ever made. I think it all started from that really. ... Self-analysis \u2013 that was his killer.\"\nCited as evidence is his gradual ostracism of those who contributed to his success, such as Sid James and his scriptwriters, Galton and Simpson. His reasoning was that, to refine his craft, he had to ditch catch-phrases and become realistic. He argued, for example, that whenever an ad-hoc character was needed, such as a policeman, it would be played by someone like Kenneth Williams, who would appear with his well-known oily catchphrase \"Good evening\". Hancock believed the comedy suffered because people did not believe in the policeman, knowing it was just Williams doing a funny voice.\nBreak with Galton and Simpson.\nHancock starred in the film \"The Rebel\" (1961), in which he plays the role of an office worker-turned-artist who finds himself successful after a move to Paris, but only as the result of mistaken identity. Although a success in Britain, the film was not well received in the United States: owing to a contemporary American television series of the same name, the film was retitled \"Call Me Genius\" and was not well received by American critics.\nAccording to his agent at the time, Beryl Vertue, his break with Galton and Simpson took place at a meeting held in October 1961, where he also broke with her. Alan Simpson remembered that the break occurred during a telephone call and that only Beryl's position was discussed at the meeting. During the previous six months, the writers had developed \u2013 without payment and in consultation with the comedian \u2013 three scripts for Hancock's second starring film vehicle. Worried that the projects were wrong for him, the first two had been abandoned incomplete; the third was written to completion at the writers' insistence, only for Hancock to reject it. It is believed that he had not read any of the screenplays. The result of the break was that he chose to separately develop something previously discussed, and the writers were ultimately commissioned to write a \"Comedy Playhouse\" series for the BBC, one of which, \"The Offer\", emerged as the pilot for \"Steptoe and Son\". That \"something previously discussed\" became \"The Punch and Judy Man\", for which Hancock hired writer Philip Oakes, who moved in with the comedian to co-write the screenplay.\nIn \"The Punch and Judy Man\" (1963), Hancock plays a struggling seaside entertainer who dreams of a better life; Sylvia Syms plays his nagging social climber of a wife, and John Le Mesurier a sand sculptor. The extent to which the character played by Hancock had merged with his real personality is clear in the film, which owes much to his memories of his childhood in Bournemouth.\nLater years.\nHancock moved to ATV in 1962 with different writers, though Oakes, retained as an advisor, disagreed over script ideas and the two men severed their professional (but not personal) relationship. The initial writer of Hancock's ATV series, Godfrey Harrison, had scripted the successful George Cole radio series \"A Life Of Bliss\", and also Hancock's first regular television appearances on \"Fools Rush In\" (a segment of \"Kaleidoscope\") more than a decade earlier. Harrison had trouble meeting deadlines, so other writers were commissioned, including Terry Nation.\nThe ATV series was transmitted in early 1963, on the same evenings as the second series of \"Steptoe and Son\", written by Hancock's former writers, Galton and Simpson. Critical comparisons did not favour Hancock's series. Around 1965, Hancock made a series of 11 television adverts for the Egg Marketing Board. Hancock starred in the adverts with Patricia Hayes as the character \"Mrs Crevatte\" in an attempt to revive the Galton and Simpson style of scripts. Slightly earlier, in 1963, he had featured in a spoof \"Hancock Report\" \u2013 hired by Lord Beeching to promote his plan to reduce railway mileage in newspaper advertisements and posters. A pamphlet featuring Hancock entitled The Truth About the Railways - The Hancock report was also published by the British Railways Board. Hancock reportedly wanted to be paid what Beeching was paid annually \u2013 \u00a334,000; he was offered half that amount for his services.\nHancock continued to make regular appearances on British television until 1967, including a 50-minute show for BBC2 from the Royal Festival Hall, which was poorly received. By then his alcoholism was seriously affecting his performances. Two unsuccessful variety series for ABC Weekend TV, \"The Blackpool Show\" (1966) and \"Hancock's\" (1967), were his last work for British television. He tried a role in a Disney film \u2013 \"The Adventures of Bullwhip Griffin\" \u2013 but was sacked after reportedly having trouble with the mock-Shakespearian dialogue. He collapsed with acute liver failure on 1 January 1967 and was told he would die within three months if he continued drinking. \nIn December 1967, while recovering from a broken rib from a drunken fall, he became ill with pneumonia. His final television appearances were in Australia under a contract to make a 13-part series for the Seven Network. However, after arriving in Australia in March 1968, he completed only three programmes before his death and they remained unaired for nearly four years. These shows are the only existing television footage of him in colour, as all his previous shows had been made for black-and-white television.\nPersonal life.\nIn June 1950 Hancock married Cicely Romanis, a Lanvin model, after a brief courtship.\nFreddie Ross worked as his publicist from 1954 and became more involved in his life, eventually becoming his mistress. He divorced&lt;ref name=\"gettyimages/cicely-romanis\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Cicely in 1965 and married Ross in December of that year. This second marriage was short-lived. During these years Hancock was also involved with Joan Le Mesurier (n\u00e9e Malin), the new wife of actor John Le Mesurier, Hancock's best friend and a regular supporting character-actor from his television series. Joan was later to describe the relationship in her book \"Lady Don't Fall Backwards\", including the claim that her husband readily forgave the affair; he is quoted as saying that if it had been anyone else he would not have understood it, but with Tony Hancock it made sense. In July 1966 Freddie took an overdose but survived. Arriving in Blackpool to record an edition of his variety series, Hancock was met by pressmen asking about his wife's attempted suicide. Freddie was granted a decree nisi a few days before Hancock's own suicide but divorce proceedings were not finalised and she became his widow.\nCicely developed her own problems with alcohol and died from a fall in 1969, the year after the death of her former husband. Freddie Hancock survived her broken marriage and resumed her career as a prominent publicist and agent in the film and television industry. Based in New York City for many years, she founded the East Coast chapter of BAFTA, the British Academy of Film and Television Arts.\nDeath.\nHancock died by suicide by overdose, in Sydney, on 25 June 1968, aged 44. He was found dead in his Bellevue Hill flat with an empty vodka bottle and a scattering of amobarbital tablets.\nIn one of his suicide notes he wrote: \"Things just seemed to go too wrong too many times.\" His ashes were taken to England by satirist Willie Rushton and were buried in St Dunstan's Church in Cranford, London.\nAsked by Van Morrison about his relationship with Hancock, Spike Milligan commented in 1989: \"Very difficult man to get on with. He used to drink excessively. You felt sorry for him. He ended up on his own. I thought, he's got rid of everybody else, he's going to get rid of himself and he did.\"\nLegacy.\nThere is a sculpture by Bruce Williams (which was established in Hancock's honour in 1996) in Old Square, Corporation Street, Birmingham.\nThere is a plaque on the house where he was born in Hall Green, Birmingham, and a plaque on the wall of the hotel in Bournemouth where he spent some of his early life. There is also a plaque, placed by the Dead Comics Society, at 10 Grey Close, Hampstead Garden Suburb, north London, where he lived in 1947 and 1948. In 2014, an English Heritage blue plaque was placed to commemorate Hancock at 20 Queen's Gate Place in South Kensington, London, where he lived between 1952 and 1958. The Tony Hancock Appreciation Society organised a plaque to commemorate Hancock's first professional appearance, in 1940, at the Labour Halls, now the \"Avon Social Club\" in Avon Road, Springbourne, in Bournemouth.\nIn a 2002 poll, BBC radio listeners voted Hancock their favourite British comedian. Commenting on this poll, Ray Galton and Alan Simpson observed that modern-day creations such as Alan Partridge and David Brent owed much of their success to mimicking dominant features of Tony Hancock's character. \"The thing they've all got in common is self-delusion,\" they remarked, in a statement issued by the BBC. \"They all think they're more intelligent than everyone else, more cultured, that people don't recognise their true greatness \u2013 self-delusion in every sense. And there's nothing people like better than failure.\" \nMary Kalemkerian, Head of Programmes for BBC 7, commented: \"Classic comedians such as Tony Hancock and the Goons are obviously still firm favourites with BBC radio listeners. Age doesn't seem to matter \u2013 if it's funny, it's funny.\" Dan Peat of the Tony Hancock Appreciation Society said of the poll: \"It's fantastic news. If he was alive, he would have taken it one of two ways. He would probably have made some kind of dry crack, but in truth he would have been chuffed.\"\nThe last eight or so years of Hancock's life were the subject of a BBC1 television film, called \"Hancock\" (1991), starring Alfred Molina. Another drama, \"\" (BBC Four, 2006), saw Martin Trenaman play the role of Hancock with Michael Sheen as Williams. Hancock's affair with Joan Le Mesurier was also dramatised in \"Hancock and Joan\" on BBC Four and transmitted in 2008 as part of the \"Curse of Comedy\" season. Hancock was portrayed by Ken Stott and Joan by Maxine Peake.\nMusician Pete Doherty is a fan of Hancock and named the first album by his band the Libertines \"Up the Bracket\" after one of Hancock's catchphrases. He also wrote a song called \"Lady Don't Fall Backwards\" after the book at the centre of the \"Hancock's Half Hour\" episode \"The Missing Page\". Hancock is also referenced in the lyrics to the Libertines' 2015 song \"You're My Waterloo\".\nPaul Merton, in 1996, appeared in remakes of six of Galton and Simpson's \"Hancock\" scripts, which were not critically well received. In 2014, five of the radio instalments of \"Hancock's Half Hour\" that did not survive, chosen by Galton and Simpson, were re-staged for BBC Radio 4 under the umbrella title \"The Missing Hancocks\", with Kevin McNally taking the title role. Over subsequent years, all the remaining missing episodes were re-made, including two episodes, The Marriage Bureau and A Visit to Swansea, where the original broadcasts were later discovered and broadcast. \nPlaywright Roy Smiles' play about Tony Hancock, \"The Lad Himself\", was staged at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe in 2012 with Mark Brailsford as Tony Hancock.&lt;ref name=\"fringereview/2012/lad-himself\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nThe \"Tony Hancock Appreciation Society\" was formed in 1976 and still attracts new members. In 1980, Chris Bumstead began publishing a monthly \"Tony Hancock Appreciation Society\" newsletter, \"Railway Cuttings\", later quarterly. Now the Society publishes two magazines for members, \"The Missing Page\" (quarterly) and a digital only supplement \"The Bonus Pages\", holds an annual reunion dinner, lately in the West Midlands near Hancock's birth place, and has worked with TV and radio producers, authors, journalists and DVD and CD companies to provide authoritative information. It has an extensive archive held in the safe keeping of De Montfort University, Leicester.&lt;ref name=\"bbc/68978879\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"ark.dmu.ac.uk/TH\" &gt;https:// - De Montfort University Archive&lt;/ref&gt;&lt;ref name=\"library.dmu.ac.uk/Trove-Hancock-\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The society's patrons are Lucy Hancock, Tony Hancock's great niece, and Kevin McNally, who plays Hancock in The Missing Hancocks.\nRecordings.\nEpisodes and anthologies from the radio series were released on vinyl LP in the 1960s, as well as four re-makes of television scripts; an annual LP was issued of radio episodes (without the incidental music) between 1980 and 1984. Much of this material was also available on cassette in later years.\nThe BBC issued CDs of the surviving 74 radio episodes in six box sets, one per series, with the sixth box containing several out-of-series specials. This was followed by the release of one large box set containing all the others in a special presentation case; while it includes no extra material, the larger box alone (without any CDs) still fetches high prices on online marketplaces like eBay, where Hancock memorabilia remains a thriving industry. There have also been numerous VHS releases of the BBC television series.\nWhile five separate Region 2 DVDs were previously issued, some of the surviving episodes were unavailable until \"The Tony Hancock BBC Collection\" (eight DVDs) appeared in 2007. Episodes of the radio series are often broadcast on the digital radio station BBC Radio 4 Extra.\nwith details of Hancock's stage, radio, TV and film appearances\nan account of Hancock's final days, written by the man who found Hancock's body after his suicide\nbased on the affair between the comedian Tony Hancock and Joan Le Mesurier\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nPapers\nTony Hancock websites\nEpisodes\n radio show on Radio 4 Extra (listen again available)\nMetadata"}
