{"id": "39748", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39748", "title": "Marching band", "text": "Company of instrumental musicians\nA marching band is a group of instrumental musicians who play while marching. Historically they were used in armed forces and many marching bands remain military bands. Others are still associated with military units or emulate a military style, with elements such as uniforms, flags and batons and occasionally rifles or sabers. Instrumentation typically includes brass, woodwind, and percussion instruments. \nMarching bands are generally categorised by affiliation, function, size and instrumentation. In addition to traditional military parades, marching bands are frequently seen at events as varied as carnivals, parades, sporting events, trade union events and marching band competitions.\nHistory.\nInstruments have been frequently used on the battlefield (for example the Iron Age carnyx and the medieval Ottoman military band) but the modern marching band developed from European military bands formed in the Baroque period, partly influenced by the Ottoman tradition. \n17th-century traveler Evliya \u00c7elebi noted the existence of 40 guilds of musicians in Istanbul. In the 18th century, each regiment in the British Army maintained its own military band. Until 1749 bandsmen were civilians hired at the expense of the colonel commanding a regiment. Subsequently, they became regular enlisted men who accompanied the unit on active service to provide morale enhancing music on the battlefield or, from the late nineteenth century on, to act as stretcher bearers. Instruments during the 18th century included fifes, drums, the oboe (hautbois), French horn, clarinet and bassoon. Drummers summoned men from their farms and ranches to muster for duty. In the chaotic environment of the battlefield, musical instruments were the only means of commanding the men to advance, stand or retire. In the mid 19th century, each smaller unit had their own fifer and drummer, who sounded the daily routine. When units massed for battle a band of musicians was formed for the whole.\nIn the United States, modern marching bands are often associated with American football games, with the oldest (the University of Notre Dame Band of the Fighting Irish) first performing at an American football game in 1887. After World War I, the presence and quality of marching bands in the American public school system expanded as military veterans with service band experience began to accept music teaching positions within schools with developments such as Precision Drill, a disciplined geometric march, based in part on military-style drill. Today, marching band competitions remain popular in the United States and largely parallel modern drum and bugle corps.\nMany marching bands are Military bands which often derive from instrumentation generally consists of brass, woodwinds and percussion and they typically march forward with consistent straight lines and a constant tempo to facilitate the steady marching of the military unit. Field music units include drum and bugle corps, fanfare bands, pipe bands and fife and drum corps.\nMilitary styled marching bands are present in many European countries due to its historical origins in 18th Century European field armies and are present in many other nations due to colonial influence, including Latin America and South America, South and South-East Asia and the Commonwealth (for example Fiji's Military Forces) and many ex-Soviet nations (with the USSR inheriting the tradition from the Kingdom of Russia).\nMany bands perform a wide selection of both traditional styles of music such as marches, with film scores, or adaptations of contemporary music. The goal of each band's performance is different. Some aim for maximum uniformity and precision; others aim to be as entertaining as possible. Some show bands also involve comedic elements, such as Scramble bands which generally do not march in time with the music, but, as their name implies, scramble from design to design.\nMany bands have auxiliaries that add a visual component to the performance such as a color guard or even dance lines and majorettes. In the USA, these auxiliaries may even perform as independent groups (such as winter guard). While military color guards were typically male, band color guards tend to be primarily female, though for both, mixed groups are becoming more common. \nA marching band is typically led by one or more drum majors, also called field commanders, who are usually responsible for conducting the band (sometimes using a large baton or mace) and are commonly referred to as the leader of the band. Commands\u2014such as vocal orders, clapping, or a whistle\u2014may be used to issue commands as well.\nShow Band Performance elements.\nThe following overview is heavily focused on the U.S. marching band tradition.\nMarching technique.\nGlide step.\nThe glide step, also commonly known as the \"roll step,\" involves bringing the heel gently to the ground with the toe pointed up, and then rolling forward onto the toes before lifting the foot to continue forward. While marching to the rear, the weight is placed continually on the ball of the foot with the heel elevated. This style is used by both marching bands as well as drum and bugle corps. The style, in comparison to high step, gives drill formations a more fluid appearance, allowing for better control of more difficult formations and various styles of music. With this control also comes the ability to perform a much broader range of tempos. Proper execution of a roll step gives a player marching at 40 beats per minute the same smooth tone as a player marching at 180. The roll step allows for much better control of the upper body, and thus better control of the air support needed for playing.\nSome bands, and a select few drum and bugle corps, use a bent-knee variant of roll step, usually known simply as \"bent knee,\" in which the members roll from heel to toe but lead the next step with the knee instead of the foot, then planting the heel of the next foot by straightening the leg.\nHigh step.\nThe high step is a style of marching used by many colleges and universities, including most bands of HBCUs and the Big Ten. Four primary sub-variants of the high are used:\nAn integral part of this style of marching is known as \"stop action,\" meaning that all movement ceases momentarily at the apex of each step. This requires a band to have a great deal of stamina, though is effective visually. High step marching is often accompanied by a horizontal swing of the player's body or instrument.\nJazz running\nJazz running is a unique technique that is used to counter a dip in height commonly experienced when covering long distances at speeds that would not be practical for standard marching techniques. This technique is performed by pushing off the legs in a lunging motion, and is historically associated with choreography for color guards within bands. However, the increased physical demand of modern performances in marching band and drum corps more often require instrumentalists to utilize this technique.\nLateral marching.\nWhen band members are marching in one direction but want to focus their sound on another, they may rotate their bodies at the waist, so that only the upper portion of the body faces in the direction of play. This is known as \"lateral marching\", but is more commonly known as either \"shifting\", \"traversing\", or \"sliding\". A lateral march is not a change in the direction of march, only in the direction the upper body faces. Percussion players, whose large drum harnesses often prevent them from twisting their torsos, and sometimes tuba and sousaphone players, instead uses a \"crab step\" when moving sideways. During a crab step, the musician crosses one leg over the other, either marching on the toes or rolling the foot sideways. Percussionists may also substitute roll step when their instruments would interfere with performing the high step.\nChanging direction.\nA true direction change involving the feet moving in a new direction requires either a \"prep step\" or a \"pivot\", both of which are sometimes referred to as a \"flank\" or \"stab\". To perform a prep step, on the last count of movement in the first direction a marcher plants the foot with the heel turned outward at half the angle of the turn desired, with the upper body still facing forward. On the next count, the other foot snaps into position completing the turn. The upper body may or may not turn with the lower body. Some bands plant the heel on the prep step rather than the toe but preserving the angle of the foot. To perform a pivot, the marcher pivots between directions over the ball of the foot on the last count instead of using a prep step.\nBackward marching.\nA \"back march\" may be used when the band wishes to move in the opposite direction from where it is projecting its sound. There are several ways to back march, one of which is to walk backward, putting each foot down and rolling from the toe to the heel (the exact reverse of the roll step). Another variation involves marching on the platforms of the feet, dragging the toe of the moving foot on the ground. Backward marching usually employs the same preference for leg straightness as forward marching (if the band marches with legs completely straight while marching forward, they also do so while marching backward, to preserve uniformity of style). Using peripheral vision to align oneself to formations or field markings is even more important during backward marching.\nMarking time.\nWhen a band is not moving, the members may \"mark time\", or march in place. The step used usually resembles the step that is used for marching forward, though mixing a high step mark time with a roll step march (or vice versa) produces an interesting visual effect. For a typical mark time, the foot is raised to the ankle bone of the opposite leg. The toe should not come off the ground and the knee should not come out much past the still-straight leg.\nSome bands mark time by bringing their feet up to their knee\u2014known as \"high-mark time\". Some bands practice marking time during concert arch with the toes coming off of the ground to give the marcher a greater sense of marching while standing still. The heel should hit the ground on the beat. Traditionally, the drumline would put their feet in a V-shape and lift either foot fully off the ground a few inches while marking time. This is to avoid hitting the drums with their legs. Additionally, some bands forgo marking time and instead come to a complete halt when not marching.\nStaying in step.\nEven when marking time, it is considered good form for all band members to stay \"in step\"\u2014that is, step with the same foot at the same time. A large majority of bands \"step off\" with, or start marching on, the left foot. Staying in step is generally easier when the band is playing music or when the drums are playing a marching cadence.\nWhen the band and percussion are not playing, rhythm may be maintained in a variety of ways: a drummer may play taps or rim shots, the drum major may clap or use a woodblock, a drum major or band member may vocalize a sharp syllable like \"hit,\" \"hut,\" or \"dut,\" or band members may chant the military call of \"left, left, left right left.\" Band members may count the steps of the move out loud to keep the entire band together. Typically, most moves consist of any number of steps that are a multiples of two or four, due to most marching band music being in even numbered time signatures. Even-numbered time signatures aid in staying in step because they assign odd-numbered counts to the left foot, and even-numbered counts to the right foot. If a band member is on the wrong foot, for instance, odd on the right foot and even on the left, this is referred to as being \"out of step\". When a band member is completely off tempo, it is referred to as being \"out of phase\".\nParade marching.\nIn parades, bands usually line up in a marching block composed of ranks and files. Each member tries to stay within his or her given rank and file, and to maintain even spacing with neighboring musicians. It is traditionally the responsibility of the people at the end of each rank and the front of each file to be in the correct location; this allows other band members to use them as a reference, also known as \"guiding\".\nBand members also try to keep a constant pace or step size while marching in parade. Step sizes usually vary between 22 and 30 inches (56\u201376 cm) per stride. A step size of 22.5\u00a0inches is called an \"8-to-5\" step because the marcher covers five yards (about 4.6 m) in eight steps. A step size of 30\u00a0inches is called \"6-to-5\" because five yards are covered in six steps. Because yard lines on an American football field are five yards apart, exact 8-to-5 and 6-to-5 steps are most useful for field shows.\nA drum cadence, sometimes called a \"walk beat\" or \"street beat,\" is usually played when the band is marching, oftentimes alternating with a song, and is typically how a band keeps time while not playing music. Alternatively, a drum or rim shot may be given on the odd beats to keep the band in step. Between songs and cadences, a roll is usually given to indicate what beat in the measure the band is at. Cadence tempo varies from group to group.\nField marching.\nWhile playing music during a field show, the band makes a series of formations, called drill, on the field, which may be pictures, geometric shapes, curvilinear designs, or blocks of musicians, although sometimes it may be pure abstract designs using no specific form.\nTypically, each band member has an assigned position in each formation. In many show bands and most drum corps, these positions are illustrated in a handheld booklet called a drill book (also known as a dot book). Drill books, or drill charts, show where each person stands during each set of the show. The drill charts include yard lines and hashes as they would be on an actual football field, which shows the band members where to stand relative to the yard lines and hashes. There are many ways of getting from one formation to the next:\nPlayers may point the bells of their instruments in the direction they are moving, or \"slide\" (also called traverse) with all the bells facing in the same direction. They may also point it towards the center of the field. Bands that march in time with the music typically also synchronize the direction of individuals' turns and try to maintain even spacing between individuals in formations (called intervals). Sometimes bands specifically have wind players turn their instruments away from the audience to emphasize the dynamics of the music.\nAuxiliaries can also add to the visual effect. Backdrops and props (\"scrims\") may be used on the field that fit the theme of the show or the music being performed. In comedic shows, particularly for university bands, an announcer may read jokes or a funny script between songs; formations that are words or pictures (or the songs themselves) may serve as punch lines.\nEach musician in a marching band creates sound waves. The waves from each musician, traveling at the speed of sound, reach the other musicians, field conductors, and listeners at slightly different times. If the distance between musicians is large enough, listeners may perceive waves to be . Typically, in this case, listeners perceive that one section of the band is playing their parts slightly after another section. This \"delay\" effect is informally referred to as \"ensemble tear\" or \"phasing\" (not to be confused with the music composition technique of the same name).\nUnited States.\nMany marching bands serve as entertainment during American football games, which may also be known as pep band. For college and high school marching bands, this is the primary purpose of the ensemble. Two National Football League teams designate an official marching band: the Washington Commanders, and the Baltimore Ravens. Marching bands are otherwise uncommon at the professional level.\nNearly all marching band personnel wear some kind of uniform. Military-style uniforms are most common, but there are bands that use everything from matching T-shirts and shorts to formal wear. The school or organization's name, symbol, or colors are commonly applied to uniforms. Uniforms may also have substantially different colors on the front and back, so if band members turn suddenly (\"flank\"), the audience sees a striking change of color. Band members at many Ivy League schools wear a jacket and tie while performing. The Southern Methodist University band wear a different combination of jackets, vests, ties, shirts, and pants for each half (changing before halftime) of each game and no clothing or uniform combinations are repeated during the marching season. The Alma College Kiltie Marching Band is famous for wearing kilts made of the official Alma College tartan.\nThe components of a band uniform are numerous. Common design elements include hats (typically shakos, pith helmets, combination hats or other styles of helmets) with feather plumes, capes, gloves, rank cords, and other embellishments. The USC Spirit of Troy Marching Band and Troy University's Sound of the South Marching Band wear traditional Trojan helmets. It is also common for band uniforms to have a stripe down the leg and light-colored shoes, or spats over dark shoes to emphasize the movement of the legs while marching. Similarly, uniforms may feature additional components which highlight movement of the upper body, such as the \"wings\" worn by the University of Minnesota's marching band to highlight flanking movements on the field. Competitive bands, however, many times opt for matching uniforms, especially pants and shoes (usually white or black) to hide the visual effect of members who are out of step as seen from a distance. Occasionally, a band forgoes traditional uniforms in favor of costumes that fit the theme of its field show. The costumes may or may not be uniform throughout the band. This kind of specialized uniform change is usually confined to competitive marching bands.\nDrum Majors, the field commanders and band directors, usually do not wear the regular band uniform, to better distinguish them from the rest of the band. Some wear more formal outfits or costumes that match the theme of the music, or most commonly a differently designed version of the regular band uniform, often employing different colors (especially white) or features such as capes. Some (especially at the college level) still employ the tall wool-lined shako or much larger bearskin (both often derisively referred to as a \"Q-Tip hat\"). Sousaphone players may use a military-style beret or entirely forgo the use of a head covering, as most hats may be in the way of the bell. Some auxiliary groups use uniforms that resemble gymnastics outfits: Often, these uniforms are themed, drawing inspiration from the music. Many auxiliary groups change the outfits they use from season to season based on the needs of the band, although some that do also have a \"base\" uniform for occasions such as parades or other ceremonies.\nBands may compete on criteria such as musicality, uniformity, visual impact, artistic interpretation, and the difficulty of the music and drill. Competition exists at all levels but is most common in the U.S. among secondary school bands and drum and bugle corps. Competitions at the national level, such as the Bands of America (BOA) Grand National Championships.\nAlthough its legitimacy is often called into question, competitive marching band is sometimes considered a sport, due in large part to the physical exertion required in combination with teamwork. Many HBCU marching band fans refer to marching band as \"marching sport.\" Sports Illustrated considered the activity a sport in 1987, describing the Drum Corps International World Championships \"one of the biggest sporting events of the summer.\" In the same article, Sports Illustrated quoted basketball coach Bobby Knight, \"If a basketball team trained as hard as these kids do, it would be unbelievable. I like to take my players [to watch drum corps] to show them what they can accomplish with hard work and teamwork. Besides, once they see them practice 12 hours a day, my players think I\u2019m a helluva lot easier.\"\nIn his presentation to the American College of Sports Medicine's annual meeting in 2009, researcher and exercise physiologist Gary Granata presented research after studying members of the Avon High School Marching Black and Gold, noting \"At the top levels of marching band and drum corps, you get a level of competition and athleticism that is equal to a Division I athletic program.\" Granata further pointed out, \"Performers are constantly moving, and often running, at velocities that reach 180 steps or more per minute while playing instruments that weigh up to 40 pounds.\"\nPerformers\u2019 metabolic rates matched those of marathon runners halfway through a marathon, while the heart rate was more along the lines of someone who was running a \"400 or 800-meter dash.\"\nPerformance styles range from traditional block marching to elaborate productions with evolving drill patterns.\nWAMSB (World Association of Marching Show Bands) is an international organization holding many competitions throughout the world. Its World Championships are held annually in the summer in a different country. Past host nations include Canada, Brazil, Japan, Malaysia, Denmark, Germany, Italy, &amp; Australia. WAMSB sanctioned events happen in 32 nations.\nIn the United States, there are two national competition circuits in which bands can compete: Bands of America and the United States Scholastic Band Association (USSBA, more commonly referred to as USBands), involving over 700 high school bands compete during the Fall season with bands of similar size and talent. Each competition provides approximately 40 professional judges who give feedback on the show's programming and design. At the season's end, the top 50 bands are invited to compete in the US Scholastic Band Championship, which is hosted at a college or professional stadium.\nBill Clinton, 42nd President of the United States, was a member of a marching band in high school. He attended Hot Springs High School in Arkansas and performed as a saxophone player while later serving as drum major for the band. He is the only U.S. President to have been a member of a marching band.\nCanada.\nMost marching bands in Canada are organized by the Canadian Band Association or by Canadian universities:\nAlthough many bands have still retained the British tradition for marching bands, most have also adopted the style used by their American counterparts. Canadian military bands are often associated with civilian marching bands. Many of the civilian marching bands that exist today, such as the Oshawa Civic Band, The Concert Band of Cobourg and the Toronto Signals Band, have military roots and were formerly Canadian Army bands. In the case of the aforementioned bands, their lineage is shared with the bands of The Ontario Regiment, the 6th Northumberland Militia and the 2nd Armoured Divisional Signals Regiment respectively. In the early to mid-20th century, the Canadian Forces maintained drum and bugle corps, which were similar in instrumentation and organization to civilian marching bands.\nTaiwan.\nIn Taiwan, the National Marching Band Association is the main organizer of local marching bands in the country. It is currently located at its headquarters in the Neihu District of Taipei City. The Taipei First Girls' High School currently sports one of the most acclaimed marching bands in the country.\nMalaysia.\nThe first marching bands were introduced in Malaysia during the British colonial period and has since grown and increased its importance. The most common are found in the Malaysian Armed Forces, however, in recent years, there has been a rise in the number of show bands and drum corps in the country. Although the Ministry of Education organizes most school marching bands, other organizations have made consistent efforts to organize local marching bands.\nRussia.\nIn Russia, there are not many school or local marching bands in existence, with most being government-sponsored military and police bands, as well as several bands operated by the local governments. The marching bands of the Russian Armed Forces are organized by the Military Band Service in the Ministry of Defence. Also known as \"Marshiruyushchiy orkestr\" (loosely translated to \u041c\u0430\u0440\u0448\u0438\u0440\u0443\u044e\u0449\u0438\u0439 \u043e\u0440\u043a\u0435\u0441\u0442\u0440, which means Marching Orchestra in Russian), notable Russian marching bands include the Band and Corps of Drums of the Moscow Military Music College, whose cadets are famous for setting the pace for the annual Victory Day Parades on Red Square. These types of bands only came into existence after 1991 when the Soviet Union ceased to exist. During the Soviet era, civilian like marching bands were extremely rare, with one of the only non-military bands having been employed in the late 1930s and early 1940s during National Sports Day parades in the capital of Moscow. Other Russian marching bands include the Drummers Group of the Boarding School for Girls of the Ministry of Defense of Russia and the Moscow &amp; District Pipe Band. The country has hosted many marching band tattoos within the last 70 years, including the Spasskaya Tower Military Music Festival and Tattoo in Moscow and the Amur Waves International Military Bands Festival in Khabarovsk.\nSingapore.\nThe traditions of both the Singapore Police Force Band and the Singapore Armed Forces Bands soon inspired the creation of the Singaporean marching band tradition. By the 1960s, school and college marching bands, corps of drums and drum and bugle corps began to be commonplace (the latter in cadet units), as well as bands of youth uniformed organizations and universities, all following the armed forces pattern and British and Malayan (later Malaysian) precedence. The People's Association became the first civilian organization to form a dedicated marching band in 1965-66, and the Ministry of Education followed suit with a teachers' band made up of band instructors. Today the Ministry of Education is responsible for overall control over the school, college, university and polytechnic bands within Singapore, with two dedicated cadet bands.\nSome of Singapore's oldest high school marching bands are from the Raffles' Institution, St. Joseph's Institution, Victoria School, Bukit Panjang Government HS and the Anglo-Chinese School.\nThe SPF has the country's three uniformed pipe bands, the Women's Police, SPF and Gurkha Contingent Pipe Bands, all raised in the late 1960s. Civilian pipe bands were formerly present in the PA, Boys Brigade and the Port of Singapore Authority.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39749", "revid": "24465790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39749", "title": "Cartoon Network Studios", "text": "American animation studio\nCartoon Network Studios, Inc. (abbreviated as CNS or CN Studios) is an American animation studio owned by the Warner Bros. Television Group division of Warner Bros. Entertainment, a subsidiary of Warner Bros. Discovery. The studio is the production arm of Cartoon Network, and was founded in 1994 as a division of Hanna-Barbera.\nThe studio primarily produces and develops animated programs and shorts for Cartoon Network and its programming blocks Adult Swim and Cartoonito, in addition to streaming service HBO Max. The studio has produced dozens of shows, including \"Dexter's Laboratory\", \"The Powerpuff Girls\" (and its film adaptation), \"Johnny Bravo\", \"Time Squad\", \"Samurai Jack\", \"The Grim Adventures of Billy &amp; Mandy\", \"Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends\", \"Camp Lazlo\", \"Ben 10\", \"Chowder\", \"The Marvelous Misadventures of Flapjack\", \"Adventure Time\", \"Generator Rex,\" \"Regular Show\", \"Steven Universe\", \"Clarence\", \"We Bare Bears\", \"OK K.O.! Let's Be Heroes\", \"Craig of the Creek\", and \"Infinity Train\".\nIn 1996, Time Warner acquired Turner Broadcasting System, which owned Cartoon Network and Hanna-Barbera at that time. In 1997, Hanna-Barbera consolidated its operations with Warner Bros. Animation, moving into their facilities in 1998, where Cartoon Network Studios also operated briefly. Hanna-Barbera closed permanently in 2001, and Warner Bros. Animation has managed its intellectual property to this day, occasionally using the Hanna-Barbera brand as a label.\nIn 1999, Cartoon Network acquired a large building in Burbank, California, to serve as the headquarters for Cartoon Network Studios after its effective separation from Hanna-Barbera and Warner Bros. Animation. This was due to the need for Cartoon Network Studios to become an independent entity dedicated to creating original series, while Warner Bros. Animation focused on existing IPs. The studio opened on May 22, 2000, and operated in those facilities for over 20 years.\nIn the 2020s, after multiple corporate mergers, the studio was consolidated into Warner Bros. Animation, and continued to operate as a separate division, although it was relocated to Second Century Development as the company's new headquarters on August 1, 2023. Sam Register, the president of both studios in Burbank, California, also leads Hanna-Barbera Studios Europe (formerly Cartoon Network Studios Europe) in London, England, alongside Vanessa Brookman.\nHistory.\n1990s.\nIn the 20th century, animation as a medium became popular on television. Hanna-Barbera became the premier studio for small-screen animated programs, launching a dominant series of Saturday-morning fare, including \"Scooby-Doo\", \"The Flintstones\", \"The Jetsons\", and more. By the 1980s, cable television was developed, with businessman Ted Turner one of its pioneers. Turner founded several cable channels and also acquired vast film libraries, and in 1991, his company signed a joint deal to buy Hanna-Barbera. The Cartoon Network was developed as a cable outlet to air these animated properties, which largely consisted of H-B reruns. As the channel grew in subscribers, executives at the Atlanta-based company sought out original programming to supplement its catalog. Other animation-heavy cable channels, including Nickelodeon and Disney Channel, respectively founded Games Animation and Walt Disney Television Animation as internal divisions to develop original programming. The network's first attempt at original content was \"Space Ghost Coast to Coast\", with the division of Cartoon Network in charge switching to production of adult-focused programming as Williams Street.\nCartoon Network Studios originated in 1994 as a division of Hanna-Barbera that focused on producing original programming suitable for children for the network. Hanna-Barbera had been located on Cahuenga Boulevard in Los Angeles since 1963, and housed the studio, its archives, and its extensive animation art collection. Its first productions included \"What a Cartoon!\" (1995), an anthology series of short subjects serving as pilots for new CN programs. The first of these, \"Dexter's Laboratory\", launched in 1996 and was an immediate success, with creator Genndy Tartakovsky becoming a longtime associate of the company. The same year, Turner Broadcasting System was merged with Time Warner, and Hanna-Barbera closed its Cahuenga campus, relocating to Sherman Oaks Galleria in nearby Sherman Oaks, where Warner Bros. Animation was located. Over the course of this transition, the Cartoon Network Studios branding was briefly phased out, with newer programs, including \"Johnny Bravo\" (1997) and \"The Powerpuff Girls\" (1998).\n2000s.\nOn July 21, 1999, Cartoon Network officially started the studio to separate itself from the complete folding of Hanna-Barbera into WBA. Following the death of the studio's co-founder William Hanna in 2001, Cartoon Network Studios took over the animation function of Hanna-Barbera. The network acquired a three-story 43,000-square-foot facility located at 300 N 3rd St. in Burbank, California to house its new offices, previously a commercial bakery, and prior to that, the location of a Pacific Bell telephone exchange. According to Cartoon Brew, the network spent around $1.2 million to renovate the building. The network took counsel from its top cartoonists, Genndy Tartakovsky and Craig McCracken, on the site of its new studio, as well as design proposals for its offices.\nIn March 2000, the network began to transfer its production offices, and on May 22, 2000, the studio was christened by veteran animator and animation advisor Joseph Barbera with a bottle of champagne. The building's official opening came on August 24, 2000; former DiC and Nickelodeon employees Brian A. Miller and Jennifer Pelphrey were hired to manage the studio. Mike Lazzo, then head of programming and development, designed a pirate flag, with a skull bearing the channel logo in its teeth, that flew over the building for several weeks before local police threatened action over its lack of permit; this logo was later to be used by the network for its nighttime programming block Adult Swim. Its artists quickly took to its stairwell with doodles and other graffiti that filled over its twenty-year history; it was also home to a mural by artist Ian Anderson titled \"Mazeway to Heaven\". The first new productions at the new offices included \"Samurai Jack\" and \"Time Squad\" (both 2001). In 2001, Lazzo called the studio \"the Termite Terrace of today.\"\nIn 2002, the studio produced two television pilots for Adult Swim, \"Welcome to Eltingville\" and \"The Groovenians\", none of which were picked as a full series. Also, the studio released this year its only theatrical film to date: \"The Powerpuff Girls Movie\", based on \"The Powerpuff Girls\", which received positive reviews from critics but was a commercial failure for Warner Bros. Pictures at the box office. In 2006, CNS collaborated with sister studio Williams Street for the first time for \"Korgoth of Barbaria\", a television pilot made for Adult Swim, which was also not green-lit as a series.\nIn 2007, CNS began its first foray into live-action with the hybrid series \"Out of Jimmy's Head\", and then its first fully live-action project, ' and its sequel, ', along with the television pilots \"Locker 514\", \"Siblings\" and \"Stan the Man\". The studio's first live-action series \"Tower Prep\" would arrive in 2010. Former New Line Television producer Mark Costa was hired to oversee the projects and CNS' live-action production company Alive and Kicking, Inc.. \"Incredible Crew\" was the last series in that genre the studio produced for Cartoon Network. Despite the failure of live-action on the channel, the studio's infrastructure was retained to produce live-action fare for sibling programming block Adult Swim, identifying on-air as Alive and Kicking, along with two other companies (Rent Now Productions and Factual Productions), instead of using the Cartoon Network Studios banner.\n2010s.\nOn April 5, 2010, \"Adventure Time\" premiered on Cartoon Network; the same series began life as a short featured on Nicktoons' \"Random! Cartoons\" that was ultimately not green-lit as a series by that channel. Cartoon Network picked it up later, and production of the show moved to CNS. The series lasted until 2018 with 10 seasons and 283 episodes. A film was announced in 2015, but in 2018 Adam Muto said that the film was never officially announced. In 2019, a continuation, titled \"\", was announced for HBO Max with a release in 2020. Also this year, \"The Cartoonstitute\", an incubator series similar to \"What a Cartoon!\", debuted on Cartoon Network Video. The pilots of \"Regular Show\" and \"Uncle Grandpa\" were presented here along with other shorts, with the \"Uncle Grandpa\" pilot also serving as a basis for \"Secret Mountain Fort Awesome\", which preceded the actual series.\nIn 2014, CNS produced its first miniseries, \"Over the Garden Wall\". The following year, \"Long Live the Royals\" was also premiered. In 2016, the studio produced two reboots based on \"The Powerpuff Girls\" and \"Ben 10\" respectively. Also, the studio produced its first television series based on a series of online shorts, \"Mighty Magiswords\".\nIn 2017, after plans as old as 2002 for a film didn't materialize, \"Samurai Jack\" was revived for a fifth and final season, which the studio returned to produce for Adult Swim, to critical acclaim, concluding the series after its cancellation from Cartoon Network in 2004. Also this year, it was announced that CNS, in collaboration with Studio T, would produce the adult animated series \"Close Enough\" for TBS, created by \"Regular Show\" creator J. G. Quintel.\nIn 2019, after handling a few episodes of \"Harvey Birdman, Attorney at Law\", the second season of \"Black Dynamite\", the above-mentioned fifth season of \"Samurai Jack\" and producing the above-mentioned television pilots \"Welcome to Eltingville\", \"The Groovenians\" and \"Korgoth of Barbaria\", CNS produced its first full program for Adult Swim: \"Primal\", an adult animated series from Genndy Tartakovsky. The first five episodes were also packaged for a limited theatrical release as a feature film titled \"Primal: Tales of Savagery\".\nCNS also began to produce content for parent company WarnerMedia's upcoming streaming service HBO Max, including \".\" After the failure of its planned animation block, \"Close Enough\" was also shifted from TBS to HBO Max. In the 2010s, the studio began to outgrow its original building, and began to rent space in other facilities in the Burbank Media Center district.\n2020s.\nIn August 2020, WBA president Sam Register was appointed head of the studio. Amy Friedman was named head of programming for Cartoon Network after Rob Sorcher resigned his roles as head of the studio and chief content officer, and switching to Warner Bros. Television Group for an overall production deal.\nIn 2021, Jason DeMarco was named SVP for Anime &amp; Action Series/Longform for Warner Bros. Animation and Cartoon Network Studios, and CNS Europe was renamed Hanna-Barbera Studios Europe as a tribute to the original Hanna-Barbera studio.\nOn May 11, 2022, after Tom Ascheim exited his role as president and departed, the Warner Bros. Global Kids, Young Adults and Classics division was broken up as part of a restructuring by new owner Warner Bros. Discovery and its studios\u2014including CNS\u2014were moved directly under Warner Bros. Television. On October 11, CNS and WBA consolidated their development and production teams as part of a restructuring by Warner Bros. Television, with Audrey Diehl overseeing kids and family, Peter Girardi overseeing adult animation, and Sammy Perlmutter overseeing animated long-form productions. The merger would not impact their output as labels, with CNS continuing to focus on original content and WBA used for classic franchises.\nOn July 9, 2023, Miller announced via Twitter that the Cartoon Network Studios Burbank building would close its doors on August 1, with all operations being transferred to WBA as both CNS and WBA would be moving to the new Warner Bros. Second Century building. While unconfirmed, Amid Amidi of Cartoon Brew reported its production teams would move to the Second Century Development, a pair of buildings with over 800,000 square feet of office space, just adjacent to the Warner Bros. lot. On December 5, it was revealed that the Hollywood Production Center had moved into the CN Burbank building. Brian A. Miller revealed that HPC has always owned the building, and Cartoon Network had a long-term lease.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39750", "revid": "28903366", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39750", "title": "Colour guard", "text": "Type of military unit\nIn military organizations, a colour guard (or color guard) is a detachment of soldiers assigned to the protection of regimental colours and the national flag. This duty is highly prestigious, and the military colour is generally carried by a young officer (ensign), while experienced non-commissioned officers (colour sergeants) are assigned to the protection of the national flag. These non-commissioned officers, accompanied in several countries by warrant officers, can be ceremonially armed with either sabres or rifles to protect the colour. Colour guards are generally dismounted, but there are also mounted colour guard formations as well.\nHistory.\nAs long as armies existed there was a need for soldiers to know where their comrades were. A solution to this problem was the carrying of colourful banners or other insignia. Such flags or banners either showed a personal symbol of the leader of said units or a symbol for the \"state\" they represented. \nSuch banners or flags also came to represent a units identity and history. They were therefore treated with reverence as they represented the honour and traditions of the regiment. The loss of a unit's flag was shameful, and losing that central point of reference could also make the unit break up. Therefore, regiments tended to adopt colour guards, a detachment of experienced or \u00e9lite soldiers, to protect their colours. As a result, the capture of an enemy's standard was considered as a great feat of arms.\nRegimental flags were sometimes awarded to a regiment by a head of state during a ceremony, which was considered a high honour usually reserved for elite units, and colours may be inscribed with battle honours or other symbols representing former achievements.\nDue to the advent of modern weapons, and subsequent changes in tactics, colours are no longer used in battle but continue to be carried by colour guards at events of formal character.\nBy country.\nArgentina.\nIn the Argentinean Armed Forces, the Colour Guard is composed by a junior officer (normally the most junior in the unit) carrying the colours, accompanied by two senior NCOs with rifles, who provide the escort. The group is followed by a senior NCO carrying the regimental standard, with two junior NCOs (sometimes, privates) as escorts. In academies and schools, the colours are carried by the student of the senior class with the highest marks, escorted by the two who follow him.\nPeople's Republic of China.\nIn the Chinese People's Liberation Army, the colour guards include one ensign holding the flag of the People's Liberation Army as the national colour domestically or the flag of China when abroad, and two officers or senior NCOs assisting the ensign holding rifles.\nIn the parades of the 1950s, this configuration was present in every unit of the PLA up to the parade of 1959, but with the ensign and escorts drawn from individual formations. Today, only honour guards are granted colour guard duty to represent the whole of the PLA. Being the senior-most branch of the PLA, the Ground Forces representative serves as the ensign in the service colour guard, with the officer to his/her right being from the Navy and the officer to their left being from the Air Force. Since 1981, the PLA has continued a tradition of the colour guard detail with the PLA flag leading the Beijing Garrison Honor Guard Battalion in military parades. In December 2017, the Beijing Garrison Colour Guard Company of the People's Armed Police, which is present during flag ceremonies in Tienanmen Square in Beijing carrying the national flag, was officially attached to the honour guard battalion. Its colour guard squad follows the same format as the guard of honor colour guard squad.\nTaiwan (Republic of China).\nIn Taiwan, the colour guard tradition of the Republic of China Armed Forces is modeled on the German, Russian and US practice. Until 1976, each military unit sported a singular stand of colours on parade, as opposed to the honour guard of the ROCAF, which is more aligned with the traditions of the US Joint Service Honour Guard of the Joint Force Headquarters National Capital Region. All colour bearers of formations above company level must be, following US tradition, holding the rank of sergeant or above as a non-commissioned officer, while the colour escorts are lower ranking enlisted personnel. All wear full dress, service dress or battle dress uniforms. Since the National Day parade of 1978, the format of unit colour guards in ROCAF formations of battalion size (and of equivalent formations) is:\nBrigade-level colours (and above) are guided by the left and right escorts only.\nThe joint service colour guard of the ROCAF General Headquarters, today as in the past, is similarly composed but is more larger, with its composition being\nCommonwealth of Nations.\nColour guards are used in the military throughout the Commonwealth of Nations, including Australia, Canada, Jamaica, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. A colour guard unit typically consists of the standard-bearer, who is of the rank of second lieutenant or equivalent (pilot officer or sub-lieutenant), positioned in the centre of the colour guard, flanked by two or more individuals, typically armed with rifles or sabres. A colour sergeant major typically stands behind the colours carrying a pace stick. So, the formation (when the colours are combined on parade) is as follows:\nAside from presenting arms and sabres, colour guards of the Commonwealth of Nations are expected to lower their flags to the ground in full and regular salutes in ceremonies and parades. Civilians should stand during such times and soldiers are expected to salute them when not in formation.\nUnited Kingdom.\nAs the British Army, the Royal Air Force, the Royal Marines and the Royal Navy have several types of colours, there are also colour guards for these colours and these colours and their colour guards are as follows:\nBritish Army (cavalry).\nIn the cavalry, the King's Standard or Guidon and the regimental/squadron standard or guidon (for the light cavalry only) are the equivalents to the King's and regimental colours.\nColour guards in the artillery units are technically the lead gun's crew and leader (except in the Honourable Artillery Company which uses both guns and colours) and there are no colour guards in the rifle regiments (nowadays The Rifles), the Royal Gurkha Rifles (which use the King's Truncheon) and in the Royal Hospital in Chelsea.\nRoyal Navy.\nAll of the RN's King's Colours are identical. Within the RN a colour guard unit consists of:\nFrance.\nA French colour guards typically includes one ensign holding the flag of France as the national colour, two non-commissioned officers assisting the ensign, and three enlisted personnel behind to guard the colour.\nThe colour guards of France's military academies tend to wear swords; those of NCO schools, other educational institutions and active units carry rifles instead. This design is used in other countries with Francophone populations.\nFrench colour guards render honours on the command of present arms (pr\u00e9sentez arme). On command, the two NCOs and three enlisted will execute present arms, whether it be by presenting their sabre vertically or by putting the right hand over the handle of their weapon while the ensign lowers the national colour/unit colour somewhere close to their legs. On some occasions, the flag is not lowered unless the guard is in the presence of a dignitary (such as the President of the Republic) or a military leader (such as the Chief of the Defence Staff).\nGermany.\nColour guards of the Bundeswehr follow the old German traditions of a three-man colour guard team. A tradition stemming from the days of empire, the colour guard is made up of an ensign, usually a senior NCO (and historically a lieutenant), and two unarmed escorts.\nIndonesia.\nIn Indonesia, the colour guard is known as \"Pataka\" an abbreviation from the Indonesian term \"Pasukan Tanda Kehormatan\" which is the term used in various uniformed institutions including the Indonesian National Armed Forces (TNI), the Indonesian National Police (Polri), the Municipal Police units, etc. The Pataka consists of white-uniformed 9 to 12 guardsmen which are present during ceremonial events carrying and escorting the Colour of the institution. The Pataka are modeled from the former Dutch practice and is led by a colour sergeant positioned at the middle of the guard (rear of the ensign), while the ensign who carries the colour is usually a junior lieutenant (2nd Lieutenant or Ensign). For a battalion level, the colour is carried by a Sergeant/chief petty officer. In the case of a massed colour guard, the Ensign (1st Lieutenant/Lieutenant (junior grade) rank leads the formation. In the Army, the Horse Cavalry Detachment (\"Detasemen Kavaleri Berkuda\") maintains a mounted colour guard unit.\nComposition.\nThe uniform of the colour guard in Indonesia is all-white, wearing a white ceremonial combat helmet similar to the M1 helmet, white full dress uniforms, white leather flag carrier worn by the ensign, and white parade boots. The colour guard from the military or police usually carries the Lee\u2013Enfield or M1 Garand rifle, but sometimes the M16, FN FAL or Pindad SS1 rifle is used.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, an \"Escolta de la bandera\" or \"Escolta\" is used to describe colour guards and flag parties in the Spanish language. In Mexico these formations are made up of six individuals: the flag party commander and the escort proper of around 5, following the French practice. In the Mexican Armed Forces, National Guard and state police formations the colour escort squad is made up of:\nIn Mexican schools, during flag ceremonies\u2014or as known in Mexico \"juramentos a la bandera\" or \"honores a la bandera\"\u2014the school's colour guard march around the schoolyard while the rest of the students and school staff sing the national anthem; once they finish, the pledge of allegiance is recited, even though it's not mandated by law to do so, and finally the colour guard march off.\nNormally, the honour of being part of such colour guards\u2014or as known in Mexico \"escoltas\"\u2014is bestowed upon disciplined students with high grades in the latest school year (6th grade in elementary schools, 9th grade in middle schools, and 12th grade in high schools). Sometimes, though, students from lower years or with lower grades may be chosen. Some schools only employ female students.\nThe layout consists of the flag-bearer flanked by two escorts\u2014the right and the left escort\u2014on the rear there are two rearguards and finally to the right escort's right is the commander. Normally the shortest members happen to be the rearguards. They wear their school dress or athletic uniform.\nNetherlands.\nThe Dutch armed forces have similar ranks corresponding to a colour guard, the \"vaandrig\" and \"kornet\" (aspirant officers who have not been sworn in yet). The colour guard practice mirrors that of the United Kingdom, with an ensign of second lieutenant rank (or equivalent), armed escorts, and a colour guard commander. All wear full dress uniform as a general rule.\nPost-Soviet states.\nThe practices of the colour guards for the armed forces of a number of post-Soviet states in the Commonwealth of Independent States are similar to one another, adopting the practice from the former Soviet Armed Forces. Colour guards from these states are typically composed of a colour officer, one ensign or senior NCO holding the flag of their respective country as the national colour or the unit colour, and two enlisted personnel assisting the ensign. Active units, military academies, and guards of honour carry sabers in the colour guard, if needed, rifles may be substituted. The guard wears full or combat dress uniform.\nIf there are multiple colour guards marching in a parade at the same time, one guard is required to march directly behind the first guard. During the Soviet era, the Soviet flag was never allowed to be paraded by a military colour guard, with military and regimental flags only being paraded in colour guards. On occasion during the Soviet era, the Victory Banner was also used in colour guard teams, with the last known occasions being in 1975, 1977, 1985, 1987 and 1990.\nHowever, several post-Soviet armed forces have deviated/modified the practices of the former Soviet colour guard; evident with the colour guards of the Turkmen Ground Forces, and the Armed Forces of Ukraine, whose colour guards dip their flags as a form of salute.\nThe customs practiced by the colour guards of the former Soviet Armed Forces was also adopted by the Mongolian Armed Forces, given the historical relationship between the two countries. Other countries such as Afghanistan, Cuba (replacing the United States practice after 1959), North Korea and Vietnam have adopted this variant of the Soviet system.\nRomania.\nA standard template for a colour guard formation in the Romanian Armed Forces follows French precedent but with the addition of a colour officer leading the formation. The front of the guard is made up of the ensign, a junior officer, flanked by two armed or unarmed escorts, together with the colour officer, with three rear escorts behind the ensign.\nFrom 1949 to 1986 the Army of the Socialist Republic of Romania and Securitate followed Soviet practice in colour guard training and protocols. Since that year the old tradition was restored in the uniformed organizations and thus remains till today in the country.\nColours of battalions and brigades are not provided with a colour guard at all since they were introduced in the 2000s.\nSerbia.\nGiven a shared heritage with Austria and Turkey plus its own traditions, the modern Serbian Armed Forces maintains a colour guard component. Every unit of the Armed Forces has a colour company that includes the colour company commander and the colour guards; which includes one ensign, usually a subaltern officer, two armed senior NCOs serving as colour escorts, and two honour guard platoons guarding the colour from the rear also armed. Unlike in other countries the colour guard company wears either full or combat dress. The Guard of the Serbian Armed Forces has its colour company wearing dress uniform.\nSweden.\nIn Sweden the colour guard can be composed in three distinct manners: Greater colour guard, smaller colour guard and an officers guard. Each regiment, or military unit that carries a colour, in Sweden sets up its own colour guard. The Swedish military rank of f\u00e4nrik (and the corresponding cavalry rank of \"kornett\") was originally intended for the holder of the company flag. This duty was considered so prestigious that an officer was necessary to carry it out. Today, it is a regular officer rank.\nComposition.\nA expanded colour guard composed of two commissioned officers, called \"fanf\u00f6rare\" (ensigns, literally \"carriers of the colour\") and eight enlisted personnel behind the colour or colours. This stems from the time of king Gustavus Adolphus and the Thirty Years' War when all Swedish regiments had eight battalions. Each battalion contributed one soldier to the common colour guard. If one colour is carried the second officer serves as the colour officer.\nA smaller colour guard is composed of one commissioned officer and four enlisted soldiers. An officers colour guard is composed of three commissioned officers, one ensign and two officer escorts carrying sabres.\nUnited States.\nIn the military of the United States, the colour guard carries the national colour and other flags appropriate to its position in the chain of command. Typically these include a unit flag and a departmental flag (Army, Marines, Navy, Air Force, Space Force or Coast Guard, plus the National Guard Bureau (Army and/or Air Force)). In addition to the flag bearers, who are positioned in the center of the colour guard, there are two or more individuals who carry rifles and or sabres. This is a symbol that the flag (and its nation) will always be protected.\nComposition of the US colour guard.\nIn the U.S., traditionally, the unit's sergeant major is responsible for the safeguarding, care, and display of the organizational colours. The sergeant major is also responsible for the selection, training, and performance of the members. The colour guard consists of enlisted members and is commanded by the senior (colour) Sergeant, who carries the National Colors and gives the necessary commands for movements and rendering honours during drill exercises or parade ceremonies.\nBeing assigned to the colour guard is considered an honour due to the fact that these individuals present and carry the symbols of their unit and country. Depending on the circumstance and subject to the orders of their commander, members may wear full dress or less formal uniforms. It is mandatory for all members of the colour guard to wear headgear, for example, a garrison cap, beret, or service cap. On occasion, certain colour guards can be horse-mounted.\nA US colour guard is made up of a \"Color Sergeant\" carrying the National Colours and serves as the unit commander, a unit or command colour bearer, and two colour escorts carrying rifles and/or sabres. If multiple colours are carried, multiple colour bearers may be needed.\nRendering honours and Maneuvering.\nThe U.S. colour guard is formed and marched in one rank at close interval. Since the National Colors must always be in the position of honour on the right, the colour guard must execute a special movement to reverse direction. It does not execute rear march, nor does it execute about face. Rather, it performs a maneuver derived from the standard counter-column command, generally known as \"counter march\" or \"colour reverse march\", in order to keep the precedence of flags in order.\nOther drill movements performed by the colour guard include presenting arms, left and right wheel (turns) marches, eyes right (upon passing the reviewing stand during a parade), casing / uncasing the colour, and fixing/unfixing bayonets (by the arms bearers).\nLiberation Day parade.\nThe colour guard renders honours when the national anthem is played or sung, when passing in review during a parade, or in certain other circumstances. In these cases, the unit and departmental flags salute by dipping (leaning the flag forward). However, with the exception of a response to a naval salute, the United States national flag renders no salute. This is enshrined in the United States Flag Code and U.S. law.\nIn the U.S. military, individuals or units passing or being passed by uncased (unfurled) colours render honours when outdoors. Individuals who are not part of any formation begin the hand salute when the colours are six paces distant and hold it until they have passed six paces beyond the colours.\nCivilians are expected to stand at the position of attention with their right hand placed over their heart for the same period, and the hand salute applies to uniformed organizations as well (specifically the Boy Scouts of America and Girl Scouts of the USA). Since recently, veterans are expected to hand salute the colours too, like their military counterparts including personnel not in uniform.\nVatican City.\nIn the Swiss Guard, the bearer of the colours is the sergeant major of the guard. On such occasions, he is protected by two guardsmen (one to either side, ranked at either corporal or vice-corporal) carrying flame-bladed swords in place of the Guard's nominal ceremonial weapon, the halberd.\nIn film and television.\nhttps:// is 2023 documentary film directed by Allen Otto and executive produced by Jim Czarnecki. The film premiered at the 2023 Philadelphia Latino Film Festival. The film follows the journey of an all-female colour guard team at Bel Air High School whose goal is to qualify for the 2020 WGI World Championships, which were ultimately canceled due to the COVID-19 pandemic, with a performance dedicated to the victims of the 2019 El Paso Shooting. \nContemporary Color is a 2016 documentary film directed by Turner Ross and Bill Ross IV. The film was produced as a collaboration between David Byrne, Michael Gottwald, Dan Janvey and Josh Penn.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39751", "revid": "20318", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39751", "title": "Multi-user software", "text": "Type of computer software\nMulti-user software is computer software that allows access by multiple users of a computer. Time-sharing systems are multi-user systems. Most batch processing systems for mainframe computers may also be considered \"multi-user\", to avoid leaving the CPU idle while it waits for I/O operations to complete. However, the term \"multitasking\" is more common in this context.\nAn example is a Unix or Unix-like system where multiple remote users have access (such as via a serial port or Secure Shell) to the Unix shell prompt at the same time. Another example uses multiple X Window sessions spread across multiple terminals powered by a single machine \u2013 this is an example of the use of thin client. Similar functions were also available in a variety of non-Unix-like operating systems, such as Multics, VM/CMS, OpenVMS, MP/M, Concurrent CP/M, Concurrent DOS, FlexOS, Multiuser DOS, REAL/32, OASIS, THEOS, PC-MOS, TSX-32 and VM/386.\nSome multi-user operating systems such as Windows versions from the Windows NT family support simultaneous access by multiple users (for example, via Remote Desktop Connection) as well as the ability for a user to disconnect from a local session while leaving processes running (doing work on their behalf) while another user logs into and uses the system. The operating system provides isolation of each user's processes from other users, while enabling them to execute concurrently.\nManagement systems are implicitly designed to be used by multiple users, typically at least one system administrator or system operator, and an end-user community.\nThe complementary term, single-user, is most commonly used when talking about an operating system being usable only by one person at a time, or in reference to a single-user software license agreement. Multi-user operating systems such as Unix sometimes have a single user mode or runlevel available for emergency maintenance. Examples of single-user operating systems include MS-DOS, OS/2 and Classic Mac OS."}
{"id": "39752", "revid": "47248563", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39752", "title": "Sousaphone", "text": "Brass musical instrument\nThe sousaphone ( ) is a brass musical instrument in the tuba family. Created around 1893 by J.\u00a0W. Pepper at the direction of American bandleader John Philip Sousa (after whom the instrument was then named), it was designed to be easier to play than the concert tuba while standing or marching, as well as to carry the sound of the instrument above the heads of the band. Like the tuba, sound is produced by moving air past the lips, causing them to vibrate or \"buzz\" into a large cupped mouthpiece. Unlike the tuba, the instrument is bent in a circle to fit around the body of the musician; it ends in a large, flaring bell that is pointed forward, projecting the sound ahead of the player. Because of the ease of carrying and the direction of sound, it is widely employed in marching bands, as well as various other musical genres. Sousaphones were originally made of brass. Beginning in the mid-20th century, some sousaphones have also been made of lighter materials, such as fiberglass and plastic.\nHistory.\nThe first sousaphone was built by James Walsh Pepper in 1893 at the request of John Philip Sousa, who was dissatisfied with the helicons in use by the United States Marine Band. Some sources credit C.\u00a0G. Conn with its construction, because of the first sousaphone he built later in 1898. Sousa wanted a tuba-like instrument that would send sound upward and over the band, much like a concert (upright) tuba. The new instrument had an oversized bell pointing straight up, rather than the directional bell of a normal helicon.\nThe sousaphone was initially developed as a concert instrument rather than for marching. Sousa wanted the new instrument for the professional band which he started after leaving the Marines, and this band marched only once. Sousa mainly used sousaphones built by C.G. Conn. Although less balanced on a player's body than a helicon, because of the large spectacular bell high in the air, the sousaphone retained the tuba-like sound by widening the bore and throat of the instrument significantly. Its upright bell led to the instrument being dubbed a \"rain-catcher\". Some versions of this design allowed the bell to also rotate forward, projecting the sound to the front of the band. This bell configuration remained the standard for several decades and is the standard today.\nThe instrument proved practical for marching, and by 1908 the United States Marine Band adopted it.\nVersions with the characteristic extra 90\u00b0 bend making a forward-facing bell were developed in the early 1900s. Early sousaphones had bells, with bells popular in the 1920s. From the mid-1930s onward, sousaphone bells have been standardized at a diameter of . Some larger sousaphones (Monster, Grand, Jumbo, Giant or Grand Jumbo, depending on brand) were produced in limited quantities.\nConstruction.\nThe sousaphone is a valved brass instrument with the same tube length and musical range as other tubas. The sousaphone's shape is such that the bell is above the tubist's head and projecting forward. The valves are situated directly in front of the musician slightly above the waist and all of the weight rests on the left shoulder. The bell is normally detachable from the instrument body to facilitate transportation and storage. Except for the instrument's general shape and appearance, the sousaphone is technically similar to a tuba.\nFor simplicity and light weight, modern sousaphones almost always use three non-compensating piston valves in their construction, in direct contrast to their concert counterparts' large variation in number, type, and orientation. Both the tuba and sousaphone are semi-conical brass instruments. No valved brass instrument can be entirely conical, since the middle section containing the valves must be cylindrical. While the degree of bore conicity does affect the timbre of the instrument, much as in a cornet and trumpet, or a euphonium and a trombone, the bore profile of a sousaphone is similar to that of most tubas.\nTo facilitate making the mouthpiece accessible to players of different height or body shapes, most sousaphones contain a detachable tubing gooseneck which arises from the lead pipe on the upwind side of the valves. One or two slightly-angled bit(s) (short tubing lengths) are inserted into the gooseneck, and then the mouthpiece is inserted into the terminal bit. This arrangement may be adjusted in height and yaw angle to place the mouthpiece comfortably at the player's lips.\nMaterials.\nMost sousaphones are manufactured from sheet brass, usually yellow or silver, with silver, lacquer, and gold plating options, much like many brass instruments. However, the sousaphone (uniquely) is also commonly seen manufactured from fiberglass, due to its lower cost, greater durability, and significantly lighter weight.\nThe weight of a sousaphone can be between and .\nPitch.\nMost modern sousaphones are made in the key of BB\u266d (Low B Flat) and like tubas (which are commonly made in pitches of BB\u266d, CC, EE\u266d, and F) the instrument's part is written in \"concert pitch\", not transposed by key for a specific instrument. Although sousaphones may have a more restricted range than their concert tuba counterpart (most sousaphones have 3 valves instead of 4 to reduce weight), generally they can all play the same music and usually have parts written in the bass clef and the indicated octave is played (unlike double bass or electric bass that sound an octave lower than the indicated note). Many older sousaphones were pitched in the key of E\u266d, but current production of sousaphones in that key is limited.\nVarieties.\nAlthough most major instrument manufacturers have made, and many continue to make, sousaphones, Conn and King (H.N. White) instruments are generally agreed among players to be the standards against which other sousaphones are judged for tone quality and playability. Perhaps the most highly regarded sousaphone ever built is the Conn model 20K, introduced in the mid-1930s and still in production. Some players, especially those who find the 20K too heavy for marching, prefer the slightly smaller King model 1250, first made in the late 1920s and also still in production as model 2350. Historically, Holton, York and Martin sousaphones have also been considered fine horns.\nVery large bore (&gt;= 0.750\u00a0inch) sousaphones, with oversized bells as large as in diameter, were made by Conn (\"Grand Jumbo\" [46K (3-valve) &amp; 48K (4-valve)]) and King (\"Jumbo\" [1265 (3- &amp; 4-valve versions)] &amp; \"Giant\" [1270 (3-valve) &amp; 1271 (4-valve)]) in the mid-1920s and 1930s, and by Martin, York, &amp; Buescher, but they disappeared from the catalogs during the Depression or at the onset of World War\u00a0II. Because of their weight and cost, few were made and even fewer survive, especially the 4-valve models.\nFiberglass.\nSince 1961, sousaphones have been available made of fiberglass reinforced plastics instead of brass; RMC-Reynolds announced their new 18-pound instrument that year (branded as \"Reynolds\" or \"Martin\") and Conn's 16-3/4-pound 36K debuted soon thereafter. King first advertised its new 18-1/2 pound \"1280\" model in 1964, as did Holton with its FG-122 and Selmer with its Buescher-division instrument. Olds first advertised its fiberglass instrument in 1966. The fiberglass versions are used mainly for marching, with brass instruments being used for all other situations. Fiberglass sousaphones can be found commonly in younger marching bands, such as middle schools, due to their lighter weight. Depending on the model, the fiberglass version does not have as dark and rich a tone as the brass (King fiberglass sousaphones tended to have smooth fiberglass and a tone somewhat more like a brass sousaphone; Conn fiberglass sousaphones often had rough fiberglass exteriors and a thinner sound; the Conn is also lighter).\nAdditional valves.\nIn the 1920s and 1930s, four-valved sousaphones were often used by professional players, especially E\u266d sousaphones; today, however, four-valved B\u266d sousaphones are uncommon and are prized by collectors, especially those made by Conn, King (H.N. White), and Holton. Jupiter Company started production of four-valve BB\u266d sousaphones in the late 2000s, and Dynasty USA makes a four-valve BB\u266d sousaphone as well. Criticisms of the fourth valve on a sousaphone center on additional weight, although the fourth valve improves intonation and facilitates playing of the lower register.\nDue to the large size of most sousaphones, the sub-contra register (for which the fourth valve is largely intended) is already covered by alternate resonances, known as \"false tones\" (see Tuba article). Many beginners are not aware of the false-tone resonances on their sousaphones because these notes reside in the sub-contra register, which is nearly impossible for most beginners to access. Some professionals develop a \"raised embouchure\" to securely play these notes. This is where either the upper or lower lip (depending on the player) takes up most of the mouthpiece area. The embouchure provides almost twice the room for vibration of the single lip (compared to the 50\u201350 embouchure).\nNon-American sousaphones.\nAsian sousaphones made in China and India are gaining popularity in the street band market. In Switzerland and Southern Germany, \"Guggenmusik\" bands often use these instruments that provide great display and passable tone. Most are tuned in E\u266d. Brands like Zweiss with older British designs make affordable sousaphones that have broken the \u20ac500 barrier. These are mostly in the medium-bell size of . Chinese brands are mostly reverse-engineered models and quite passable.\nSpecial effects.\nIn large marching bands of the United States, the bell is often covered with a tight fitting cloth, called a sock, which enables the sousaphone section to spell out the school's name, initials, or mascot. The Leland Stanford Junior University Marching Band T\u00f6\u00f6bz! have a tradition of painting the front surface of their sousaphone bells with a variety of images.\nSousaphone players are also known to perform the 'flaming tubas', in which flash paper is ignited in the bell, thus making it appear as if the musician is breathing fire. David Silverman developed a propane powered flaming sousaphone with a trigger valve to control an array of flame jets across the top of the bell of his horn.\nThe Yale Precision Marching Band has made a tradition of setting fire to the tops of the bells of their sousaphones, including in the fall of 1992 when sousaphones served as the \"candles\" of a \"wedding cake\" formed by the band when two band alumni were married during a halftime show. They also utilize what they refer to as the \"\u00dcberphone\", a sousaphone that was disassembled from its coiled format and welded back together on a twelve-foot frame to extend straight up from the player's shoulders.\nCollege marching bands.\nJohn Philip Sousa was a benefactor of the University of Illinois music program and a friend of the university's Director of Bands Albert Austin Harding. The Marching Illini became the first band to march in a football halftime show, and were the first band to use sousaphones on the field.\nThe sousaphone sections of some marching bands have developed specialized performance traditions. The University of California Marching Band Bass section traditionally \"struts\" during the band's pregame show. During the \"strut\" the section separates from the rest of the band, circles the North goal post, and rejoins the band to complete the Script Cal. The University of Southern California Trojan Marching Band sousaphones play John Williams' \"Imperial March\" from \"Star Wars\" in single file when crossing streets on their way to and from performances on the USC campus. When The Ohio State University Marching Band performs its traditional Script Ohio formation, a senior sousaphone player dots the \"i\".\nThe Fightin' Texas Aggie Band sousaphone section (called \"Bass Horns\" within the university) execute a distinct two-step and four-step counter-march during marching performances. During halftime performances this is accompanied (specifically for the last rank consisting all of 12 bass horns) by a \"huh! huh!\" from the crowd.\nThe University of Delaware Fightin' Blue Hen Marching Band has several traditions involving sousaphone players. During pre-game, they branch off from the rest of the band. From here, the sousaphone players run in a snake around the field jumping to drum line cadence. At most pre-games they act out a skit as well. At post game, \"In My Life\" by The Beatles is played featuring a sousaphone solo while the band sings.\nMusical genres.\nThe sousaphone is an important fixture of the New Orleans brass band tradition and is still used in groups such as the Dirty Dozen Brass Band by Kirk Joseph. Soul Rebels Brass Band from New Orleans features sousaphone player Edward Lee Jr.\nSinaloa, a state of Mexico, has a type of music called Banda Sinaloense, and the sousaphone is used there as a tuba.\nDamon \"Tuba Gooding Jr.\" Bryson from The Roots played the sousaphone on \"Late Night with Jimmy Fallon\". He now does this for \"The Tonight Show Starring Jimmy Fallon\".\nNat Mcintosh is the sousaphone player and co-founder of Youngblood Brass Band, who play a mixture of traditional New Orleans style brass band music and hip hop.\nThe Lemon Bucket Orkestra, a Canadian self-described \"Balkan-Klezmer-Gypsy-Punk-Super-Party-Band\", features a sousaphone as one of their instruments.\nRed Baraat, a Brooklyn-based dhol &amp; brass band that fuses North Indian Bhangra with hip-hop, go-go and jazz music, features http:// on sousaphone.\nIn Israel there's a growing scene of brass bands that use Sousaphone for the bass function, including acts such as Marsh Dondurma, Las Piratas Piratas and Pam Pah Orkestra.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39753", "revid": "40672539", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39753", "title": "John Philip Sousa", "text": "American composer and conductor (1854\u20131932)\nJohn Philip Sousa ( , ; November 6, 1854\u00a0\u2013 March 6, 1932) was an American composer and conductor of the late Romantic era known primarily for U.S. military marches. He is known as \"The March King\" or the \"American March King\", to distinguish him from his British counterpart Kenneth J. Alford. Among Sousa's best-known marches are \"The Stars and Stripes Forever\" (National March of the United States of America), \"Semper Fidelis\" (official march of the United States Marine Corps), \"The Liberty Bell\", \"The Thunderer\", and \"The Washington Post\".\nSousa began his career playing violin and studying music theory and composition under John Esputa and George Felix Benkert. In 1868, Sousa's father enlisted him in the United States Marine Band as an apprentice. Sousa left the band in 1875, and over the next five years, he performed as a violinist and learned to conduct. In 1880, Sousa rejoined the Marine Band and served there for 12 years as director. In 1892, he left the Marine Band and organized the civilian Sousa Band. From 1880 until his death, Sousa focused exclusively on conducting and writing music. He aided in the development of the sousaphone, a large brass instrument similar to the helicon and tuba.\nUpon the United States joining World War I, Sousa was awarded a wartime commission of lieutenant to lead the Naval Reserve Band in Illinois. He then returned to conduct the Sousa Band until his death in 1932. In the 1920s, Sousa was promoted to the permanent rank of lieutenant commander in the naval reserve.\nEarly life and education.\nJohn Philip Sousa was born in Washington, D.C., the third of 10 children of Jo\u00e3o Ant\u00f3nio de Sousa (John Anthony Sousa) (September 22, 1824\u00a0\u2013 April 27, 1892), who was born in Spain to Portuguese parents, and his wife Maria Elisabeth Trinkhaus (May 20, 1826\u00a0\u2013 August 25, 1908), who was German and from Bavaria. Sousa began his music education under the tuition of John Esputa Sr., who taught him solfeggio. This was short-lived due to the teacher's frequent bad temper. \nSousa's real music education began in 1861 or 1862 as a pupil of John Esputa Jr., the son of his previous teacher under whom Sousa studied violin, piano, flute, several brass instruments, and singing. Esputa shared his father's bad temper, and the relationship between teacher and pupil was often strained, but Sousa progressed very rapidly and was also found to have perfect pitch. During this period, Sousa wrote his first composition, \"An Album Leaf\", but Esputa dismissed it as \"bread and cheese\", and the composition was subsequently lost.\nSousa's father was a trombonist in the Marine Band, and he enlisted Sousa in the United States Marine Corps as an apprentice at age 13 to keep him from joining a circus band. That same year, Sousa began studying music under George Felix Benkert. Sousa was enlisted under a minority enlistment, meaning that he would not be discharged until his 21st birthday.\nCareer.\nIn 1868, Sousa enlisted in the Marine Corps at age 13 as an apprentice musician (his rank listed as \"boy\"). Sousa completed his apprenticeship and left the Marine Corps in 1875. He then began performing on the violin and joined a theatrical pit orchestra where he learned to conduct.\nSousa returned to the Marine Band as its head in 1880 and remained as its conductor until 1892. During this period, Sousa led the Marine Band through its development into the country's premier military band. He led \"The President's Own\" band under five presidents from Rutherford B. Hayes to Benjamin Harrison. Sousa's band played at the inaugural balls of James A. Garfield in 1881 and Benjamin Harrison in 1889.\nIn July 1892, Sousa requested a discharge from the Marine Corps to pursue a financially promising civilian career as a band leader. Sousa organized The Sousa Band the year that he left the Marine Band, and it toured from 1892 to 1931 and performed at 15,623 concerts, both in the United States and internationally, including at the World Exposition in Paris and at the Royal Albert Hall in London. Jascha Gurewich, an early popularizer of the saxophone in the concert hall, was soloist for Sousa's band in the early 1920s. In Paris, the Sousa Band marched through the streets to the Arc de Triomphe, one of only eight parades that the band marched in during its 40 years.\nSousa was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Naval Reserve on May 31, 1917, shortly after the United States declared war on Germany and entered World War I. He was 62 years old, the mandatory retirement age for Navy officers. During the war, Sousa led the Navy Band at the Great Lakes Naval Station near Chicago, and he donated all of his naval salary except a token $1 per month to the Sailors' and Marines' Relief Fund. \nSousa was discharged from active duty after the end of the war in November 1918 and returned to conducting his own band. In the early 1920s, Sousa was promoted to lieutenant commander in the Naval Reserve but did not return to active duty. He frequently wore his Navy uniform during performances for the remainder of his life.\nFor his service during the war, Sousa received the World War I Victory Medal and was elected as a Veteran Companion of the Military Order of Foreign Wars. He was also a member of the New York Athletic Club and Post 754 of the American Legion.\nPersonal life.\nOn December 30, 1879, Sousa married Jane van Middlesworth Bellis (February 22, 1862\u00a0\u2013 March 11, 1944), who was descended from Adam Bellis who served in the New Jersey troops during the American Revolutionary War. They had three children: John Jr. (April 1, 1881\u00a0\u2013 May 18, 1937), Jane Priscilla (August 7, 1882\u00a0\u2013 October 28, 1958), and Helen (January 21, 1887\u00a0\u2013 October 14, 1975).\nOn July 15, 1881, the \"March King\" was initiated into Freemasonry by Hiram Lodge No. 10 (Now Hiram-Takoma Lodge No. 10) in Washington, D.C., where Sousa remained an active member until his death in 1932. Among other Masonic honors, Sousa was named the Honorary Band Leader of the Temple Band of Almas Shriners, the DC-based Chapter of Shriners International. A number of his compositions were for the organization, including the \"Nobles of the Mystic Shrine\" March.\nIn his later years, Sousa lived in Sands Point, New York. On March 6, 1932, he died of heart failure at age 77 in his room at the Abraham Lincoln Hotel in Reading, Pennsylvania. Sousa had conducted a rehearsal of \"The Stars and Stripes Forever\" the day before with the Ringgold Band as its guest conductor. Sousa is buried at Congressional Cemetery in Washington, D.C. Every year on November 6, the Marine Band performs \"Semper Fidelis\" at Sousa's grave. His house Wildbank has been designated as a National Historic Landmark, although it remains a private home and is not open to the public.\nSousa has surviving descendants today; one of his great-grandsons, John Philip Sousa IV, works as a political activist for the Republican Party.\nHonors.\nSousa was decorated with the palms of the Order of Public Instruction of Portugal and the Order of Academic Palms of France. He also received the Royal Victorian Medal from King Edward VII of the United Kingdom in December 1901 for conducting a private birthday concert for Queen Alexandra.\nIn 1922, Sousa accepted the invitation of the national chapter to become an honorary member of Kappa Kappa Psi, the national honorary band fraternity. In 1932, he was initiated as an honorary member of Phi Mu Alpha Sinfonia, a national fraternity for men in music, by the fraternity's Alpha Xi chapter at the University of Illinois.\nThe World War II Liberty ship was named in Sousa's honor. The Marine Band possesses the ship's bell, using it in performances of the \"Liberty Bell March\".\nIn 1952, 20th Century Fox honored Sousa in their Technicolor feature film \"Stars and Stripes Forever\" with Clifton Webb portraying him. It was loosely based on Sousa's memoirs \"Marching Along\".\nIn 1987, an act of Congress named \"The Stars and Stripes Forever\" as the national march of the United States.\nIn 2012, a crater on the planet Mercury was named in Sousa's honor. He was posthumously enshrined in the Hall of Fame for Great Americans in 1976.\nMemberships.\nSousa was a member of the Sons of the Revolution, Military Order of Foreign Wars, Freemasons, and the Society of Authors and Composers. He was also a member of the Salmagundi, Players, Musicians, New York Athletic, and Lambs clubs of New York City and the Army and Navy and the Gridiron clubs of Washington.\nMusic.\nSousa wrote over 130 marches, 15 operettas, 5 overtures, 11 suites, 24 dances, 28 fantasies, and countless arrangements of nineteenth-century western European symphonic works.\nMarches.\nSousa wrote over 130 marches, published by Harry Coleman of Philadelphia, Carl Fischer Music, the John Church Company, and the Sam Fox Publishing Company, the last association beginning in 1917 and continuing until his death. Some of his more well-known marches include:\nSousa wrote marches for several U.S. universities, including the University of Minnesota, University of Illinois, University of Nebraska, Kansas State University, Marquette University, Pennsylvania Military College (Widener University), and the University of Michigan.\nOperettas.\nSousa wrote many notable operettas, including:\nMarches and waltzes have been derived from many of these stage-works. Sousa also composed the music for six operettas that were either unfinished or not produced: \"The Devils' Deputy\", \"Florine\", \"The Irish Dragoon\", \"Katherine\", \"The Victory\", and \"The Wolf\".\nIn addition, Sousa wrote a march based on themes from Gilbert and Sullivan's comic opera \"The Mikado\", the elegant overture \"Our Flirtations\", several musical suites, etc. He frequently added Sullivan opera overtures or other Sullivan pieces to his concerts.\nHobbies, writing and recording.\nSousa ranked as one of the all-time great trapshooters and was enshrined in the Trapshooting Hall of Fame. He organized the first national trapshooting organization, a forerunner to today's Amateur Trapshooting Association (ATA). He also wrote numerous articles about trapshooting. He was a regular competitor representing the Navy in trapshooting competitions, particularly against the Army. Records indicate that Sousa registered more than 35,000 targets during his shooting career. The Trapshooter Hall of Fame quotes him as saying \"Let me say that just about the sweetest music to me is when I call, 'pull,' the old gun barks, and the referee in perfect key announces, 'dead'.\"\nIn Sousa's 1902 novella \"The Fifth String\", a virtuoso violinist makes a deal with the Devil for a magic violin with five strings. The first four strings excite the emotions of Pity, Hope, Love, and Joy but the fifth string, made from the hair of Eve, will cause the player's death once played. The violinist wins the love of the woman he desires but out of jealous suspicion, she commands him to play the death string, which he does. \nIn 1905, Sousa published \"Pipetown Sandy\", which includes a satirical poem titled \"The Feast of the Monkeys\". In 1920, he wrote a 40,000-word story entitled \"The Transit of Venus\". Sousa also wrote the booklet \"A manual for trumpet and drum\", published by the Ludwig Drum Company with advice for playing drums and trumpet. An early version of the trumpet solo to \"Semper Fidelis\" was included in this volume.\nThe marching brass bass or sousaphone is a modified helicon created in 1893 by Philadelphia instrument maker J. W. Pepper at Sousa's request, using several of his suggestions in its design. Sousa wanted a tuba that could sound upward and over the band whether its player was seated or marching. C.G. Conn recreated the instrument in 1898 and this was the model that Sousa preferred to use.\nSousa held a very low opinion of the emerging recording industry. He derided recordings as \"canned music\", a reference to the early wax cylinder records that came in can-like cylindrical cardboard boxes. He argued to a congressional hearing in 1906:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;These talking machines are going to ruin the artistic development of music in this country. When I was a boy... in front of every house in the summer evenings, you would find young people together singing the songs of the day or old songs. Today you hear these infernal machines going night and day. We will not have a vocal cord left. The vocal cord will be eliminated by a process of evolution, as was the tail of man when he came from the ape.\nSousa's antipathy to recording was such that he very rarely conducted his band when it was being recorded. Nevertheless, the band made numerous recordings, the earliest being issued on cylinders by several companies, followed by many recordings on discs by the Berliner Gramophone Company and its successor, the Victor Talking Machine Company (later RCA Victor). The Berliner recordings were conducted by Henry Higgins (one of Sousa's cornet soloists) and Arthur Pryor (Sousa's trombone soloist and assistant conductor). Sousa claimed that he had \"never been in the gramophone company's office in my life\". \nSousa conducted a few of the Victor recordings but most were conducted by Pryor, Herbert L. Clarke, Edwin H. Clarke, Walter B. Rogers (who had also been a cornet soloist with Sousa), Rosario Bourdon, Josef Pasternack, or Nathaniel Shilkret. Details of the Victor recordings are available in the external link below to the EDVR.\nAfter the introduction of electrical recording in 1925 Sousa changed his mind about phonograph records. After a demonstration of the Orthophonic Victrola on October 6, 1925, at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel he said, \"[Gentlemen], that is a band. This is the first time I have ever heard music with any soul to it produced by a mechanical talking machine.\"\nSousa refused to appear on radio broadcasts for many years, but relented beginning with a 1929 nationwide broadcast.\nJohn Philip Sousa Award.\nEven after his death, Sousa continues to be remembered as \"The March King\" through the John Philip Sousa Foundation. The non-profit organization, founded in 1981, recognizes one superior student in marching band for \"musicianship, dependability, loyalty, and cooperation.\" \nThe John Philip Sousa Foundation provides awards, scholarships, and projects such as The Sudler Trophy, The Sudler Shield, The Sudler Silver Scroll, The Sudler Flag of Honor, The Historic Roll of Honor, The Sudler Cup, The Hawkins Scholarship, National Young Artists, The National Community Band, and The Junior Honor Band Project. He won many honorable awards across his lifetime.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nMusic sources.\nArticles\nDissertations"}
{"id": "39756", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39756", "title": "March, music", "text": ""}
{"id": "39757", "revid": "41822903", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39757", "title": "Teratogenesis", "text": ""}
{"id": "39758", "revid": "1358233", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39758", "title": "Cut time", "text": ""}
{"id": "39759", "revid": "29615425", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39759", "title": "Common time", "text": ""}
{"id": "39760", "revid": "47587808", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39760", "title": "Casimir Funk", "text": "Polish-American biochemist (1884\u20131967)\nCasimir Funk ( ; February 23, 1884 \u2013 November 19, 1967) was a Polish biochemist generally credited with being among the first to formulate the concept of vitamins (the first being the English chemist Frederick Gowland Hopkins) after publishing a landmark medical writing in 1912. He highlighted these \"vital amines\" (or \"vitamines\") as critical in fighting significant diseases such as pellagra and rickets, and his analysis influenced a major shift in scientific thinking. His scientific work involved research in Poland, France and the United Kingdom. In 1920, he became a citizen of the United States where he continued his work.\nEarly life and education.\nHe was born in Warsaw (the capital of Poland), being the son of a medical specialist in dermatology. In 1904, at the age of twenty, he earned a doctorate in chemistry at the University of Bern. In his early career, he worked as a biochemist at the Pasteur Institute, the Wiesbaden Municipal Hospital, the University of Berlin, and the Lister Institute. Funk emigrated to New York State in 1915, moving back and forth between the United States and Europe until World War II. After working in that country for several years, he became a citizen of the U.S. in 1920.\nFunk came from a Jewish background. Retrospective reporting by a British news agency stated that, despite studying in various European countries in the context of increasing domestic antisemitism, he succeeded in his collegiate goals, without any specific obstacles hindering his efforts at those various institutions.\nCareer.\nAfter reading an article by Christiaan Eijkman that indicated that persons who ate brown rice were less vulnerable to beri-beri than those who ate only the fully milled product, Funk tried to isolate the substance responsible, and he succeeded. Because that substance contained an amine group, he called it \"vitamine\". It was later to be known as vitamin B3 (niacin), although he thought it would be thiamine (vitamin B1) and described it as \"anti-beri-beri-factor\".\nIn 1911, he published his first paper in English, on dihydroxyphenylalanine. Funk was sure more than one substance like Vitamin B1 existed, and in his 1912 article for the \"Journal of State Medicine\", he proposed the existence of at least four vitamins: one preventing beriberi (\"antiberiberi\"); one preventing scurvy (\"antiscorbutic\"); one preventing pellagra (\"antipellagric\"); and one preventing rickets (\"antirachitic\"). From there, Funk published a book, \"The Vitamines\", in 1912, and later that year received a Beit Fellowship to continue his research.\nFunk proposed the hypothesis that other diseases, such as rickets, pellagra, coeliac disease, and scurvy could also be cured by vitamins. Funk was an early investigator of the problem of pellagra. He suggested that a change in the method of milling corn was responsible for the outbreak of pellagra, but no attention was paid to his article on this subject.\nThe \"e\" at the end of \"vitamine\" was later removed, when it was realized that vitamins need not be nitrogen-containing amines. He postulated the existence of other essential nutrients, which became known as vitamins B1, B2, C, and D. In 1936, he determined the molecular structure of thiamine, though he was not the first to isolate it. Funk also conducted research into hormones, diabetes, peptic ulcers, and the biochemistry of cancer.\nFrom 1923 to 1927 Funk was the head of the National Institute of Hygiene in Poland. In 1940, after returning to the United States, he became president of the Funk Foundation for Medical Research. He spent his last years studying the causes of neoplasms.\nLegacy.\nFunk's academic career is noted to have included serving at the Lister Institute of Preventive Medicine within London, England and the Pasteur Institute within Paris, France while he additionally worked with commercial firms such as the U.S. Vitamin &amp; Pharmaceutical Corp. Upon his death, the American publication \"Time\" highlighted both Funk and Elmer Verner McCollum, the latter being known for his discovery of Vitamin A and other efforts, as having significant legacies \"in everyday importance\" for medicine, with the news organization lauding Funk as a \"pioneer\". \"Time\" additionally commented positively upon Funk's personal character as a \"research scientist [who] focused his intense curiosity on other fields\" given his status. A medical textbook distributed in 1997 by Taylor &amp; Francis stated that Funk's 1912 release of his \"landmark publication\" in vitamins had internationally created a \"theory [that] provided a new concept for interpreting diet-related events.\"\nOutside of vitamin-related research, Funk's career history has been described as also having significantly extended humanity's \"knowledge of sex hormones.\" A retrospective analysis by the British publication \"The Independent\" in 2024 stated that Funk's discoveries as an overall body of work, especially in terms of nutrition, \"has helped the health of many people and led to the cures of several life-threatening diseases.\" A member of Funk's family, as well, has accepted a Nutrition Hall of Fame award given to the biochemist posthumously.\nRecognition.\nThe Polish Institute of Arts and Sciences of America (PIASA), a non-profit organization focused on advancing civil society, annually honors Polish-American scientists with the \"Casimir Funk Natural Sciences Award\". As of February 2024, the last winner of that award was Alexander Wlodawer. An associate of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), Wlodawer has become known in the U.S. as an expert on structural biology. Past winners have included Nobel Laureate Roald Hoffmann, Aleksander Wolszczan, Hilary Koprowski, Peter T. Wolczanski, Wac\u0142aw Szybalski, Zbyszek Darzynkiewicz and Benoit Mandelbrot.\nA Google Doodle commemorated Funk's 140th birthday on February 23rd of 2024 in tandem with his family's estate and its various efforts. This included working with Erik Funk, Casimir Funk's grandson, who praised the company's actions.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39761", "revid": "48431446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39761", "title": "Adnams", "text": "Brewery in Suffolk, England\nAdnams is a regional brewery founded in 1872 in Southwold, Suffolk, England, by George and Ernest Adnams. It produces cask ale and bottled beers. Annual production is around 85,000 barrels.\nIn 2010, the company established the Copper House distillery for the production of gin, vodka and English whisky.\nHistory.\nThe earliest recorded brewing on the Adnams site was in 1396 by Johanna de Corby.\nThe Sole Bay Brewery in Southwold was purchased in 1872 by George and Ernest Adnams. The company was incorporated in 1890, and has remained independent since then, producing a range of beers for distribution mainly in East Anglia. \nThe mixed-culture yeast used by Adnams was sourced from Morgans brewery of Norwich in 1942.\nUntil 1953 and from 1970 to 2006, casks of Adnams ale were delivered to the six pubs of Southwold by horse and dray; the tradition ended when a new distribution depot was built three miles from the brewery.\nThe company founded a charity, \"The Adnams Charity\", in 1990 to celebrate its centenary as a public company. A percentage of the company's annual profits is used to support worthwhile causes within a 25-mile radius of Southwold.\nIn 1993, Adnams Extra won the Champion Beer of Britain, an award presented by the Campaign for Real Ale at the annual Great British Beer Festival. New fermenting vessels were installed in March 2001, and the brewhouse was completely re-equipped in July 2006, making it one of the most energy efficient in Europe.\nAt the beginning of 2004, Adnams purchased land in neighbouring village of Reydon to expand its business with a new distribution centre, designed by architect Jeremy Blake, which was nominated for the 2007 RICS East of England Award for Sustainability. Adnams was awarded a Queen's Award for Enterprise in the sustainable development category in 2005.\nThe distribution centre features the UK's largest living roof known as the Sky Garden which is made up of a variety of sedum species. Not only does this help to insulate the building, but the water stored in the sedum plants is also harvested and used to flush the staff toilets and clean company vehicles. This, combined with the solar panels and the environmental construction have meant the energy bills have been cut by half.\nIn June 2009, Adnams signed a five-year agreement to supply Ipswich Town FC with beers at their Portman Road stadium, replacing the 14-year-old association with Greene King. The rights went back to Greene King in July 2014.\nIn 2010 Carl's Copper Pot still and Rectifying columns were installed and put in operation in November of that same year for the production of Gin, Vodka &amp; Whisky.\nIn early 2019, Adnams launched a new English cider called Wild Wave.\nBeers.\nAdnams produce regular cask ale, seasonal beer, bottled beer, \"international\" beer and \"commemorative\" beers and cider :\nInternational beers.\nFrom time to time, Adnams produce limited brews of specialty beers, either in the styles of non-UK beers, or using special international ingredients. Past and current international beers have included:\nCommemorative beers.\nAdnams have a long history of producing limited and one-off special beers to commemorate events of local or national importance. These are generally available for a limited period in bottles, and in cask at a few selected outlets. Recent beers include:-\nDistillery.\nThe company branched out to distilling when they installed an 800-litre copper pot still with 42 plated rectifying columns, they acquired from Carl in 2010.\nThe capacity was expanded in 2015 with two extra pot stills.\nThe product line holds a wide variety of gin, vodka and whisky.\nThe whisky range consists of three whiskies each with different mash-bills: a single malt of 100% malted barley: a rye whisky of 75% rye and 25% malted barley; and a \"triple malt\" of 60% malted barley, 35% wheat, and 5% oats.\nSome less common products of the distiller are a \"Spirit of Broadside\", two absinthe expressions: \"Verte\" &amp; \"Rouge\", and non-grain products like brandy made from locally grown grapes.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39762", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39762", "title": "Norman Rockwell", "text": "American painter and illustrator (1894\u20131978)\nNorman Percevel Rockwell (February 3, 1894 \u2013 November 8, 1978) was an American painter and illustrator. His works have a broad popular appeal in the United States for their reflection of the country's culture. Rockwell is most famous for the cover illustrations of everyday life he created for \"The Saturday Evening Post\" magazine over nearly five decades. Among the best-known of Rockwell's works are the \"Willie Gillis\" series, \"Rosie the Riveter\", the \"Four Freedoms\" series, \"Saying Grace\", and \"The Problem We All Live With\". He is also noted for his 64-year relationship with the Boy Scouts of America (BSA), during which he produced covers for their publication \"Boys' Life\" (now \"Scout Life\"), calendars, and other illustrations. These works include popular images that reflect the Scout Oath and \"Scout Law\" such as \"The Scoutmaster\", \"A Scout Is Reverent\", and \"A Guiding Hand\".\nRockwell was a prolific artist, producing more than 4,000 original works in his lifetime. Most of his surviving works are in public collections. Rockwell was also commissioned to illustrate more than 40 books, including \"Tom Sawyer\" and \"Huckleberry Finn\" and to paint portraits of Presidents Eisenhower, Kennedy, Johnson, and Nixon, as well as those of foreign figures, including Gamal Abdel Nasser and Jawaharlal Nehru. His portrait subjects also included Judy Garland. One of his last portraits was of Colonel Sanders in 1973. His annual contributions for the Boy Scouts calendars between 1925 and 1976 were only slightly overshadowed by his most popular of calendar works: the \"Four Seasons\" illustrations for Brown &amp; Bigelow that were published for 17 years beginning in 1947 and reproduced in various styles and sizes since 1964. He created artwork for advertisements for Coca-Cola, Jell-O, General Motors, Scott Tissue, and other companies. Illustrations for booklets, catalogs, posters (particularly movie promotions), sheet music, stamps, playing cards, and murals (including \"Yankee Doodle Dandy\" and \"God Bless the Hills\", which was completed in 1936 for the Nassau Inn in Princeton, New Jersey) rounded out Rockwell's oeuvre as an illustrator.\nRockwell's work was dismissed by serious art critics in his lifetime. Many of his works appear overly sweet in the opinion of modern critics, especially \"The Saturday Evening Post\" covers, which tend toward idealistic or sentimentalized portrayals of American life. This has led to the often deprecatory adjective \"Rockwellesque\". Consequently, Rockwell is not considered a \"serious painter\" by some contemporary artists, who regard his work as bourgeois and kitsch. Writer Vladimir Nabokov stated that Rockwell's brilliant technique was put to \"banal\" use, and wrote in his novel \"Pnin\": \"That Dal\u00ed is really Norman Rockwell's twin brother kidnapped by gypsies in babyhood.\" He is called an \"illustrator\" instead of an artist by some critics, a designation he did not mind, as that was what he called himself.\nIn his later years, Rockwell began receiving more attention as a painter when he chose more serious subjects such as the series on racism for \"Look\" magazine. One example of this more serious work is \"The Problem We All Live With\", which dealt with the issue of school racial integration. The painting depicts Ruby Bridges, flanked by white federal marshals, walking to school past a wall defaced by racist graffiti. This 1964 painting was displayed in the White House when Bridges met with President Barack Obama in 2011.\nLife.\nEarly years.\nNorman Rockwell was born on February 3, 1894, in New York City, to Jarvis Waring Rockwell and Anne Mary \"Nancy\" (n\u00e9e Hill) Rockwell. His father was a Presbyterian and his mother was an Episcopalian; two years after their engagement, he converted to the Episcopal faith. Rockwell's earliest American ancestor was John Rockwell (1588\u20131662), from Somerset, England, who immigrated to colonial North America, probably in 1635, aboard the ship \"Hopewell\" and became one of the first settlers of Windsor, Connecticut. Rockwell had one brother, Jarvis Jr., older by a year and a half. Jarvis Sr. was the manager of the New York office of a Philadelphia textile firm, George Wood, Sons &amp; Company, where he spent his entire career.\nRockwell transferred from high school to the Chase Art School (later Parsons School of Design) at the age of 14. He then went on to the National Academy of Design and finally to the Art Students League of New York. There, Rockwell was taught by Thomas Fogarty, George Bridgman, and Frank Vincent DuMond; his early works were produced for \"St. Nicholas Magazine\", the Boy Scouts of America (BSA) magazine \"Boys' Life\", and other youth publications. As a student, Rockwell had some small jobs, including one as a supernumerary at the Metropolitan Opera. His first major artistic job came at age 18, illustrating Carl H. Claudy's book \"Tell Me Why: Stories about Mother Nature\".\nAfter that, Rockwell was hired as a staff artist for \"Boys' Life\". In this role, he received 50 dollars' compensation each month for one completed cover and a set of story illustrations. It is said to have been his first paying job as an artist. At 19, Rockwell became the art editor for \"Boys' Life\", published by the Boy Scouts of America. He held the job for three years, during which Rockwell painted several covers, beginning with his first published magazine cover, \"Scout at Ship's Wheel\", which appeared on the \"Boys' Life\" September 1913 edition.\nAssociation with \"The Saturday Evening Post\".\nRockwell's family moved to New Rochelle, New York, when Norman was 21 years old. They shared a studio with the cartoonist Clyde Forsythe, who worked for \"The Saturday Evening Post\". With Forsythe's help, Rockwell submitted his first successful cover painting to the \"Post\" in 1916, \"Mother's Day Off\" (published on May 20). He followed that success with \"Circus Barker and Strongman\" (published on June 3), \"Gramps at the Plate\" (August 5), \"Redhead Loves Hatty Perkins\" (September 16), \"People in a Theatre Balcony\" (October 14), and \"Man Playing Santa\" (December 9). Rockwell was published eight times on the \"Post\" cover within the first year. Ultimately, Rockwell published 323 original covers for \"The Saturday Evening Post\" over 47 years. His \"Sharp Harmony\" appeared on the cover of the issue dated September 26, 1936; it depicts a barber and three clients, enjoying an a cappella song. The image was adopted by SPEBSQSA in its promotion of the art.\nRockwell's success on the cover of the \"Post\" led to covers for other magazines of the day, most notably the \"Literary Digest\", the \"Country Gentleman\", \"Leslie's Weekly\", \"Judge\", \"Peoples Popular Monthly\" and \"Life\" magazine.\nWhen Rockwell's tenure began with \"The Saturday Evening Post\" in 1916, he left his salaried position at \"Boys' Life\", but continued to include scouts in \"Post\" cover images and the monthly magazine of the \"American Red Cross\". He resumed work with the Boy Scouts of America in 1926 with production of his first of fifty-one original illustrations for the official Boy Scouts of America annual calendar, which still may be seen in the \"Norman Rockwell Art Gallery\" at the National Scouting Museum in Cimarron, New Mexico.\nDuring World War I, he tried to enlist into the U.S. Navy but was refused entry because, at , he was eight pounds underweight for someone tall. To compensate, he spent one night gorging himself on bananas, liquids and doughnuts, and weighed enough to enlist the next day. He was given the role of a military artist, however, and did not see any action during his tour of duty.\nWorld War II.\nIn 1943, during World War II, Rockwell painted the \"Four Freedoms\" series, which was completed in seven months and resulted in him losing fifteen pounds. The series was inspired by a speech by Franklin D. Roosevelt, wherein Roosevelt described and articulated Four Freedoms for universal rights. Rockwell then painted \"Freedom from Want\", \"Freedom of Speech\", \"Freedom of Worship\" and \"Freedom from Fear\".\nThe paintings were published in 1943 by \"The Saturday Evening Post\". Rockwell used the Pennell shipbuilding family from Brunswick, Maine as models for two of the paintings, \"Freedom from Want\" and \"A Thankful Mother\", and would combine models from photographs and his own vision to create his idealistic paintings. The United States Department of the Treasury later promoted war bonds by exhibiting the originals in sixteen cities. Rockwell considered \"Freedom of Speech\" to be the best of the four.\nThat same year, a fire in his studio destroyed numerous original paintings, costumes, and props. Because the period costumes and props were irreplaceable, the fire split his career into two phases, the second phase depicting modern characters and situations. Rockwell was contacted by writer Elliott Caplin, brother of cartoonist Al Capp, with the suggestion that the three of them should make a daily comic strip together, with Caplin and his brother writing and Rockwell drawing. King Features Syndicate is reported to have promised a $1,000 per week deal, knowing that a Capp\u2013Rockwell collaboration would gain strong public interest. The project was ultimately aborted, however, as it turned out that Rockwell, known for his perfectionism as an artist, could not deliver material so quickly as would be required of him for a daily comic strip.\nLater career.\nDuring the late 1940s, Norman Rockwell spent the winter months as artist-in-residence at Otis College of Art and Design. Occasionally, students were models for his \"Saturday Evening Post\" covers. In 1949, Rockwell donated an original \"Post\" cover, \"April Fool\", to be raffled off in a library fund raiser.\nIn 1959, after his wife Mary died suddenly from a heart attack, Rockwell took time off from his work to grieve. It was during that break that he and his son Thomas produced Rockwell's autobiography, \"My Adventures as an Illustrator\", which was published in 1960. The \"Post\" printed excerpts from this book in eight consecutive issues, the first containing Rockwell's famous \"Triple Self-Portrait\".\nRockwell's last painting for the \"Post\" was published in 1963, marking the end of 47 years of a publishing relationship that had included 321 cover paintings. He spent the next 10 years painting for \"Look\" magazine, where his work depicted his interests in civil rights, poverty, and space exploration.\nIn 1966, Rockwell was invited to Hollywood to paint portraits of the stars of the film \"Stagecoach\", and also found himself appearing as an extra in the film, playing a \"mangy old gambler\".\nIn 1968, Rockwell was commissioned to do an album cover portrait of Mike Bloomfield and Al Kooper for their record, \"The Live Adventures of Mike Bloomfield and Al Kooper\".\nAs a tribute on the 75th anniversary of Rockwell's birth, officials of Brown &amp; Bigelow and the Boy Scouts of America asked Rockwell to pose in \"Beyond the Easel\" as the illustration for the 1969 Boy Scout calendar.\nIn 1969 the U. S. Bureau of Reclamation commissioned Rockwell to paint the Glen Canyon Dam.\nHis last commission for the Boy Scouts of America was a calendar illustration titled \"The Spirit of 1976\", which was completed when Rockwell was 82, concluding a partnership which generated 471 images for periodicals, guidebooks, calendars, and promotional materials. His connection to the BSA spanned 64 years, marking the longest professional association of his career. His legacy and style for the BSA has been carried on by Joseph Csatari.\nFor \"vivid and affectionate portraits of our country\", Rockwell was awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom, the United States of America's highest civilian honor, in 1977 by President Gerald Ford. Rockwell's son, Jarvis, accepted the award.\nDeath.\nRockwell, a heavy smoker, died on November 8, 1978, of emphysema at the age of\u00a084 in his Stockbridge, Massachusetts, home. First Lady Rosalynn Carter attended Rockwell's funeral.\nPersonal life.\nRockwell married his first wife, Irene O'Connor, on July 1, 1916. Irene was Rockwell's model in \"Mother Tucking Children into Bed\", published on the cover of The \"Literary Digest\" on January 19, 1921. The couple divorced on January 13, 1930.\nDepressed, Rockwell moved briefly to Alhambra, California, as a guest of his old friend Clyde Forsythe. There, Rockwell painted some of his best-known paintings, including \"The Doctor and the Doll\". While there, he met and married schoolteacher Mary Barstow on April 17, 1930. The couple returned to New York shortly after their marriage. They had three sons: Jarvis, Thomas, and Peter. The family lived at 24 Lord Kitchener Road in the Bonnie Crest neighborhood of New Rochelle, New York.\nRockwell and his wife were not regular church attendees, although they were members of St. John's Wilmot Church, an Episcopal church near their home, and their sons were baptized there. Rockwell moved to Arlington, Vermont, in 1939 where his work began to reflect small-town life. He would later be joined by his good friend John Carlton Atherton.\nIn 1953, the Rockwell family moved to Stockbridge, Massachusetts, so that his wife could be treated at the Austen Riggs Center, a psychiatric hospital at 25 Main Street, close to where Rockwell set up his studio. Rockwell also received psychiatric treatment, seeing the analyst Erik Erikson, who was on staff at Riggs. Erikson told biographer Laura Claridge that Rockwell painted his happiness, but did not live it. On August 25, 1959, Mary died unexpectedly of a heart attack.\nRockwell married his third wife, retired Milton Academy English teacher Mary Leete \"Mollie\" Punderson (1896\u20131985), on October 25, 1961. His Stockbridge studio was located on the second floor of a row of buildings. Directly underneath Rockwell's studio was, for a time in 1966, the Back Room Rest, better known as the famous \"Alice's Restaurant\". During his time in Stockbridge, chief of police William Obanhein was a frequent model for Rockwell's paintings.\nFrom 1961 until his death, Rockwell was a member of the Monday Evening Club, a men's literary group based in Pittsfield, Massachusetts. At his funeral, five members of the club served as pallbearers, along with Jarvis Rockwell.\nLegacy.\nA custodianship of his original paintings and drawings was established with Rockwell's help near his home in Stockbridge, Massachusetts, and the Norman Rockwell Museum still is open today year-round. The museum's collection includes more than 700 original Rockwell paintings, drawings, and studies. The Rockwell Center for American Visual Studies at the Norman Rockwell Museum is a national research institute dedicated to American illustration art.\nRockwell's work was exhibited at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum in 2001. Rockwell's \"Breaking Home Ties\" sold for $15.4 million at a 2006 Sotheby's auction. A 12-city U.S. tour of Rockwell's works took place in 2008.\nIn 2008, Rockwell was named the official state artist of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. The 2013 sale of \"Saying Grace\" for $46 million (including buyer's premium) established a new record price for Rockwell. Rockwell's work was exhibited at the Reading Public Museum and the Church History Museum in 2013\u20132014. \nFilms have made references to Rockwell's work. In \"Annie Hall\" (1977) Alvy (Woody Allen) teases Annie (Diane Keaton) saying: \"What did you do, grow up in a Norman Rockwell painting?\". In the Steven Spielberg film \"Empire of the Sun\", a young boy (played by Christian Bale) is put to bed by his loving parents in a scene also inspired by a Rockwell painting\u2014a reproduction of which is later kept by the young boy during his captivity in a prison camp (\"Freedom from Fear\", 1943). The 1994 film \"Forrest Gump\" includes a shot in a school that re-creates Rockwell's \"Girl with Black Eye\" with young Forrest in place of the girl. Much of the film drew heavy visual inspiration from Rockwell's art. Film director George Lucas owns Rockwell's original of \"The Peach Crop\", and his colleague Steven Spielberg owns a sketch of Rockwell's \"Triple Self-Portrait\". Each of the artworks hangs in the respective filmmaker's work space. Rockwell is a major character in an episode of George Lucas' \"The Young Indiana Jones Chronicles\", \"Passion for Life\", portrayed by Lukas Haas.\nSome albums and tracks have had inspiration taken from Rockwell. In 1981, Rockwell's painting \"Girl at Mirror\" was used for the cover of Prism's fifth studio album \"Small Change\". \"Dreamland\", a track from Canadian alternative rock band Our Lady Peace's 2009 album \"Burn Burn\", was inspired by Rockwell's paintings. The cover for the Oingo Boingo album \"Only a Lad\" is a parody of the Boy Scouts of America 1960 official handbook cover illustrated by Rockwell. Lana Del Rey named her sixth studio album, \"Norman Fucking Rockwell!\" (2019), after Rockwell.\nRockwell is among the figures depicted in \"Our Nation's 200th Birthday, The Telephone's 100th Birthday\" (1976) by Stanley Meltzoff for Bell System which Meltzoff based on Rockwell's 1948 painting \"The Gossips\".\nMuseum director Thomas S. Buechner said that Rockwell's art is important for standing the test of time, \"When the last half century is explored by the future, a few paintings will continue to communicate with the same immediacy and veracity they have today.\"\nIn 2005, May Corporation, that previously bought Marshall Field's from Target Corp., was bought by Federated Department Stores. After the sale, Federated discovered that Rockwell's \"The Clock Mender\" displayed in the store was a reproduction. Rockwell had donated the painting, which depicts a repairman setting the time on one of the Marshall Field and Company Building clocks, and was depicted on the cover of the November 3, 1945 \"Saturday Evening Post\", to the store in 1948. Target had since donated the original to the Chicago History Museum.\nOn an anniversary of Norman Rockwell's birth, on February 3, 2010, Google featured Rockwell's iconic image of young love \"Boy and Girl Gazing at the Moon\", which is also known as \"Puppy Love\", on its home page. The response was so great that day that the Norman Rockwell museum's servers were overwhelmed by the volume of traffic.\nIn 2017, the original 1948 oil study for \"Tough Call\" (also known as \"Game Called Because of Rain\"), one of Rockwell\u2019s best-known baseball-themed works, sold for US $1.68 million at Heritage Auctions. The painting had hung for years in a Texas family\u2019s home before being identified as a Rockwell and became one of the highest prices ever achieved for a Rockwell study.\nOn November 2, 2025, the Norman Rockwell family published an essay in the opinion section of USA Today denouncing the Donald Trump administration's Department of Homeland Security's unauthorized use of several Rockwell paintings in social media posts along with nationalist slogans promoting anti-immigration policy initiatives.\"If Norman Rockwell were alive today, he would be devastated to see [...] his own work has been marshalled for the cause of persecution toward immigrant communities and people of color\".\nFilm posters and album covers.\nRockwell provided illustrations for several film posters.\nHe designed an album cover for \"The Live Adventures of Mike Bloomfield and Al Kooper\" (1969). He was also commissioned by English musician David Bowie to design the cover artwork for his 1975 album \"Young Americans\", but the offer was retracted after Rockwell informed him he would need at least half a year to complete a painting for the album.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39763", "revid": "32990417", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39763", "title": "Millennium Dome", "text": "Original name of a large dome-shaped building in South East London, England\nThe Millennium Dome was the original name of the large dome-shaped building on the Greenwich Peninsula in South East London, England, which housed a major exhibition celebrating the beginning of the third millennium. When opened in 1999, it was the fifth largest building in the world by usable volume. The exhibition was open to the public from 1 January to 31 December 2000. The project and exhibition were highly contentious and attracted barely half of the 12 million customers its sponsors forecasted, and so were deemed a failure by the press. All the original exhibition elements were sold or dismantled.\nIn a 2005 report, the cost of the Dome and surrounding land (which increased to 170 acres from the initial offering of the 48 acres enclosed by the Dome) and managing the Dome until the deal was closed was \u00a328.7 million. The value of the 48 acres occupied by the Dome was estimated at \u00a348 million, which could have been realised by demolishing the structure, but it was considered preferable to preserve the Dome. The structure itself still exists and serves as the exterior to The O2 entertainment complex, which includes the O2 Arena.\nThe Prime Meridian passes the western edge of the Dome and the nearest London Underground station is North Greenwich on the Jubilee line.\nArchitecture.\nThe dome is one of the largest of its type in the world. Externally, it appears as a large white marquee with twelve yellow support towers, one for each month of the year, or each hour of the clock face, representing the role played by Greenwich Mean Time. In plan view it is circular, ( for each day in a standard year) in diameter. It has become one of the United Kingdom's most recognisable landmarks, and can be easily identified on satellite images of London. \nThe architect was Richard Rogers and the contractor was a joint venture company, McAlpine/Laing Joint Venture (MLJV) formed between Sir Robert McAlpine and Laing Management. The building structure was engineered by Buro Happold, and the entire roof structure weighs less than the air contained within the building. Although referred to as a dome it is \"not a dome in the structural sense [...] In this building, a dome-shaped cable network is supported on a ring of [...] masts\". It has been disparagingly referred to as the Millennium Tent.\nThe canopy is high in the middle \u2013 for each week of the year and is made of durable and weather-resistant PTFE-coated glass fibre fabric panels (original plans to use PVC-coated polyester fabric were dropped after protest led by Greenpeace), with each of the 72 segments containing two panels. Its symmetry is interrupted by a hole through which a ventilation shaft from the Blackwall Tunnel rises. Six segments were destroyed during Storm Eunice on 18 February 2022.\nBuilt in 15 months, the dome structure was delivered under budget, at a cost of \u00a343m.\nThe critic Jonathan Meades has scathingly referred to the Millennium Dome as a \"Museum of Toxic Waste\", and apart from the dome itself, the project included the reclamation of the entire Greenwich Peninsula. The land was previously derelict and contaminated by toxic sludge from East Greenwich Gas Works that operated from 1889 to 1985. The clean-up operation was seen by the then Deputy Prime Minister Michael Heseltine as an investment that would add a large area of useful land to the crowded capital.\nBackground to the Dome project.\nThe Dome project was conceived, originally on a somewhat smaller scale, under John Major's Conservative government, as a Festival of Britain or World's Fair-type showcase to celebrate the third millennium. The incoming Labour government elected in 1997 under Tony Blair greatly expanded the size, scope and funding of the project, and construction began in June 1997. It also significantly increased expectations of what would be delivered. Just before its opening Blair claimed the Dome would be \"a triumph of confidence over cynicism, boldness over blandness, excellence over mediocrity\". In the words of BBC correspondent Robert Orchard, \"the Dome was to be highlighted as a glittering New Labour achievement in the next election manifesto\", but criticised in the 2001 Conservative Party manifesto as \"banal, anonymous and rootless\", and lacking \"a sense of Britain's history or culture\". Following the death of Diana, Princess of Wales, a member of the Dome's board suggested the project be refashioned and extended \"to accommodate, for example, a hospital, businesses, charities, private residences, and the whole thing named 'the Princess Diana Centre'\". The idea was later scrapped.\nBefore its opening, the Dome was excoriated in Iain Sinclair's diatribe, \"Sorry Meniscus \u2013 Excursions to the Millennium Dome\" (Profile Books: London 1999, ), which forecast the hype, the associated political posturing, and the eventual disillusion. The post-exhibition plan had been to convert the Dome into a European football stadium which would last for 25 years: Charlton Athletic at one point considered a possible move but instead chose to redevelop their own stadium. Local team Fisher Athletic were at one time interested in moving to the Dome, but they were considered to have too small a fan base to make this feasible. The Dome was planned to take over the functions performed by the London Arena after its closure. This is the function which The O2 Arena has now undertaken.\nMillennium Experience.\nAfter a private opening on the evening of 31 December 1999, including a New Year's Eve celebration attended by Queen Elizabeth II, the Millennium Experience at the Dome was open to the public for the whole of 2000, and contained a large number of attractions and exhibits.\nMillennium Dome Show.\nThe English musician Peter Gabriel issued in 2000 The Story of OVO which was released in a CD-booklet-shaped comic book as part of the CD edition with the title \"OVO The Millennium Show\". The story of the 2000 Millennium Dome Show based on it. The show opened on 1 January 2000 and was performed 999 times before closing on 31 December of that year. \"sponsored by Walt Disney World\".\nExhibits.\nThe interior space was subdivided into 14 \"zones\": \"Who We Are\" (Body, Faith, Mind and Self-Portrait), \"What We Do\" (Work, Learning, Rest, Play, Talk, Money and Journey) and \"Where We Live\" (Shared Ground, Living Island and Home Planet).\nSurrounded by the zones was a performance area in the centre of the dome. With music composed by Peter Gabriel and an acrobatic cast of 160, the Millennium Dome Show was performed 999 times over the course of the year. Throughout the year, the specially-commissioned film \"\" was shown in Skyscape (a separate cinema on the site sponsored by BSkyB). There was also the McDonald's \"Our Town Story\" project in which each Local Education Authority in the UK was invited to perform a show of their devising which characterised their area and its people.\nAs well as the above, the first ever series of \"Techno Games\" was filmed there and shown on BBC Two the same year.\nOther attractions.\nThere were a number of other attractions both in and outside of The Dome. Inside the Dome there was a play area named Timekeepers of the Millennium (featuring the characters Coggsley and Sprinx), The Millennium Coin Minting Press in association with the Royal Mint, the 1951 Festival of Britain Bus, and the Millennium Star Jewels (focus of the failed Millennium Diamond heist.) Outside was the Millennium Map (thirteen metres; 43' high), the Childhood Cube, \"Looking Around\" (a hidden installation), Greenwich Pavilion, the Hanging Gardens at the front of the Dome, as well as a number of other art installations and sculptures.\nTwo of the remaining art installations form the start of The Line, a modern art trail connecting the O2 to the Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park.\nFinancial and management problems.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n At worst it is a millennial metaphor for the twentieth century. An age in which all things, like the Dome itself, became disposable. A century in which forest and cities, marriages, animal species, races, religions and even the Earth itself, became ephemeral. What more cynical monument can there be for this totalitarian cocksure fragile age than a vast temporary plastic bowl, erected from the aggregate contribution of the poor through the National Lottery. Despite the spin, it remains a massive pantheon to the human ego, the Ozymandias of its time.\n Bob Marshall-Andrews MP, \"Sunday Times\" 1 February 1998\nThe project was largely reported by the press to have been a failure. During 2000, the organisers repeatedly asked for, and received, more cash from the Millennium Commission, the Lottery body which supported it. There were numerous changes at management and board level, before and during the exhibition; Jennifer Page was sacked as chief executive of the New Millennium Experience Company just one month after the dome's opening. The project came to be seen as closely aligned with Tony Blair's New Labour, making its success or failure politically important. Part of the problem was that the financial predictions were based on an unrealistically high forecast of visitor numbers at 12 million. During the first year that it was open there were approximately 6.5 million visitors \u2013 significantly fewer than the approximately 10 million paying visitors that attended the Festival of Britain, which only ran from May to September. Empire Exhibition, Scotland 1938, held in Glasgow, attracted more than 12 million visitors, being open May to October. Unlike the press, visitor feedback was positive; as of August 2000, 87% of visitors said they were satisfied with their visit. It was the most popular admission-paying tourist attraction in 2000, with almost twice as many visitors as the second most visited attraction, Alton Towers.\nAccording to the UK National Audit Office, the cost of The Dome at the liquidation of the New Millennium Experience Company in 2002 was \u00a3789 million, of which \u00a3628 million was covered by National Lottery grants and \u00a3189 million through sales of tickets etc. A surplus of \u00a325 million over costs meant that the full lottery grant was not required. The \u00a3603 million of lottery money was still \u00a3204 million in excess of the original estimate of \u00a3399 million required, due to the shortfall in visitor numbers.\nClosure and sale of site.\nThe government's difficulties in selling the site became the subject of much critical comment. The amount spent on maintaining the closed building was also criticised. Shortly after it had closed, Lord Falconer reported that The Dome was costing over \u00a31\u00a0million per month to maintain.\nFollowing closure of the Dome, some Zones were dismantled by the sponsoring organisations, but much of the content was auctioned or donated to Disney World. This included a number of artworks specially commissioned from contemporary British artists. A piece by Gavin Turk was sold for far below his auction price, though Turk stated that he did not think the piece had worked. The Timekeepers of the Millennium attraction was acquired by the Chessington World of Adventures theme park in Surrey. A unique record of the memorabilia and paraphernalia of the Millennium Experience is held by a private collector in the United States. Many of the fixtures and fittings were also purchased by Paul Scally, chairman of Gillingham F.C., for the club's stadium.\nTemporary reopenings.\nThe Dome opened again during December 2003 for the \"Winter Wonderland 2003\" experience. The event, which featured a large funfair, ice rink, and other attractions, culminated in a laser and firework display on New Year's Eve. It also served as the venue for a number of free music festivals organised by the Mayor of London under the \"Respect\" banner.\nOver the 2004 Christmas period, part of the main dome was used as a shelter for the homeless and others in need, organised by the charity Crisis after superseding the London Arena, which had previously hosted the event. In 2005, when work began for the redevelopment of the Dome, the London Arena hosted the event again.\nRedevelopment and rebranding as The O2.\nBy late 2000, a proposal had been made for a high-tech business park to be erected under the tent area, creating an \"indoor city\" complete with streets, parks, and buildings. The business park was actually the original 1996 proposal for the site of the peninsula before the plans for the Millennium Dome were proposed.\nA suggestion was also made that the entire Dome be relocated to Swindon to serve as a research centre and extension of the Science Museum; this proposal only came to light when released by The National Archives in 2022.\nIn December 2001, it was announced that Meridian Delta Ltd had been chosen by the government to develop the Dome as a sports and entertainment centre, and to develop housing, shops and offices on of surrounding land. It also hoped to relocate some of London's tertiary education establishments to the site. Meridian Delta is backed by the American billionaire Philip Anschutz, who has interests in oil, railways, and telecommunications, as well as a string of sports-related investments.\nA report in 2005 by the House of Commons Public Accounts Committee found that the cost of the process of selling the Dome and surrounding land (which increased to 170 acres from the initial offering of the 48 acres enclosed by the Dome) and managing the Dome until the deal was closed was \u00a328.7 million. \u00a333 million were expected to be returned to the taxpayer by 2009. The value of the 48 acres occupied by the Dome was estimated at \u00a348 million, which could have been realised by demolishing the structure, but it was considered preferable to preserve the Dome.\nThe dome was publicly renamed as The O2 on 31 May 2005, in a \u00a36 million-per-year deal with telecommunications company O2 plc, now a subsidiary of Telef\u00f3nica Europe. This announcement, which presaged a major redevelopment of the site that retained little beyond the shell of the dome, gave publicity to the dome's transition into an entertainment district including an indoor arena, a music club, a cinema, an exhibition space and bars and restaurants. This redevelopment was undertaken by the dome's new owners, the Anschutz Entertainment Group, to a design by HOK SVE and Buro Happold. It cost \u00a3600 million, and the resulting venue opened to the public on 24 June 2007, with a concert by rock band Bon Jovi.\nDuring the 2012 Summer Olympics, the artistic gymnastics events, along with the medal rounds of basketball, were held at The O2. It also held wheelchair basketball events during the 2012 Summer Paralympics. For sponsorship reasons, during those times the arena was temporarily renamed the North Greenwich Arena.\nThe O2 now contains multiple VR theme park rides, a trampoline park, and an attraction called \"Up at The O2,\" offering guided climbs on the O2 arena.\nEffects on political careers.\nIssues related to the Dome damaged the political careers of government ministers Peter Mandelson and John Prescott. The scheme was seen as an early example of what some saw as Tony Blair's often excessive optimism, who stated at the Dome's opening: \"In the Dome we have a creation that, I believe, will truly be a beacon to the world\". The fact that Mandelson's grandfather was Herbert Morrison\u2014who as a minister had been involved with the Festival of Britain\u2014was often drawn on for negative comparisons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39764", "revid": "48227547", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39764", "title": "Jacques Chirac", "text": "President of France from 1995 to 2007\nJacques Ren\u00e9 Chirac (, ; ; 29 November 1932\u00a0\u2013 26 September 2019) was a French politician who served as President of France from 1995 to 2007. He was previously Prime Minister of France from 1974 to 1976 and 1986 to 1988, as well as Mayor of Paris from 1977 to 1995.\nAfter attending the , Chirac began his career as a high-level civil servant, entering politics shortly thereafter. Chirac occupied various senior positions, including minister of agriculture and minister of the interior. In 1981 and 1988, he unsuccessfully ran for president as the standard-bearer for the conservative Gaullist party Rally for the Republic (RPR). Chirac's internal policies initially included lower tax rates, the removal of price controls, strong punishment for crime and terrorism, and business privatisation.\nAfter pursuing these policies in his second term as prime minister, Chirac changed his views. He argued for different economic policies and was elected president in 1995, with 52.6% of the vote in the second round, beating Socialist Lionel Jospin, after campaigning on a platform of healing the \"social rift\" (). Chirac's economic policies, based on dirigisme, allowing for state-directed investment, stood in opposition to the \"laissez-faire\" policies of the United Kingdom under the ministries of Margaret Thatcher and John Major, which Chirac described as \"Anglo-Saxon ultraliberalism\".\nChirac was known for his stand against the American-led invasion of Iraq, his recognition of the collaborationist French government's role in deporting Jews, and his reduction of the presidential term from seven years to five through a referendum in 2000. At the 2002 presidential election, he won 82.2% of the vote in the second round against the far-right candidate, Jean-Marie Le Pen, and was the last president to be re-elected until 2022. In 2011, the Paris court declared Chirac guilty of diverting public funds and abusing public confidence, giving him a two-year suspended prison sentence.&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEarly life and education.\nFamily background.\nJacques Ren\u00e9 Chirac was born on 29 November 1932 in the 5th arrondissement of Paris. He was the son of Abel Fran\u00e7ois Marie Chirac (1898\u20131968), a successful executive for an aircraft company, and Marie-Louise Valette (1902\u20131973), a housewife. His grandparents were all teachers from in . His great-grandparents on both sides were peasants in the rural south-western region of the .\nAccording to Chirac, his name \"originates from the , that of the troubadours, therefore that of poetry\". He was a Roman Catholic.\nChirac was an only child (his elder sister, Jacqueline, died in infancy nearly ten years before his birth). He was educated in Paris at the , a private school. He then attended the and the . After his , behind his father's back, he went off to serve for three months as a sailor on a coal transport.\nChirac played rugby union for Brive's youth team, and also played at university level. He played no. 8 and second row. At age 18, his ambition was to become a ship's captain.\nEducation and early career.\nAt age 16, Chirac wanted to learn Sanskrit and found a White Russian Sanskrit teacher in Paris who ended up teaching him Russian; by age 17 Chirac was almost fluent in Russian. Inspired by Charles de Gaulle, Chirac started to pursue a civil service career in the 1950s. During this period, he joined the French Communist Party, sold copies of , and took part in meetings of a communist cell. In 1950, he signed the Soviet-inspired Stockholm Appeal for the abolition of nuclear weapons \u2013 which led him to be questioned when he applied for his first visa to the United States.\nIn 1953, after graduating from the , he attended a non-credit course at Harvard University's summer school, before entering the , which trains France's top civil servants, in 1957.\nIn the United States, Chirac worked at Anheuser-Busch in St. Louis, Missouri.\nChirac trained as a reserve military officer in armoured cavalry at Saumur. He then volunteered to fight in the Algerian War, using personal connections to be sent despite the reservations of his superiors. His superiors did not want to make him an officer because they suspected he had communist leanings. In 1965, he became an auditor in the Court of Auditors.\nEarly political career.\nThe \"Bulldozer\": 1962\u20131971.\nIn April 1962, Chirac was appointed head of the personal staff of Prime Minister Georges Pompidou. This appointment launched Chirac's political career. Pompidou considered Chirac his prot\u00e9g\u00e9, and referred to him as \"my bulldozer\" for his skill at getting things done. The nickname caught on in French political circles, where it also referred to his abrasive manner. As late as the 1988 presidential election, Chirac maintained this reputation.\nAt Pompidou's suggestion, Chirac ran as a Gaullist for a seat in the National Assembly in 1967. He was elected deputy for his home Corr\u00e8ze , a stronghold of the left. This surprising victory in the context of a Gaullist ebb permitted him to enter the government as Minister of Social Affairs. Although Chirac was well-situated in de Gaulle's entourage, being related by marriage to the general's sole companion at the time of the Appeal of 18 June 1940, he was more of a \"Pompidolian\" than a \"Gaullist\". When student and worker unrest rocked France in May 1968, Chirac played a central role in negotiating a truce. Subsequently, as state secretary of economy (1968\u20131971), he worked closely with Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing, who headed the ministry of economy and finance.\nCabinet minister: 1971\u20131974.\nAfter some months in the ministry for Relations with Parliament, Chirac's first high-level post came in 1972 when he became Minister of Agriculture and Rural Development under Pompidou, who had been elected president in 1969, after de Gaulle retired. Chirac quickly earned a reputation as a champion of French farmers' interests, and first attracted international attention when he assailed U.S., West German, and European Commission agricultural policies which conflicted with French interests.\nOn 27 February 1974, after the resignation of Raymond Marcellin, Chirac was appointed Minister of the Interior. On 21 March 1974, he cancelled the SAFARI project due to privacy concerns after its existence was revealed by . From March 1974, he was entrusted by President Pompidou with preparations for the presidential election then scheduled for 1976. These elections were moved forward because of Pompidou's sudden death on 2 April 1974.\nChirac vainly attempted to rally Gaullists behind Prime Minister Pierre Messmer. Jacques Chaban-Delmas announced his candidacy in spite of the disapproval of the \"Pompidolians\". Chirac and others published the \"call of the 43\" in favour of Giscard d'Estaing, the leader of the non-Gaullist part of the parliamentary majority. Giscard d'Estaing was elected as Pompidou's successor after France's most competitive election campaign in years. In return, the new president chose Chirac to lead the cabinet.\nPrime Minister under Giscard: 1974\u20131976.\nWhen Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing became president, he nominated Chirac as prime minister on 27 May 1974, to reconcile the \"Giscardian\" and \"non-Giscardian\" factions of the parliamentary majority. At the age of 41, Chirac stood out as the very model of the ('young wolves') of French politics, but he was faced with the hostility of the \"Barons of Gaullism\" who considered him a traitor for his role during the previous presidential campaign. In December 1974, he took the lead of the Union of Democrats for the Republic (UDR) against the will of its more senior personalities.\nAs prime minister, Chirac quickly set about persuading the Gaullists that, despite the social reforms proposed by President Giscard, the basic tenets of Gaullism, such as national and European independence, would be retained. Chirac was advised by Pierre Juillet and Marie-France Garaud, two former advisers of Pompidou. These two organised the campaign against Chaban-Delmas in 1974. They advocated a clash with Giscard d'Estaing because they thought his policy bewildered the conservative electorate.\nCiting Giscard's unwillingness to give him authority, Chirac resigned as prime minister in 1976. He proceeded to build up his political base among France's several conservative parties, with a goal of reconstituting the Gaullist UDR into a Neo-Gaullist group, the Rally for the Republic (RPR). Chirac's first tenure as prime minister was also an arguably progressive one, with improvements in both the minimum wage and the social welfare system carried out during the course of his premiership.\nMayor of Paris: 1977\u20131995.\nAfter his departure from the cabinet, Chirac wanted to gain the leadership of the political right, to gain the French presidency in the future. The RPR was conceived as an electoral machine against President Giscard d'Estaing. Paradoxically, Chirac benefited from Giscard's decision to create the office of mayor in Paris, which had been in abeyance since the 1871 Commune, because the leaders of the Third Republic (1871\u20131940) feared that having municipal control of the capital would give the mayor too much power. In 1977, Chirac stood as a candidate against Michel d'Ornano, a close friend of the president, and won. As mayor of Paris, Chirac's political influence grew. He held this post until 1995.\nChirac supporters point out that, as mayor, he provided programmes to help the elderly, people with disabilities, and single mothers, and introduced the street-cleaning Motocrotte, while providing incentives for businesses to stay in Paris. His opponents contend that he installed \"clientelist\" policies.\nGovernmental opposition.\nStruggle for the right-wing leadership: 1976\u20131986.\nIn 1978, Chirac attacked Giscard's pro-European policy and made a nationalist turn with the December 1978 Call of Cochin, initiated by his counsellors Marie-France Garaud and Pierre Juillet, which had first been called by Pompidou. Hospitalised in after a car crash, he declared that \"as always about the drooping of France, the pro-foreign party acts with its peaceable and reassuring voice\". He appointed Yvan Blot, an intellectual who would later join the National Front, as director of his campaigns for the 1979 European election.\nAfter the poor results of the election, Chirac broke with Garaud and Juillet. Vexed Marie-France Garaud stated: \"We thought Chirac was made of the same marble of which statues are carved in, we perceive he's of the same faience bidets are made of.\" His rivalry with Giscard d'Estaing intensified.\nChirac made his first run for president against Giscard d'Estaing in the 1981 election, thus splitting the centre-right vote. He was eliminated in the first round with 18% of the vote. He reluctantly supported Giscard in the second round. He refused to give instructions to the RPR voters but said that he supported the incumbent president \"in a private capacity\", which was interpreted as almost \"de facto\" support of the Socialist Party's (PS) candidate, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, who was elected by a broad majority.\nGiscard has always blamed Chirac for his defeat. He was told by Mitterrand, before his death, that the latter had dined with Chirac before the election. Chirac told the Socialist candidate that he wanted to \"get rid of Giscard\". In his memoirs, Giscard wrote that between the two rounds, he phoned the RPR headquarters. He passed himself off, as a right-wing voter, by changing his voice. The RPR employee advised him \"certainly do not vote Giscard!\" After 1981, the relationship between the two men became tense, with Giscard, even though he had been in the same government coalition as Chirac, criticising Chirac's actions openly.\nAfter the May 1981 presidential election, the right also lost the subsequent legislative election that year. However, as Giscard had been knocked out, Chirac appeared as the principal leader of the right-wing opposition. Due to his attacks against the economic policy of the Socialist government, he gradually aligned himself with the prevailing economically liberal opinion, even though it did not correspond with Gaullist doctrine. While the far-right National Front grew, taking advantage of the proportional representation electoral system which had been introduced for the 1986 legislative elections, he signed an electoral pact with the Giscardian (and more or less Christian Democratic) party Union for French Democracy (UDF).\nPrime Minister under Mitterrand: 1986\u20131988.\nWhen the RPR/UDF right-wing coalition won a slight majority in the National Assembly in the 1986 election, Mitterrand (PS) appointed Chirac prime minister (though many in Mitterrand's inner circle lobbied him to choose Jacques Chaban-Delmas instead). This unprecedented power-sharing arrangement, known as cohabitation, gave Chirac the lead in domestic affairs. However, it is generally conceded that Mitterrand used the areas granted to the President of the Republic, or \"reserved domains\" of the Presidency, Defence and Foreign Affairs, to belittle his prime minister.\nChirac's cabinet sold many public companies, renewing the liberalisation initiated under Laurent Fabius's Socialist government of 1984\u20131986, and abolished the solidarity tax on wealth (ISF), a symbolic tax on those with high-value assets introduced by Mitterrand's government. Elsewhere, the plan for university reform (plan Devaquet) caused a crisis in 1986 when a student called Malik Oussekine was killed by the police, leading to massive demonstrations and the proposal's withdrawal. It has been said during other student crises that this event strongly affected Jacques Chirac, who was afterwards careful about possible police violence during such demonstrations (e.g., maybe explaining part of the decision to \"promulgate without applying\" the First Employment Contract (CPE) after large student demonstrations against it).\nOne of his first acts concerning foreign policy was to call back Jacques Foccart (1913\u20131997), who had been de Gaulle's and his successors' leading counsellor for African matters, called by journalist Stephen Smith the \"father of all \"networks\" on the continent, at the time [in 1986] aged 72.\" Foccart, who had also co-founded the Gaullist SAC militia (dissolved by Mitterrand in 1982 after the Auriol massacre) along with Charles Pasqua, and who was a key component of the system, was again called to the Elys\u00e9e Palace when Chirac won the 1995 presidential election. Furthermore, confronted by anti-colonialist movements in New Caledonia, Prime Minister Chirac ordered a military intervention against the separatists in the Ouv\u00e9a cave, leading to the deaths of 19 militants. He allegedly refused any alliance with Jean-Marie Le Pen's National Front.\nCrossing the desert: 1988\u20131995.\nChirac ran against Mitterrand for a second time in the 1988 election. He obtained 20 per cent of the vote in the first round but lost the second with only 46 per cent. He resigned from the cabinet and the right lost the next legislative election.\nFor the first time, his leadership over the RPR was challenged. Charles Pasqua and Philippe S\u00e9guin criticised his abandonment of Gaullist doctrines. On the right, a new generation of politicians, the \"renovation men\", accused Chirac and Giscard of being responsible for the electoral defeats. In 1992, convinced a candidate could not become president whilst advocating anti-European policies, he called for a \"yes\" vote in the referendum on the Maastricht Treaty, against the opinion of Pasqua, S\u00e9guin and a majority of the RPR voters, who chose to vote \"no\".\nWhile he still was mayor of Paris (since 1977), Chirac went to Abidjan () where he supported President Houphou\u00ebt-Boigny (1960\u20131993), although the latter was being called a \"thief\" by the local population. Chirac then declared that multipartism was a \"kind of luxury\".\nNevertheless, the right won the 1993 legislative election. Chirac announced that he did not want to come back as prime minister as his previous term had ended with his unsuccessful run for the presidency against Mitterrand who was still president at this point.\nChirac instead suggested the appointment of Edouard Balladur, who had promised that he would not run for the presidency against Chirac in 1995. However, benefiting from positive polls, Balladur decided to be a presidential candidate, with the support of a majority of right-wing politicians. Balladur broke from Chirac along with a number of friends and allies, including Charles Pasqua, Nicolas Sarkozy, etc., who supported his candidacy. A small group of would remain with Chirac, including Alain Jupp\u00e9 and Jean-Louis Debr\u00e9. When Nicolas Sarkozy became president in 2007, Jupp\u00e9 was one of the few to serve in Fran\u00e7ois Fillon's government.\nPresidency (1995\u20132007).\nFirst term: 1995\u20132002.\nJupp\u00e9 ministry.\nDuring the 1995 presidential campaign, Chirac criticised the \"sole thought\" () of neoliberalism represented by his challenger on the right and promised to reduce the \"social fracture\", placing himself more to the centre and thus forcing Balladur to radicalise himself. Ultimately, he obtained more votes than Balladur in the first round (20.8 per cent), and then defeated the Socialist candidate Lionel Jospin in the second round (52.6 per cent).\nChirac was elected on a platform of tax cuts and job programmes, but his policies did little to ease the labour strikes during his first months in office. On the domestic front, neo-liberal economic austerity measures introduced by Chirac and his conservative prime minister Alain Jupp\u00e9, including budgetary cutbacks, proved highly unpopular. At about the same time, it became apparent that Jupp\u00e9 and others had obtained preferential conditions for public housing, as well as other perks. At the year's end, Chirac faced major workers' strikes which turned, in November\u2013December 1995, into a general strike, one of the largest since May 1968. The demonstrations were largely pitted against Jupp\u00e9's plan for pension reform, and ultimately led to his dismissal.\nShortly after taking office, Chirac\u00a0\u2013 undaunted by international protests by environmental groups\u00a0\u2013 insisted upon the resumption of nuclear tests at Mururoa Atoll in French Polynesia in 1995, a few months before signing the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty. Reacting to criticism, Chirac said, \"You only have to look back at 1935...There were people then who were against France arming itself, and look what happened.\" On 1 February 1996, Chirac announced that France had ended \"once and for all\" its nuclear testing and intended to accede to the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty.\nElected as President of the Republic, he refused to discuss the existence of French military bases in Africa, despite requests by the Ministry of Defence and the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The French Army thus remained in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire as well as in Omar Bongo's Gabon.\nState responsibility for the roundup of Jews.\nPrior to 1995, the French government had maintained that the French Republic had been dismantled when Philippe P\u00e9tain instituted a new French State during World War II and that the Republic had been re-established when the war was over. It was not for France, therefore, to apologise for the roundup of Jews for deportation that happened while the Republic had not existed and was carried out by a state, Vichy France, which it did not recognise. President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand had reiterated this position: \"The Republic had nothing to do with this. I do not believe France is responsible,\" he said in September 1994.\nChirac was the first president of France to take responsibility for the deportation of Jews during the Vichy regime. In a speech made on 16 July 1995 at the site of the Vel' d'Hiv Roundup, where 13,000 Jews had been held for deportation to concentration camps in July 1942, Chirac said, \"France, on that day, committed the irreparable\". Those responsible for the roundup were \"4,500 policemen and gendarmes, French, under the authority of their leaders [who] obeyed the demands of the Nazis. ... the criminal folly of the occupiers was seconded by the French, by the French State\".\n\"Cohabitation\" with Jospin.\nIn 1997, Chirac dissolved parliament for early legislative elections in a gamble designed to bolster support for his conservative economic program. But instead, it created an uproar, and his power was weakened by the subsequent backlash. The Socialist Party (PS), joined by other parties on the left, soundly defeated Chirac's conservative allies, forcing Chirac into a new period of cohabitation with Jospin as prime minister (1997\u20132002), which lasted five years.\nCohabitation significantly weakened the power of Chirac's presidency. The French president, by a constitutional convention, only controls foreign and military policy\u2014 and even then, allocation of funding is under the control of Parliament and under the significant influence of the prime minister. Short of dissolving parliament and calling for new elections, the president was left with little power to influence public policy regarding crime, the economy, and public services. Chirac seized the occasion to periodically criticise Jospin's government.\nHis position was weakened by scandals about the financing of RPR by Paris municipality. In 2001, the left, represented by Bertrand Delano\u00eb (PS), won a majority on the city council of the capital. Jean Tiberi, Chirac's successor at the Paris city hall, was forced to resign after having been put under investigation in June 1999 on charges of in the HLMs of Paris affairs (related to the illegal financing of the RPR). Tiberi was finally expelled from the Rally for the Republic, Chirac's party, on 12 October 2000, declaring to the magazine on 18 November 2000: \"Jacques Chirac is not my friend anymore\".\nAfter the publication of the diaries of Jean-Claude M\u00e9ry by on 22 September 2000, in which Jean-Claude M\u00e9ry, in charge of the RPR's financing, directly accused Chirac of organising the network, and of having been physically present on 5 October 1986, when M\u00e9ry gave in cash 5 million Francs, which came from companies who had benefited from state deals, to Michel Roussin, personal secretary () of Chirac, Chirac refused to attend court in response to his summons by judge Eric Halphen, and the highest echelons of the French justice system declared that he could not be inculpated while in office.\nDuring his two terms, he increased the Elysee Palace's total budget by 105 per cent (to \u20ac90\u00a0million, whereas 20 years before it was the equivalent of \u20ac43.7\u00a0million). He doubled the number of presidential cars \u2013 to 61 cars and seven scooters in the Palace's garage. He hired 145 extra employees \u2013 the total number of people he employed simultaneously was 963.\nDefence policy.\nAs the Supreme Commander of the French armed forces, he reduced the military budget, as did his predecessor. At the end of his first term, it accounted for three per cent of GDP. In 1997 the aircraft carrier \"Clemenceau\" was decommissioned after 37 years of service, with her sister ship \"Foch\" decommissioned in 2000 after 37 years of service, leaving the French Navy with no aircraft carrier until 2001, when \"Charles de Gaulle\" was commissioned. He also reduced expenditure on nuclear weapons and the French nuclear arsenal was reduced to include 350 warheads, compared to the Russian nuclear arsenal of 16,000 warheads. He also published a plan to reduce the number of fighters the French military had by 30.\nAfter Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand left office in 1995, Chirac began a rapprochement with NATO by joining the Military Committee and attempting to negotiate a return to the integrated military command, which failed after the French demand for parity with the United States went unmet. The possibility of a further attempt foundered after Chirac was forced into cohabitation with a Socialist-led cabinet between 1997 and 2002, then poor Franco-American relations after the French UN veto threat over Iraq in 2003 made transatlantic negotiations impossible.\nClose call.\nOn 25 July 2000, as Chirac and the first lady were returning from the G7 Summit in Okinawa, Japan, they were placed in a dangerous situation by Air France Flight 4590 after they landed at Charles de Gaulle International Airport. The first couple were in an Air France Boeing 747 taxiing toward the terminal when the jet had to stop and wait for Flight 4590 to take off. The departing plane, an A\u00e9rospatiale-BAC Concorde, ran over a strip of metal on takeoff puncturing its left fuel tank and sliced electrical wires near the left landing gear. The sequence of events ignited a large fire and caused the Concorde to veer left on its takeoff roll. As it reached takeoff speed and lifted off the ground, it came within 30 feet of hitting Chirac's 747. Photographs of Flight 4590 ablaze were taken by passenger Toshihiko Sato on Chirac's jetliner.\nSecond term: 2002\u20132007.\nAt the age of 69, Chirac faced his fourth presidential campaign in 2002. He received 20% of the vote in the first ballot of the presidential elections in April 2002. It had been expected that he would face incumbent prime minister Lionel Jospin (PS) in the second round of elections; instead, Chirac faced far-right politician Jean-Marie Le Pen of the National Front (FN), who came in 200,000 votes ahead of Jospin. All parties other than the National Front (except for ) called for opposing Le Pen, even if it meant voting for Chirac. The 14-day period between the two rounds of voting was marked by demonstrations against Le Pen and slogans such as \"Vote for the crook, not for the fascist\" or \"Vote with a clothespin on your nose\". Chirac won re-election by a landslide, with 82 per cent of the vote on the second ballot. However, Chirac became increasingly unpopular during his second term. According to a July 2005 poll, 37 per cent judged Chirac favourably and 63 per cent unfavourably. In 2006, \"The Economist\" wrote that Chirac \"is the most unpopular occupant of the Elys\u00e9e Palace in the fifth republic's history.\"\nEarly term.\nAs the left-wing Socialist Party was in thorough disarray following Jospin's defeat, Chirac reorganised politics on the right, establishing a new party \u2013 initially called the Union of the Presidential Majority, then the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP). The RPR had broken down; a number of members had formed Eurosceptic breakaways. While the Giscardian liberals of the Union for French Democracy (UDF) had moved to the right, the UMP won the parliamentary elections that followed the presidential poll with ease.\nDuring an official visit to Madagascar on 21 July 2005, Chirac described the repression of the 1947 Malagasy uprising, which left between 80,000 and 90,000 dead, as \"unacceptable\".\nDespite past opposition to state intervention, the Chirac government approved a \u20ac2.8\u00a0billion aid package to troubled manufacturing giant Alstom. In October 2004, Chirac signed a trade agreement with PRC president Hu Jintao where Alstom was given \u20ac1\u00a0billion in contracts and promises of future investment in China.\nAssassination attempt.\nOn 14 July 2002, during Bastille Day celebrations, Chirac survived an assassination attempt by a lone gunman with a rifle hidden in a guitar case. The would-be assassin fired a shot toward the presidential motorcade, before being overpowered by bystanders. The gunman, Maxime Brunerie, underwent psychiatric testing; the violent far-right group with which he was associated, , was thence administratively dissolved.\nForeign policy.\nAlong with Vladimir Putin (whom he called \"a personal friend\"), Hu Jintao, and Gerhard Schr\u00f6der, Chirac emerged as a leading voice against George W. Bush and Tony Blair in 2003 during the organisation and deployment of American and British forces participating in a military coalition to forcibly remove the government of Iraq controlled by the Ba'ath Party under the leadership of Saddam Hussein that resulted in the 2003\u20132011 Iraq War.\nDespite British and American pressure, Chirac threatened to veto, at that given point, a resolution in the UN Security Council that would authorise the use of military force to rid Iraq of alleged weapons of mass destruction, and rallied other governments to his position. \"Iraq today does not represent an immediate threat that justifies an immediate war\", Chirac said on 18 March 2003. Future prime minister Dominique de Villepin acquired much of his popularity for his speech against the war at the United Nations (UN).\nAfter Togo's leader Gnassingb\u00e9 Eyad\u00e9ma's death on 5 February 2005, Chirac gave him tribute and supported his son, Faure Gnassingb\u00e9, who has since succeeded his father.\nOn 19 January 2006, Chirac said that France was prepared to launch a nuclear strike against any country that sponsors a terrorist attack against French interests. He said his country's nuclear arsenal had been reconfigured to include the ability to make a tactical strike in retaliation for terrorism.\nChirac criticised the Israeli offensive into Lebanon on 14 July 2006. However, Israeli Army Radio later reported that Chirac had secretly told Israeli prime minister Ehud Olmert that France would support an Israeli invasion of Syria and the overthrow of the government of President Bashar al-Assad, promising to veto any moves against Israel in the United Nations or European Union. Whereas the disagreement on Iraq had caused a rift between Paris and Washington, recent analysis suggests that both governments worked closely together on the Syria file to end the Syrian occupation of Lebanon, and that Chirac was a driver of this diplomatic cooperation.\nIn July 2006, the G8 met to discuss international energy concerns. Despite the rising awareness of global warming issues, the G8 focused on \"energy security\" issues. Chirac continued to be the voice within the G8 summit meetings to support international action to curb global warming and climate change concerns. Chirac warned that \"humanity is dancing on a volcano\" and called for serious action by the world's leading industrialised nations.\nAfter Chirac's death in 2019, the street leading to the Louvre Abu Dhabi was named Jacques Chirac Street in November 2019 in celebration of Chirac's efforts to bolster links between France and the United Arab Emirates during his presidency.\nChirac espoused a staunchly pro-Moroccan policy, and the already established pro-Moroccan French stances vis-\u00e0-vis the Western Sahara conflict were strengthened during his presidential tenure.\nFlight tax.\nChirac requested the \"Landau-report\" (published in September 2004) and combined with the \"Report of the Technical Group on Innovative Financing Mechanisms\" formulated upon request by the Heads of State of Brazil, Chile, France and Spain (issued in December 2004), these documents present various opportunities for innovative financing mechanisms while equally stressing the advantages (stability and predictability) of tax-based models. The UNITAID project was born. Today the organisation's executive board is chaired by Marisol Touraine.\n2005 referendum on TCE.\nOn 29 May 2005, a referendum was held in France to decide whether the country should ratify the proposed treaty for a Constitution of the European Union (TCE). The result was a victory for the No campaign, with 55 per cent of voters rejecting the treaty on a turnout of 69 per cent, dealing a devastating blow to Chirac and the Union for a Popular Movement (UMP) party, and to part of the centre-left which had supported the TCE. Following the referendum defeat, Chirac replaced his prime minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin with Dominique de Villepin. In an address to the nation, Chirac declared that the new cabinet's top priority was to curb unemployment, which was consistently hovering above 10 per cent, calling for a \"national mobilisation\" to that effect.\n2005 civil unrest and CPE protests.\nFollowing major student protests in spring 2006, which followed civil unrest in autumn 2005 after the death of two young boys in Clichy-sous-Bois, one of the poorest communes in Paris' suburbs, Chirac retracted the proposed First Employment Contract (CPE) by \"promulgating [it] without applying it\", an unheard-of \u2013 and, some claim, illegal \u2013 move intended to appease the protesters while giving the appearance of not making a regarding the contract, and therefore to continue his support for his prime minister Dominique de Villepin.\nRetirement.\nIn early September 2005, Chirac suffered an event that his doctors described as a \"vascular incident\". It was officially reported as a \"minor stroke\" or a mild stroke (also known as a transient ischemic attack). He recovered and returned to his duties soon afterward.\nIn a pre-recorded television broadcast aired on 11 March 2007, he announced, in a widely predicted move, that he would not choose to seek a third term as president. (In 2000 the constitution was amended to reduce the length of the presidential term to five years, so his second term was shorter than his first.) \"My whole life has been committed to serving France, and serving peace\", Chirac said, adding that he would find new ways to serve France after leaving office. He did not explain the reasons for his decision. He did not, during the broadcast, endorse any of the candidates running for election, but did devote several minutes of his talk to a plea against extremist politics that was considered a thinly disguised invocation to voters not to vote for Jean-Marie Le Pen and a recommendation to Nicolas Sarkozy not to orient his campaign so as to include themes traditionally associated with Le Pen.\nPost-presidency and death.\nShortly after leaving office, he launched the Fondation Chirac in June 2008. Since then it has been striving for peace through five advocacy programmes: conflict prevention, access to water and sanitation, access to quality medicines and healthcare, access to land resources, and preservation of cultural diversity. It supports field projects that involve local people and provide concrete and innovative solutions. Chirac chaired the jury for the Prize for Conflict Prevention awarded every year by his foundation. As a former president of France, he was entitled to a lifetime pension and personal security protection, and was an \"ex officio\" member for life of the Constitutional Council. He sat for the first time on the council on 15 November 2007, six months after leaving the presidency. Immediately after Sarkozy's victory, Chirac moved into a duplex on the in Paris lent to him by the family of former Lebanese prime minister Rafik Hariri. During the Didier Schuller affair, the latter accused Hariri of having participated in illegal funding of the RPR's political campaigns, but the judge closed the case without further investigations. In Volume 2 of his memoirs published in June 2011, Chirac mocked his successor Nicolas Sarkozy as \"irritable, rash, impetuous, disloyal, ungrateful, and un-French\". Chirac wrote that he considered firing Sarkozy previously, and conceded responsibility in allowing Jean-Marie Le Pen to advance in 2002. A poll conducted in 2010 suggested Chirac was the most admired political figure in France, while Sarkozy was 32nd. On 11 April 2008, Chirac's office announced that he had undergone successful surgery to fit a pacemaker.\nChirac suffered from frail health and memory loss in later life. In February 2014 he was admitted to hospital because of pains related to gout. On 10 December 2015, Chirac was hospitalised in Paris for undisclosed reasons, although his state of health did not \"give any cause for concern\", he remained for about a week in ICU. According to his son-in-law Frederic Salat-Baroux, Chirac was again hospitalised in Paris with a lung infection on 18 September 2016.\nDeath and state funeral.\nChirac died at his home in the 6th arrondissement of Paris on 26 September 2019, surrounded by his family. A requiem mass was held at Saint-Sulpice on 30 September, celebrated by Michel Aupetit, Archbishop of Paris, and attended by representatives from about 175 countries, included 69 past and present heads of state, government and international organisations. Notable names included Ant\u00f3nio Guterres, Jean-Claude Juncker, Jens Stoltenberg, Vladimir Putin, Sergio Mattarella, Frank-Walter Steinmeier, Charles Michel, Viktor Orb\u00e1n, Recep Tayyip Erdo\u011fan, Saad Hariri, Borut Pahor, Salome Zourabichvili, Prince Edward, Jean Chr\u00e9tien, Vaira Vike-Freiberga, Bill Clinton, Hamid Karzai, Dai Bingguo plus many ministers.\nThe day was declared a national day of mourning in France and a minute of silence was held nationwide at 15:00. Following the public ceremony, Chirac was buried at Montparnasse Cemetery, with only close family in attendance. Andorra announced three days of national mourning. Lebanon declared the day of the ex-president's funeral national day of mourning.\nPopular culture.\nChirac was a major supporter of the nation's film industry.\nBecause of Jacques Chirac's long public career, he was often parodied or caricatured: Young Jacques Chirac is the basis of a young, dashing bureaucrat character in the 1976 Asterix comic strip album \"Obelix and Co.\", proposing methods to quell Gallic unrest to elderly, old-style Roman politicians. Chirac was also featured in as an overexcited, jumpy character.\nA major fixture of the Guignols.\nJacques Chirac was a favourite character of , a satiric latex puppet show. He was originally portrayed as a rather likeable, though overexcited, character; following the corruption allegations, however, he was depicted as a kind of dilettante and incompetent who pilfered public money and lied through his teeth. His character for a while developed a superhero alter ego, ('super liar') to get him out of embarrassing situations.\nSatirical songs.\nIn 1988, the band Parabellum lambasted Chirac in their song \"Anarchie en Chiraquie\" (\"anarchy in Chirac-land\"). In 1995, Zebda criticized Chirac's declarations on the \"noise and smell\" of immigrant families.\nBecause of his alleged improprieties, Chirac was lambasted in a song ('Chirac in prison') by French punk band , with a video clip made by the . Similarly, the band Sinsemilia lambasted Chirac in the song \"Bienvenue en Chiraquie\" (\"Welcome to Chirac-land\") as being the leader of a political mafia behaving outside of the laws applicable to normal citizenry. In June 2005, the band attracted media controversy when, on live television during midday news, it stopped early playing the gentle \"Tout le bonheur du monde\" and instead started playing \"Bienvenue en Chiraquie\" as a political gesture, before being cut early.\nIg Nobel.\nHe was given the Ig Nobel prize for peace, for commemorating the fiftieth anniversary of Hiroshima with atomic bomb tests in the Pacific (1996).\nPortrayals in film.\nJ. Grant Albrecht voices Chirac in the Oliver Stone film \"W.\" Marc Rioufol plays him in Richard Loncraine's 2010 film \"The Special Relationship\".\nBernard Le Coq portrays Chirac in and \"The Conquest\" by Xavier Durringer.\nControversies.\nOsirak controversy.\nAt the invitation of Saddam Hussein (then vice-president of Iraq, but \"de facto\" dictator), Chirac made an official visit to Baghdad in 1975. Hussein approved a deal granting French oil companies a number of privileges plus a 23-percent share of Iraqi oil. As part of this deal, France sold Iraq the Osirak MTR nuclear reactor, designed to test nuclear materials.\nThe Israeli Air Force alleged that the reactor's imminent commissioning was a threat to its security, and pre-emptively bombed the Osirak reactor on 7 June 1981, provoking considerable anger from French officials and the United Nations Security Council.\nThe Osirak deal became a controversy again in 2002\u20132003, when an international military coalition led by the United States invaded Iraq and forcibly removed Hussein's government from power. France led several other European countries in an effort to prevent the invasion. The Osirak deal was then used by parts of the American media to criticise the Chirac-led opposition to starting a war in Iraq, despite French involvement in the Gulf War.\nConviction for corruption.\nChirac has been named in several cases of alleged corruption that occurred during his term as mayor, some of which have led to felony convictions of some politicians and aides. However, a controversial judicial decision in 1999 granted Chirac immunity while he was president of France. He refused to testify on these matters, arguing that it would be incompatible with his presidential functions. Investigations concerning the running of Paris's city hall, the number of whose municipal employees increased by 25% from 1977 to 1995 (with 2,000 out of approximately 35,000 coming from the region where Chirac had held his seat as deputy), as well as a lack of financial transparency () and the communal debt, were thwarted by the legal impossibility of questioning him as president.\nThe conditions of the privatisation of the Parisian water system acquired very cheaply by the and the , then directed by J\u00e9r\u00f4me Monod, a close friend of Chirac, were also criticised. Furthermore, the satirical newspaper revealed the astronomical \"food expenses\" paid by the Parisian municipality (\u20ac15\u00a0million a year according to the ), expenses managed by Roger Romani (who allegedly destroyed all archives of the period 1978\u201393 during night raids in 1999\u20132000). Thousands of people were invited each year to receptions in the Paris city hall, while many political, media and artistic personalities were hosted in private flats owned by the city.\nChirac's immunity from prosecution ended in May 2007, when he left office as president. In November 2007 a preliminary charge of misuse of public funds was filed against him. Chirac is said to be the first former French head of state to be formally placed under investigation for a crime. On 30 October 2009, a judge ordered Chirac to stand trial on embezzlement charges, dating back to his time as mayor of Paris.\nOn 7 March 2011, he went on trial on charges of diverting public funds, accused of giving fictional city jobs to 28 activists from his political party while serving as the mayor of Paris (1977\u201395). Along with Chirac, nine others stood trial in two separate cases, one dealing with fictional jobs for 21 people and the other with jobs for the remaining seven. The President of Union for a Popular Movement, who later served as France's Minister of Foreign Affairs, Alain Jupp\u00e9, was sentenced to a 14-month suspended prison sentence for the same case in 2004.\nOn 15 December 2011, Chirac was found guilty and given a suspended sentence of two years. He was convicted of diverting public funds, abuse of trust and illegal conflict of interest. The suspended sentence meant he did not have to go to prison and took into account his age, health and status as a former head of state. He did not attend the trial, since medical doctors deemed that his neurological problems damaged his memory. His defence team decided not to appeal.\nThe Clearstream Affair.\nDuring April and May 2006, Chirac's administration was beset by a crisis as his chosen prime minister, Dominique de Villepin, was accused of asking Philippe Rondot, a top-level French spy, for a secret investigation into Villepin's chief political rival, Nicolas Sarkozy, in 2004. This matter has been called the second Clearstream Affair. On 10 May 2006, following a Cabinet meeting, Chirac made a rare television appearance to try to protect Villepin from the scandal and to debunk allegations that Chirac himself had set up a Japanese bank account containing 300\u00a0million francs in 1992 as Mayor of Paris. Chirac said that \"The Republic is not a dictatorship of rumours, a dictatorship of calumny.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn 1956, Chirac married Bernadette Chodron de Courcel, with whom he had two daughters: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Laurence (4 March 1958\u00a0\u2013 14 April 2016) and Claude (born 6 December 1962). Claude was a long-term public relations assistant and personal adviser to her father, while Laurence, who suffered from anorexia nervosa in her youth, did not participate in her father's political activities. Chirac was the grandfather of Martin Rey-Chirac by the relationship of Claude with French judoka Thierry Rey. A former Vietnamese refugee, Anh Dao Traxel, is a foster daughter of Jacques and Bernadette Chirac.\nChirac remained married, but had many other relationships.\nChirac was a close friend of actor Gregory Peck.\nAcademic works.\nIn 1954, Chirac presented \"The Development of the Port of New-Orleans\", a short geography/economic thesis to the (\u2014), which he had entered three years before. The 182-page typewritten work, supervised by Professor Jean Chardonnet, is illustrated by photographs, sketches and diagrams.\nHonours.\nOther.\nOn 22 July 2003, Jacques Chirac was presented with the inaugural Kuala Lumpur World Peace Award by Malaysian Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad at his office.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nrole=\"presentation\" class=\"wikitable succession-box noprint\" style=\"margin:0.5em auto; font-size:small;clear:both;\""}
{"id": "39766", "revid": "11096", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39766", "title": "History of Sweden", "text": "%5B%5BWP%3ACSD%23G6%7CG6%5D%5D%3A%20%5B%5BWikipedia%3ATemplates%20for%20discussion/Log/none%20%7D%7D%23Template%3AHistory%20of%20Sweden%5D%5D\nThe history of Sweden can be traced back to the melting of the Northern polar ice cap. From as early as 12000\u00a0BC, humans have inhabited this area. Throughout the Stone Age, between 8000\u00a0BC and 6000\u00a0BC, early inhabitants used stone-crafting methods to make tools and weapons for hunting, gathering and fishing as means of survival. Written sources about Sweden before AD\u00a01000 are rare and short, usually written by outsiders. It is usually accepted that Swedish recorded history, in contrast with pre-history, starts around the late 10th century, when sources are common enough that they can be contrasted with each other.\nThe modern Swedish state was formed over a long period of unification and consolidation. Historians have set different standards for when it can be considered complete. Some common laws were present from the second half of the 13th century. At this time, Sweden consisted of most of what is today the southern part of the country (except for Scania, Blekinge, Halland and Bohusl\u00e4n), as well as parts of modern Finland. Over the following centuries, Swedish influence would expand into the North and East.\nIn the late 14th century Sweden, Denmark and Norway were united in the Kalmar Union. During the following century, a series of rebellions lessened Sweden's ties to the union, sometimes even leading to the election of a separate Swedish king. The fighting reached a climax following the Stockholm Bloodbath in 1520, a mass execution of accused heretics orchestrated by Christian II of Denmark. One of the few members of the most powerful noble families not present, Gustav Vasa, was able to raise a new rebellion and eventually was crowned King in 1523. His reign proved lasting and marked the end of Sweden's participation in the Kalmar Union. Gustav Vasa furthermore encouraged Protestant preachers, finally breaking with the papacy and establishing the Lutheran Church in Sweden, seizing Catholic Church property and wealth.\nDuring the 17th century, after winning wars against Denmark\u2013Norway, Russia, and the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, Sweden emerged as a great power by taking direct control of the Baltic region. Sweden's role in the Thirty Years' War determined the political and religious balance of power in Europe. The Swedish Empire expanded enormously into the modern Estonia and Latvia, northern Germany, and several regions that to this day are part of Sweden.\nBefore the end of the 17th century, a secret alliance was formed between Denmark\u2013Norway, Poland\u2013Lithuania, and Russia against Sweden. This coalition acted at the start of the 18th century when Denmark\u2013Norway and Poland launched surprise attacks on Sweden. In 1721, Russia and its allies won the war against Sweden. As a result, Russia was able to annex the Swedish territories of Estonia, Livonia, Ingria, and Karelia. This effectively put an end to the Swedish Empire, and crippled her Baltic Sea power. Sweden joined in the Enlightenment culture of the day in the arts, architecture, science, and learning. Between 1570 and 1800, Sweden experienced two periods of urban expansion. Finland was lost to Russia in a war in 1808\u20131809.\nIn the early 19th century, Finland and the remaining territories outside the Scandinavian Peninsula were lost. Sweden's last war was the Swedish\u2013Norwegian War (1814). Sweden was victorious in this war, leading to the Danish king being forced to cede Norway to Sweden. Norway was then forced to enter into a personal union with Sweden that lasted until 1905. Since 1814, Sweden has been at peace, adopting a non-aligned foreign policy in peacetime and neutrality in wartime. During World War I, Sweden remained neutral, but let the Germans travel in the country. Post-war prosperity provided the foundations for the social welfare policies characteristic of modern Sweden. During World War II, Sweden once again remained neutral, avoiding the fate of occupied Norway.\nThe country attempted to stay out of alliances and remain officially neutral during the entire Cold War, and declined to join NATO. The social democratic party held government for 44 years (1932\u20131976). The 1976 parliamentary elections brought a liberal/right-wing coalition to power. During the Cold War, Sweden remained neutral. The neutrality policy was dropped in 2022, in response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, and Sweden formally became a member of NATO in March 2024.\nPrehistoric Sweden before AD 800.\nSweden has a large number of petroglyphs (\"h\u00e4llristningar\" in Swedish), with the highest concentration in the province of Bohusl\u00e4n and the northern part of the county of Kalmar, also called \"Tjust\". The earliest images can be found in the province of J\u00e4mtland, dating from 5000 BC. They depict wild animals such as elk, reindeer, bears and seals. 2300\u2013500 BC was the most intensive carving period, with carvings of agriculture, warfare, ships, domesticated animals, etc. Petroglyphs with themes have also been found in Bohusl\u00e4n, dating from 800 to 500 BC.\nViking Period and Middle Ages: 800\u20131500.\nFor centuries, the Swedes were merchant seamen well known for their far-reaching trade. During the 11th and 12th centuries, Sweden gradually became a unified Christian kingdom that later included Finland. Until 1060, the kings of Uppsala ruled most of modern Sweden except for the southern and western coastal regions, which remained under Danish rule until the 17th century. After a century of civil wars, a new royal family emerged, which strengthened the power of the crown at the expense of the nobility, while giving the nobles privileges such as exemption from taxation in exchange for military service. Sweden never had a fully developed feudal system, and its peasants were never reduced to serfdom. Vikings from Sweden took part in the raids of the Western and Southern regions of Europe, but mainly traveled east to Russia, Constantinople and the Muslim world (Serkland). The large Russian mainland and its many navigable rivers offered good prospects for merchandise and plundering. During the 9th century, extensive Scandinavian settlements began on the east side of the Baltic Sea.\nThe conversion from Norse paganism to Christianity was a complex, gradual, and at times violent (see Temple at Uppsala) process. The main early source of religious influence was England, due to interactions between Scandinavians and Saxons in the Danelaw, and with Irish missionary monks. German influence was less obvious in the beginning, despite an early missionary attempt by Ansgar, but gradually emerged as the dominant religious force in the area, especially after the Norman conquest of England. Despite the close relations between Swedish and Russian aristocracy (see also Rus'), there is no direct evidence of Orthodox influence.\nAround the year 1000, Olof Sk\u00f6tkonung became the first known king to rule both Svealand and G\u00f6taland. Historical details about some of the early medieval kings are obscure, and even the dates of their reigning periods remain unclear. In the 12th century, Sweden was undergoing dynastic struggles between the Erik and Sverker clans. Svealand and the Swedes were usually more supportive of the Erik dynasty and G\u00f6taland and Geats more supportive of the Sverker dynasty, which wanted friendlier relations with Denmark. This further divided the country between parties because the ruler was not clear. The country elected their king from each district by selecting 12 people from the local nobles, who then elected the king at the Stones of Mora. The divide ended when a third clan married into the Erik clan and founded the Bj\u00e4lbo dynasty. This dynasty gradually consolidated Sweden to a strong state.\nDuring the early Middle Ages, the Swedish kingdom also expanded to control Norrland and Finland. This expansion sparked tension with the Russian states, a tension that was to continue throughout Swedish history.\nIn 1319, Sweden and Norway were united under King Magnus Eriksson, who was the paternal grandson of King Magnus Ladul\u00e5s of Sweden and the maternal grandson of King Haakon V of Norway. On 21 July 1336, Magnus was crowned king of Sweden and Norway in Stockholm. In 1332 the lands of the eastern Danish provinces, which included Scania, Blekinge and Ven were sold to King Magnus from Duke Johan of Holstein (who had received the provinces from the Danish king), after the local population expressed dissatisfaction with Duke Johan and stated they would rather be ruled by the Swedes. The Duke started negotiations with the Swedes and it was agreed that the Swedish king would redeem the pledge for 34,000 marks of silver (6 432 kilo).\nAfter the Black Death and internal power struggles in Sweden, Queen Margaret I of Denmark (the former daughter-in-law of King Magnus Eriksson) united the Nordic countries in the Union of Kalmar in 1397, with the approval of the Swedish nobility.\nEarly Modern Sweden: 1523\u20131611.\nIn the 16th century, Gustav Vasa (1496\u20131560) crushed an attempt to restore the Union of Kalmar, thereby laying the foundation for modern Sweden. At the same time, he broke with the papacy and established the Lutheran Church in Sweden.\nThe Union's final disintegration in the early 16th century brought on a long-lived rivalry between Norway and Denmark on one side and Sweden on the other. The Catholic bishops had supported Christian II of Denmark, but he was overthrown by Gustavus Vasa, and Sweden became independent again. Gustavus used the Protestant Reformation to curb the power of the church and was crowned as King Gustavus I in 1523. In 1527, he persuaded the Riksdag of V\u00e4ster\u00e5s (comprising the nobles, clergy, burghers, and freehold peasants) to confiscate church lands, which comprised 21% of the farmland. Gustavus took the Lutheran reformers under his protection and appointed his men as bishops. Gustavus suppressed aristocratic opposition to his ecclesiastical policies and efforts at centralization.\nTax reforms took place in 1538 and 1558, whereby multiple complex taxes on independent farmers were simplified and standardized throughout the district; tax assessments per farm were adjusted to reflect an ability to pay. Crown tax revenues increased, but more importantly, the new system was perceived as fairer and more acceptable. A war with L\u00fcbeck in 1535 resulted in the expulsion of the Hanseatic traders, who previously had had a monopoly of foreign trade. With its own businessmen in charge, Sweden's economic strength grew rapidly, and by 1544 Gustavus controlled 60% of the farmlands in all of Sweden. Sweden now built the first modern army in Europe, supported by a sophisticated tax system and government bureaucracy. Gustavus proclaimed the Swedish crown hereditary and the house of Vasa ruled Sweden (1523\u20131654) and Poland (1587\u20131668).\nRise as a Great Power.\nDuring the 16th and 17th centuries, the kings demanded ever increasing taxes and military conscription, emphasizing the need for defense. However the money and manpower were used for offensive warfare. Indeed, when there seemed to be a real threat of invasion in 1655\u20131660, King Charles X Gustav asked the people to give more and to manage their own defences. Finally a balance was reached that provided a well supplied aggressive foreign policy. During the 17th century, after winning wars against Denmark, Russia, and Poland, Sweden (with scarcely more than 1 million inhabitants) emerged as a great power by taking direct control of the Baltic region, which was Europe's main source of grain, iron, copper, timber, tar, hemp, and furs.\nSweden had first gained a foothold on territory outside its traditional provinces in 1561, when Estonia opted for vassalage to Sweden during the Livonian War. While, in 1590, Sweden had to cede Ingria and Kexholm to Russia, and Sigismund tried to incorporate Swedish Estonia into the Duchy of Livonia, Sweden gradually expanded at the eastern Baltic during the following years. In a series of Polish\u2013Swedish War (1600\u20131629) and the Russo-Swedish Ingrian War, Gustavus Adolphus retook Ingria and Kexholm (formally ceded in the Treaty of Stolbovo, 1617) as well as the bulk of Livonia (formally ceded in the Treaty of Altmark, 1629).\nSweden's role in the Thirty Years' War determined the political as well as the religious balance of power in Europe. From bridgeheads in Stralsund (1628) and Pomerania (1630), the Swedish army advanced to the south of the Holy Roman Empire, and in a side theater of the war deprived Denmark\u2013Norway of Danish Estonia, J\u00e4mtland, Gotland, Halland, H\u00e4rjedalen, Idre and S\u00e4rna, became exempt from the Sound Dues, and established claims to Bremen-Verden, all of which was formalized in the Treaty of Br\u00f6msebro (1645). In 1648, Sweden became a guarantor power for the Peace of Westphalia, which ended the Thirty Years' War and left her with the additional dominions of Bremen-Verden, Wismar and Swedish Pomerania. From 1638 Sweden also held the colony of New Sweden, along the Delaware River in North America.\nSweden as a Great Power 1648\u20131721.\nIn 1655, in the Second Northern War, Charles X Gustav of Sweden invaded and occupied western Poland\u2013Lithuania, the eastern half of which was already occupied by Russia. The rapid Swedish advance became known in Poland as the Swedish Deluge. The Grand Duchy of Lithuania became a Swedish fief, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian regular armies surrendered and the Polish King John II Casimir Vasa fled to the Habsburgs. The Deluge lasted for five years and took a great toll on Poland and Lithuania, with some historians crediting this invasion as the start of the downfall of Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth. The country was devastated, treasures stolen, and insurmountable loss of lives occurred.\nSweden was able to establish control of the Eastern bank of the Sound, formalised in the Treaty of Roskilde (1658), and gain recognition of her southeastern dominions by the European great powers in the Treaty of Oliva (1660); but Sweden was barred from further expansion at the Southern coast of the Baltic. Sweden came out of the Scanian War with only minor losses largely due to France forcing Sweden's adversaries into the treaties of Fontainebleau (1679) (confirmed at Lund) and Saint-Germain (1679).\nThe following period of peace allowed Charles XI of Sweden to reform and stabilise the realm. He consolidated the finances of the Crown by the great reduction of 1680; further changes were made in finance, commerce, national maritime and land armaments, judicial procedure, church government and education.\nThe Great Northern War: 1700.\nRussia, Saxony\u2013Poland, and Denmark\u2013Norway pooled their power in 1700 and attacked the Swedish Empire. Although the young Swedish King Charles XII (1682\u20131718; reigned 1697\u20131718) won spectacular victories in the early years of the Great Northern War, most notably in the stunning success against the Russians at the Battle of Narva (1700), his plan to attack Moscow and force Russia into peace proved too ambitious.\nThe Russians won decisively at the Battle of Poltava in June 1709, capturing much of the exhausted Swedish army. Charles XII and the remnants of his army were cut off from Sweden and fled south into Ottoman territory, where he remained three years. He overstayed his welcome, refusing to leave until the Ottoman Empire joined him in a new war against Tsar Peter I of Russia. He established a powerful political network in Constantinople, which included even the mother of the sultan. Charles's persistence worked, as Peter's army was checked by Ottoman troops. However, Turkish failure to pursue the victory enraged Charles and from that moment his relations with the Ottoman administration soured. During the same period, the behavior of his troops worsened and turned disastrous. Lack of discipline and contempt for the locals soon created an unbearable situation in Moldavia. The Swedish soldiers behaved badly, destroying, stealing, raping, and killing. Meanwhile, back in the north, Sweden was invaded by its enemies; Charles returned home in 1714, too late to restore his lost empire and impoverished homeland; he died in 1718. In the subsequent peace treaties, the allied powers, joined by Russia and Great Britain-Hanover, ended Sweden's reign as a great power. Russia now dominated the north. The war-weary Riksdag asserted new powers and reduced the crown to a constitutional monarchy, with power held by a civilian government controlled by the Riksdag. A new \"Age of Freedom\" opened, and the economy was rebuilt, supported by large exports of iron and lumber to Britain. The Riksdag developed into an active parliament. This tradition continued into the nineteenth century, laying the basis for the transition towards a modern democracy.\nThe reign of Charles XII (1697\u20131718) has stirred up great controversy. Historians have puzzled over why this military genius overreached and greatly weakened Sweden. Although most early-19th-century historians tended to follow Voltaire's lead in bestowing extravagant praise on the warrior-king, others have criticised him as a fanatic, a bully, and a bloodthirsty warmonger. A more balanced view suggests a highly capable military ruler whose oft-reviled peculiarities seemed to have served him well, but who neglected his base in Sweden in pursuit of foreign adventure. Slow to learn the limits of Sweden's diminished strength, a party of nobles, who called themselves the \"Hats\", dreamed of revenge on Russia and ruled the country from 1739 to 1765; they engaged in wars in 1741, 1757, Russian influence grew in Sweden after the war in 1741 which greatly affected politics in the Swedish realm (though much of this influence was lost in 1790 as a result of the Russo-Swedish war of 1788\u20131790).\nEnlightenment.\nSweden joined in the Enlightenment culture of the day in the arts, architecture, science, and learning. A new law in 1766 established for the first time the principle of freedom of the press, a notable step towards liberty of political opinion. The Academy of Science was founded in 1739 and the Academy of Letters, History, and Antiquities in 1753. The outstanding cultural leader was Carl Linnaeus (1707\u20131778), whose work in biology and ethnography had a major impact on European science.\nFollowing half a century of parliamentary domination came the reaction from the monarchy. King Gustav III (1746\u20131792) came to the throne in 1771, and in 1772 led a coup d'\u00e9tat, with French support, that established him as an \"enlightened despot\", who ruled at will. The Age of Freedom and party politics was over. Precocious and well-educated, he became a patron of the arts and music. His edicts reformed the bureaucracy, repaired the currency, expanded trade, and improved defense. The population had reached two million and the country was prosperous, although rampant alcoholism was a growing social problem. Gustav III weakened the nobility and promoted numerous major social reforms. He felt the Swedish monarchy could survive and flourish by achieving a coalition with the newly emerged middle classes against the nobility. He personally disliked the French Revolution but decided to promote additional anti-feudal reforms to strengthen his hand among the middle classes.\nAfter Gustav made war on Russia and did poorly, he was assassinated by a conspiracy of nobles who were angry that he tried to restrict their privileges for the benefit of the peasants. Under the successor, King Gustav IV, Sweden joined various coalitions against Napoleon but was badly defeated and lost much of its territory, especially Finland and Pomerania. The king was overthrown by the army, which in 1810 decided to bring in one of Napoleon's marshals, Jean Bernadotte, as the heir apparent.\nColonies and slavery.\nSweden experimented briefly with overseas colonies, including \"New Sweden\" in Colonial America and the \"Swedish Gold Coast\" in present-day Ghana, which began in the 1630s. Sweden purchased the small Caribbean island of Saint Barth\u00e9lemy from France in 1784, then sold it back in 1878; the population had included slaves until they were freed by the Swedish government in 1847.\nEarly urbanisation.\nBetween 1570 and 1800, Sweden experienced two periods of urban expansion, c. 1580\u20131690 and in the mid-18th century, separated by relative stagnation from the 1690s to about 1720. The initial phase was the more active, including an increase in the percentage of urban dwellers in Stockholm \u2013 a pattern comparable to increasing urban populations in other European capital and port cities \u2013 as well as the foundation of a number of small new towns. The second period of urban growth began around 1750 in response to shifts in Swedish trade patterns from the Baltic to the North Atlantic. It was characterised by increasing populations in the small towns of the north and west.\n19th century.\nLoss of Finland: 1809.\nFinland was lost to Russia in a war that lasted from February 1808 to September 1809. As a result of the peace agreement, Finland became a Grand Duchy and thus was officially ruled by the Tsar of Russia though it was not strictly part of Russia. Humanitarian aid from England did not succeed in preventing Sweden from adopting more Napoleon-friendly policies after the Swedish coup d'\u00e9tat in 1809.\nUnion with Norway: 1814.\nIn 1810, French Marshal Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte, one of Napoleon's top generals, was elected as Charles XIV John of Sweden (1818\u201344) by the Riksdag. He had a Jacobin background and was well-grounded in revolutionary principles, but put Sweden in the coalition that opposed Napoleon. In 1813, his forces joined the allies against Napoleon and defeated the Danes at Bornh\u00f6ved. In the Treaty of Kiel, Denmark ceded mainland Norway to the Swedish king. Norway, however, declared its independence, adopted a constitution and chose a new king. Sweden invaded Norway to enforce the terms of the Kiel treaty in the last war Sweden has fought. After brief fighting, the peace established a personal union between the two states. Even though they shared the same king, Norway was largely independent of Sweden, except Sweden controlled foreign affairs. The king's rule was not well received and when Sweden refused to allow Norway to have its own diplomats, Norway rejected the King of Sweden in 1905 and selected its own king.\nDuring Charles XIV's reign, the first stage of the Industrial Revolution reached Sweden. This first take-off was founded on rural forges, textile proto-industries and sawmills.\nThe popularity of Charles XIV decreased for a time in the 1830s, culminating in the Rabulist riots in 1838 after the L\u00e8se-majest\u00e9 conviction of the journalist Magnus Jacob Crusenstolpe, and some calls for his abdication.\nThe 19th century was marked by the emergence of a liberal opposition press, the abolition of guild monopolies in trade and manufacturing in favor of free enterprise, the introduction of taxation and voting reforms, the installation of a national military service, and the rise in the electorate of three major party groups: the Social Democratic Party, the Liberal Party, and the Conservative Party.\nModernization of Sweden: 1860\u20131910.\nSweden, much like Japan at the same time, transformed from a stagnant rural society to a vibrant industrial society between the 1860s and 1910. The agricultural economy shifted gradually from a communal village to a more efficient private farm-based agriculture. There was less need for manual labor on the farm so many went to the cities and a million Swedes emigrated to the United States between 1850 and 1890. Many returned and brought word of the higher productivity of American industry, this stimulating faster modernization.\nIn 1873, Sweden and Denmark formed the Scandinavian Monetary Union.\nThe late 19th century saw the emergence of an opposition press, the abolition of guild monopolies on craftsmen and the reform of taxation. Two years of military service was made compulsory for young men although there was no warfare.\n20th century.\nWith a broader voting franchise, the nation saw the emergence of three major party groups \u2013 Social Democrat, Liberal, and Conservative. The parties debated further expansion of the voting franchise. The Liberal Party, based on the middle class, put forth in 1907 a program for local voting rights later accepted in the Riksdag. The majority of Liberals wanted to require some property ownership before a man could vote, while the Social Democrats called for total male suffrage without property limitations. The strong farmer representation in the Second Chamber of the Riksdag maintained a conservative view, but their decline after 1900 gradually ended opposition to full suffrage.\nReligion maintained a major role but public school religious education changed from the drill in the Lutheran catechism to biblical-ethical studies.\nSweden in World War I.\nSweden was neutral in World War I, although the Swedish government was sympathetic to both sides at different times during the conflict, even briefly occupying the \u00c5land islands jointly with the Germans. At first, the Swedish government flirted with the possibility of changing their neutral stance to side with the Central Powers, and made concessions to them including mining the \u00d6resund straits to close them to Allied warships wishing to enter the Baltic. Later the Swedish signed agreements allowing trade with the Allied powers and limiting trade with Central Powers, though this brought about the fall of the government of Hjalmar Hammarskj\u00f6ld.\nIndustrialization: 1910\u20131939.\nDuring the First World War and the 1920s, its industries expanded to meet the European demand for Swedish steel, ball bearings, wood pulp, and matches. Post-war prosperity provided the foundations for the social welfare policies characteristic of modern Sweden.\nWelfare state.\nSweden created a successful model of social democracy because of the unique way in which Sweden's labor leaders, politicians, and classes cooperated during the early development of Swedish democracy. Sweden's socialist leaders chose a moderate, reformist political course with broad-based public support. This helped Sweden avoid the severe extremist challenges and political and class divisions that plagued many European countries that attempted to develop social democratic systems after 1911. By dealing early, cooperatively, and effectively with the challenges of industrialization and its impact on Swedish social, political, and economic structures, Swedish social democrats were able to create one of the most successful social democratic systems in the world, including both a welfare state and extensive protections of civil liberties.\nWhen the Social Democratic Party came into power in 1932, its leaders introduced a new political decision-making process, which later became known as \"the Swedish model\" or the \"Folkhemmet\" (\"The People's Home\"). The party took a central role, but tried as far as possible to base its policy on mutual understanding and compromise. Different interest groups were always involved in official committees that preceded government decisions.\nForeign policy 1920\u20131939.\nForeign policy concerns in the 1930s centered on Soviet and German expansionism, which pursuing abortive efforts at Nordic defense co-operation.\nSweden during World War II.\nSweden declared itself neutral during World War II, with the exception of the Winter War between Finland the Soviet Union, in which Sweden declared itself a non-belligerent on Finland's side. During the German occupation of Norway, Sweden did permit German troops to pass through its territory, and supplied the Nazi regime with steel and ball-bearings.\nThe dominant historiography for decades after the war ignored the Holocaust and used what it called the \"small state realist\" argument. It held that that neutrality and co-operation with Germany were necessary for survival since Germany was vastly more powerful, concessions were limited and were only made when the threat was too great. Neutrality was bent but not broken; national unity was paramount; and in any case, Sweden had the neutral right to trade with Germany. Germany needed Swedish iron, and Sweden had nothing to gain and much to lose from an invasion. The nation was run by a national unity government, which included all major parties in the Riksdag except the communist party. Its key leaders included Prime Minister Per Albin Hansson, King Gustav V, and Foreign Minister Christian G\u00fcnther.\nHumanitarian aid to Jews facing the Holocaust was the mission of Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg. As the secretary of the 1944 Swedish delegation to Hungary, to co-ordinate humanitarian relief for the Jews of Europe during the Jewish Holocaust. He helped to rescue tens of thousands of Jews in Nazi-occupied Hungary in late 1944. He disappeared in January 1945, and probably died in a Soviet prison in 1947.\nPost-war Sweden.\nSweden was one of the first non-participants of World War II to join the United Nations (in 1946). Apart from this, the country's leaders tried to stay out of alliances and remained officially neutral during the entire Cold War, not joining NATO until 2024.\nThe social democratic party held government for 44 years (1932\u20131976). They spent much of the 1950s and 1960s building \"Folkhemmet\" (\"The People's Home\"), the Swedish welfare state. Sweden's industry had not been damaged by the war and it was in a position to help re-build Northern Europe in the decades following 1945. This led to an economic upswing in the post-war era that made the welfare system feasible. However, by the 1970s, the economies of the rest of Western Europe were prosperous and growing rapidly, while the Swedish economy stagnated. Many economists blamed its large tax funded public sector.\nIn 1976, the social democrats lost their majority. The 1976 parliamentary elections brought a liberal/right-wing coalition to power. Over the next six years, four governments ruled and fell, composed by all or some of the parties that had won in 1976. The fourth liberal government in these years came under fire by Social Democrats and trade unions and the Moderate Party, culminating in the Social Democrats regaining power in 1982.\nDuring the Cold War Sweden maintained a dual approach; publicly the strict neutrality policy was forcefully maintained, but unofficially strong ties were kept with the U.S., Norway, Denmark, West Germany, and other NATO countries. Swedes hoped that the U.S. would use conventional and nuclear weapons in case of a Soviet attack on Sweden. A strong ability to defend against an amphibious invasion was maintained, complete with Swedish-built warplanes, but there was no long-range bombing capability.\nIn the early 1960s, U.S. nuclear submarines armed with mid-range Polaris A-1 nuclear missiles were deployed not far from the Swedish west coast. Range and safety considerations made this a good area from which to launch a retaliatory nuclear strike on Moscow. The U.S. secretly provided Sweden with a military security guarantee, promising to provide military force in aid of Sweden in case of Soviet aggression. As part of the military cooperation, the U.S. provided much help in the development of the Saab 37 Viggen, as a strong Swedish air force was seen as necessary to keep Soviet anti-submarine aircraft from operating in the missile launch area. In return, Swedish scientists at the Royal Institute of Technology made considerable contributions to enhancing the targeting performance of the Polaris missiles.\nOn 28 February 1986, the Social Democratic leader Prime Minister Olof Palme was assassinated. The murderer was never found. Shocked Swedes worried whether the nation had lost its innocence.\nOn 28 September 1994, the MS Estonia sank as the ship was crossing the Baltic Sea, en route from Tallinn, Estonia, to Stockholm, Sweden. The disaster claimed the lives of 852 people (501 of them were Swedes), being one of the worst maritime disasters of the 20th century.\nIn 1995, a few years after the end of the Cold War, Sweden became a member of the European Union and the old term \"policy of neutrality\" fell out of use. In a referendum held in 2003, the majority voted not to adopt the Euro as the country's official currency. Foreign Minister Anna Lindh was murdered just before the referendum.\nDuring the 1980s, Sweden attempted to preserve its model of capitalism plus a generous welfare state through what it called a \"bridging policy.\" Unintended consequences became apparent in the 1990s. There was an economic crisis with high unemployment and several banks and companies going bankrupt. There was high inflation as well as overheated real estate and financial markets and a negative real rate of interest. After 1991, these factors caused a recession with high unemployment. There were political reverberations and businesses called for neoliberal government policies. By 2000, however, the positive trends dominated. Compared to the rest of Europe, unemployment in Sweden was low, while economic growth has been high, inflation low, the budget in balance, and the balance of payments positive.\nForeign policy.\nThe foreign policy of Sweden encompasses a range of themes over the centuries. Some of the main issues include:\nHistoriography.\nAccording to L\u00f6nnroth (1998) in the 19th century and early 20th century, Swedish historians saw their writing in terms of literature and storytelling, rather than analysis and interpretation. Harald Hj\u00e4rne (1848\u20131922) pioneered modern historical scholarship. In 1876, he attacked the traditional myths of the social and legal conditions of ancient Greece and Rome inherited from the classical authors. He was inspired by German scholar Barthold Georg Niebuhr (1776\u20131831), a founder of modern German historiography. As a professor of history at Uppsala University, Hj\u00e4rne became a spokesman for the Conservative Party and the Swedish monarchy by 1900. Hj\u00e4rne had an enormous influence on his students and, indeed, on an entire generation of historians, who mostly became political conservatives and nationalists. Another movement emerged at Lund University around 1910, where critical scholars began using the source critics' methods to the early history of Scandinavia. The brothers Lauritz Weibull and Curt Weibull were the leaders, and they had followers at Lund and G\u00f6teborg universities. The result was a half-century of often embittered controversy between traditionalists and revisionists that lasted until 1960. There was a blurring of the ideological fronts resulting from experiences during and after World War II. In the meantime, in the general expansion of university education in the postwar period, history was generally neglected. Only through the activities of the National Research Council of the Humanities and the dedicated efforts of certain ambitious university professors created some expansion of historical scholarship. After 1990, there were signs of revival in historiography, with a strong new emphasis on 20th-century topics, as well as the application of social history and computerized statistical techniques to the demographic history of ordinary villagers before 1900.\nAccording to Lars Magnusson, social history is a specialty inside economic history. Three major themes are the standard of living by strata during industrialization; the history of work; and social issues in preindustrial society and the transition to industrialism.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39767", "revid": "51046755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39767", "title": "History of the European Union", "text": "The European Union is a geo-political entity, created in 1993, covering a large portion of the European continent. It is founded upon numerous treaties and has undergone expansions and secessions that have taken it from six member states to 27, a majority of the states in Europe.\nSince the beginning of the institutionalised modern European integration in 1948, the development of the European Union has been based on a supranational foundation that would \"make war unthinkable and materially impossible\" and reinforce democracy amongst its members as laid out by Robert Schuman and other leaders in the Schuman Declaration (1950) and the Europe Declaration (1951). This principle was at the heart of the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC) (1951), the Treaty of Paris (1951), and later the Treaty of Rome (1957) which established the European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (EAEC). The Maastricht Treaty (1992) created the European Union with its pillars system, including foreign and home affairs alongside the European Communities. This in turn led to the creation of the single European currency, the euro (launched 1999). The ECSC expired in 2002. The Maastricht Treaty has been amended by the treaties of Amsterdam (1997), Nice (2001) and Lisbon (2007), the latter merging the three pillars into a single legal entity, though the EAEC has maintained a distinct legal identity despite sharing members and institutions.\nDevelopment of Europe as a region.\nEurope as a continent.\nThe known world in Ancient Greece was differentiated into three landmasses: Asia, \"Libya\" (Africa) and Europe, giving rise to identifying the European landmass as a coherent area, a continent.\nRoman Europes.\nThe European landmass was populated and territorialized by many long before its conceptualization as a coherent continent. But the Roman Empire, an empire built on the Hellenistic world and Alexandrian Empire, Ancient Egypt, the Levant and North Africa, became the first state to control the whole Mediterranean Basin and also large parts, particularly the Southern and Western parts of the European landmass. This historic prominence in the Mediterranean Basin and Europe has been invoked by states that came after it, claiming succession to Roman authority and to legitimate their rule over lands throughout the former Roman eucomene, and therefore also in Europe, particularly in Western Europe, the lands of the later Western Roman Empire of Latin Rome. The latter established Western Europe as a coherent and independent political area of Europe, which has taken sometimes prominence, as simply the West, over the concept of Europe. Similarly other concepts for Europe as a coherent political space have been used, such as for example Frangistan.\nThe claims for the succession of the control over the West, after the fall of Western Rome in 476 developed into the concept of \"translatio imperii\" (\"transfer of rule\") through the King of Italy, enabling claims by the Goths, Lombards, Frankish Empire (481/800\u2013843) and Holy Roman Empire (800/962\u20131806).\nFurthermore, during and after the Roman Empire the concept \"renovatio imperii\" (\"restoration of the empire\") was employed, particularly in the forms of the religiously inspired \"Imperium Christianum\" (\"christian empire\"), and later the \"Reichsidee\" (\"imperial idea\"), to establish and sustain a coherent political region. As such the position and extent of influence of the Papacy over a range of European lands has been a force, while not exclusively European, capable of rallying European powers under a common Christian identity.\nThat said, some European powers, such as France (after the installment of the Holy Roman Empire with East Francia) and the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth challenged the Western Roman authority through the Western Schism and the Italian Wars, while England, the Dutch Republic, Prussia, the Swedish Empire and Denmark\u2013Norway also challenged the Papal one with Protestant Reformation.\nThe Greek Eastern Rome, also called Byzantine Empire, remained long after the dissolution of the Western Roman Empire, sustaining a coherent political space also over large areas of Europe, particularly of (South-) Eastern Europe, or simply the East, giving rise to the other major particular Europe. With the fall of the Eastern Roman Empire in 1453, the Ottoman Empire and the Russian Tsardom, and ultimately the Empire (1547\u20131917), with Moscow as the so-called Third Rome, used claims of inheritance of the eastern Roman Empire to legitimate their rule over larger areas of Europe, though not exclusively.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther Europes.\nBut also other polities of Europe have established, independently from Rome and Byzantine, their European realms, such as a range of pre-Roman or pre-Christian Greek, Germanic, Celtic, Slavic and Hungarian powers, Khanates, or Al-Andalus and the Sicilian Emirate.\nIdeas of European unity before 1948.\nApart from the ideas of federation, confederation, or customs union such as Winston Churchill's 1946 call for a \"United States of Europe\", the original development of the European Union was based on a supranational foundation that would \"make war unthinkable and materially impossible\" \nA peaceful means of some consolidation of European territories used to be provided by dynastic unions; less common were country-level unions, such as the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and Austro-Hungarian Empire.\nIn 15th century, King of Bohemia George of Pod\u011bbrady proposed the Treaty on the Establishment of Peace throughout Christendom which sought to end military conflict between Christian kingdoms of Europe. The treaty proposed a multilateral framework, including a peaceful dispute resolution process, but despite a vigorous promotional campaign, the proposal was ultimately unsuccessful. This effort has been occasionally noted as a first coherent proposal for a proto-European Union.\nIn the Congress of Aix-la-Chapelle of 1818, Tsar Alexander, as the most advanced internationalist of the day, suggested a kind of permanent European union and even proposed the maintenance of international military forces to provide recognised states with support against changes by violence.\nPan-European political thought truly emerged during the 19th century, inspired by the liberal ideas of the French and American Revolutions. The following Napoleonic Wars and First French Empire (1804\u20131815), brought down the Holy Roman Empire, enabled nationalism and following the Congress of Vienna, the ideals of internationalism like with Immanuel Kant and European unity flourished across the continent, especially in the writings of Wojciech Jastrz\u0119bowski (1799\u20131882) or Giuseppe Mazzini (1805\u20131872). The term \"United States of Europe\" () was used at that time by Victor Hugo (1802\u20131885) during a speech at the International Peace Congress held in Paris in 1849:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;A day will come when all nations on our continent will form a European brotherhood ... A day will come when we shall see ... the United States of America and the United States of Europe face to face, reaching out for each other across the seas.\nFrom World War I to World War II.\nDuring the interwar period, the consciousness that national markets in Europe were interdependent though confrontational, along with the observation of a larger and growing US market on the other side of the ocean, nourished the urge for the economic integration of the continent. In 1920, advocating the creation of a European economic union, the British economist John Maynard Keynes wrote that \"a Free Trade Union should be established ... to impose no protectionist tariffs whatever against the produce of other members of the Union.\" During the same decade, the Austrian Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, in light of the dissolution of the Habsburg Empire, imagined as one of the first modern political unions of Europe, founded the Pan-Europa Movement. His ideas influenced his contemporaries, among whom was then-Prime Minister of France Aristide Briand. As French prime minister, Nobel Peace Prize laureate for the Locarno Treaties and follower of the Paneuropean Union Aristide Briand delivered a widely recognized speech at the League of Nations, the precursor of the United Nations, in Geneva on 5 September 1929 for a federal Europe to secure Europe and settle the historic Franco-German enmity.\nWorld War II (1939\u20131945).\nWorld War II from 1939 to 1945 demonstrated more than ever the horrors of war, but particularly also of extremism, of discrimination and of genocide. As with devastating wars before, there was a desire to ensure it could never happen again, particularly with the war bringing the world nuclear weapons. Most European countries failed to maintain their Great Power status, with the exception of the Soviet Union, which became a superpower after World War II and maintained that status for 45 years. This left two rival ideologically opposed superpowers.\nWith large scale war being waged in Europe once again in the 1930s and becoming World War II, the question of what to fight against and what for, had to be agreed on. A first agreement was the Declaration of St James's Palace of 1941, when Europe's resistance gathered in London. This was expanded on by the 1941 Atlantic Charter, establishing the Allies and their common goals, inciting a new wave of global international institutions like the United Nations (founded 1945) or the Bretton Woods System (1944).\nDuring the 1943 Moscow Conference and Tehran Conference plans to establish joint institutions for a post-war world and Europe became increasingly an agenda. This led to a decision at the Yalta Conference in 1944 to form a European Advisory Commission, later replaced by the Council of Foreign Ministers and the Allied Control Council, following the German surrender and the Potsdam Agreement in 1945.\nWith war still raging, resistance movements formulated their vision of a post-war Europe, the Ventotene prison Manifesto of 1941 by Altiero Spinelli propagated European integration through the Italian Resistance and after 1943 through the Italian European Federalist Movement. In March 1943, in a radio address, the United Kingdom's leader Sir Winston Churchill spoke warmly of \"restoring the true greatness of Europe\" once victory had been achieved, and mused on the post-war creation of a \"Council of Europe\" which would bring the European nations together to build peace.\nAftermath (1945\u20131948).\nBy the end of the war European integration became seen as an antidote to the extreme nationalism which caused the war. On 19 September 1946 in a much recognized speech Winston Churchill reiterated his calls since 1930 for a \"European Union\" and \"Council of Europe\", at the University of Z\u00fcrich. After leaving office, Churchill called as a civilian for a United States of Europe. Coincidentally parallel to his speech the Hertenstein Congress in the Lucerne Canton was being held, resulting in the Union of European Federalists, one of the then founded and later constituting members of the European Movement. Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi, who successfully established during the interwar period the oldest organization for European integration, the Paneuropean Union, founded in June 1947 the European Parliamentary Union (EPU). To ensure Germany could never threaten the peace again, its heavy industry was partly dismantled (See: Allied plans for German industry after World War II) and its main coal-producing regions were either awarded to neighbouring countries (Silesia), managed as separate directly by an occupying power (Saarland) or put under international control (Ruhr area).\nThough by 1947 a growing rift between the western Allied Powers and the Soviet Union became evident as a result of the rigged 1947 Polish legislative election which constituted an open breach of the Yalta Agreement, followed by the announcement of the Truman Doctrine on 12 March 1947. On 4 March 1947 France and the United Kingdom signed the Treaty of Dunkirk for mutual assistance in the event of future military aggression in the aftermath of World War II against any of the pair. The rationale for the treaty was the threat of a potential future military attack, specifically a Soviet one in practice, though publicised under the disguise of a German one, according to the official statements. Immediately following the February 1948 coup d'\u00e9tat by the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia, the London Six-Power Conference was held, resulting in the Soviet boycott of the Allied Control Council and its incapacitation, an event marking the beginning of the Cold War. The remainder of the year 1948 marked the beginning of the institutionalised modern European integration.\nInitial years (1948\u20131957).\nWith the start of the Cold War, the Treaty of Brussels was signed in 1948 establishing the Western Union (WU) as the first organisation, followed by the International Authority for the Ruhr. In the same year, the Organization for European Economic Co-operation, the predecessor of the OECD, was also founded to manage the Marshall Plan; the Eastern Bloc responded with establishing the Comecon.\nA pivotal moment in European integration was the Hague Congress of May 1948, as it led to the creation of the European Movement International, the College of Europe and most importantly to the founding of the Council of Europe on the 5th of May 1949 (now known as Europe Day). The Council of Europe was the first institution to bring the sovereign nations of Western Europe together, raising great hopes and fevered debates in the following two years for further European integration. It has since been a broad forum to further cooperation and shared issues, achieving things like the 1950-signed European Convention on Human Rights.\nEssential for the actual birth of the institutions of the EU was the 9th of May 1950 Schuman Declaration (on the day after the fifth Victory Day, today's Europe day \u2013 of the EU). On the basis of that speech, France, Italy, the Benelux countries (Belgium, Netherlands and Luxembourg) together with West Germany signed the Treaty of Paris (1951) creating the European Coal and Steel Community the following year; this took over the role of the International Authority for the Ruhr and lifted some restrictions on German industrial productivity. It gave birth to the first institutions, such as the High Authority (now the European Commission) and the Common Assembly (now the European Parliament). The first presidents of those institutions were Jean Monnet and Paul-Henri Spaak respectively. The founding fathers of the European Union understood that coal and steel were the two industries essential for waging war, and believed that by tying their national industries together, a future war between their nations became much less likely. Backed by the Marshall Plan with large funds coming from the United States since 1948, the ECSC became a milestone organization, enabling European economic development and integration and being the origin of the main institutions of the EU such as the European Commission and Parliament.\nThe formation of the European Coal and Steel Community was advanced by American Secretary of State George C. Marshall. His namesake plan to rebuild Europe in the wake of World War II contributed more than $100 billion in today's dollars to the Europeans, helping to feed Europeans, deliver steel to rebuild industries, provide coal to warm homes, and construct dams to help provide power. In doing so, the Marshall Plan encouraged the integration of European powers into the European Coal and Steel Community, the precursor to present-day European Union, by illustrating the effects of economic integration and the need for coordination. The potency of the Marshall Plan caused former German Chancellor Helmut Schmidt to remark in 1997 that \"America should not forget that the development of the European Union is one of its greatest achievements. Without the Marshall Plan it perhaps would never have come to that.\"\nParalleling Schuman, the Pleven Plan of 1951 tried, but failed to tie the institutions of the developing European community under the European Political Community, which was to include the also proposed European Defence Community, an alternative to West Germany joining NATO which was established 1949 under the Truman Doctrine.\nIn 1954 the Western European Union was founded, after NATO took over competences from the WU, and West Germany joined. This prompted the Soviet Union to form the Warsaw Pact in 1955, allowing it to enforce its standing in Eastern Europe.\nThe attempt to turn the Saar protectorate into a \"European territory\" was rejected by a referendum in 1955. The Saar was to have been governed by a statute supervised by a European Commissioner reporting to the Council of Ministers of the Western European Union.\nAfter the failed attempts at creating defence (European Defence Community) and political communities (European Political Community), leaders met at the Messina Conference and established the Spaak Committee which produced the Spaak report. The report was accepted at the Venice Conference (29 and 30 May 1956), which decided to organise an Intergovernmental Conference. The Intergovernmental Conference on the Common Market and Euratom focused on economic unity, leading to the Treaties of Rome being signed in 1957 \u2013 this established the European Economic Community (EEC) and the European Atomic Energy Community (Euratom) among the members.\n1958\u20131972: Three communities.\nThe two new communities were created separately from ECSC, although they shared the same courts and the Common Assembly. The executives of the new communities were called Commissions, as opposed to the \"High Authority\". The EEC was headed by Walter Hallstein (Hallstein Commission) and Euratom was headed by Louis Armand (Armand Commission) and then \u00c9tienne Hirsch. Euratom would integrate sectors in nuclear energy while the EEC would develop a customs union between members.\nThroughout the 1960s tensions began to show with France seeking to limit supranational power and rejecting the membership of the United Kingdom. However, in 1965 an agreement was reached to merge the three communities under a single set of institutions, and hence the Merger Treaty was signed in Brussels and came into force on 1 July 1967 creating the European Communities. Jean Rey presided over the first merged Commission (Rey Commission).\nWhile the political progress of the Communities was hesitant in the 1960s, this was a fertile period for European legal integration. Many of the foundational legal doctrines of the Court of Justice were first established in landmark decisions during the 1960s and 1970s, above all in the \"Van Gend en Loos\" decision of 1963 that declared the \"direct effect\" of European law, that is to say, its enforceability before national courts by private parties. Other landmark decisions during this period included \"Costa v ENEL\", which established the supremacy of European law over national law and the \"Dairy Products\" decision, which declared that general international law principles of reciprocity and retaliation were prohibited within the European Community. All three of these judgments were made after the appointment of French judge Robert Lecourt in 1962, and Lecourt appears to have become a dominant influence on the Court of Justice over the 1960s and 1970s.\n1973\u20131993: Enlargement to Delors.\nAfter much negotiation, and following a change in the French Presidency, Denmark, Ireland and the United Kingdom (with Gibraltar) eventually joined the European Communities on 1 January 1973. This was the first of several enlargements which became a major policy area of the Union (see: Enlargement of the European Union).\nIn 1979, the European Parliament held its first direct elections by universal suffrage. 410 members were elected, who then elected the first female President of the European Parliament, Simone Veil.\nA further enlargement took place in 1981 with Greece joining on 1 January, six years after applying. In 1982, Greenland voted to leave the Community after gaining home rule from Denmark (See also: Special member state territories and the European Union). Spain and Portugal joined (having applied in 1977) on 1 January 1986 in the third enlargement.\nRecently appointed Commission President Jacques Delors (Delors Commission) presided over the adoption of the European flag by the Communities in 1986. In the first major revision of the treaties since the Merger Treaty, leaders signed the Single European Act in February 1986. The text dealt with institutional reform, including extension of community powers \u2013 in particular in regarding foreign policy. It was a major component in completing the single market and came into force on 1 July 1987.\nIn 1987 Turkey formally applied to join the Community and began the longest application process for any country. After the 1988 Polish strikes and the Polish Round Table Agreement, the first small signs of opening in Central Europe appeared. The opening of a border gate between Austria and Hungary at the Pan-European Picnic on August 19, 1989, then set in motion a peaceful chain reaction, at the end of which there was no longer a GDR and the Eastern Bloc had disintegrated. Otto von Habsburg and Imre Pozsgay saw the event as an opportunity to test Mikhail Gorbachev`s reaction to an opening of the Iron Curtain. In particular, it was examined whether Moscow would give the Soviet troops stationed in Hungary the command to intervene. But with the mass exodus at the Pan-European Picnic, the subsequent hesitant behavior of the Socialist Unity Party of East Germany and the non-intervention of the Soviet Union broke the dams. So the bracket of the Eastern Bloc was broken and as a result the Berlin Wall fell together with the whole Iron Curtain. Germany reunified and the door to enlargement to the former Eastern Bloc was opened (See also: Copenhagen Criteria).\nWith a wave of new enlargements on the way, the Maastricht Treaty was signed on 7 February 1992 which established the European Union when it came into force the following year.\n1993\u20132004: Creation.\nOn 1 November 1993, under the third Delors Commission, the Maastricht Treaty became effective, creating the European Union with its pillar system, including foreign and home affairs alongside the European Community. The 1994 European elections were held resulting in the Party of European Socialists maintaining their position as the largest party in Parliament. The Council proposed Jacques Santer as Commission President but he was seen as a second choice candidate, undermining his position. Parliament narrowly approved Santer but his commission gained greater support, being approved by 416 votes to 103. Santer had to use his new powers under Maastricht to flex greater control over his choice of Commissioners. They took office on 23 January 1995.\nOn 30 March 1994, accession negotiations concluded with Austria, Sweden and Finland. Meanwhile, Norway, Iceland and Liechtenstein joined the European Economic Area (which entered into force on 1 January 1994), an organisation that allowed European Free Trade Association states to enter the Single European Market. The following year, the Schengen Agreement came into force between seven members, expanding to include nearly all others by the end of 1996. The 1990s also saw the further development of the euro. 1 January 1994 saw the second stage of the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union begin with the establishment of the European Monetary Institute and at the start of 1999 the euro as a currency was launched and the European Central Bank was established. On 1 January 2002, notes and coins were put into circulation, replacing the old currencies entirely.\nDuring the 1990s, the conflicts in the Balkans gave impetus to developing the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP). The EU failed to react during the beginning of the conflict, and UN peacekeepers from the Netherlands failed to prevent the Srebrenica massacre (July 1995) in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the largest mass murder in Europe since the Second World War. The North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) finally had to intervene in the war, forcing the combatants to the negotiation table. The early foreign policy experience of the EU led to foreign policy being emphasised in the Treaty of Amsterdam (which created the High Representative).\nHowever, any success was overshadowed by the budget crisis in March 1999. The Parliament refused to approve the commission's 1996 community's budget on grounds of financial mismanagement, fraud and nepotism. With Parliament ready to throw them out, the entire Santer Commission resigned. The post-Delors mood of euroscepticism became entrenched with the Council and Parliament constantly challenging the commission's position in coming years.\nIn the following elections, the Socialists lost their decades-old majority to the new People's Party and the incoming Prodi Commission was quick to establish the new European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF). Under the new powers of the Amsterdam Treaty, Prodi was described by some as the 'First Prime Minister of Europe'. On 4 June, Javier Solana was appointed Secretary General of the council and the strengthened High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy admitted the intervention in Kosovo \u2013 Solana was also seen by some as Europe's first Foreign Minister. The Nice Treaty was signed on 26 February 2001 and entered into force on 1 February 2003 which made the final preparations before the 2004 enlargement to 10 new members.\n2004\u20132007: The great enlargement and consolidation.\nOn 10\u201313 June 2004, the 25 member states participated in the largest trans-national election in history (with the second largest democratic electorate in the world). The result of the sixth Parliamentary election was a second victory for the European People's Party-European Democrats group. It also saw the lowest voter turnout of 45.5%, the second time it had fallen below 50%. On 22 July 2004, Jos\u00e9 Manuel Barroso was approved by the new Parliament as the next Commission President. However, his new team of 25 Commissioners faced a tougher road. With Parliament raising objections to a number of his candidates he was forced to withdraw his selection and try once more. The Prodi Commission had to extend their mandate to 22 November after the new line-up of commissioners was finally approved.\nA proposed constitutional treaty was signed by plenipotentiaries from EU member states on 28 October 2004. The document was ratified in most member states, including two positive referendums. The referendums that were held in France and the Netherlands failed however, killing off the treaty. The European Council agreed that the constitution proposal would be abandoned, but most of its changes would be retained in an amending treaty. On 3 October 2005, the EU decided to officially open accession negotiations with Croatia and Turkey. On 13 December 2007 the treaty was signed, containing opt-outs for the more eurosceptic members and no state-like elements. The Lisbon treaty finally came into force on 1 December 2009. It created the post of President of the European Council and significantly expanded the post of High Representative. After much debate about what kind of person should be president, the European Council agreed on a low-key personality and chose Herman Van Rompuy while foreign policy-novice Catherine Ashton became High Representative.\nThe 2009 elections again saw a victory for the European People's Party, despite losing the British Conservatives who formed a smaller eurosceptic European Conservatives and Reformists grouping with other anti-federalist right wing parties. Parliament's presidency was once again divided between the People's Party and the Socialists, with Jerzy Buzek elected as the first President of the European Parliament from an ex-communist country. Barroso was nominated by the council for a second term and received backing from EPP who had declared him as their candidate before the elections. However, the Socialists and Greens led the opposition against him despite not agreeing on an opposing candidate. Parliament finally approved Barroso II, though once more several months behind schedule.\nIn 2007, the fifth enlargement completed with the accession of Bulgaria and Romania on 1 January 2007. Also, in 2007 Slovenia adopted the euro, Malta and Cyprus in 2008 and Slovakia in 2009.\n2008\u20132016: European crisis.\nHowever, trouble developed with existing members as the eurozone entered its first recession in 2008. Members cooperated and the ECB intervened to help restore economic growth and the euro was seen as a safe haven, particularly by those outside such as Iceland. With the risk of a default in Greece, Ireland, Portugal and other members in late 2009\u201310, eurozone leaders agreed to provisions for loans to member states who could not raise funds. Accusations that this was a U-turn on the EU treaties, which rule out any bail out of a euro member in order to encourage them to manage their finances better, were countered by the argument that these were loans, not grants, and that neither the EU nor other Member States assumed any liabilities for the debts of the aided countries. With Greece struggling to restore its finances, other member states also at risk and the repercussions this would have on the rest of the eurozone economy, a loan mechanism was agreed. The crisis also spurred consensus for further economic integration and a range of proposals such as a European Monetary Fund or federal treasury.\nThe European Union received the 2012 Nobel Peace Prize for having \"contributed to the advancement of peace and reconciliation, democracy and human rights in Europe.\" The Nobel Committee stated that \"that dreadful suffering in World War II demonstrated the need for a new Europe [...] today war between Germany and France is unthinkable. This shows how, through well-aimed efforts and by building up mutual confidence, historical enemies can become close partners.\" The Nobel Committee's decision was subject to considerable criticism.\nOn 1 July 2013, Croatia joined the EU, and on 1 January 2014 the French Indian Ocean territory of Mayotte was added as an outermost region.\n2016\u201320: Brexit.\nOn 23 June 2016, the citizens of the United Kingdom voted to withdraw from the European Union in a referendum and subsequently became the first and to date only member to trigger Article 50 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU). The vote was in favour of leaving the EU by a margin of 51.9% in favour to 48.1% against. The UK's withdrawal was completed on 31 January 2020.\n2020\u201322: Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.\nAfter the economic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic the EU leaders agreed for the first time to emit common debt to finance the European Recovery Program called Next Generation EU (NGEU).\n2022\u2013present: Impact of the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nOn 24 February 2022, after massing near the borders of Ukraine, the Russian Armed Forces undertook a full-scale invasion of Ukraine.\nThe European Union imposed heavy sanctions on Russia and agreed on a pooled military aid package to Ukraine for lethal weapons funded via the European Peace Facility off-budget instrument. Likewise, neighbouring EU member countries received a mass influx of Ukrainian refugees fleeing the conflict over the course of the first weeks of the war. The conflict exposed the EU energy dependency on Russia, deemed as a supplier \"explicitly\" threatening the EU. This development injected a sense of urgency in the switch towards alternative energy suppliers and further development of clean energy sources.\n2023\u2013present: Impact of Middle Eastern crisis.\nThe European Union since 7 October 2023, has had to face the resurgence of the Israeli\u2013Palestinian conflict, in particular the attack by Hamas in Israel that detonated a conflict first in the Gaza Strip, and then gradually wider to include Lebanon, Syria, Iraq, Iran, Yemen and at last West Bank and Qatar.\n2024: The Draghi Report and the new European challenges.\nAmong the challenges of the European Union is the implementation of the European Green Deal. While among the new challenges there is the governance of AI that must combine the development of this new technology with the intrinsic risks that it brings to the European Union.\n2025: Donald Trump's Second US Presidency.\nThe European Union must address the new US policy, implemented by Donald Trump's second presidency of the United States in the economic, trade, financial and defense of the European continent. A challenge that places Europe in front of new choices of collaboration and opportunity that requires an unprecedented effort to maintain competitiveness as illustrated in Mario Draghi's report.\n2026: The Defense of the European Union.\nAs of September 2025, despite the efforts of the President of the United States, the failure to resolve the war in Ukraine through diplomacy and the pressing need to ensure security both for the part of Ukraine not occupied by Russia and for Europe itself along its entire eastern border, the European Union has adopted a defense plan that calls for strengthening the defenses of individual states in full agreement with NATO. This plan is becoming increasingly urgent and extraordinary. Germany has planned a major rearmament program unseen since World War II, with major investments in the modernization of its entire defense industry and with the possibility of reinstatement of military conscription. Italy has increased its defense industry investments, including in partnership with German defense industry, developing fully or partially shared technologies. The objective is to create the conditions for a unified defense of the European Union, especially for deterrence against potentially hostile actors, beyond Russia, which is involved in the war with Ukraine. The European Union's defense strategy not only involves strengthening and modernizing the defense sector but also impacts on civilian industries, such as the strengthening of European infrastructure and the space industry. Furthermore, to be effective and efficient, the European Union's defense strategy requires mutual security guarantees with Russia, as part of the solution to the Russo-Ukrainian War, to ensure a lasting and secure peace between the parties.\nReform.\nMulti-speed Europe is a concept of differentiated integration currently in operation that has recently been given renewed emphasis by a team of independent experts in a report presented at a council meeting in Brussels in September 2023. \"France and Germany are pushing for a larger EU reform before any new member joins the bloc.\"\nStructural evolution.\nSince the end of World War II, most sovereign European countries have entered into treaties and thereby co-operated and harmonised policies (or \"pooled sovereignty\") in an increasing number of areas, in the European integration project or the \"construction of Europe\" (). The following timeline outlines the legal inception of the European Union (EU)\u2014the principal framework for this unification. The EU inherited many of its present organizations, institutions, and responsibilities from the European Communities (EC), which were founded in the 1950s in the spirit of the Schuman Declaration.\n&lt;br&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39768", "revid": "38962780", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39768", "title": "Erich Honecker", "text": "Leader of East Germany from 1971 to 1989\nErich Ernst Paul Honecker (; 25 August 1912 \u2013 29 May 1994) was a German communist politician who led the German Democratic Republic (East Germany) from 1971 until shortly before the fall of the Berlin Wall in November 1989. He held the posts of General Secretary of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED) and Chairman of the National Defence Council; in 1976, he replaced Willi Stoph as Chairman of the State Council, the official head of state. As the leader of East Germany, Honecker was viewed as a dictator. During his leadership, the country had close ties to the Soviet Union, which maintained a large army in the country.\nHonecker's political career began in the 1930s when he became an official of the Communist Party of Germany, a position for which he was imprisoned by the Nazis. Following World War II, he was freed by the Soviet army and relaunched his political activities, founding the SED's youth organisation, the Free German Youth, in 1946 and serving as the group's chairman until 1955. As the Security Secretary of the SED Central Committee, he was the prime organiser of the building of the Berlin Wall in 1961 and, in this function, bore administrative responsibility for the \"order to fire\" along the Wall and the larger inner German border.\nIn 1970, Honecker initiated a political power struggle that led, with support of Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev, to him replacing Walter Ulbricht as General Secretary of the SED and chairman of the National Defence Council. Under his command, the country adopted a programme of \"consumer socialism\" and moved towards the international community by normalising relations with West Germany and also becoming a full member of the UN, in what is considered one of his greatest political successes. As Cold War tensions eased in the late 1980s with the advent of perestroika and glasnost\u2014the liberal reforms introduced by Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev\u2014Honecker refused all but cosmetic changes to the East German political system. He cited the consistent hardliner attitudes of Kim Il Sung, Fidel Castro and Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu whose respective governments of North Korea, Cuba and Romania had been critical of reforms. Honecker was forced to resign by the SED Politburo in October 1989 in a bid to improve the government's image in the eyes of the public; the effort was unsuccessful, and the regime would collapse entirely the following month.\nFollowing German reunification in 1990, Honecker sought asylum in the Chilean embassy in Moscow, but was extradited back to Germany in 1992, after the fall of the Soviet Union, to stand trial for his role in the human rights abuses committed by the East German government. However, the proceedings were abandoned, as Honecker was suffering from terminal liver cancer. He was freed from custody to join his family in exile in Chile, where he died in May 1994.\nChildhood and youth.\nHonecker was born into a deeply Protestant family in Neunkirchen, in what is now Saarland, to Wilhelm Honecker (1881\u20131969), a coal miner and political activist, and his wife Caroline Catharine Weidenhof (1883\u20131963). The couple, married in 1905, had six children. Erich, their fourth child, was born on 25 August 1912 during the period in which the family resided on Max-Braun-Stra\u00dfe, before later moving to Kuchenbergstra\u00dfe 88 in the present-day Neunkirchen city district of Wiebelskirchen.\nAfter World War I, the Territory of the Saar Basin was occupied by France. This change from the strict rule of Ferdinand Eduard von Stumm to French military occupation provided the backdrop for what Wilhelm Honecker understood as proletarian exploitation, and introduced young Erich to communism. After his tenth birthday in 1922, Erich Honecker became a member of the Spartacus League's children's group in Wiebelskirchen. Aged 14 he entered the KJVD, the Young Communist League of Germany, for whom he later served the organisation's leader of Saarland from 1931.\nHonecker did not find an apprenticeship immediately after leaving school, but instead worked for a farmer in Pomerania for almost two years. In 1928 he returned to Wiebelskirchen and began a traineeship as a roofer with his uncle, but quit to attend the International Lenin School in Moscow and Magnitogorsk after the KJVD handpicked him for a course of study there. There, sharing a room with Anton Ackermann, he studied under the cover name \"Fritz Malter\".\nOpposition to the Nazis and imprisonment.\nIn 1930, aged 18, Honecker entered the KPD, the Communist Party of Germany. His political mentor was Otto Niebergall, who later represented the KPD in the Reichstag. After returning from Moscow in 1931 following his studies at the International Lenin School, he became the leader of the KJVD in the Saar region. After the Nazi seizure of power in 1933, Communist activities within Germany were only possible undercover; the Saar region however still remained outside the German Reich under a League of Nations mandate. Honecker was arrested in Essen, Germany, but soon released. Following this, he fled to the Netherlands and from there oversaw KJVD's activities in Pfalz, Hesse and Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg.\nHonecker returned to the Saar in 1934 and worked alongside Johannes Hoffmann on the campaign against the region's re-incorporation into Germany. A referendum on the area's future in January 1935 however saw 90.73% vote in favour of reunifying with Germany. Like 4,000 to 8,000 others, Honecker then fled the region, initially relocating to Paris.\nOn 28 August 1935 he illegally travelled to Berlin under the alias \"Marten Tjaden\", with a printing press in his luggage. From there he worked closely together with KPD official Herbert Wehner in opposition/resistance to the Nazi state. On 4 December 1935 Honecker was detained by the Gestapo and until 1937 remanded in Berlin's Moabit detention centre. On 3 July 1937 he was sentenced to ten years imprisonment for the \"preparation of high treason alongside the severe falsification of documents\".\nHonecker spent the majority of his incarceration in the Brandenburg-G\u00f6rden Prison, where he also carried out tasks as a handyman. In early 1945, he was moved to the Barnimstrasse women's prison in Berlin due to good behaviour and to be put to work repairing the bomb-damaged building, as he was a skilled roofer. During an Allied bombing raid on 6 March 1945, he managed to escape and hid himself at the apartment of Lotte Grund, a female prison guard. After several days she persuaded him to turn himself in, and his escape was then covered up by the guard.\nAfter the liberation of the prisons by advancing Soviet troops on 27 April 1945, Honecker remained in Berlin. His \"escape\" from prison and his relationships during his captivity later led to his experiencing difficulties within the Socialist Unity Party, as well as straining his relations with his former inmates. In later interviews and in his personal memoirs, Honecker falsified many of the details of his life during this period. Material from the East German State Security Service has been used to allege that, to be released from prison, Honecker offered the Gestapo evidence incriminating fellow imprisoned Communists, claimed he had renounced communism \"for good\", and was willing to serve in the German army.\nPost-war return to politics.\nIn May 1945 Honecker was \"picked up\" by chance in Berlin by Hans Mahle and taken to the Ulbricht Group, a collective of exiled German communists that had returned from the Soviet Union to Germany after the end of the Nazi regime. Through Waldemar Schmidt, Honecker befriended Walter Ulbricht, who had not been aware of him at that point. Honecker's future role in the group was still undecided until well into the summer months, as he had yet to face a party process. This ended in a reprimand due to his \"undisciplined conduct\" in fleeing from prison at the start of the year, an action which was debated upon, potentially jeopardising the other (communist) inmates.\nIn 1946, Honecker became the co-founder of the Free German Youth (FDJ), whose chairmanship he also undertook. After the formation of the SED, the Socialist Unity Party, in April 1946 through a merger of the KPD and SPD, Honecker swiftly became a leading party member and took his place in the party's Central Committee.\nOn 7 October 1949, the German Democratic Republic was formed with the adoption of a new constitution, establishing a political system similar to that of the Soviet Union. Within the state's socialist single party government, Honecker determinedly resumed his political career and the following year was named as a candidate member of the Politb\u00fcro of the SED's Central Committee. As President of the Free German Youth movement, he organised the inaugural \"Deutschlandtreffen der Jugend\" in East Berlin in May 1950 and the 3rd World Festival of Youth and Students in 1951, although the latter was beset with organisational problems.\nDuring the internal party unrest following the suppressed uprising of June 1953, Honecker sided with First Secretary Walter Ulbricht, despite the majority of the Politburo attempting to depose Ulbricht in favour of Rudolf Herrnstadt. Honecker himself though faced questioning from party members about his inadequate qualifications for his position. On 27 May 1955 he handed the Presidency of the FDJ over to Karl Namokel, and departed for Moscow to study for two years at the School of the Soviet Communist Party at Ulbricht's request. During this period he witnessed the 20th Congress of the Soviet Communist Party in person, where its First Secretary Nikita Khrushchev denounced Joseph Stalin.\nAfter returning to East Germany in 1958, Honecker became a fully-fledged member of the Politburo, taking over responsibility for military and security issues. As the Party Security Secretary he was the prime organiser of the building of the Berlin Wall in August 1961 and also a proponent of the \"order to fire\" along the Inner German border.\nLeadership of East Germany.\nWhile Ulbricht had replaced the state's command economy with, firstly the \"New Economic System\", then the Economic System of Socialism, as he sought to improve the country's failing economy, Honecker declared the main task under his New System of Economic Socialism to in fact be the \"unity of economic and social politics\", essentially through which living standards (with increased consumer goods) would be raised in exchange for political loyalty. Tensions had already led to his once-mentor Ulbricht removing Honecker from the position of Second Secretary in July 1970, only for the Soviet leadership to swiftly reinstate him. Honecker played up the thawing East-West German relationship as Ulbricht's strategy, to win the support of the Soviet leadership under Leonid Brezhnev. With this secured, Honecker was appointed First Secretary (from 1976 titled general secretary) of the Central Committee on 3 May 1971 after the Soviet leadership forced Ulbricht to step aside \"for health reasons\".\nAfter also succeeding Ulbricht as Chairman of the National Defence Council in 1971, Honecker was eventually also elected Chairman of the State Council (a post equivalent to that of president) on 29 October 1976. With this, Honecker reached the height of power within East Germany. From there on, he, along with Economic Secretary G\u00fcnter Mittag and Minister of State Security Erich Mielke, made all key government decisions. Until 1989 the \"little strategic clique\" composed of these three men was unchallenged as the top level of East Germany's ruling class. Honecker's closest colleague was Joachim Herrmann, the SED's Agitation and Propaganda Secretary. Alongside him, Honecker held daily meetings concerning the party's media representation in which the layout of the party's own newspaper \"Neues Deutschland\", as well as the sequencing of news items in the national news bulletin \"Aktuelle Kamera\", were determined. \nUnder Honecker's leadership, East Germany adopted a programme of \"consumer socialism\", which resulted in a marked improvement in living standards already the highest among the Eastern bloc countries \u2013\u00a0though still far behind West Germany. More attention was placed on the availability of consumer goods, and the construction of new housing was accelerated, with Honecker promising to \"settle the housing problem as an issue of social relevance\". His policies were initially marked by a liberalisation toward culture and art. While 1973 brought the World Festival of Youth and Students to East Berlin, soon dissident artists such as Wolf Biermann were expelled and the Ministry for State Security raised its efforts to suppress political resistance. Honecker remained committed to the expansion of the Inner German border and the \"order to fire\" policy along it. During his time in the office around 125 East German citizens were killed while trying to reach the West.\nAfter the Federal Republic had secured an agreement with the Soviet Union on cooperation and a policy of non-violence, it became possible to reach a similar agreement with the GDR. The Basic Treaty between East and West Germany in 1972 sought to normalise contacts between the two governments.\nEast Germany also participated in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe held in Helsinki in 1975, which attempted to improve relations between the West and the Eastern Bloc, and became a full member of the United Nations. These acts of diplomacy were considered Honecker's greatest successes in foreign politics.\nHonecker received additional high-profile personal recognitions including honorary doctorates of business administration from East Berlin's Humboldt University in 1976, Tokyo's Nihon University in 1981 and the London School of Economics in 1984 and the Olympic Order from the IOC in 1985. In September 1987, he became the first East German head of state to visit West Germany, where he was received with full state honours by West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl in an act that seemed to confirm West Germany's acceptance of East Germany's existence. During this trip he also journeyed to his birthplace in Saarland, where he held an emotional speech in which he spoke of a day when Germans would no longer be separated by borders. This trip had been planned twice before, including September 1984, but was initially blocked by the Soviet leadership which mistrusted the special East-West German relationship, particularly efforts to expand East Germany's limited independence in the realm of foreign policy.\nIllness, downfall and resignation.\nIn the late 1980s, Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev introduced \"glasnost\" and \"perestroika\", reforms to liberalise the socialist planned economy. Frictions between him and Honecker had grown over these policies and numerous additional issues from 1985 onward. East Germany refused to implement similar reforms, with Honecker reportedly telling Gorbachev: \"We have done our perestroika; we have nothing to restructure\". Gorbachev grew to dislike Honecker, and by 1988 was lumping him in with Bulgaria's Todor Zhivkov, Czechoslovakia's Gust\u00e1v Hus\u00e1k and Romania's Nicolae Ceau\u0219escu as a \"Gang of Four\": a group of inflexible hardliners unwilling to make reforms.\nAccording to White House experts Philip Zelikow and Condoleezza Rice, Gorbachev looked to Communist leaders in Eastern Europe to follow his example of perestroika and glasnost. They argue:\n Gorbachev himself had no particular sympathy for Erich Honecker, chairman of the East German Communist Party, and his hard-line comrades and the government. As early as 1985... [Gorbachev] had told East German party officials that kindergarten was over; no one would lead them by the hand. They were responsible for their own people. The relations between Gorbachev and Honecker went downhill from there.\nWestern analysts, according to Zelikow and Rice, believed in 1989 that Communism was still secure in East Germany:\nBolstered by relatively greater affluence than his country's Eastern European neighbours enjoyed in a fantastically elaborate system of internal controls, East Germany's longtime leader Eric Honecker seemed secure in his position. His government had long dealt with dissent through a mixture of brutal repression, forced emigration, and the vent of allowing occasional, limited travel to the West for a substantial part of the population.\nHonecker felt betrayed by Gorbachev in his German policy and ensured that official texts of the Soviet Union, especially those concerning \"perestroika\", could no longer be published or sold in East Germany.\n One month after the 1989 Polish legislative election in which Lech Wa\u0142\u0119sa and the Solidarity Citizens' Committee unexpectedly won 99 out of 100 seats, at the Warsaw Pact summit on 7\u20138 July 1989 in Bucharest, the Soviet Union reaffirmed its shift from the Brezhnev Doctrine of the limited sovereignty of its member states, and announced \"freedom of choice\". The Bucharest statement prescribed that its signatories henceforth developed their \"own political line, strategy and tactics without external intervention\". This called into question the Soviet guarantee of existence for the Communist states in Europe. Already in May 1989 Hungary had begun dismantling its border with Austria, creating the first gap in the so-called Iron Curtain, through which later several thousand East Germans quickly fled in hopes of reaching West Germany by way of Austria. But with the mass exodus at the Pan-European Picnic in August 1989 (which was based on an idea by Otto von Habsburg to test Gorbachev's reaction to the opening of the border), the subsequent hesitant behaviour of the Socialist Unity Party of East Germany and the non-intervention of the Soviet Union opened the floodgates. Thus the united front of the Eastern Bloc was broken. The reaction to this from Erich Honecker in the \"Daily Mirror\" of 19 August 1989 was too late and showed the current loss of power: \"Habsburg distributed leaflets far into Poland, on which the East German holidaymakers were invited to a picnic. When they came to the picnic, they were given gifts, food and Deutsche Mark, and then they were persuaded to come to the West.\" Later, after his fall, Honecker said of Otto von Habsburg in connection with the summer of 1989: \"That this Habsburg drove the nail into my coffin.\" Now tens of thousands of media-informed East Germans made their way to Hungary, which was no longer ready to keep its borders completely closed or to oblige its border troops to use force of arms. A 1969 treaty required the Hungarian government to send the East Germans back home; however, starting on 11 September 1989, the Hungarians let them pass into Austria, telling their outraged East German counterparts that they were refugees and that international treaties on refugees took precedence.\nAt the time, Honecker was sidelined through illness, leaving his colleagues unable to act decisively. He had been taken ill with biliary colic during the Warsaw Pact summit. He was shortly afterwards flown home to East Berlin. After an initial stabilisation in his health, he underwent surgery on 18 August 1989 to remove his inflamed gallbladder and, due to a perforation, part of his colon. According to the urologist Peter Althaus, the surgeons left a suspected carcinogenic nodule in Honecker's right kidney due to his weak condition, and also failed to inform the patient of the suspected cancer; other sources say the tumour was simply undetected. As a result of this operation, Honecker was away from his office until late September 1989.\nBack in office, Honecker had to contend with the rising number and strength of demonstrations across East Germany that had first been sparked by reports in the West German media of fraudulent results in local elections on 7 May 1989, the same results he had labelled a \"convincing reflection\" of the populace's faith in his leadership. He also had to deal with a new refugee problem. Several thousand East Germans tried to go to West Germany by way of Czechoslovakia, only to have that government bar them from passing. Several thousands of them headed straight for the West German embassy in Prague and demanded safe passage to West Germany. With some reluctance, Honecker allowed them to go \u2013 but forced them to go back through East Germany on sealed trains and stripped them of their East German citizenship. Several members of the SED \"Politb\u00fcro\" realised this was a serious blunder and made plans to get rid of him.\nAs unrest visibly grew, large numbers began fleeing the country through the West German embassies in Prague and Budapest, as well as over the borders of the \"socialist brother\" states. Each month saw tens of thousands more exit. On 3 October 1989 East Germany closed its borders to its eastern neighbours and prevented visa-free travel to Czechoslovakia; a day later these measures were also extended to travel to Bulgaria and Romania. East Germany was now not only behind the Iron Curtain to the West, but also cordoned off from most other Eastern bloc states.\nOn 6\u20137 October 1989 the national celebrations of the 40th anniversary of the East German state took place with Gorbachev in attendance. To the surprise of Honecker and the other SED leaders in attendance, several hundred members of the Free German Youth \u2014 reckoned as the future vanguard of the party and nation \u2014 began chanting, \"Gorby, help us! Gorby, save us!\". In a private conversation between the two leaders Honecker praised the success of the country, but Gorbachev knew that, in reality, it faced bankruptcy; East Germany had already accepted billions of dollars in loans from West Germany during the decade as it sought to stabilise its economy. Attempting to make Honecker accept a need for reforms, Gorbachev warned Honecker that \"He who is too late is punished by life\", yet Honecker maintained that \"we will solve our problems ourselves with socialist means\". Protests outside the reception at the Palace of the Republic led to hundreds of arrests in which many were brutally beaten by soldiers and police.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"\nAs the reform movement spread throughout Central and Eastern Europe, mass demonstrations against the East German government erupted, most prominently in Leipzig\u2014the first of several demonstrations which took place on Monday nights across the country. In response, an elite paratroop unit was dispatched to Leipzig\u2014almost certainly on Honecker's orders, since he was commander-in-chief of the Army. A bloodbath was averted only when local party officials themselves ordered the troops to pull back. In the following week, Honecker faced a torrent of criticism. This gave his Politburo comrades the impetus they needed to replace him.\nAfter a crisis meeting of the Politburo on 10\u201311 October 1989, Honecker's planned state visit to Denmark was cancelled and, despite his resistance, at the insistence of the regime's number-two-man, Egon Krenz, a public statement was issued that called for \"suggestions for attractive socialism\". Over the following days Krenz worked to secure himself the support of the military and the Stasi and arranged a meeting between Gorbachev and Politburo member Harry Tisch, who was in Moscow, to inform the Kremlin about the now-planned removal of Honecker; Gorbachev reportedly wished them good luck.\nThe sitting of the SED Central Committee planned for the end of November 1989 was pulled forward a week, with the most urgent item on the agenda now being the composition of the Politburo. Krenz and Mielke attempted by telephone on the night of 16 October to win other Politburo members over to remove Honecker. At the beginning of the session on 17 October, Honecker asked his routine question of \"Are there any suggestions for the agenda?\" Stoph replied, \"Please, general secretary, Erich, I propose that a new item be placed on the agenda. It is the release of Comrade Erich Honecker as general secretary and the election of Comrade Egon Krenz in his place.\" Honecker reportedly calmly responded: \"Well, then I open the debate\".\nAll those present then spoke, in turn, but none in favour of Honecker. G\u00fcnter Schabowski even extended the dismissal of Honecker to also include his posts in the State Council and as Chairman of the National Defence Council while childhood friend G\u00fcnter Mittag moved away from Honecker. Mielke, hollering and pounding the conference room table with his fist pointed at Honecker and blamed him for almost all the country's current ills and threatened to publish compromising information that he possessed, if Honecker refused to resign. A ZDF documentary on the matter claims this information was contained in a large red briefcase found in Mielke's possession in 1990. After three hours the Politburo voted to remove Honecker. In accordance with longstanding practice, Honecker voted for his own removal. As a concession to Honecker, he was allowed to publicly save face by resigning due to \"ill health\". Krenz was unanimously elected as his successor as General Secretary. This closely echoed how Honecker helped force Ulbricht out 18 years earlier; he too had been publicly allowed to retire for health reasons.\nStart of prosecution and asylum attempts.\nThree weeks after Honecker's ousting the Berlin Wall fell, and the SED swiftly lost control of the country. On 1 December, the Volkskammer deleted the provisions in the East German constitution giving the SED a monopoly on power, thus formally ending Communist rule in East Germany two months after Honecker's removal. In an effort to rehabilitate itself, the SED expelled Honecker and several other former officials two days later. He went on to join the newly founded Communist Party of Germany in 1990, remaining a member until his death.\nDuring November the Volkskammer had already set up a committee to investigate corruption and abuses of office, with Honecker being alleged to have received annual donations from the National Academy of Architecture of around 20,000 marks as an \"honorary member\". On 5 December 1989 the chief public prosecutor in East Germany formally launched a judicial inquiry against him on charges of high treason, abuses of confidence and embezzlement to the serious disadvantage of socialist property (the charge of high treason was dropped in March 1990). As a result, Honecker was placed under house arrest for a month.\nFollowing the lifting of his house arrest, Honecker and his wife Margot were forced to vacate their apartment in the Waldsiedlung housing area in Wandlitz, exclusively used by senior SED party members, after the Volkskammer decided to put it to use as a sanatorium for the disabled. In any case, Honecker spent the majority of January 1990 in hospital after having the error of the tumour missed in 1989 corrected after the suspicion of cancer was confirmed. Upon leaving the hospital on 29 January he was re-arrested and held at the Berlin-Rummelsburg remand centre. However, on the evening of the following day, 30 January, Honecker was again released from custody: The district court had annulled the arrest warrant and, due to medical reports, certified him unfit for detention and interrogation.\nLacking a home, Honecker instructed his lawyer Wolfgang Vogel to ask the Evangelical Church in Berlin-Brandenburg for help. Pastor Uwe Holmer, leader of the Hoffnungstal Institute in Lobetal, Bernau bei Berlin, offered the couple a home in his vicarage. This drew immediate condemnation and later demonstrations against the church for assisting the Honeckers, given they had both discriminated against Christians who did not conform with the SED leadership's ideology. Aside from a stay at a holiday home in Lindow in March 1990 that lasted only one day before protests swiftly brought it to an end, the couple resided at the Holmer residence until 3 April 1990.\nThe couple then moved into a three-room living quarters within the Soviet military hospital in Beelitz. Here, doctors diagnosed a malignant liver tumour following another re-examination. Following German reunification, prosecutors in Berlin issued a further arrest warrant for Honecker in November 1990 on charges that he gave the order to fire on escapees at the Inner German border in 1961 and had repeatedly reiterated that command (most specifically in 1974). However, this warrant was not enforceable because Honecker lay under the protection of Soviet authorities in Beelitz. On 13 March 1991 the Honeckers fled Germany from the Soviet-controlled Sperenberg Airfield to Moscow on a military jet with the aid of Soviet hardliners.\nThe German Chancellery had only been informed by Soviet diplomats about the Honeckers\u2019 flight to Moscow one hour in advance. It limited its response to a public protest, claiming the existence of an arrest warrant meant the Soviet Union was breaching international law by admitting Honecker. The initial Soviet reaction was that Honecker was now too ill to travel and was receiving medical treatment after a deterioration of his health. He underwent further surgery the following month.\nOn 11 December 1991 the Honeckers sought refuge in the Chilean Embassy in Moscow, while also applying for political asylum in the Soviet Union. Despite an offer of help from North Korea, Honecker instead reached out to the Chilean government under Christian Democrat Patricio Aylwin. Under Honecker's rule, East Germany had granted many Chileans exile following the military coup of 1973 by Augusto Pinochet. In addition his daughter Sonja was married to a Chilean. Chilean authorities, however, stated he could not enter their country without a valid German passport.\nMikhail Gorbachev agreed to the dissolution of the Soviet Union on 25 December 1991 and gave all his powers to Russian president Boris Yeltsin. Russian authorities had long been keen on expelling Honecker, against the wishes of Gorbachev, and the new government now demanded that he leave the country or else face deportation.\nIn June 1992, Chilean President Patricio Aylwin, leader of a center-left coalition, finally assured German Chancellor Helmut Kohl that Honecker would be leaving the embassy in Moscow. Reportedly against his will, Honecker was ejected from the embassy on 29 July 1992 and flown to Berlin Tegel Airport, where he was arrested and detained in Moabit Prison. By contrast, his wife Margot travelled on a direct flight from Moscow to Santiago, Chile, where she initially stayed with her daughter Sonja. Honecker's lawyers unsuccessfully appealed for him to be released from detention in the period leading up to his trial.\nCriminal trial.\nOn 12 May 1992, while under protection in the Chilean embassy in Moscow, Honecker, along with several co-defendants, including Erich Mielke, Willi Stoph, Heinz Kessler, Fritz Streletz and Hans Albrecht, were accused in a 783-page indictment of taking part in the \"collective manslaughter\" of 68 people as they attempted to flee East Germany. It was alleged that Honecker, in his role as Chairman of the National Defence Council, had both given the decisive order in 1961 for the construction of the Berlin Wall and also, at subsequent meetings, ordered the extensive expansion of the border fortifications around West Berlin and the barriers to the West so as to make any passing impossible. In addition, specifically at a May 1974 sitting of the National Defence Council, he had stated that the development of the border must continue, that lines of fire were warranted along the whole border and, as prior, the use of firearms was essential: \"Comrades who have successfully used their firearms [are] to be praised\".\nThe charges were approved by the Berlin District Court on 19 October 1992 at the opening of the trial. On the same day, it was decided that the hearing of 56 charges would be postponed and the remaining twelve cases would be the subject of the trial to begin on 12 November 1992. The question of under which laws the former East German leader could be tried was highly controversial and, in the view of many jurists, the process had an uncertain outcome.\nDuring his 70-minute-long statement to the court on 3 December 1992, Honecker said that he had political responsibility for the building of the Berlin Wall and subsequent deaths at the borders, but claimed he was \"without juridical, legal or moral guilt\". He blamed the escalation of the Cold War for the building of the Berlin Wall, saying the decision had not been taken solely by the East German leadership but all the Warsaw Pact countries that had collectively concluded in 1961 that a \"Third World War with millions dead\" would be unavoidable without this action. He quoted several West German politicians who had opined that the wall had indeed reduced and stabilised the two factions. He stated that he had always regretted every death, both from a human point of view and due to the political damage they caused.\nMaking reference to past trials in Germany against communists and socialists such as Karl Marx and August Bebel, he claimed that the legal process against him was politically motivated and a \"show trial\" against communism. He stated that no court lying in the territory of West Germany had the legal right to place him, his co-defendants or any East German citizen on trial, and that the portrayal of East Germany as an was contradictory to its recognition by over one hundred other states and the UN Security Council. Furthermore, he questioned how a German court could now legally judge his political decisions in the light of the lack of legal action taken over various military operations that had been carried out by Western countries with either overt support or absence of condemnation from (West) Germany. He dismissed public criticism of the Stasi, arguing that journalists in Western countries were praised for denouncing others. While accepting political responsibility for the deaths at the Wall, he believed he was free of any \"legal or moral guilt\", and thought that East Germany would go down in history as \"a sign that socialism is possible and is better than capitalism\".\nBy the time of the proceedings Honecker was already seriously ill. A new CT scan in August 1992 had confirmed an ultrasound examination made in Moscow and the existence of a malignant tumour in the right lobe of his liver. Based on these findings and additional medical testimonies, Honecker's lawyers requested that the legal proceedings, as far as they were aimed against their client, be abandoned and the arrest warrant against him withdrawn; the cases against both Mielke and Stoph had already been postponed due to their ill health. Arguing that his life expectancy was estimated to be three to six months, while the legal process was forecast to take at least two years, his lawyers questioned whether it was humane to try a dying man. Their application was rejected on 21 December 1992 when the court concluded that, given the seriousness of the charges, no obstacle to the proceedings existed.\nHonecker lodged a constitutional complaint to the recently created Constitutional Court of the State of Berlin, stating that the decision to proceed violated his fundamental right to human dignity, which was an overriding principle in the Constitution of Berlin, above even the state penal system and criminal justice. On 12 January 1993, Honecker's complaint was upheld and the Berlin District Court therefore abandoned the case and withdrew their arrest warrant. An application for a new arrest warrant was rejected on 13 January. The court also refused to commence with the trial related to the indictment of 12 November 1992, and withdrew the second arrest warrant related to these charges. After a total of 169 days Honecker was released from custody, drawing protests both from victims of the East German regime as well as German political figures.\nHonecker flew via Brazil to Santiago, Chile, to reunite with his wife and his daughter Sonja, who lived there with her son Roberto. Upon his arrival he was greeted by the leaders of the Chilean Communist and Socialist parties. In contrast, his co-defendants Heinz Kessler, Fritz Streletz and Hans Albrecht were sentenced on 16 September 1993 to imprisonment of between four and seven-and-a-half years. On 13 April 1993 a final attempt to separate and continue the trial against Honecker in his absence was discontinued. Four days later, on the 66th birthday of his wife Margot, he gave a final public speech, ending with the words: \"Socialism is the opposite of what we have now in Germany. For that I would like to say that our beautiful memories of the German Democratic Republic are testimony of a new and just society. And we want to always remain loyal to these things\".\nDeath.\nHonecker died on 29 May 1994 of liver cancer at the age of 81 in a terraced house in the La Reina district of Santiago. His funeral, arranged by the Communist Party of Chile, was conducted the following day at the central cemetery in Santiago.\nFamily.\nHonecker was married three times. After being liberated from prison in 1945, he married the prison warden Charlotte Schanuel (n\u00e9e Drost), nine years his senior, on 23 December 1946. She died suddenly from a brain tumour in June 1947. Details of this marriage were not revealed until 2003.\nBy the time of her death, Honecker was already romantically involved with the Free German Youth official Edith Baumann, whom he met on a trip to Moscow. With her, he had a daughter. Sources differ on whether Honecker and Baumann married in 1947 or 1949, but in 1952 he fathered an illegitimate daughter with Margot Feist, a People's Chamber member and chairperson of the Ernst Th\u00e4lmann Pioneer Organisation.\nIn September 1950, Baumann wrote directly to Walter Ulbricht to inform him of her husband's extramarital activity in the hope of him pressuring Honecker to end his relationship with Feist. Following his divorce and reportedly under pressure from the Politburo, he married Feist. However, sources again differ on both the year of his divorce from Baumann and of his marriage to Feist; depending on the source, the events took place either in 1953 or 1955. For more than twenty years, Margot Honecker served as Minister of National Education. In 2012 intelligence reports collated by West German spies alleged that both Honecker and his wife had secret affairs but did not divorce for political reasons; however, his bodyguard Bernd Br\u00fcckner, in a book about his time spent in Honecker's service, denied the claims.\nIn popular culture.\nDmitri Vrubel's 1990 mural on the Berlin Wall \"My God, Help Me to Survive This Deadly Love\", depicting a socialist fraternal kiss between Honecker and Leonid Brezhnev, became known around the world.\nA traffic signal inspired by Honecker wearing a jaunty straw hat was used in parts of East Germany (Ost-Ampelm\u00e4nnchen) and has become a symbol of Ostalgie.\nBritish actor Paul Freeman will portray Honecker in upcoming film \"Whispers of Freedom\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39769", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39769", "title": "IBM AS/400", "text": "IBM midrange computer (1988\u20132013)\nThe IBM AS/400 (Application System/400) is a family of midrange computers from IBM announced in June 1988 and released in August 1988. It was the successor to the System/36 and System/38 platforms, and ran the OS/400 operating system. Lower-cost but more powerful than its predecessors, an estimated 111,000 installations existed by the end of 1990 and annual revenue reaching $14 billion that year, increasing to 250,000 systems by 1994, and about 500,000 shipped by 1997.\nA key concept in the AS/400 platform is Technology Independent Machine Interface (TIMI), a platform-independent instruction set architecture (ISA) that is translated to native machine language instructions. The platform has used this capability to change the underlying processor architecture without breaking application compatibility. Early systems were based on a 48-bit CISC instruction set architecture known as the \"Internal Microprogrammed Interface\" (IMPI), originally developed for the System/38. In 1995, the company introduced a new version of the system running on a series of 64-bit PowerPC-derived CPUs, which later were developed into the IBM RS64 family. Due to the use of TIMI, applications for the original CISC-based programs continued to run on the new systems without modification, as the TIMI code can be re-translated to the new systems' PowerPC Power ISA native machine code. The RS64 was replaced with POWER4 processors in 2001, which was followed by POWER5 and POWER6 in later upgrades.\nThe AS/400 went through multiple re-branding exercises, finally becoming the System i in 2006. In 2008, IBM consolidated the separate System i and System p product lines (which had mostly identical hardware by that point) into a single product line named IBM Power Systems. The name \"AS/400\" is sometimes used informally to refer to the IBM i operating system running on modern Power Systems hardware.\nHistory.\nFort Knox.\nIn the early 1980s, IBM management became concerned that IBM's large number of incompatible midrange computer systems was hurting the company's competitiveness, particularly against Digital Equipment Corporation's VAX. In 1982, a project named \"Fort Knox\" commenced, which was intended to consolidate the System/36, the System/38, the IBM 8100, the Series/1 and the IBM 4300 series into a single product line based around an IBM 801-based processor codenamed \"Iliad\", while retaining backwards compatibility with all the systems it was intended to replace. A new operating system would be created for Fort Knox, but the operating systems of each platform which Fort Knox was intended to replace would also be ported to the Iliad processor to allow customers to migrate their software to the new platform.\nThe Fort Knox project proved to be overly ambitious and ran into multiple delays and changes of scope. As the project advanced, the requirement to support IBM 8100 and Series/1 software was dropped. When IBM's engineers attempted to port the operating systems and software of their existing platforms, they discovered that it would be impossible without making extensive changes to the Iliad processor for each individual operating system \u2014 changes that Iliad's architects were unwilling to make. The proposed solution to this was to augment Iliad with operating system-specific co-processors that provided hardware support for a single operating system. However, the amount of logic needed in each co-processor grew until the co-processors became the main processor, and the Iliad was relegated to the role of a support processor \u2014 thus failing the goal of consolidating on a single processor architecture. The Fort Knox project was ultimately cancelled in 1985.\nSilverlake.\nDuring the Fort Knox project, a skunkworks project was started at IBM Rochester by engineers who believed that Fort Knox's failure was inevitable. These engineers developed code that allowed System/36 applications to run on top of the System/38, and when Fort Knox was cancelled, this skunkworks project evolved into an official project to replace both the System/36 and System/38 with a single new hardware platform. The project became known as \"Silverlake\" (named for Silver Lake in Rochester, Minnesota) and officially began in December 1985. The Silverlake hardware was essentially an evolution of the System/38 that reused some of the technology developed for the Fort Knox project.\nSilverlake's goal was to deliver a replacement for the System/36 and System/38 in as short a timeframe as possible, as the Fort Knox project had stalled new product development at Rochester, leaving IBM without a competitive midrange system. On its launch in 1986, the System/370-compatible IBM 9370 was positioned as IBM's preferred midrange platform, but failed to achieve the commercial success IBM hoped it would have. Much like Silverlake, the 9370 also reused the co-processor developed during the Fort Knox project as its main processor and the same SPD I/O bus that was derived from the Series/1 bus.\nAS/400.\nOn June 21, 1988, IBM officially announced the Silverlake system as the \"Application System/400\" (AS/400). The announcement included more than 1,000 software packages written for it by IBM and IBM Business Partners. The AS/400 operating system was named \"Operating System/400\" (OS/400).\nThe creators of the AS/400 originally planned to use the name \"System/40\", but IBM had adopted a new product nomenclature around the same time, which led to the Application System/400 name. First, IBM began prefixing \"System\" in product names with words to indicate the intended use or target market of the system (e.g., Personal System/2 and Enterprise System/9000). Second, IBM decided to reserve one- and two-digit model numbers for personal systems (e.g., PS/2 and PS/55), three-digit numbers for midrange systems (e.g., AS/400) and four-digit numbers for mainframes (e.g., ES/9000). The reassignment of two-digit model numbers from midrange systems to personal systems was to prevent the personal systems from running out of single-digit numbers for new products.\nThe move to PowerPC.\nIBM announced RS/6000 in February 1990. Its RISC technology offered a much better price/performance ratio than AS/400. Analysts said that IBM intended to let the proprietary AS/400 and Unix-based RS/6000 compete with each other for midrange customers. IBM Rochester reportedly attempted to make RS/6000 less attractive compared to AS/400.\nIn 1990, IBM Rochester began work to replace the AS/400's original System/38-derived 48-bit CISC processors with a 96-bit architecture known as \"C-RISC\" (Commercial RISC). Rather than being a clean-slate design, C-RISC would have added RISC-style and VLIW-style instructions to the AS/400's processor, while maintaining backwards compatibility with the System/370-style \"Internal Microprogrammed Interface\" (IMPI) instruction set and the microcode used to implement it.\nIn 1991, at the request of IBM president Jack Kuehler, a team under the leadership of Frank Soltis delivered a proposal to adapt the 64-bit PowerPC architecture to support the needs of the AS/400 platform. Their extensions to the PowerPC architecture, known as \"Amazon\" (and later as \"PowerPC AS\"), were approved by IBM management instead of the C-RISC design for development into the next AS/400 processor architecture. These extensions include support for tagged memory, as well as assistance for decimal arithmetic.\nIBM initially attempted to create a single PowerPC implementation for both AS/400 and high-end RS/6000 systems known as \"Belatrix\". The Belatrix project proved to be too ambitious, and was cancelled when it became apparent that it would not deliver on schedule. Instead, a pair of AS/400-specific processors were designed at IBM Endicott and IBM Rochester, known as \"Cobra\" (for low end systems) and \"Muskie\" (for high end systems) respectively. These became the initial implementations of the IBM RS64 processor line. The RS64 series continued to be developed as a separate product line at IBM until the POWER4 merged both the RS64 and POWER product lines together.\nDespite the move from IMPI to an entirely different processor architecture, the AS/400's Technology Independent Machine Interface (TIMI) mostly hid the changes from users and applications, and transparently recompiled applications for the new processor architecture. The port of OS/400 to the PowerPC AS architecture required a rewrite of most of the code below the TIMI due to the use of IMPI microcode to implement significant quantities of the operating system's low level code. This led to the creation of the System Licensed Internal Code (SLIC) - a new implementation of the lower levels of the operating system mostly written in C++.\nRebranding.\nThe AS/400 family line was rebranded several times in the 1990s and 2000s as IBM introduced newer generations of hardware and operating system. \nIn 1994, the \"AS/400 Advanced Series\" name was used for new models, followed by the rebranding of the product line to \"AS/400e\" (the \"e\" standing for e-business) in 1997.\nIn 2000, the \"eServer iSeries\" was introduced as part of its \"eServer branding initiative\". The eServer iSeries was built on the POWER4 processor from the RS64 processors used by previous generations, meaning that the same processors were used in both the iSeries and pSeries platforms, the latter of which ran AIX.\nIn 2004, \"eServer i5\" (along with OS/400 becoming \"i5/OS\") the \"5\" signifying the use of POWER5 processors, was introduced, replacing the eServer iSeries brand. Successive generations of iSeries and pSeries hardware converged until they were essentially the same hardware sold under different names and with different operating systems. Some i5 servers were still using the AS/400-specific IBM Machine Type (MT/M 9406-520) and were able to run AIX in a logical partition along i5/OS, while the p5 servers were able to run i5/OS, respectively. The licensing for AIX and i5/OS was controlled in the firmware by the POWER hypervisor.\nThe final rebranding occurred in 2006, when IBM rebranded the eServer i5 to \"System i\".\nIn April 2008, IBM introduced the IBM Power Systems line, which was a convergence of System i and System p product lines. The first Power Systems machines used the POWER6 processors; i5/OS was renamed as \"IBM i\" in order to remove the association with POWER5 processors. IBM i is sold as one of the operating system options for Power Systems (along with AIX and Linux) instead of being tied to its own hardware platform.\nLegacy.\nAlthough announced in 1988, the AS/400 remains IBM's most recent major architectural shift that was developed wholly internally. After the departure of CEO John Akers in 1993, when IBM looked likely to be split up, Bill Gates commented that the only part of IBM that Microsoft would be interested in was the AS/400 division. (At the time, many of Microsoft's business and financial systems ran on the AS/400 platform, rumored as ending around 1999 with the introduction of Windows 2000.)\nSystem architecture.\nAccording to Frank Soltis, one of the architects of the AS/400 platform, the AS/400's architecture is defined by five architectural principles. Most of these principles are inherited from System/38.\nTechnology Independence.\nThe high-level instruction set (called TIMI for \"Technology Independent Machine Interface\" by IBM) allows application programs to take advantage of advances in hardware and software without recompilation. TIMI is a virtual instruction set independent of the underlying machine instruction set of the CPU. User-mode programs contain both TIMI instructions and the machine instructions of the CPU, thus ensuring hardware independence. This is conceptually somewhat similar to the virtual machine architecture of programming environments such as Java and .NET.\nUnlike some other virtual-machine architectures in which the virtual instructions are interpreted at run time, TIMI instructions are never interpreted. They constitute an intermediate compile time step and are translated into the processor's instruction set as the final compilation step. The TIMI instructions are stored within the final program object, in addition to the executable machine instructions. This is how application objects compiled on one processor family (e.g., the original CISC AS/400 48-bit processors) could be moved to a new processor (e.g., PowerPC 64-bit) without re-compilation. An application saved from the older 48-bit platform can simply be restored onto the new 64-bit platform where the operating system discards the old machine instructions and re-translates the TIMI instructions into 64-bit instructions for the new processor.\nThe system's instruction set defines all pointers as 128-bit. This was the original design feature of the System/38 (S/38) in the mid-1970s planning for future use of faster processors, memory, and an expanded address space. The original AS/400 CISC models used the same 48-bit address space as the S/38. The address space was expanded in 1995 when the RISC PowerPC RS64 64-bit CPU processor replaced the 48-bit CISC processor.\nSoftware integration.\nOS/400 (now known as IBM i) is the native operating system of the AS/400 platform and was the sole operating system supported on the original AS/400 hardware. Many of the advanced features associated with the AS/400 are implemented in the operating system as opposed to the underlying hardware, which changed significantly throughout the life of the AS/400 platform. Features include a RDBMS (Db2 for i), a menu-driven interface, support for multiple users, block-oriented terminal support (IBM 5250), and printers.\nObject-based design.\nUnlike the \"everything is a file\" principle of Unix and its derivatives, on IBM i everything is an object (with built-in persistence and garbage collection).\nSingle-level store.\nIBM uses a single-level store virtual memory architecture in the AS/400 platform. For 64-bit PowerPC processors, the virtual address resides in the rightmost 64 bits of a pointer while it was 48 bits in the S/38 and CISC AS/400. The 64-bit address space references main memory and disk as a single address set, which is the single-level store concept.\nHardware integration.\nLater generations of hardware are also capable of supporting various guest operating systems, including SSP, AIX, Linux, Microsoft Windows 2000, and Windows Server 2003. While OS/400, AIX, and Linux are supported on the POWER processors on LPARs (logical partitions), Windows is supported with either single-processor internal blade servers (IXS) or externally linked multiple-processor servers (IXA and iSCSI). SSP guests were supported using emulation from OS/400 V3R6 through V4R4 using the Advanced 36 Machine facility of the operating system, a feature distinct from the System/36 Environment compatibility layer, which requires System/36 software to be recompiled.\nHardware.\nCPUs.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39770", "revid": "9755426", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39770", "title": "IBM System p", "text": "High-end line of RISC (POWER)/UNIX-based servers\nThe IBM System p is a high-end line of RISC (Power)/UNIX-based servers. It was the successor of the RS/6000 line, and predecessor of the IBM Power Systems server series.\nHistory.\nThe previous RS/6000 line was originally a line of workstations and servers. The first System p server line was named the \"e\"Server pSeries in 2000 as part of the e-Server branding initiative.\nIn 2004, with the advent of the POWER5 processor, the server family was rebranded the \"e\"Server p5.\nIn 2005, following IBM's move to streamline its server and storage brands worldwide, and incorporating the \"System\" brand with the Systems Agenda, the family was again renamed to System p5. The System p5 now encompassed the IBM OpenPower product line.\nIn 2007, after the introduction of the POWER6 processor models, the last rename under the System p brand dropped the p (numbered) designation.\nIn April 2008, IBM announced a rebranding of the System p and its unification with the mid-range System i platform. The resulting product line was called IBM Power Systems.\nHardware and software.\nProcessors.\nWhereas the previous RS/6000 line used a mix of early POWER and PowerPC processors, when pSeries came along, this had evolved into RS64-III and POWER3 across the board\u2014POWER3 for its excellent floating-point performance and RS64 for its scalability, throughput, and integer performance.\nIBM developed the POWER4 processor to replace both POWER3 and the RS64 line in 2001. After that, the differences between throughput and number crunching-optimized systems no longer existed. Since then, System p machines evolved to use the POWER5 but also the PowerPC 970 for the low-end and blade systems.\nThe last System p systems used the POWER6 processor, such as the POWER6-based System p 570 and the JS22 blade. In addition, during the SuperComputing 2007 (SC07) conference in Reno, IBM introduced a new POWER6-based System p 575 with 32 POWER6 cores at 4.7\u00a0GHz and up to 256\u00a0GB of RAM with water cooling.\nFeatures.\nAll IBM System p5 and IBM \"e\"Server p5 machines support DLPAR (Dynamic Logical Partitioning) with Virtual I/O and Micro-partitioning.\nSystem p generally uses the AIX operating system and, more recently, 64-bit versions of the Linux operating system.\nModels.\nMain line.\neServer pSeries.\nThe IBM p690 was, at the time of its release in late 2001, the flagship of IBM's high-end Unix servers during the POWER4 era of processors. It was built to run IBM AIX Unix, although it is possible to run a version of Linux minus some POWER4-specific features.\nIt could support up to 32 (1.5, 1.7 or 1.9\u00a0GHz) POWER4+ processors and 1 TB of RAM, which weighs well over 1000\u00a0kg. It was used in a supercomputer at Forschungszentrum J\u00fclich in 2004, and was discontinued in late 2005.\neServer p5.\nReleased in 2004.\nSystem p.\nSystem p was rebranded to Power Systems in 2008.\nOpenPower.\nOpenPower was the name of a range of servers in the System p line from IBM. They featured IBM's POWER5 CPUs and run only 64-bit versions of Linux. IBM's own UNIX variant, AIX is not supported since the OpenPower servers are not licensed for this operating system.\nThere were two models available, with a variety of configurations.\nBefore 2005, OpenPower belonged to the eServer product line but were eventually rolled into the IBM's Power Systems product portfolio.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39772", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39772", "title": "Cape Cod Canal", "text": "Waterway in Massachusetts\nThe Cape Cod Canal is an artificial waterway in Massachusetts connecting Cape Cod Bay in the north to Buzzards Bay in the south, and is part of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway. The approximately canal traverses the neck of land joining Cape Cod to the state's mainland. It mostly follows tidal rivers widened to and deepened to at mean low water, shaving up to off the journey around the cape for its approximately 14,000 annual users.\nMost of the canal is located in the town of Bourne, but its northeastern terminus is in Sandwich. Scusset Beach State Reservation lies near the canal's north entrance, and the Massachusetts Maritime Academy is near its south. A swift-running current changes direction every six hours and can reach during the receding ebb tide.\nThe waterway is maintained by the United States Army Corps of Engineers and has no toll fees. It is spanned by the Cape Cod Canal Railroad Bridge, the Bourne Bridge, and the Sagamore Bridge. Traffic lights at either end govern the approach of vessels over .\nThe canal is occasionally used by whales and dolphins, including endangered North Atlantic right whales, which can cause closure of the canal.\nHistory.\nConstruction of a canal was first considered by Myles Standish of the Plymouth Colony in 1623, and the Pilgrims scouted the low-lying stretch of land between the Manomet and Scusset rivers for potential routes. William Bradford established the Aptucxet Trading Post in 1627 at the portage between the rivers. Trade prospered with the Indians of Narragansett Bay and the Dutch of New Netherland, and this was a major factor enabling the Pilgrims to pay off their debt.\nIn 1697, the General Court of Massachusetts considered the first formal proposal to build the canal but took no action. In 1717, a canal was created in Orleans, Massachusetts called Jeremiah's Gutter which spanned a narrower portion of the Cape some distance to the east, but it remained active only until the late 1800s. More energetic planning with surveys took place repeatedly in 1776 (commissioned by George Washington), 1791, 1803, 1818, 1824\u20131830, and 1860. None of these efforts came to fruition.\nThe first attempts at actually building a canal did not take place until the late 19th century; earlier planners either ran out of money or were overwhelmed by the project's size. The engineers finally decided which route to take through the hillsides by connecting and widening the Manomet and Scusset rivers. The first excavation began in 1880, when the Cape Cod Ship Canal Company hired 400 immigrant Italian laborers to begin digging with shovels and wheelbarrows. The effort ran out of money almost immediately, and the laborers were unpaid and forced to beg for food in Sandwich. In 1883, the Cape Cod Ship Canal Company reorganized under engineer Frederick Lockwood. The company used a bucket dredge to clear nearly a mile of channel through the Sandwich marshes before shutting down in 1891.\nPrivate construction.\nOn June 22, 1909, construction finally began for a working canal under the direction of August Belmont Jr.'s Boston, Cape Cod &amp; New York Canal Company, using designs by engineer William Barclay Parsons. The canal engineers encountered many obstacles, such as large submerged boulders. Divers were hired to blow them up, but the effort slowed dredging. Another problem was cold winter storms which forced the engineers to stop dredging altogether and wait for spring. Nevertheless, the canal opened on a limited basis on July 29, 1914, and it was completed in 1916. The privately owned toll canal had a maximum width of and a maximum depth of , and it took a somewhat difficult route from Phinney Harbor at the head of Buzzards Bay. Several accidents occurred due to the narrow channel and navigation difficulty, and these limited traffic and tarnished the canal's reputation. Toll revenues failed to meet investors' expectations as a result, despite shortening the trade route from New York City to Boston by .\nPublic takeover and expansion.\nOn July 25, 1918, the Director General of the United States Railroad Administration took over jurisdiction and operation of the canal under a presidential proclamation. Four days earlier, the German U-boat surfaced off Orleans, Massachusetts on July 21, 1918, and shelled the tugboat \"Perth Amboy\" and her string of four barges. The canal remained under government control until 1920, during which the United States Army Corps of Engineers re-dredged the channel to deep.\nIn 1928, the government purchased the canal for $11.4 million as a free public waterway, and $21 million was spent between 1935 and 1940 increasing the canal's width to and its depth to . As a result, it became the widest sea-level canal of its time. The southern entrance to the canal was rebuilt for direct access from Buzzards Bay rather than through Phinney Harbor. Before construction began, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology built a huge scale model of the canal (9 feet to a mile, roughly &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;1\u2044587 actual size) to study the hydraulic effects of tidal currents on the enlarged and rerouted canal.\nWorld War II.\nDuring World War II, shipping again used the canal to avoid U-boats patrolling offshore. It was protected by coastal artillery batteries at the Sagamore Hill Military Reservation at the northern entrance and the Butler Point Military Reservation at the southern entrance. The artillery was never fired in defense of the canal.\nThe Mystic Steamship Company's collier SS \"Stephen R. Jones\" was grounded and sank in the canal on June 28, 1942. Shipping was routed around Cape Cod, and the Liberty ship SS \"Alexander Macomb\" was torpedoed by the German submarine \"U-215\" on July 3 with the loss of ten lives. The canal reopened on July 31 after the wrecked \"Stephen R. Jones\" was removed with the help of 17 tons of dynamite.\nRecreational uses.\nThe canal is used extensively by recreational and commercial vessels. Service roads on both sides of the canal provide access for fishing and are heavily used by in-line skaters, bicyclists, and walkers. Several parking areas are maintained at access points. Bourne Scenic Park is leased by the Corps of Engineers to the Town of Bourne Recreation Authority for use as a tent and RV campground adjacent to the Canal.\nThe Army Corps of Engineers maintains the Cape Cod Canal Visitor Center which introduces visitors to the history, features, and operation of the canal. Features include a retired US Army Corps of Engineers patrol boat, a 46-seat theater showing continuous DVD presentations on canal history, canal flora and fauna, real time radar and camera images of the waterway, and a variety of interactive exhibits. Corps Park Rangers staff the center and provide free public programs on a variety of subjects. The Visitor Center is open seasonally from May to October, and admission is free. It is located on Moffitt Drive in Sandwich near the canal's east end. A second seasonally staffed center is at the Herring Run along Scenic Highway.\nScusset Beach State Reservation lies just north of the east end of the canal and offers beach facilities as well as tent and RV camping. A trail there leads to Sagamore Hill, once an Indian meeting ground and the site of a World War II coastal fortification. Bournedale Hills Trail extends along the north side of the Canal from Bourne Scenic Park campground to the Herring Run. The trail includes a self-guided loop which interprets the Canal's historic and natural features.\nTunnel folklore and proposal.\nA spoof became popular during the late 20th century concerning a fictitious road tunnel, allegedly built in the 1960s, under the Cape Cod Canal. It came into popular usage in Massachusetts as a commentary on the severe traffic entering and exiting Cape Cod during the summer months. Since 1994, decals have been sold in shops around the Cape as popular souvenirs purporting to be \"permits\" allowing the bearer to use the tunnel; the popularity of these \"permits\" briefly led to a lawsuit among several different sellers. In 2019, the Massachusetts Department of Transportation (MassDOT) said that it had studied the idea of adding a tunnel, but had no plans to do so.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39773", "revid": "34646063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39773", "title": "Colin Renfrew", "text": "British archaeologist (1937\u20132024)\nAndrew Colin Renfrew, Baron Renfrew of Kaimsthorn, (25 July 1937 \u2013 24 November 2024) was a British archaeologist, paleolinguist and Conservative peer noted for his work on radiocarbon dating, the prehistory of languages, archaeogenetics, neuroarchaeology, and the prevention of looting at archaeological sites.\nRenfrew was also the Disney Professor of Archaeology at the University of Cambridge and Director of the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research, and was a Senior Fellow of the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.\nEarly life and education.\nRenfrew was educated at St Albans School, Hertfordshire; where one of the houses is now named after him. From 1956 to 1958, he did National Service in the Royal Air Force. On 21 June 1956, he was granted a national service commission in the Technical Branch with the rank of pilot officer. Having completed his full-time service, he transferred to the reserve (national service list) on 25 March 1958. He was promoted to flying officer on 25 June 1958, with seniority in that rank from 25 March 1958. \nHe then went up to St John's College, Cambridge, where he first read Natural Sciences, and then Archaeology and Anthropology, graduating in 1962. He was elected president of Cambridge Union in 1961 and was a member of the University of Cambridge's Archaeological Field Club (AFC). He had run against and lost an election to Barry Cunliffe to become president of the AFC. In 1965, he completed his PhD thesis \"Neolithic and Bronze Age cultures of the Cyclades and their external relations.\" In the same year, he married Jane M. Ewbank.\nAcademic.\nIn 1965, Renfrew was appointed to the post of lecturer in the Department of Prehistory and Archaeology at the University of Sheffield. Between 1968 and 1970, he directed excavations at Sitagroi, Greece. In the 1968 Sheffield Brightside by-election he unsuccessfully contested this parliamentary constituency on behalf of the Conservative Party. He was elected a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries in that same year, Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in 1970, and an Honorary Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries of Scotland in 2000.\nIn 1972, Renfrew became Professor of Archaeology at the University of Southampton, succeeding Barry Cunliffe. During his time at Southampton, he directed excavations at Quanterness in Orkney and Phylakopi on the island of Milos, Greece. In 1973, Renfrew published \"Before Civilisation: The Radiocarbon Revolution and Prehistoric Europe\" in which he challenged the assumption that prehistoric cultural innovation originated in the Near East and then spread to Europe. He also excavated with Marija Gimbutas at Sitagroi.\nIn 1980, Renfrew was elected a Fellow of the British Academy. In 1981 he was elected to the Disney Professorship of Archaeology in the University of Cambridge, a post he held until his retirement. In 1990 Renfrew was appointed the founding Director of the McDonald Institute for Archaeological Research.\nIn 1987, he published \"Archaeology and Language: The Puzzle of the Indo-European Origins\", a book on the Proto-Indo-Europeans. His \"Anatolian hypothesis\" posited that this group lived 2,000 years before the Kurgans, in Anatolia, later diffusing to Greece, then Italy, Sicily, Corsica, the Mediterranean coast of France, Spain, and Portugal. Another branch migrated along the fertile river valleys of the Danube and Rhine into central and northern Europe.\nThe Anatolian hypothesis argued that Proto-Indo-European, the reconstructed ancestor of the Indo-European languages, originated approximately 9,000 years ago in Anatolia and moved with the spread of farming throughout the Mediterranean and into central and northern Europe. This hypothesis contradicted Marija Gimbutas's Kurgan hypothesis, which states that Proto-Indo-European was spread by a migration of peoples from the Pontic\u2013Caspian steppe approximately 6,000 years ago.\nFrom 1987 to 1991, he co-directed excavations at Markiani on Amorgos and at Dhaskalio Kavos, Keros, Greece.\nRenfrew's work in using the archaeological record as the basis for understanding the ancient mind was foundational to the field of evolutionary cognitive archaeology. Renfrew and his student, Lambros Malafouris, coined the phrase neuroarchaeology to describe an archaeology of mind.\nIn 1996, Renfrew formulated a sapient paradox, that can be formulated as \"why there was such a long gap between emergence of genetically and anatomically modern humans and the development of complex behaviors?\"\nRenfrew served as Master of Jesus College, Cambridge from 1986 until 1997. In 2004, he retired from the Disney Professorship and was a Senior Fellow at the McDonald Institute. From 2006 to 2008 he directed new excavations on the Cycladic Island of Keros and was recently co-director of the Keros Island Survey. He died on 24 November 2024, at the age of 87.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39774", "revid": "50910661", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39774", "title": "Optical rotation", "text": "Rotation of the plane of linearly polarized light as it travels through a chiral material\nOptical rotation, also known as polarization rotation or circular birefringence, is the rotation of the orientation of the plane of polarization about the optical axis of linearly polarized light as it travels through certain materials. Circular birefringence and circular dichroism are the manifestations of optical activity. Optical activity occurs only in chiral materials, those lacking microscopic mirror symmetry. Unlike other sources of birefringence which alter a beam's state of polarization, optical activity can be observed in fluids. This can include gases or solutions of chiral molecules such as sugars, molecules with helical secondary structure such as some proteins, and also chiral liquid crystals. It can also be observed in chiral solids such as certain crystals with a rotation between adjacent crystal planes (such as quartz) or metamaterials.\nWhen looking at the source of light, the rotation of the plane of polarization may be either to the right (dextrorotatory or dextrorotary \u2014 \"d\"-rotary, represented by (+), clockwise), or to the left (levorotatory or levorotary \u2014 \"l\"-rotary, represented by (\u2212), counter-clockwise) depending on which stereoisomer is dominant. For instance, sucrose and camphor are \"d\"-rotary whereas cholesterol is \"l\"-rotary. For a given substance, the angle by which the polarization of light of a specified wavelength is rotated is proportional to the path length through the material and (for a solution) proportional to its concentration.\nOptical activity is measured using a polarized source and polarimeter. This is a tool particularly used in the sugar industry to measure the sugar concentration of syrup, and generally in chemistry to measure the concentration or enantiomeric ratio of chiral molecules in solution. Modulation of a liquid crystal's optical activity, viewed between two sheet polarizers, is the principle of operation of liquid-crystal displays (used in most modern televisions and computer monitors).\nForms.\nDextrorotation and laevorotation (also spelled levorotation) in chemistry and physics are the optical rotation of plane-polarized light. From the point of view of the observer, \"dextrorotation\" refers to clockwise or right-handed rotation, and \"laevorotation\" refers to counterclockwise or left-handed rotation.\nA chemical compound that causes dextrorotation is \"dextrorotatory\" or \"dextrorotary\", while a compound that causes laevorotation is \"laevorotatory\" or \"laevorotary\". Compounds with these properties consist of chiral molecules and are said to have optical activity. If a chiral molecule is dextrorotary, its enantiomer (geometric mirror image) will be laevorotary, and vice versa. Enantiomers rotate plane-polarized light the same number of degrees, but in opposite directions.\nChirality prefixes.\nA compound may be labeled as dextrorotary by using the \"(+)-\" or \"\"d\"-\" prefix. Likewise, a levorotary compound may be labeled using the \"(\u2212)-\" or \"\"l\"-\" prefix. The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry, the authority on chemical nomenclature, strongly discourages use of the \"\"d\"-\" and \"\"l\"-\" prefixes. The lowercase \"\"d\"-\" and \"\"l\"-\" prefixes are distinct from the \"-\" and \"-\" prefixes. The \"-\" and \"-\" prefixes are used to specify the enantiomer of chiral organic compounds in biochemistry and are based on the compound's absolute configuration relative to (+)-glyceraldehyde, which is the -form by definition.\nThe prefix used to indicate absolute configuration is not directly related to the (+) or (\u2212) prefix used to indicate optical rotation in the same molecule. For example, nine of the nineteen -amino acids naturally occurring in proteins are, despite the - prefix, actually dextrorotary (at a wavelength of 589\u00a0nm), and -fructose is sometimes called \"levulose\" because it is levorotary. The two naming systems can be combined to indicate both absolute configuration and optical rotation, as in -(+)-glyceraldehyde.\nThe - and - prefixes describe the molecule as a whole, as do the (+) and (\u2212) prefixes for optical rotation. In contrast, the (\"R\")- and (\"S\")- prefixes from the Cahn\u2013Ingold\u2013Prelog priority rules characterize the absolute configuration of each specific chiral stereocenter with the molecule, rather than a property of the molecule as a whole. A molecule having exactly one chiral stereocenter (usually an asymmetric carbon atom) can be labeled (\"R\") or (\"S\"), but a molecule having multiple stereocenters needs more than one label. For example, the essential amino acid -threonine contains two chiral stereocenters and is written (2\"S\",3\"S\")-threonine. There is no strict relationship between the R/S, the /, and (+)/(\u2212) designations, although some correlations exist. For example, of the naturally occurring amino acids, all are , and most are (\"S\"). For some molecules the (\"R\")-enantiomer is the dextrorotary (+) enantiomer, and in other cases it is the levorotary (\u2212) enantiomer. The relationship must be determined on a case-by-case basis with experimental measurements or detailed computer modeling.\nHistory.\nThe rotation of the orientation of linearly polarized light was first observed in 1811 in quartz by French physicist Fran\u00e7ois Arago. In 1820, the English astronomer Sir John F.W. Herschel discovered that different individual quartz crystals, whose crystalline structures are mirror images of each other (see illustration), rotate linear polarization by equal amounts but in opposite directions. Jean Baptiste Biot also observed the rotation of the axis of polarization in certain liquids and vapors of organic substances such as turpentine. In 1822, Augustin-Jean Fresnel found that optical rotation could be explained as a species of birefringence: whereas previously known cases of birefringence were due to the different speeds of light polarized in two perpendicular planes, optical rotation was due to the different speeds of right-hand and left-hand circularly polarized light. Simple polarimeters have been used since this time to measure the concentrations of simple sugars, such as glucose, in solution. In fact one name for -glucose (the biological isomer), is \"dextrose\", referring to the fact that it causes linearly polarized light to rotate to the right or dexter side. In a similar manner, levulose, more commonly known as fructose, causes the plane of polarization to rotate to the left. Fructose is even more strongly levorotatory than glucose is dextrorotatory. Invert sugar syrup, commercially formed by the hydrolysis of sucrose syrup to a mixture of the component simple sugars, fructose, and glucose, gets its name from the fact that the conversion causes the direction of rotation to \"invert\" from right to left.\nIn 1849, Louis Pasteur resolved a problem concerning the nature of tartaric acid. A solution of this compound derived from living things (to be specific, wine lees) rotates the plane of polarization of light passing through it, but tartaric acid derived by chemical synthesis has no such effect, even though its reactions are identical and its elemental composition is the same. Pasteur noticed that crystals of this compound come in two asymmetric forms that are mirror images of one another. Sorting the crystals by hand gave two forms of the compound: Solutions of one form rotate polarized light clockwise, while the other form rotate light counterclockwise. An equal mix of the two has no polarizing effect on light. Pasteur deduced that the molecule in question is asymmetric and could exist in two different forms that resemble one another as would left- and right-hand gloves, and that the organic form of the compound consists of purely the one type.\nIn 1874, Jacobus Henricus van 't Hoff and Joseph Achille Le Bel independently proposed that this phenomenon of optical activity in carbon compounds could be explained by assuming that the 4 saturated chemical bonds between carbon atoms and their neighbors are directed towards the corners of a regular tetrahedron. If the 4 neighbors are all different, then there are two possible orderings of the neighbors around the tetrahedron, which will be mirror images of each other. This led to a better understanding of the three-dimensional nature of molecules.\nIn 1898, Jagadish Chandra Bose described the ability of twisted artificial structures to rotate the polarization of microwaves. In 1914, Karl F. Lindman showed the same effect for an artificial composite consisting of randomly-dispersed left- or right-handed wire helices in cotton. Since the early 21st century, the development of artificial materials has led to the prediction and realization of chiral metamaterials with optical activity exceeding that of natural media by orders of magnitude in the optical part of the spectrum. Extrinsic chirality associated with oblique illumination of metasurfaces lacking two-fold rotational symmetry has been observed to lead to large linear optical activity in transmission and reflection, as well as nonlinear optical activity exceeding that of lithium iodate by 30 million times.\nIn 1945, Charles William Bunn predicted optical activity of achiral structures, if the wave's propagation direction and the achiral structure form an experimental arrangement that is different from its mirror image. Such optical activity due to extrinsic chirality was observed in the 1960s in liquid crystals.\nIn 1950, Sergey Vavilov predicted optical activity that depends on the intensity of light and the effect of nonlinear optical activity was observed in 1979 in lithium iodate crystals.\nOptical activity is normally observed for transmitted light. However, in 1988, M. P. Silverman discovered that polarization rotation can also occur for light reflected from chiral substances. Shortly after, it was observed that chiral media can also reflect left-handed and right-handed circularly polarized waves with different efficiencies. These phenomena of specular circular birefringence and specular circular dichroism are jointly known as specular optical activity. Specular optical activity is very weak in natural materials.\nTheory.\nOptical activity occurs due to molecules dissolved in a fluid or due to the fluid itself only if the molecules are one of two (or more) stereoisomers; this is known as an enantiomer. The structure of such a molecule is such that it is \"not\" identical to its mirror image (which would be that of a different stereoisomer, or the \"opposite enantiomer\"). In mathematics, this property is also known as chirality. For instance, a metal rod is \"not\" chiral, since its appearance in a mirror is not distinct from itself. However a screw or light bulb base (or any sort of helix) \"is\" chiral; an ordinary right-handed screw thread, viewed in a mirror, would appear as a left-handed screw (very uncommon) which could not possibly screw into an ordinary (right-handed) nut. A human viewed in a mirror would have their heart on the right side, clear evidence of chirality, whereas the mirror reflection of a doll might well be indistinguishable from the doll itself.\nIn order to display optical activity, a fluid must contain only one, or a preponderance of one, stereoisomer. If two enantiomers are present in equal proportions, then their effects cancel out and no optical activity is observed; this is termed a racemic mixture. But when there is an enantiomeric excess, more of one enantiomer than the other, the cancellation is incomplete and optical activity is observed. Many naturally occurring molecules are present as only one enantiomer (such as many sugars). Chiral molecules produced within the fields of organic chemistry or inorganic chemistry are racemic unless a chiral reagent was employed in the same reaction.\nAt the fundamental level, polarization rotation in an optically active medium is caused by circular birefringence, and can best be understood in that way. Whereas linear birefringence in a crystal involves a small difference in the phase velocity of light of two different linear polarizations, circular birefringence implies a small difference in the velocities between right and left-handed \"circular polarizations\". Think of one enantiomer in a solution as a large number of little helices (or screws), all right-handed, but in random orientations. Birefringence of this sort is possible even in a fluid because the handedness of the helices is not dependent on their orientation: even when the direction of one helix is reversed, it still appears right handed. And circularly polarized light itself is chiral: as the wave proceeds in one direction the electric (and magnetic) fields composing it are rotating clockwise (or counterclockwise for the opposite circular polarization), tracing out a right (or left) handed screw pattern in space. In addition to the bulk refractive index which substantially lowers the phase velocity of light in any dielectric (transparent) material compared to the speed of light (in vacuum), \"there is an additional interaction between the chirality of the wave and the chirality of the molecules.\" Where their chiralities are the same, there will be a small additional effect on the wave's velocity, but the opposite circular polarization will experience an opposite small effect as its chirality is opposite that of the molecules.\nUnlike linear birefringence, however, natural optical rotation (in the absence of a magnetic field) cannot be explained in terms of a local material permittivity tensor (i.e., a charge response that only depends on the local electric field vector), as symmetry considerations forbid this. Rather, circular birefringence only appears when considering nonlocality of the material response, a phenomenon known as spatial dispersion. Nonlocality means that electric fields in one location of the material drive currents in another location of the material. Light travels at a finite speed, and even though it is much faster than the electrons, it makes a difference whether the charge response naturally wants to travel along with the electromagnetic wavefront, or opposite to it. Spatial dispersion means that light travelling in different directions (different wavevectors) sees a slightly different permittivity tensor. Natural optical rotation requires a special material, but it also relies on the fact that the wavevector of light is nonzero, and a nonzero wavevector bypasses the symmetry restrictions on the local (zero-wavevector) response. However, there is still reversal symmetry, which is why the direction of natural optical rotation must be 'reversed' when the direction of the light is reversed, in contrast to magnetic Faraday rotation. All optical phenomena have some nonlocality/wavevector influence but it is usually negligible; natural optical rotation, rather uniquely, absolutely requires it.\nThe phase velocity of light in a medium is commonly expressed using the index of refraction \"n\", defined as the speed of light (in free space) divided by its speed in the medium. The difference in the refractive indices between the two circular polarizations quantifies the strength of the circular birefringence (polarization rotation),\n formula_1\nWhile formula_2 is small in natural materials, examples of giant circular birefringence resulting in a negative refractive index for one circular polarization have been reported for chiral metamaterials.\nThe familiar rotation of the axis of \"linear\" polarization relies on the understanding that a linearly polarized wave can as well be described as the superposition (addition) of a left and right circularly polarized wave in equal proportion. The phase difference between these two waves is dependent on the orientation of the linear polarization which we'll call formula_3, and their electric fields have a relative phase difference of formula_4 which then add to produce linear polarization:\n formula_5\nwhere formula_6 is the electric field of the net wave, while formula_7 and formula_8 are the two circularly polarized basis functions (having zero phase difference). Assuming propagation in the +\"z\" direction, we could write formula_7 and formula_8 in terms of their \"x\" and \"y\" components as follows:\n formula_11\n formula_12\nwhere formula_13 and formula_14 are unit vectors, and \"i\" is the imaginary unit, in this case representing the 90-degree phase shift between the \"x\" and \"y\" components that we have decomposed each circular polarization into. As usual when dealing with phasor notation, it is understood that such quantities are to be multiplied by formula_15 and then the actual electric field at any instant is given by the \"real part\" of that product.\nSubstituting these expressions for formula_7 and formula_8 into the equation for formula_18 we obtain\n formula_19\nThe last equation shows that the resulting vector has the \"x\" and \"y\" components in phase and oriented exactly in the formula_3 direction, as we had intended, justifying the representation of any linearly polarized state at angle formula_21 as the superposition of right and left circularly polarized components with a relative phase difference of formula_22. Now let us assume transmission through an optically active material which induces an additional phase difference between the right and left circularly polarized waves of formula_23. Let us call formula_24 the result of passing the original wave linearly polarized at angle formula_21 through this medium. This will apply additional phase factors of formula_26 and formula_27 to the right and left circularly polarized components of formula_6:\n formula_29\nUsing similar math as above, we find\n formula_30\ndescribing a wave linearly polarized at angle formula_31, thus rotated by formula_32 relative to the incoming wave formula_33\nWe defined above the difference in the refractive indices for right and left circularly polarized waves of formula_2. Considering propagation through a length \"L\" in such a material, there will be an additional phase difference induced between them of formula_23 (as we used above) given by\n formula_36\nwhere formula_37 is the wavelength of the light (in vacuum). This will cause a rotation of the linear axis of polarization by formula_27 as we have shown.\nIn general, the refractive index depends on wavelength (see dispersion) and the differential refractive index formula_2 will also be wavelength dependent. The resulting variation in rotation with the wavelength of the light is called optical rotatory dispersion (ORD). ORD spectra and circular dichroism spectra are related through the Kramers\u2013Kronig relations. Complete knowledge of one spectrum allows the calculation of the other.\nSo we find that the degree of rotation depends on the color of the light (the yellow sodium D line near 589\u00a0nm wavelength is commonly used for measurements) and is directly proportional to the path length formula_40 through the substance and the amount of circular birefringence of the material formula_2 which, for a solution, may be computed from the substance's specific rotation and its concentration in solution.\nAlthough optical activity is normally thought of as a property of fluids, particularly aqueous solutions, it has also been observed in crystals such as quartz (SiO2). Although quartz has a substantial linear birefringence, that effect is cancelled when propagation is along the optic axis. In that case, rotation of the plane of polarization is observed due to the relative rotation between crystal planes, thus making the crystal formally chiral as we have defined it above. The rotation of the crystal planes can be right or left-handed, again producing opposite optical activities. On the other hand, amorphous forms of silica such as fused quartz, like a racemic mixture of chiral molecules, has no net optical activity since one or the other crystal structure does not dominate the substance's internal molecular structure.\nApplications.\nFor a pure substance in solution, if the color and path length are fixed and the specific rotation is known, the observed rotation can be used to calculate the concentration. This usage makes a polarimeter a tool of great importance to those trading in or using sugar syrups in bulk.\nComparison to the Faraday effect.\nRotation of light's plane of polarization may also occur through the Faraday effect, which involves a static magnetic field. However, this is a distinct phenomenon and is not classified as \"optical activity\". Optical activity is reciprocal, i.e. it is the same for opposite directions of wave propagation through an optically active medium, for example, clockwise polarization rotation from the point of view of an observer. In case of optically active isotropic media, the rotation is the same for any direction of wave propagation. In contrast, the Faraday effect is non-reciprocal, i.e. opposite directions of wave propagation through a Faraday medium will result in clockwise and anti-clockwise polarization rotation from the point of view of an observer. Faraday rotation depends on the propagation direction relative to that of the applied magnetic field. All compounds can exhibit polarization rotation in the presence of an applied magnetic field, provided that (a component of) the magnetic field is oriented in the direction of light propagation. The Faraday effect is one of the first discoveries of the relationship between light and electromagnetic effects.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39775", "revid": "302229", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39775", "title": "Electromagnetic isotope separation", "text": ""}
{"id": "39776", "revid": "47555821", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39776", "title": "Denial-of-service attack", "text": "Type of cyber-attack\nIn computing, a denial-of-service attack (DoS attack; UK: US: ) is a cyberattack in which the perpetrator seeks to make a machine or network resource unavailable to its intended users by temporarily or indefinitely disrupting services of a host connected to a network. Denial of service is typically accomplished by flooding the targeted machine or resource with superfluous requests in an attempt to overload systems and prevent some or all legitimate requests from being fulfilled. The range of attacks varies widely, spanning from inundating a server with millions of requests to slow its performance, overwhelming a server with a substantial amount of invalid data, to submitting requests with an illegitimate IP address.\nIn a distributed denial-of-service attack (DDoS attack; UK: US: ), the incoming traffic flooding the victim originates from many different sources. More sophisticated strategies are required to mitigate this type of attack; simply attempting to block a single source is insufficient as there are multiple sources. A DDoS attack is analogous to a group of people crowding the entry door of a shop, making it hard for legitimate customers to enter, thus disrupting trade and losing the business money. Criminal perpetrators of DDoS attacks often target sites or services hosted on high-profile web servers such as banks or credit card payment gateways. Revenge and blackmail, as well as hacktivism, can motivate these attacks.\nHistory.\nPanix, the third-oldest ISP in the world, was the target of what is thought to be the first DoS attack. On September 6, 1996, Panix was subject to a SYN flood attack, which brought down its services for several days while hardware vendors, notably Cisco, figured out a proper defense. The release of sample code during the event led to the online attack of Sprint, EarthLink, E-Trade, and other major corporations in the year to follow.\nIn February 2020, Amazon Web Services experienced an attack with a peak volume of . In July 2021, Cloudflare boasted of protecting its client from a DDoS attack from a global Mirai botnet that was up to 17.2 million requests per second. Russian DDoS prevention provider Yandex said it blocked an HTTP pipelining DDoS attack on Sept. 5. 2021 that originated from unpatched Mikrotik networking gear. In the first half of 2022, the Russian invasion of Ukraine significantly shaped the cyberthreat landscape, with an increase in cyberattacks attributed to both state-sponsored actors and global hacktivist activities. The most notable event was a DDoS attack in February, the largest Ukraine has encountered, disrupting government and financial sector services. This wave of cyber aggression extended to Western allies like the UK, the US, and Germany. Particularly, the UK's financial sector saw an increase in DDoS attacks from nation-state actors and hacktivists, aimed at undermining Ukraine's allies.\nIn February 2023, Cloudflare faced a 71 million/requests per second attack which Cloudflare claims was the largest HTTP DDoS attack at the time. HTTP DDoS attacks are measured by HTTP requests per second instead of packets per second or bits per second. On July 10, 2023, the fanfiction platform Archive of Our Own (AO3) faced DDoS attacks, disrupting services. Anonymous Sudan, claiming the attack for religious and political reasons, was viewed skeptically by AO3 and experts. Flashpoint, a threat intelligence vendor, noted the group's past activities but doubted their stated motives. AO3, supported by the non-profit Organization for Transformative Works (OTW) and reliant on donations, is unlikely to meet the $30,000 Bitcoin ransom.\nIn August 2023, the group of hacktivists NoName057 targeted several Italian financial institutions, through the execution of slow DoS attacks. On 14 January 2024, they executed a DDoS attack on Swiss federal websites, prompted by President Zelensky's attendance at the Davos World Economic Forum. Switzerland's National Cyber Security Centre quickly mitigated the attack, ensuring core federal services remained secure, despite temporary accessibility issues on some websites. In October 2023, exploitation of a new vulnerability in the HTTP/2 protocol resulted in the record for largest HTTP DDoS attack being broken twice, once with a 201 million requests per second attack observed by Cloudflare, and again with a 398 million requests per second attack observed by Google. In August 2024, Global Secure Layer observed and reported on a record-breaking packet DDoS at 3.15 billion packets per second, which targeted an undisclosed number of unofficial Minecraft game servers.\nIn October 2024, the Internet Archive faced two severe DDoS attacks that brought the site completely offline, immediately following a previous attack that leaked records of over 31 million of the site's users. The hacktivist group SN_Blackmeta claimed the DDoS attack as retribution for American involvement in the Gaza war, despite the Internet Archive being unaffiliated with the United States government; however, their link with the preceding data leak remains unclear.\nCloudflare claims to have recorded and successfully autonomously blocked a 40-second DDoS attack on 23 September 2025, that reached a peak volume of 22.2 Tb/s, which would be the largest DDoS attack to date. Cloudflare has stated that over 404,000 source IPs were used to target one IP address, and that the source IPs were not spoofed. According to Cloudflare, this came after several other large-scale DDoS attacks, each consecutively beating the previous record, including a 7.3 Tb/s attack in May 2025 and an 11.5 Tb/s attack on 1 September, 2025.\nTypes.\nDenial-of-service attacks are characterized by an explicit attempt by attackers to prevent legitimate use of a service. There are two general forms of DoS attacks: those that crash services and those that flood services. The most serious attacks are distributed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Visible anchor/styles.css\" /&gt;Distributed DoS.\nA distributed denial-of-service (DDoS; UK: US: ) attack occurs when multiple systems flood the bandwidth or resources of a targeted system, usually one or more web servers. A DDoS attack uses more than one unique IP address or machines, often from thousands of hosts infected with malware. A distributed denial of service attack typically involves more than around 3\u20135 nodes on different networks; fewer nodes may qualify as a DoS attack but is not a DDoS attack.\nMost of the time, attackers operate from an endpoint that is not their intended target, for example using another user's machine to attack a server. By using another unsuspecting endpoint if it becomes compromised they can then move onto another workstation within the enterprise network. However, even faking lots of users and executing a DoS attack, a single attacker with few computers is still very limited in the amount of traffic they can generate. If the attacks are from multiple sources, it can be difficult for the host to identify and stop them.\nThe scale of DDoS attacks has continued to rise over recent years, by 2016 exceeding a terabit per second. Some common examples of DDoS attacks are UDP flooding, SYN flooding and DNS amplification.\nYo-yo attack.\nA yo-yo attack is a specific type of DoS/DDoS aimed at cloud-hosted applications which use autoscaling. During the attack, an attacker repeatedly changes between sending a lot of traffic (which causes a scale-up) and stopping the burst (causing a scale-down as a result).\nApplication layer attacks.\nAn application layer DDoS attack (sometimes referred to as layer 7 DDoS attack) is a form of DDoS attack where attackers target application-layer processes. The attack over-exercises specific functions or features of a website with the intention to disable those functions or features. This application-layer attack is different from an entire network attack, and is often used against financial institutions to distract IT and security personnel from security breaches. In 2013, application-layer DDoS attacks represented 20% of all DDoS attacks. According to research by Akamai Technologies, there have been \"51 percent more application layer attacks\" from Q4 2013 to Q4 2014 and \"16 percent more\" from Q3 2014 to Q4 2014. In November 2017; Junade Ali, an engineer at Cloudflare noted that whilst network-level attacks continue to be of high capacity, they were occurring less frequently. Ali further noted that although network-level attacks were becoming less frequent, data from Cloudflare demonstrated that application-layer attacks were still showing no sign of slowing down.\nMethod of attack.\nThe simplest DoS attack relies primarily on brute force, flooding the target with an overwhelming flux of packets, oversaturating its connection bandwidth or depleting the target's system resources. Bandwidth-saturating floods rely on the attacker's ability to generate the overwhelming flux of packets. A common way of achieving this today is via distributed denial-of-service, employing a botnet. An application layer DDoS attack is done mainly for specific targeted purposes, including disrupting transactions and access to databases. It requires fewer resources than network layer attacks but often accompanies them. An attack may be disguised to look like legitimate traffic, except it targets specific application packets or functions. The attack on the application layer can disrupt services such as the retrieval of information or search functions on a website.\nAdvanced persistent DoS.\nAn advanced persistent DoS (APDoS) is associated with an advanced persistent threat and requires specialized DDoS mitigation. These attacks can persist for weeks; the longest continuous period noted so far lasted 38 days. This attack involved approximately 50+ petabits (50,000+ terabits) of malicious traffic. Attackers in this scenario may tactically switch between several targets to create a diversion to evade defensive DDoS countermeasures but all the while eventually concentrating the main thrust of the attack onto a single victim. In this scenario, attackers with continuous access to several very powerful network resources are capable of sustaining a prolonged campaign generating enormous levels of unamplified DDoS traffic. APDoS attacks are characterized by:\nDenial-of-service as a service.\nSome vendors provide so-called \"booter\" or \"stresser\" services, which have simple web-based front ends, and accept payment over the web. Marketed and promoted as stress-testing tools, they can be used to perform unauthorized denial-of-service attacks, and allow technically unsophisticated attackers access to sophisticated attack tools. Usually powered by a botnet, the traffic produced by a consumer stresser can range anywhere from 5-50 Gbit/s, which can, in most cases, deny the average home user internet access.\nMarkov-modulated denial-of-service attack.\nA Markov-modulated denial-of-service attack occurs when the attacker disrupts control packets using a hidden Markov model. A setting in which Markov-model based attacks are prevalent is online gaming as the disruption of the control packet undermines game play and system functionality.\nSymptoms.\nThe United States Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) has identified symptoms of a denial-of-service attack to include:\nAttack techniques.\nAttack tools.\nIn cases such as MyDoom and Slowloris, the tools are embedded in malware and launch their attacks without the knowledge of the system owner. Stacheldraht is a classic example of a DDoS tool. It uses a layered structure where the attacker uses a client program to connect to handlers which are compromised systems that issue commands to the zombie agents which in turn facilitate the DDoS attack. Agents are compromised via the handlers by the attacker using automated routines to exploit vulnerabilities in programs that accept remote connections running on the targeted remote hosts. Each handler can control up to a thousand agents.\nIn other cases a machine may become part of a DDoS attack with the owner's consent, for example, in Operation Payback organized by the group Anonymous. The Low Orbit Ion Cannon has typically been used in this way. Along with High Orbit Ion Cannon a wide variety of DDoS tools are available today, including paid and free versions, with different features available. There is an underground market for these in hacker-related forums and IRC channels.\nApplication-layer attacks.\nApplication-layer attacks employ DoS-causing exploits and can cause server-running software to fill the disk space or consume all available memory or CPU time. Attacks may use specific packet types or connection requests to saturate finite resources by, for example, occupying the maximum number of open connections or filling the victim's disk space with logs. An attacker with shell-level access to a victim's computer may slow it until it is unusable or crash it by using a fork bomb. Another kind of application-level DoS attack is XDoS (or XML DoS) which can be controlled by modern web application firewalls (WAFs). All attacks belonging to the category of \"timeout exploiting\".\nSlow DoS attacks implement an application-layer attack. Examples of threats are Slowloris, establishing pending connections with the victim, or SlowDroid, an attack running on mobile devices. Another target of DDoS attacks may be to produce added costs for the application operator, when the latter uses resources based on cloud computing. In this case, normally application-used resources are tied to a needed quality of service (QoS) level (e.g. responses should be less than 200 ms) and this rule is usually linked to automated software (e.g. Amazon CloudWatch) to raise more virtual resources from the provider to meet the defined QoS levels for the increased requests. The main incentive behind such attacks may be to drive the application owner to raise the elasticity levels to handle the increased application traffic, to cause financial losses, or force them to become less competitive. A \"banana attack\" is another particular type of DoS. It involves redirecting outgoing messages from the client back onto the client, preventing outside access, as well as flooding the client with the sent packets. A LAND attack is of this type.\nDegradation-of-service attacks.\nPulsing zombies are compromised computers that are directed to launch intermittent and short-lived floodings of victim websites with the intent of merely slowing it rather than crashing it. This type of attack, referred to as \"degradation-of-service\", can be more difficult to detect and can disrupt and hamper connection to websites for prolonged periods of time, potentially causing more overall disruption than a denial-of-service attack. Exposure of degradation-of-service attacks is complicated further by the matter of discerning whether the server is really being attacked or is experiencing higher than normal legitimate traffic loads.\nDistributed DoS attack.\nIf an attacker mounts an attack from a single host, it would be classified as a DoS attack. Any attack against availability would be classed as a denial-of-service attack. On the other hand, if an attacker uses many systems to simultaneously launch attacks against a remote host, this would be classified as a DDoS attack. Malware can carry DDoS attack mechanisms; one of the better-known examples of this was MyDoom. Its DoS mechanism was triggered on a specific date and time. This type of DDoS involved hardcoding the target IP address before releasing the malware and no further interaction was necessary to launch the attack. A system may also be compromised with a trojan containing a zombie agent. Attackers can also break into systems using automated tools that exploit flaws in programs that listen for connections from remote hosts. This scenario primarily concerns systems acting as servers on the web. Stacheldraht is a classic example of a DDoS tool. It uses a layered structure where the attacker uses a client program to connect to handlers, which are compromised systems that issue commands to the zombie agents, which in turn facilitate the DDoS attack. Agents are compromised via the handlers by the attacker. Each handler can control up to a thousand agents. In some cases a machine may become part of a DDoS attack with the owner's consent, for example, in Operation Payback, organized by the group Anonymous. These attacks can use different types of internet packets such as TCP, UDP, ICMP, etc.\nThese collections of compromised systems are known as botnets. DDoS tools like Stacheldraht still use classic DoS attack methods centered on IP spoofing and amplification like smurf attacks and fraggle attacks (types of bandwidth consumption attacks). SYN floods (a resource starvation attack) may also be used. Newer tools can use DNS servers for DoS purposes. Unlike MyDoom's DDoS mechanism, botnets can be turned against any IP address. Script kiddies use them to deny the availability of well known websites to legitimate users. More sophisticated attackers use DDoS tools for the purposes of extortion\u00a0\u2013 including against their business rivals. It has been reported that there are new attacks from internet of things (IoT) devices that have been involved in denial of service attacks. In one noted attack that was made peaked at around 20,000 requests per second which came from around 900 CCTV cameras. UK's GCHQ has tools built for DDoS, named PREDATORS FACE and ROLLING THUNDER.\nSimple attacks such as SYN floods may appear with a wide range of source IP addresses, giving the appearance of a distributed DoS. These flood attacks do not require completion of the TCP three-way handshake and attempt to exhaust the destination SYN queue or the server bandwidth. Because the source IP addresses can be trivially spoofed, an attack could come from a limited set of sources, or may even originate from a single host. Stack enhancements such as SYN cookies may be effective mitigation against SYN queue flooding but do not address bandwidth exhaustion. In 2022, TCP attacks were the leading method in DDoS incidents, accounting for 63% of all DDoS activity. This includes tactics like TCP SYN, TCP ACK, and TCP floods. With TCP being the most widespread networking protocol, its attacks are expected to remain prevalent in the DDoS threat scene.\nDDoS extortion.\nIn 2015, DDoS botnets such as DD4BC grew in prominence, taking aim at financial institutions. Cyber-extortionists typically begin with a low-level attack and a warning that a larger attack will be carried out if a ransom is not paid in bitcoin. Security experts recommend targeted websites to not pay the ransom. The attackers tend to get into an extended extortion scheme once they recognize that the target is ready to pay.\nHTTP slow POST DoS attack.\nFirst discovered in 2009, the HTTP slow POST attack sends a complete, legitimate HTTP POST header, which includes a \"Content-Length\" field to specify the size of the message body to follow. However, the attacker then proceeds to send the actual message body at an extremely slow rate (e.g. 1 byte/110 seconds). Due to the entire message being correct and complete, the target server will attempt to obey the \"Content-Length\" field in the header, and wait for the entire body of the message to be transmitted, which can take a very long time. The attacker establishes hundreds or even thousands of such connections until all resources for incoming connections on the victim server are exhausted, making any further connections impossible until all data has been sent. It is notable that unlike many other DDoS or DDoS attacks, which try to subdue the server by overloading its network or CPU, an HTTP slow POST attack targets the \"logical\" resources of the victim, which means the victim would still have enough network bandwidth and processing power to operate. Combined with the fact that the Apache HTTP Server will, by default, accept requests up to 2GB in size, this attack can be particularly powerful. HTTP slow POST attacks are difficult to differentiate from legitimate connections and are therefore able to bypass some protection systems. OWASP, an open source web application security project, released a tool to test the security of servers against this type of attack.\nChallenge Collapsar (CC) attack.\nA Challenge Collapsar (CC) attack is an attack where standard HTTP requests are sent to a targeted web server frequently. The Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs) in the requests require complicated time-consuming algorithms or database operations which may exhaust the resources of the targeted web server. In 2004, a Chinese hacker nicknamed KiKi invented a hacking tool to send these kinds of requests to attack a NSFOCUS firewall named Collapsar, and thus the hacking tool was known as Challenge Collapsar, or \"CC\" for short. Consequently, this type of attack got the name \"CC attack\".\nInternet Control Message Protocol (ICMP) flood.\nA smurf attack relies on misconfigured network devices that allow packets to be sent to all computer hosts on a particular network via the broadcast address of the network, rather than a specific machine. The attacker will send large numbers of IP packets with the source address faked to appear to be the address of the victim. Most devices on a network will, by default, respond to this by sending a reply to the source IP address. If the number of machines on the network that receive and respond to these packets is very large, the victim's computer will be flooded with traffic. This overloads the victim's computer and can even make it unusable during such an attack.\nPing flood is based on sending the victim an overwhelming number of ping packets, usually using the \"ping\" command from Unix-like hosts. It is very simple to launch, the primary requirement being access to greater bandwidth than the victim. Ping of death is based on sending the victim a malformed ping packet, which will lead to a system crash on a vulnerable system. The BlackNurse attack is an example of an attack taking advantage of the required Destination Port Unreachable ICMP packets.\nNuke.\nA nuke is an old-fashioned denial-of-service attack against computer networks consisting of fragmented or otherwise invalid ICMP packets sent to the target, achieved by using a modified ping utility to repeatedly send this corrupt data, thus slowing down the affected computer until it comes to a complete stop. A specific example of a nuke attack that gained some prominence is the WinNuke, which exploited the vulnerability in the NetBIOS handler in Windows 95. A string of out-of-band data was sent to TCP port 139 of the victim's machine, causing it to lock up and display a Blue Screen of Death.\nPeer-to-peer attacks.\nAttackers have found a way to exploit a number of bugs in peer-to-peer servers to initiate DDoS attacks. The most aggressive of these peer-to-peer-DDoS attacks exploits DC++. With peer-to-peer there is no botnet and the attacker does not have to communicate with the clients it subverts. Instead, the attacker acts as a \"puppet master\", instructing clients of large peer-to-peer file sharing hubs to disconnect from their peer-to-peer network and to connect to the victim's website instead.\nPermanent denial-of-service attacks.\nPermanent denial-of-service (PDoS), also known loosely as phlashing, is an attack that damages a system so badly that it requires replacement or reinstallation of hardware. Unlike the distributed denial-of-service attack, a PDoS attack exploits security flaws which allow remote administration on the management interfaces of the victim's hardware, such as routers, printers, or other networking hardware. The attacker uses these vulnerabilities to replace a device's firmware with a modified, corrupt, or defective firmware image\u2014a process which when done legitimately is known as \"flashing.\" The intent is to brick the device, rendering it unusable for its original purpose until it can be repaired or replaced. The PDoS is a pure hardware-targeted attack that can be much faster and requires fewer resources than using a botnet in a DDoS attack. Because of these features, and the potential and high probability of security exploits on network-enabled embedded devices, this technique has come to the attention of numerous hacking communities. BrickerBot, a piece of malware that targeted IoT devices, used PDoS attacks to disable its targets. PhlashDance is a tool created by Rich Smith (an employee of Hewlett-Packard's Systems Security Lab) used to detect and demonstrate PDoS vulnerabilities at the 2008 EUSecWest Applied Security Conference in London, UK.\nReflected attack.\nA distributed denial-of-service attack may involve sending forged requests of some type to a very large number of computers that will reply to the requests. Using Internet Protocol address spoofing, the source address is set to that of the targeted victim, which means all the replies will go to (and flood) the target. This reflected attack form is sometimes called a distributed reflective denial-of-service (DRDoS) attack. ICMP echo request attacks (Smurf attacks) can be considered one form of reflected attack, as the flooding hosts send Echo Requests to the broadcast addresses of mis-configured networks, thereby enticing hosts to send Echo Reply packets to the victim. Some early DDoS programs implemented a distributed form of this attack.\nAmplification.\nAmplification attacks are used to magnify the bandwidth that is sent to a victim. Many services can be exploited to act as reflectors, some harder to block than others. US-CERT have observed that different services may result in different amplification factors, as tabulated below:\nDNS amplification attacks involves an attacker sending a DNS name lookup request to one or more public DNS servers, spoofing the source IP address of the targeted victim. The attacker tries to request as much information as possible, thus amplifying the DNS response that is sent to the targeted victim. Since the size of the request is significantly smaller than the response, the attacker is easily able to increase the amount of traffic directed at the target.\nSimple Network Management Protocol (SNMP) and Network Time Protocol (NTP) can also be exploited as reflectors in an amplification attack. An example of an amplified DDoS attack through the NTP is through a command called monlist, which sends the details of the last 600 hosts that have requested the time from the NTP server back to the requester. A small request to this time server can be sent using a spoofed source IP address of some victim, which results in a response 556.9 times the size of the request being sent to the victim. This becomes amplified when using botnets that all send requests with the same spoofed IP source, which will result in a massive amount of data being sent back to the victim. It is very difficult to defend against these types of attacks because the response data is coming from legitimate servers. These attack requests are also sent through UDP, which does not require a connection to the server. This means that the source IP is not verified when a request is received by the server. To bring awareness of these vulnerabilities, campaigns have been started that are dedicated to finding amplification vectors which have led to people fixing their resolvers or having the resolvers shut down completely.\nMirai botnet.\nThe Mirai botnet works by using a computer worm to infect hundreds of thousands of IoT devices across the internet. The worm propagates through networks and systems taking control of poorly protected IoT devices such as thermostats, Wi-Fi-enabled clocks, and washing machines. The owner or user will usually have no immediate indication of when the device becomes infected. The IoT device itself is not the direct target of the attack, it is used as a part of a larger attack. Once the hacker has enslaved the desired number of devices, they instruct the devices to try to contact an ISP. In October 2016, a Mirai botnet attacked Dyn which is the ISP for sites such as Twitter, Netflix, etc. As soon as this occurred, these websites were all unreachable for several hours.\nR-U-Dead-Yet? (RUDY).\nRUDY attack targets web applications by starvation of available sessions on the web server. Much like Slowloris, RUDY keeps sessions at halt using never-ending POST transmissions and sending an arbitrarily large content-length header value.\nSACK Panic.\nManipulating maximum segment size and selective acknowledgement (SACK) may be used by a remote peer to cause a denial of service by an integer overflow in the Linux kernel, potentially causing a kernel panic. Jonathan Looney discovered CVE- on June 17, 2019.\nShrew attack.\nThe shrew attack is a denial-of-service attack on the Transmission Control Protocol where the attacker employs man-in-the-middle techniques. It exploits a weakness in TCP's re-transmission timeout mechanism, using short synchronized bursts of traffic to disrupt TCP connections on the same link.\nSlow read attack.\nA slow read attack sends legitimate application layer requests, but reads responses very slowly, keeping connections open longer hoping to exhaust the server's connection pool. The slow read is achieved by advertising a very small number for the TCP Receive Window size, and at the same time emptying clients' TCP receive buffer slowly, which causes a very low data flow rate.\nSophisticated low-bandwidth Distributed Denial-of-Service Attack.\nA sophisticated low-bandwidth DDoS attack is a form of DoS that uses less traffic and increases its effectiveness by aiming at a weak point in the victim's system design, i.e., the attacker sends traffic consisting of complicated requests to the system. Essentially, a sophisticated DDoS attack is lower in cost due to its use of less traffic, is smaller in size making it more difficult to identify, and it has the ability to hurt systems which are protected by flow control mechanisms.\nSYN flood.\nA SYN flood occurs when a host sends a flood of TCP/SYN packets, often with a forged sender address. Each of these packets is handled like a connection request, causing the server to spawn a half-open connection, send back a TCP/SYN-ACK packet, and wait for a packet in response from the sender address. However, because the sender's address is forged, the response never comes. These half-open connections exhaust the available connections the server can make, keeping it from responding to legitimate requests until after the attack ends.\nTeardrop attacks.\nA teardrop attack involves sending mangled IP fragments with overlapping, oversized payloads to the target machine. This can crash various operating systems because of a bug in their TCP/IP fragmentation re-assembly code. Windows 3.1x, Windows 95 and Windows NT operating systems, as well as versions of Linux prior to versions 2.0.32 and 2.1.63 are vulnerable to this attack. One of the fields in an IP header is the \"fragment offset\" field, indicating the starting position, or offset, of the data contained in a fragmented packet relative to the data in the original packet. If the sum of the offset and size of one fragmented packet differs from that of the next fragmented packet, the packets overlap. When this happens, a server vulnerable to teardrop attacks is unable to reassemble the packets resulting in a denial-of-service condition.\nTelephony denial-of-service.\nVoice over IP has made abusive origination of large numbers of telephone voice calls inexpensive and easily automated while permitting call origins to be misrepresented through caller ID spoofing. According to the US Federal Bureau of Investigation, telephony denial-of-service (TDoS) has appeared as part of various fraudulent schemes:\nTDoS can exist even without Internet telephony. In the 2002 New Hampshire Senate election phone jamming scandal, telemarketers were used to flood political opponents with spurious calls to jam phone banks on election day. Widespread publication of a number can also flood it with enough calls to render it unusable, as happened by accident in 1981 with multiple +1-area code-867-5309 subscribers inundated by hundreds of calls daily in response to the song \"867-5309/Jenny\". TDoS differs from other telephone harassment (such as prank calls and obscene phone calls) by the number of calls originated. By occupying lines continuously with repeated automated calls, the victim is prevented from making or receiving both routine and emergency telephone calls. Related exploits include SMS flooding attacks and black fax or continuous fax transmission by using a loop of paper at the sender.\nTTL expiry attack.\nIt takes more router resources to drop a packet with a TTL value of 1 or less than it does to forward a packet with a higher TTL value. When a packet is dropped due to TTL expiry, the router CPU must generate and send an ICMP time exceeded response. Generating many of these responses can overload the router's CPU.\nUPnP attack.\nA UPnP attack uses an existing vulnerability in Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) protocol to get past network security and flood a target's network and servers. The attack is based on a DNS amplification technique, but the attack mechanism is a UPnP router that forwards requests from one outer source to another. The UPnP router returns the data on an unexpected UDP port from a bogus IP address, making it harder to take simple action to shut down the traffic flood. According to the Imperva researchers, the most effective way to stop this attack is for companies to lock down UPnP routers.\nSSDP reflection attack.\nIn 2014, it was discovered that Simple Service Discovery Protocol (SSDP) was being used in DDoS attacks known as an SSDP reflection attac\"k\" \"with amplification\". Many devices, including some residential routers, have a vulnerability in the UPnP software that allows an attacker to get replies from UDP port 1900 to a destination address of their choice. With a botnet of thousands of devices, the attackers can generate sufficient packet rates and occupy bandwidth to saturate links, causing the denial of services. Because of this weakness, the network company Cloudflare has described SSDP as the \"Stupidly Simple DDoS Protocol\".\nARP spoofing.\nARP spoofing is a common DoS attack that involves a vulnerability in the ARP protocol that allows an attacker to associate their MAC address to the IP address of another computer or gateway, causing traffic intended for the original authentic IP to be re-routed to that of the attacker, causing a denial of service.\nDefense techniques.\nDefensive responses to denial-of-service attacks typically involve the use of a combination of attack detection, traffic classification and response tools, aiming to block traffic the tools identify as illegitimate and allow traffic that they identify as legitimate. A list of response tools include the following.\nUpstream filtering.\nAll traffic destined to the victim is diverted to pass through a \"cleaning center\" or a \"scrubbing center\" via various methods such as: changing the victim IP address in the DNS system, tunneling methods (GRE/VRF, MPLS, SDN), proxies, digital cross connects, or even direct circuits. The cleaning center separates \"bad\" traffic (DDoS and also other common internet attacks) and only passes good legitimate traffic to the victim server. The victim needs central connectivity to the Internet to use this kind of service unless they happen to be located within the same facility as the cleaning center. DDoS attacks can overwhelm any type of hardware firewall, and passing malicious traffic through large and mature networks becomes more and more effective and economically sustainable against DDoS.\nApplication front end hardware.\nApplication front-end hardware is intelligent hardware placed on the network before traffic reaches the servers. It can be used on networks in conjunction with routers and switches and as part of bandwidth management. Application front-end hardware analyzes data packets as they enter the network, and identifies and drops dangerous or suspicious flows.\nApplication level key completion indicators.\nApproaches to detection of DDoS attacks against cloud-based applications may be based on an application layer analysis, indicating whether incoming bulk traffic is legitimate. These approaches mainly rely on an identified path of value inside the application and monitor the progress of requests on this path, through markers called \"key completion indicators\". In essence, these techniques are statistical methods of assessing the behavior of incoming requests to detect if something unusual or abnormal is going on. An analogy is to a brick-and-mortar department store where customers spend, on average, a known percentage of their time on different activities such as picking up items and examining them, putting them back, filling a basket, waiting to pay, paying, and leaving. If a mob of customers arrived in the store and spent all their time picking up items and putting them back, but never made any purchases, this could be flagged as unusual behavior.\nBlackholing and sinkholing.\nWith blackhole routing, all the traffic to the attacked DNS or IP address is sent to a \"black hole\" (null interface or a non-existent server). To be more efficient and avoid affecting network connectivity, it can be managed by the ISP. A DNS sinkhole routes traffic to a valid IP address which analyzes traffic and rejects bad packets. Sinkholing may not be efficient for severe attacks.\nIPS based prevention.\nIntrusion prevention systems (IPS) are effective if the attacks have signatures associated with them. However, the trend among attacks is to have legitimate content but bad intent. Intrusion-prevention systems that work on content recognition cannot block behavior-based DoS attacks. An ASIC based IPS may detect and block denial-of-service attacks because they have the processing power and the granularity to analyze the attacks and act like a circuit breaker in an automated way.\nDDS based defense.\nMore focused on the problem than IPS, a DoS defense system (DDS) can block connection-based DoS attacks and those with legitimate content but bad intent. A DDS can also address both protocol attacks (such as teardrop and ping of death) and rate-based attacks (such as ICMP floods and SYN floods). DDS has a purpose-built system that can easily identify and obstruct denial of service attacks at a greater speed than a software-based system.\nFirewalls.\nIn the case of a simple attack, a firewall can be adjusted to deny all incoming traffic from the attackers, based on protocols, ports, or the originating IP addresses. More complex attacks will however be hard to block with simple rules: for example, if there is an ongoing attack on port 80 (web service), it is not possible to drop all incoming traffic on this port because doing so will prevent the server from receiving and serving legitimate traffic. Additionally, firewalls may be too deep in the network hierarchy, with routers being adversely affected before the traffic gets to the firewall. Also, many security tools still do not support IPv6 or may not be configured properly, so the firewalls may be bypassed during the attacks.\nRouters.\nSimilar to switches, routers have some rate-limiting and ACL capabilities. They, too, are manually set. Most routers can be easily overwhelmed under a DoS attack. Nokia SR-OS using FP4 or FP5 processors offers DDoS protection. Nokia SR-OS also uses big data analytics-based Nokia Deepfield Defender for DDoS protection. Cisco IOS has optional features that can reduce the impact of flooding.\nSwitches.\nMost switches have some rate-limiting and ACL capability. Some switches provide automatic or system-wide rate limiting, traffic shaping, delayed binding (TCP splicing), deep packet inspection and bogon filtering (bogus IP filtering) to detect and remediate DoS attacks through automatic rate filtering and WAN Link failover and balancing. These schemes will work as long as the DoS attacks can be prevented by using them. For example, SYN flood can be prevented using delayed binding or TCP splicing. Similarly, content-based DoS may be prevented using deep packet inspection. Attacks using Martian packets can be prevented using bogon filtering. Automatic rate filtering can work as long as set rate thresholds have been set correctly. WAN-link failover will work as long as both links have a DoS prevention mechanism.\nBlocking vulnerable ports.\nThreats may be associated with specific TCP or UDP port numbers. Blocking these ports at the firewall can mitigate an attack. For example, in an SSDP reflection attack, the key mitigation is to block incoming UDP traffic on port 1900.\nBlocking based on TTL.\nBlocking specific Time to live (TTL) values based on the network path length can be a viable option for blocking spoofed attacks.\nUnintentional denial-of-service.\nAn unintentional denial-of-service can occur when a system ends up denied, not due to a deliberate attack by a single individual or group of individuals, but simply due to a sudden enormous spike in popularity. This can happen when an extremely popular website posts a prominent link to a second, less well-prepared site, for example, as part of a news story. The result is that a significant proportion of the primary site's regular users\u00a0\u2013 potentially hundreds of thousands of people\u00a0\u2013 click that link in the space of a few hours, having the same effect on the target website as a DDoS attack. A VIPDoS is the same, but specifically when the link was posted by a celebrity. When Michael Jackson died in 2009, websites such as Google and Twitter slowed down or even crashed. Many sites' servers thought the requests were from a virus or spyware trying to cause a denial-of-service attack, warning users that their queries looked like \"automated requests from a computer virus or spyware application\".\nNews sites and link sites\u00a0\u2013 sites whose primary function is to provide links to interesting content elsewhere on the Internet\u00a0\u2013 are most likely to cause this phenomenon. The canonical example is the Slashdot effect when receiving traffic from Slashdot. It is also known as \"the Reddit hug of death\" and \"the Digg effect\".\nSimilar unintentional denial-of-service can also occur via other media, e.g. when a URL is mentioned on television. In March 2014, after Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 went missing, DigitalGlobe launched a crowdsourcing service on which users could help search for the missing jet in satellite images. The response overwhelmed the company's servers. An unintentional denial-of-service may also result from a prescheduled event created by the website itself, as was the case of the Census in Australia in 2016.\nLegal action has been taken in at least one such case. In 2006, Universal Tube &amp; Rollform Equipment Corporation sued YouTube: massive numbers of would-be YouTube.com users accidentally typed the tube company's URL, utube.com. As a result, the tube company ended up having to spend large amounts of money on upgrading its bandwidth. \nRouters have also been known to create unintentional DoS attacks, as both D-Link and Netgear routers have overloaded NTP servers by flooding them without respecting the restrictions of client types or geographical limitations.\nSide effects of attacks.\nBackscatter.\nIn computer network security, backscatter is a side-effect of a spoofed denial-of-service attack. In this kind of attack, the attacker spoofs the source address in IP packets sent to the victim. In general, the victim machine cannot distinguish between the spoofed packets and legitimate packets, so the victim responds to the spoofed packets as it normally would. These response packets are known as backscatter.\nIf the attacker is spoofing source addresses randomly, the backscatter response packets from the victim will be sent back to random destinations. This effect can be used by network telescopes as indirect evidence of such attacks. The term \"backscatter analysis\" refers to observing backscatter packets arriving at a statistically significant portion of the IP address space to determine the characteristics of DoS attacks and victims.\nLegality.\nMany jurisdictions have laws under which denial-of-service attacks are illegal. UNCTAD highlights that 156 countries, or 80% globally, have enacted cybercrime laws to combat its widespread impact. Adoption rates vary by region, with Europe at a 91% rate, and Africa at 72%.\nIn the US, denial-of-service attacks may be considered a federal crime under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act with penalties that include years of imprisonment. The Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section of the US Department of Justice handles cases of DoS and DDoS. In one example, in July 2019, Austin Thompson, aka DerpTrolling, was sentenced to 27 months in prison and $95,000 restitution by a federal court for conducting multiple DDoS attacks on major video gaming companies, disrupting their systems from hours to days.\nIn European countries, committing criminal denial-of-service attacks may, as a minimum, lead to arrest. The United Kingdom is unusual in that it specifically outlawed denial-of-service attacks and set a maximum penalty of 10 years in prison with the Police and Justice Act 2006, which amended Section 3 of the Computer Misuse Act 1990.\nIn January 2019, Europol announced that \"actions are currently underway worldwide to track down the users\" of Webstresser.org, a former DDoS marketplace that was shut down in April 2018 as part of Operation PowerOFF. Europol said UK police were conducting a number of \"live operations\" targeting over 250 users of Webstresser and other DDoS services.\nOn January 7, 2013, Anonymous posted a petition on the whitehouse.gov site asking that DDoS be recognized as a legal form of protest similar to the Occupy movement, the claim being that the similarity in the purpose of both is same.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39777", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39777", "title": "Natural Language Processing", "text": ""}
{"id": "39780", "revid": "23235884", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39780", "title": "Glome", "text": ""}
{"id": "39781", "revid": "2707674", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39781", "title": "Simplex", "text": "Multi-dimensional generalization of triangle\nIn geometry, a simplex (plural: simplexes or simplices) is a generalization of the notion of a triangle or tetrahedron to arbitrary dimensions. The simplex is so-named because it represents the simplest possible polytope in any given dimension. For example,\nSpecifically, a k-simplex is a k-dimensional polytope that is the convex hull of its \"k\" + 1 vertices. More formally, suppose the \"k\" + 1 points formula_1 are affinely independent, which means that the k vectors formula_2 are linearly independent. Then, the simplex determined by them is the set of points\nformula_3\nA regular simplex is a simplex that is also a regular polytope. A regular k-simplex may be constructed from a regular (\"k\" \u2212 1)-simplex by connecting a new vertex to all original vertices by the common edge length.\nThe standard simplex or probability simplex is the k-dimensional simplex whose vertices are the \"k\" + 1 standard unit vectors in formula_4 or, in other words,\nformula_5\nIn topology and combinatorics, it is common to \"glue together\" simplices to form a simplicial complex. \nThe geometric simplex and simplicial complex should not be confused with the abstract simplicial complex, in which a simplex is simply a finite set and the complex is a family of such sets that is closed under taking subsets.\nHistory.\nThe concept of a simplex was known to William Kingdon Clifford, who wrote about these shapes in 1886 but called them \"prime confines\". \nHenri Poincar\u00e9, writing about algebraic topology in 1900, called them \"generalized tetrahedra\".\nIn 1902 Pieter Hendrik Schoute described the concept first with the Latin superlative \"simplicissimum\" (\"simplest\") and then with the same Latin adjective in the normal form \"simplex\" (\"simple\").\nThe regular simplex family is the first of three regular polytope families, labeled by Donald Coxeter as \"\u03b1\"\"n\", the other two being the cross-polytope family, labeled as \"\u03b2\"\"n\", and the hypercubes, labeled as \"\u03b3\"\"n\". A fourth family, the tessellation of n-dimensional space by infinitely many hypercubes, he labeled as \"\u03b4\"\"n\".\nElements.\nThe convex hull of any nonempty subset of the \"n\" + 1 points that define an n-simplex is called a face of the simplex. Faces are simplices themselves. In particular, the convex hull of a subset of size \"m\" + 1 (of the \"n\" + 1 defining points) is an m-simplex, called an m-face of the n-simplex. The 0-faces (i.e., the defining points themselves as sets of size 1) are called the vertices (singular: vertex), the 1-faces are called the edges, the (\"n\" \u2212 1)-faces are called the facets, and the sole n-face is the whole n-simplex itself. In general, the number of m-faces is equal to the binomial coefficient formula_6. Consequently, the number of m-faces of an n-simplex may be found in column (\"m\" + 1) of row (\"n\" + 1) of Pascal's triangle. A simplex A is a coface of a simplex B if B is a face of A. \"Face\" and \"facet\" can have different meanings when describing types of simplices in a simplicial complex.\nThe extended f-vector for an n-simplex can be computed by (1,1)\"n\"+1, like the coefficients of polynomial products. For example, a 7-simplex is (1,1)8 = (1,2,1)4 = (1,4,6,4,1)2 = (1,8,28,56,70,56,28,8,1).\nThe number of 1-faces (edges) of the n-simplex is the n-th triangle number, the number of 2-faces of the n-simplex is the (\"n\" \u2212 1)th tetrahedron number, the number of 3-faces of the n-simplex is the (\"n\" \u2212 2)th 5-cell number, and so on.\nAn n-simplex is the polytope with the fewest vertices that requires n dimensions. Consider a line segment \"AB\" as a shape in a 1-dimensional space (the 1-dimensional space is the line in which the segment lies). One can place a new point C somewhere off the line. The new shape, triangle \"ABC\", requires two dimensions; it cannot fit in the original 1-dimensional space. The triangle is the 2-simplex, a simple shape that requires two dimensions. Consider a triangle \"ABC\", a shape in a 2-dimensional space (the plane in which the triangle resides). One can place a new point D somewhere off the plane. The new shape, tetrahedron \"ABCD\", requires three dimensions; it cannot fit in the original 2-dimensional space. The tetrahedron is the 3-simplex, a simple shape that requires three dimensions. Consider tetrahedron \"ABCD\", a shape in a 3-dimensional space (the 3-space in which the tetrahedron lies). One can place a new point E somewhere outside the 3-space. The new shape \"ABCDE\", called a 5-cell, requires four dimensions and is called the 4-simplex; it cannot fit in the original 3-dimensional space. (It also cannot be visualized easily.) This idea can be generalized, that is, adding a single new point outside the currently occupied space, which requires going to the next higher dimension to hold the new shape. This idea can also be worked backward: the line segment we started with is a simple shape that requires a 1-dimensional space to hold it; the line segment is the 1-simplex. The line segment itself was formed by starting with a single point in 0-dimensional space (this initial point is the 0-simplex) and adding a second point, which required the increase to 1-dimensional space. \nMore formally, an (\"n\" + 1)-simplex can be constructed as a join (\u2228 operator) of an n-simplex and a point,\u00a0( ). An (\"m\" + \"n\" + 1)-simplex can be constructed as a join of an m-simplex and an n-simplex. The two simplices are oriented to be completely normal from each other, with translation in a direction orthogonal to both of them. A 1-simplex is the join of two points: ( ) \u2228 ( ) = 2 \u22c5 ( ). A general 2-simplex (scalene triangle) is the join of three points: ( ) \u2228 ( ) \u2228 ( ). An isosceles triangle is the join of a 1-simplex and a point: {} \u2228 ( ). An equilateral triangle is 3 \u22c5 (\u00a0) or\u00a0{3}. A general 3-simplex is the join of 4 points: ( ) \u2228 ( ) \u2228 ( ) \u2228 ( ). A 3-simplex with mirror symmetry can be expressed as the join of an edge and two points: {} \u2228 ( ) \u2228 ( ). A 3-simplex with triangular symmetry can be expressed as the join of an equilateral triangle and 1 point: 3.( )\u2228( ) or {3}\u2228( ). A regular tetrahedron is 4 \u22c5 ( ) or {3,3} and so on.\nIn some conventions, the empty set is defined to be a (\u22121)-simplex. The definition of the simplex above still makes sense if \"n\" = \u22121. This convention is more common in applications to algebraic topology (such as simplicial homology) than to the study of polytopes.\nSymmetric graphs of regular simplices.\nThese Petrie polygons (skew orthogonal projections) show all the vertices of the regular simplex on a circle, and all vertex pairs connected by edges.\nStandard simplex.\nThe standard n-simplex (or unit n-simplex) is the subset of R\"n\"+1 given by\n formula_7.\nThe simplex \u0394\"n\" lies in the affine hyperplane obtained by removing the restriction \"t\"\"i\" \u2265 0 in the above definition.\nThe \"n\" + 1 vertices of the standard n-simplex are the points \"e\"\"i\" \u2208 R\"n\"+1, where\n \"e\"0 = (1, 0, 0, ..., 0),\n \"e\"1 = (0, 1, 0, ..., 0),\n \"e\"\"n\" = (0, 0, 0, ..., 1).\nA \"standard simplex\" is an example of a 0/1-polytope, with all coordinates as 0 or 1. It can also be seen one facet of a regular (\"n\" + 1)-orthoplex.\nThere is a canonical map from the standard n-simplex to an arbitrary n-simplex with vertices (\"v\"0, ..., \"v\"\"n\") given by\n formula_8\nThe coefficients \"t\"\"i\" are called the barycentric coordinates of a point in the n-simplex. Such a general simplex is often called an affine n-simplex, to emphasize that the canonical map is an affine transformation. It is also sometimes called an oriented affine n-simplex to emphasize that the canonical map may be orientation preserving or reversing.\nMore generally, there is a canonical map from the standard formula_9-simplex (with n vertices) onto any polytope with n vertices, given by the same equation (modifying indexing):\n formula_10\nThese are known as generalized barycentric coordinates, and express every polytope as the \"image\" of a simplex: formula_11\nA commonly used function from R\"n\" to the interior of the standard formula_9-simplex is the softmax function, or normalized exponential function; this generalizes the standard logistic function.\nIncreasing coordinates.\nAn alternative coordinate system is given by taking the indefinite sum:\n formula_13\nThis yields the alternative presentation by \"order,\" namely as nondecreasing n-tuples between 0 and 1:\n formula_14\nGeometrically, this is an n-dimensional subset of formula_15 (maximal dimension, codimension 0) rather than of formula_16 (codimension 1). The facets, which on the standard simplex correspond to one coordinate vanishing, formula_17 here correspond to successive coordinates being equal, formula_18 while the interior corresponds to the inequalities becoming \"strict\" (increasing sequences).\nA key distinction between these presentations is the behavior under permuting coordinates \u2013 the standard simplex is stabilized by permuting coordinates, while permuting elements of the \"ordered simplex\" do not leave it invariant, as permuting an ordered sequence generally makes it unordered. Indeed, the ordered simplex is a (closed) fundamental domain for the action of the symmetric group on the n-cube, meaning that the orbit of the ordered simplex under the n! elements of the symmetric group divides the n-cube into formula_19 mostly disjoint simplices (disjoint except for boundaries), showing that this simplex has volume 1/\"n\"!. Alternatively, the volume can be computed by an iterated integral, whose successive integrands are 1, x, \"x\"2/2, \"x\"3/3!, ..., \"x\"\"n\"/\"n\"!.\nA further property of this presentation is that it uses the order but not addition, and thus can be defined in any dimension over any ordered set, and for example can be used to define an infinite-dimensional simplex without issues of convergence of sums.\nProjection onto the standard simplex.\nEspecially in numerical applications of probability theory, a projection onto the standard simplex is of interest. Given\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, possibly with coordinates that are negative or in excess of\u00a01, the closest point\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; on the simplex has coordinates \n formula_20\nwhere\u00a0formula_21 is chosen such that\u00a0formula_22\nformula_21 can be easily calculated from sorting the coordinates of\u00a0&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe sorting approach takes\u00a0formula_24 complexity, which can be improved to\u00a0O(\"n\") complexity via median-finding algorithms. Projecting onto the simplex is computationally similar to projecting onto the formula_25 ball. Also see Integer programming.\nCorner of cube.\nFinally, a simple variant is to replace \"summing to 1\" with \"summing to at most 1\"; this raises the dimension by 1, so to simplify notation, the indexing changes:\n formula_26\nThis yields an n-simplex as a corner of the n-cube, and is a standard orthogonal simplex. This is the simplex used in the simplex method, which is based at the origin, and locally models a vertex on a polytope with n facets.\nCartesian coordinates for a regular n-dimensional simplex in R\"n\".\nOne way to write down a regular n-simplex in R\"n\" is to choose two points to be the first two vertices, choose a third point to make an equilateral triangle, choose a fourth point to make a regular tetrahedron, and so on. Each step requires satisfying equations that ensure that each newly chosen vertex, together with the previously chosen vertices, forms a regular simplex. There are several sets of equations that can be written down and used for this purpose. These include the equality of all the distances between vertices; the equality of all the distances from vertices to the center of the simplex; the fact that the angle subtended through the new vertex by any two previously chosen vertices is formula_27; and the fact that the angle subtended through the center of the simplex by any two vertices is formula_28.\nIt is also possible to directly write down a particular regular n-simplex in R\"n\" which can then be translated, rotated, and scaled as desired. One way to do this is as follows. Denote the basis vectors of R\"n\" by e1 through e\"n\". Begin with the standard (\"n\" \u2212 1)-simplex which is the convex hull of the basis vectors. By adding an additional vertex, these become a face of a regular n-simplex. The additional vertex must lie on the line perpendicular to the barycenter of the standard simplex, so it has the form (\"\u03b1\"/\"n\", ..., \"\u03b1\"/\"n\") for some real number \u03b1. Since the squared distance between two basis vectors is 2, in order for the additional vertex to form a regular n-simplex, the squared distance between it and any of the basis vectors must also be 2. This yields a quadratic equation for \u03b1. Solving this equation shows that there are two choices for the additional vertex:\n formula_29\nEither of these, together with the standard basis vectors, yields a regular n-simplex.\nThe above regular n-simplex is not centered on the origin. It can be translated to the origin by subtracting the mean of its vertices. By rescaling, it can be given unit side length. This results in the simplex whose vertices are:\n formula_30\nfor formula_31, and\n formula_32\nNote that there are two sets of vertices described here. One set uses formula_33 in each calculation. The other set uses formula_34 in each calculation.\nThis simplex is inscribed in a hypersphere of radius formula_35.\nA different rescaling produces a simplex that is inscribed in a unit hypersphere. When this is done, its vertices are\n formula_36\nwhere formula_31, and\n formula_38\nThe side length of this simplex is formula_39.\nA highly symmetric way to construct a regular n-simplex is to use a representation of the cyclic group Z\"n\"+1 by orthogonal matrices. This is an \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" orthogonal matrix Q such that \"Q\"\"n\"+1 = \"I\" is the identity matrix, but no lower power of Q is. Applying powers of this matrix to an appropriate vector v will produce the vertices of a regular n-simplex. To carry this out, first observe that for any orthogonal matrix Q, there is a choice of basis in which Q is a block diagonal matrix\n formula_40\nwhere each \"Q\"\"i\" is orthogonal and either 2 \u00d7 2 or 1 \u00d7 1. In order for Q to have order \"n\" + 1, all of these matrices must have order dividing \"n\" + 1. Therefore each \"Q\"\"i\" is either a 1 \u00d7 1 matrix whose only entry is 1 or, if n is odd, \u22121; or it is a 2 \u00d7 2 matrix of the form\n formula_41\nwhere each \"\u03c9\"\"i\" is an integer between zero and n inclusive. A sufficient condition for the orbit of a point to be a regular simplex is that the matrices \"Q\"\"i\" form a basis for the non-trivial irreducible real representations of Z\"n\"+1, and the vector being rotated is not stabilized by any of them.\nIn practical terms, for n even this means that every matrix \"Q\"\"i\" is 2 \u00d7 2, there is an equality of sets\n formula_42\nand, for every \"Q\"\"i\", the entries of v upon which \"Q\"\"i\" acts are not both zero. For example, when \"n\" = 4, one possible matrix is\n formula_43\nApplying this to the vector (1, 0, 1, 0) results in the simplex whose vertices are\n formula_44\neach of which has distance \u221a5 from the others.\nWhen n is odd, the condition means that exactly one of the diagonal blocks is 1 \u00d7 1, equal to \u22121, and acts upon a non-zero entry of v; while the remaining diagonal blocks, say \"Q\"1, ..., \"Q\"(\"n\" \u2212 1) / 2, are 2 \u00d7 2, there is an equality of sets\n formula_45\nand each diagonal block acts upon a pair of entries of v which are not both zero. So, for example, when \"n\" = 3, the matrix can be\n formula_46\nFor the vector , the resulting simplex has vertices\n formula_47\neach of which has distance 2 from the others.\nGeometric properties.\nVolume.\nThe volume of an n-simplex in n-dimensional space with vertices (\"v\"0, ..., \"v\"\"n\") is\n formula_48\nwhere each column of the \"n\" \u00d7 \"n\" determinant is a vector that points from vertex \"v\"0 to another vertex \"v\"\"k\". This formula is particularly useful when formula_49 is the origin.\nThe expression\n formula_50\nemploys a Gram determinant and works even when the n-simplex's vertices are in a Euclidean space with more than n dimensions, e.g., a triangle in formula_51. \nA more symmetric way to compute the volume of an n-simplex in formula_15 is\n formula_53\nAnother common way of computing the volume of the simplex is via the Cayley\u2013Menger determinant, which works even when the n-simplex's vertices are in a Euclidean space with more than n dimensions.\nWithout the 1/\"n\"! it is the formula for the volume of an n-parallelotope. \nThis can be understood as follows: Assume that P is an n-parallelotope constructed on a basis formula_54 of formula_15.\nGiven a permutation formula_56 of formula_57, call a list of vertices formula_58 a n-path if \n formula_59 \n(so there are \"n\"! n-paths and formula_60 does not depend on the permutation). The following assertions hold:\nIf P is the unit n-hypercube, then the union of the n-simplexes formed by the convex hull of each n-path is P, and these simplexes are congruent and pairwise non-overlapping. In particular, the volume of such a simplex is\n formula_61\nIf P is a general parallelotope, the same assertions hold except that it is no longer true, in dimension\u00a0&gt; 2, that the simplexes need to be pairwise congruent; yet their volumes remain equal, because the n-parallelotope is the image of the unit n-hypercube by the linear isomorphism that sends the canonical basis of formula_15 to formula_63. As previously, this implies that the volume of a simplex coming from a n-path is:\n formula_64\nConversely, given an n-simplex formula_65 of formula_66, it can be supposed that the vectors formula_67 form a basis of formula_66. Considering the parallelotope constructed from formula_49 and formula_63, one sees that the previous formula is valid for every simplex.\nFinally, the formula at the beginning of this section is obtained by observing that \n formula_71\nFrom this formula, it follows immediately that the volume under a standard n-simplex (i.e. between the origin and the simplex in R\"n\"+1) is\n formula_72\nThe volume of a regular n-simplex with unit side length is\n formula_73\nas can be seen by multiplying the previous formula by \"x\"\"n\"+1, to get the volume under the n-simplex as a function of its vertex distance x from the origin, differentiating with respect to x, at formula_74\u00a0 (where the n-simplex side length is 1), and normalizing by the length formula_75 of the increment, formula_76, along the normal vector.\nDihedral angles of the regular \"n\"-simplex.\nAny two (\"n\" \u2212 1)-dimensional faces of a regular n-dimensional simplex are themselves regular (\"n\" \u2212 1)-dimensional simplices, and they have the same dihedral angle of cos\u22121(1/\"n\"). \nThis can be seen by noting that the center of the standard simplex is formula_77, and the centers of its faces are coordinate permutations of formula_78. Then, by symmetry, the vector pointing from formula_77 to formula_78 is perpendicular to the faces. So the vectors normal to the faces are permutations of formula_81, from which the dihedral angles are calculated.\nSimplices with an \"orthogonal corner\".\nAn \"orthogonal corner\" means here that there is a vertex at which all adjacent edges are pairwise orthogonal. It immediately follows that all adjacent faces are pairwise orthogonal. Such simplices are generalizations of right triangles and for them there exists an n-dimensional version of the Pythagorean theorem: The sum of the squared (\"n\" \u2212 1)-dimensional volumes of the facets adjacent to the orthogonal corner equals the squared (\"n\" \u2212 1)-dimensional volume of the facet opposite of the orthogonal corner.\n formula_82\nwhere formula_83 are facets being pairwise orthogonal to each other but not orthogonal to formula_84, which is the facet opposite the orthogonal corner.\nFor a 2-simplex, the theorem is the Pythagorean theorem for triangles with a right angle and for a 3-simplex it is de Gua's theorem for a tetrahedron with an orthogonal corner.\nRelation to the (\"n\" + 1)-hypercube.\nThe Hasse diagram of the face lattice of an n-simplex is isomorphic to the graph of the (\"n\" + 1)-hypercube's edges, with the hypercube's vertices mapping to each of the n-simplex's elements, including the entire simplex and the null polytope as the extreme points of the lattice (mapped to two opposite vertices on the hypercube). This fact may be used to efficiently enumerate the simplex's face lattice, since more general face lattice enumeration algorithms are more computationally expensive.\nThe n-simplex is also the vertex figure of the (\"n\" + 1)-hypercube. It is also the facet of the (\"n\" + 1)-orthoplex.\nTopology.\nTopologically, an n-simplex is equivalent to an n-ball. Every n-simplex is an n-dimensional manifold with corners.\nProbability.\nIn probability theory, the points of the standard n-simplex in (\"n\" + 1)-space form the space of possible probability distributions on a finite set consisting of \"n\" + 1 possible outcomes. The correspondence is as follows: For each distribution described as an ordered (\"n\" + 1)-tuple of probabilities whose sum is (necessarily) 1, we associate the point of the simplex whose barycentric coordinates are precisely those probabilities. That is, the kth vertex of the simplex is assigned to have the kth probability of the (\"n\" + 1)-tuple as its barycentric coefficient. This correspondence is an affine homeomorphism.\nAitchison geometry.\nAitchinson geometry is a natural way to construct an inner product space from the standard simplex formula_85. It defines the following operations on simplices and real numbers:\n formula_86\n formula_87\n formula_88\nCompounds.\nSince all simplices are self-dual, they can form a series of compounds;\nAlgebraic topology.\nIn algebraic topology, simplices are used as building blocks to construct an interesting class of topological spaces called simplicial complexes. These spaces are built from simplices glued together in a combinatorial fashion. Simplicial complexes are used to define a certain kind of homology called simplicial homology.\nA finite set of k-simplexes embedded in an open subset of R\"n\" is called an affine k-chain. The simplexes in a chain need not be unique; they may occur with multiplicity. Rather than using standard set notation to denote an affine chain, it is instead the standard practice to use plus signs to separate each member in the set. If some of the simplexes have the opposite orientation, these are prefixed by a minus sign. If some of the simplexes occur in the set more than once, these are prefixed with an integer count. Thus, an affine chain takes the symbolic form of a sum with integer coefficients.\nNote that each facet of an n-simplex is an affine (\"n\" \u2212 1)-simplex, and thus the boundary of an n-simplex is an affine (\"n\" \u2212 1)-chain. Thus, if we denote one positively oriented affine simplex as\n formula_89\nwith the formula_90 denoting the vertices, then the boundary formula_91 of \u03c3 is the chain\n formula_92\nIt follows from this expression, and the linearity of the boundary operator, that the boundary of the boundary of a simplex is zero:\n formula_93\nLikewise, the boundary of the boundary of a chain is zero: formula_94.\nMore generally, a simplex (and a chain) can be embedded into a manifold by means of smooth, differentiable map formula_95. In this case, both the summation convention for denoting the set, and the boundary operation commute with the embedding. That is,\n formula_96\nwhere the formula_97 are the integers denoting orientation and multiplicity. For the boundary operator formula_98, one has:\n formula_99\nwhere \u03c1 is a chain. The boundary operation commutes with the mapping because, in the end, the chain is defined as a set and little more, and the set operation always commutes with the map operation (by definition of a map).\nA continuous map formula_100 to a topological space X is frequently referred to as a singular n-simplex. (A map is generally called \"singular\" if it fails to have some desirable property such as continuity and, in this case, the term is meant to reflect to the fact that the continuous map need not be an embedding.)\nAlgebraic geometry.\nSince classical algebraic geometry allows one to talk about polynomial equations but not inequalities, the \"algebraic standard n-simplex\" is commonly defined as the subset of affine (\"n\" + 1)-dimensional space, where all coordinates sum up to 1 (thus leaving out the inequality part). The algebraic description of this set is\nformula_101\nwhich equals the scheme-theoretic description formula_102 with\nformula_103\nthe ring of regular functions on the algebraic n-simplex (for any ring formula_104).\nBy using the same definitions as for the classical n-simplex, the n-simplices for different dimensions n assemble into one simplicial object, while the rings formula_105 assemble into one cosimplicial object formula_106 (in the category of schemes resp. rings, since the face and degeneracy maps are all polynomial).\nThe algebraic n-simplices are used in higher \"K\"-theory and in the definition of higher Chow groups.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39782", "revid": "50691596", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39782", "title": "N-sphere", "text": "Generalized sphere of dimension n (mathematics)\nIn mathematics, an n-sphere or hypersphere is an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional generalization of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional circle and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional sphere to any non-negative integer &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;.\nThe circle is considered 1-dimensional and the sphere 2-dimensional because a point within them has one and two degrees of freedom respectively. However, the typical embedding of the 1-dimensional circle is in 2-dimensional space, the 2-dimensional sphere is usually depicted embedded in 3-dimensional space, and a general &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is embedded in an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional space. The term \"hyper\"sphere is commonly used to distinguish spheres of dimension &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; which are thus embedded in a space of dimension &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which means that they cannot be easily visualized. The &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is the setting for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional spherical geometry.\nConsidered extrinsically, as a hypersurface embedded in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space, an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is the locus of points at equal distance (the \"radius\") from a given \"center\" point. Its interior, consisting of all points closer to the center than the radius, is an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional ball. In particular:\nGiven a Cartesian coordinate system, the \"unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere\" of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be defined as:\nformula_1\nConsidered intrinsically, when &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is a Riemannian manifold of positive constant curvature, and is orientable. The geodesics of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere are called great circles.\nThe stereographic projection maps the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere onto &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-space with a single adjoined point at infinity; under the metric thereby defined, formula_2 is a model for the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere.\nIn the more general setting of topology, any topological space that is homeomorphic to the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is called an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-\"sphere\". Under inverse stereographic projection, the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is the one-point compactification of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-space. The &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-spheres admit several other topological descriptions: for example, they can be constructed by gluing two &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional spaces together, by identifying the boundary of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-cube with a point, or (inductively) by forming the suspension of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere. When &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; it is simply connected; the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere (circle) is not simply connected; the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is not even connected, consisting of two discrete points.\nDescription.\nFor any natural number &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is defined as the set of points in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space that are at distance &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; from some fixed point &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, where &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; may be any positive real number and where &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; may be any point in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional space. In particular:\nCartesian coordinates.\nThe set of points in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-space, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, that define an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, is represented by the equation:\nformula_3\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a center point, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the radius.\nThe above &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere exists in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space and is an example of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-manifold. The volume form &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is given by\nformula_4\nwhere formula_5 is the Hodge star operator; see for a discussion and proof of this formula in the case &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. As a result,\nformula_6\n\"n\"-ball.\nThe space enclosed by an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is called an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball. An &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball is closed if it includes the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, and it is open if it does not include the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere.\nSpecifically:\nTopological description.\nTopologically, an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere can be constructed as a one-point compactification of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space. Briefly, the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere can be described as &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, which is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space plus a single point representing infinity in all directions.\nIn particular, if a single point is removed from an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, it becomes homeomorphic to formula_7. This forms the basis for stereographic projection.\nVolume and area.\nLet &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; be the surface area of the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; embedded in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space, and let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; be the volume of its interior, the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball. The surface area of an arbitrary &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is proportional to the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;st power of the radius, and the volume of an arbitrary &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball is proportional to the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;th power of the radius.\nThe &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball is sometimes defined as a single point. The &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Hausdorff measure is the number of points in a set. So\n formula_8\nA unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball is a line segment whose points have a single coordinate in the interval &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of length &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere consists of its two end-points, with coordinate &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;.\nformula_9\nA unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is the unit circle in the Euclidean plane, and its interior is the unit disk (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball).\nformula_10\nThe interior of a 2-sphere in three-dimensional space is the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball.\nformula_11\nIn general, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are given in closed form by the expressions\nformula_12\nwhere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is the gamma function. Note that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;'s values at half-integers contain a factor of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; that cancels out the factor in the numerator.\nAs &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; tends to infinity, the volume of the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball (ratio between the volume of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-cube of side length &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;) tends to zero. \nRecurrences.\nThe \"surface area\", or properly the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional volume, of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere at the boundary of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is related to the volume of the ball by the differential equation\nformula_13\nEquivalently, representing the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball as a union of concentric &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere \"shells\",\nformula_14\nWe can also represent the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere as a union of products of a circle (&amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere) with an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere. Then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Since &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the equation\nformula_15\nholds for all &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Along with the base cases &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; from above, these recurrences can be used to compute the surface area of any sphere or volume of any ball.\nSpherical coordinates.\nWe may define a coordinate system in an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space which is analogous to the spherical coordinate system defined for &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space, in which the coordinates consist of a radial coordinate &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; angular coordinates &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, where the angles &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; range over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; radians (or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; degrees) and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; ranges over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; radians (or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; degrees). If &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are the Cartesian coordinates, then we may compute &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; from &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; with:\nformula_16\nExcept in the special cases described below, the inverse transformation is unique:\nformula_17\nwhere atan2 is the two-argument arctangent function.\nThere are some special cases where the inverse transform is not unique; &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for any &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; will be ambiguous whenever all of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are zero; in this case &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; may be chosen to be zero. (For example, for the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, when the polar angle is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; or &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; then the point is one of the poles, zenith or nadir, and the choice of azimuthal angle is arbitrary.)\nSpherical volume and area elements.\nThe arc length element isformula_18To express the volume element of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional Euclidean space in terms of spherical coordinates, let &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; for concision, then observe that the Jacobian matrix of the transformation is:\nformula_19\nThe determinant of this matrix can be calculated by induction. When &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, a straightforward computation shows that the determinant is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. For larger &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, observe that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be constructed from &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; as follows. Except in column &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, rows &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are the same as row &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, but multiplied by an extra factor of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; in row &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and an extra factor of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; in row &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. In column &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, rows &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are the same as column &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of row &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, but multiplied by extra factors of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; in row &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; in row &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, respectively. The determinant of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; can be calculated by Laplace expansion in the final column. By the recursive description of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, the submatrix formed by deleting the entry at &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and its row and column almost equals &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, except that its last row is multiplied by &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Similarly, the submatrix formed by deleting the entry at &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and its row and column almost equals &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, except that its last row is multiplied by &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. Therefore the determinant of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is\nformula_20\nInduction then gives a closed-form expression for the volume element in spherical coordinates\nformula_21\nThe formula for the volume of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball can be derived from this by integration.\nSimilarly the surface area element of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, which generalizes the area element of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, is given by\n formula_22\nThe natural choice of an orthogonal basis over the angular coordinates is a product of ultraspherical polynomials,\n formula_23\nfor &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and the &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; for the angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in concordance with the spherical harmonics.\nPolyspherical coordinates.\nThe standard spherical coordinate system arises from writing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as the product &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. These two factors may be related using polar coordinates. For each point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of formula_7, the standard Cartesian coordinates\nformula_25\ncan be transformed into a mixed polar\u2013Cartesian coordinate system:\nformula_26\nThis says that points in &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; may be expressed by taking the ray starting at the origin and passing through formula_27, rotating it towards formula_28 by formula_29, and traveling a distance formula_30 along the ray. Repeating this decomposition eventually leads to the standard spherical coordinate system.\nPolyspherical coordinate systems arise from a generalization of this construction. The space &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is split as the product of two Euclidean spaces of smaller dimension, but neither space is required to be a line. Specifically, suppose that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are positive integers such that &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Using this decomposition, a point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; may be written as\nformula_31\nThis can be transformed into a mixed polar\u2013Cartesian coordinate system by writing:\nformula_32\nHere formula_33 and formula_34 are the unit vectors associated to &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. This expresses &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in terms of &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and an angle &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. It can be shown that the domain of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; if exactly one of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; if neither &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; nor &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The inverse transformation is\nformula_35\nThese splittings may be repeated as long as one of the factors involved has dimension two or greater. A polyspherical coordinate system is the result of repeating these splittings until there are no Cartesian coordinates left. Splittings after the first do not require a radial coordinate because the domains of formula_33 and formula_34 are spheres, so the coordinates of a polyspherical coordinate system are a non-negative radius and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; angles. The possible polyspherical coordinate systems correspond to binary trees with &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; leaves. Each non-leaf node in the tree corresponds to a splitting and determines an angular coordinate. For instance, the root of the tree represents &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and its immediate children represent the first splitting into &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Leaf nodes correspond to Cartesian coordinates for &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak;. The formulas for converting from polyspherical coordinates to Cartesian coordinates may be determined by finding the paths from the root to the leaf nodes. These formulas are products with one factor for each branch taken by the path. For a node whose corresponding angular coordinate is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, taking the left branch introduces a factor of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and taking the right branch introduces a factor of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The inverse transformation, from polyspherical coordinates to Cartesian coordinates, is determined by grouping nodes. Every pair of nodes having a common parent can be converted from a mixed polar\u2013Cartesian coordinate system to a Cartesian coordinate system using the above formulas for a splitting.\nPolyspherical coordinates also have an interpretation in terms of the special orthogonal group. A splitting &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; determines a subgroup\nformula_38\nThis is the subgroup that leaves each of the two factors formula_39 fixed. Choosing a set of coset representatives for the quotient is the same as choosing representative angles for this step of the polyspherical coordinate decomposition.\nIn polyspherical coordinates, the volume measure on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and the area measure on &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; are products. There is one factor for each angle, and the volume measure on &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; also has a factor for the radial coordinate. The area measure has the form:\nformula_40\nwhere the factors &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are determined by the tree. Similarly, the volume measure is\nformula_41\nSuppose we have a node of the tree that corresponds to the decomposition &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and that has angular coordinate &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. The corresponding factor &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; depends on the values of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. When the area measure is normalized so that the area of the sphere is &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, these factors are as follows. If &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then\nformula_42\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, and if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; denotes the beta function, then\nformula_43\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, then\nformula_44\nFinally, if both &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; are greater than one, then\nformula_45\nStereographic projection.\nJust as a two-dimensional sphere embedded in three dimensions can be mapped onto a two-dimensional plane by a stereographic projection, an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere can be mapped onto an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional hyperplane by the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional version of the stereographic projection. For example, the point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; on a two-dimensional sphere of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; maps to the point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; on the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-plane. In other words,\nformula_46\nLikewise, the stereographic projection of an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; of radius &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; will map to the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional hyperplane &amp;NoBreak;}&amp;NoBreak; perpendicular to the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-axis as\nformula_47\nProbability distributions.\nUniformly at random on the (\"n\" \u2212 1)-sphere.\nSee also: .\nTo generate uniformly distributed random points on the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere (that is, the surface of the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball), gives the following algorithm.\nGenerate an &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-dimensional vector of normal deviates (it suffices to use &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, although in fact the choice of the variance is arbitrary), &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;. Now calculate the \"radius\" of this point:\nformula_48\nThe vector &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is uniformly distributed over the surface of the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball.\nAn alternative given by Marsaglia is to uniformly randomly select a point &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; in the unit n-cube by sampling each &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; independently from the uniform distribution over &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;, computing &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; as above, and rejecting the point and resampling if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; (i.e., if the point is not in the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball), and when a point in the ball is obtained scaling it up to the spherical surface by the factor &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;; then again &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is uniformly distributed over the surface of the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball. This method becomes very inefficient for higher dimensions, as a vanishingly small fraction of the unit cube is contained in the sphere. In ten dimensions, less than 2% of the cube is filled by the sphere, so that typically more than 50 attempts will be needed. In seventy dimensions, less than formula_49 of the cube is filled, meaning typically a trillion quadrillion trials will be needed, far more than a computer could ever carry out.\nUniformly at random within the \"n\"-ball.\nWith a point selected uniformly at random from the surface of the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere (e.g., by using Marsaglia's algorithm), one needs only a radius to obtain a point uniformly at random from within the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball. If &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a number generated uniformly at random from the interval &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; and &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a point selected uniformly at random from the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is uniformly distributed within the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball.\nAlternatively, points may be sampled uniformly from within the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball by a reduction from the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere. In particular, if &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is a point selected uniformly from the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, then &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is uniformly distributed within the unit &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball (i.e., by simply discarding two coordinates).\nIf &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; is sufficiently large, most of the volume of the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-ball will be contained in the region very close to its surface, so a point selected from that volume will also probably be close to the surface. This is one of the phenomena leading to the so-called curse of dimensionality that arises in some numerical and other applications.\nDistribution of the first coordinate.\nLet &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; be the square of the first coordinate of a point sampled uniformly at random from the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere, then its probability density function, for formula_50, is \nformula_51\nLet formula_52 be the appropriately scaled version, then at the formula_53 limit, the probability density function of formula_54 converges to formula_55. This is sometimes called the Porter\u2013Thomas distribution.\nOctahedral sphere.\nThe octahedral &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is defined similarly to the &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere but using the 1-norm\nformula_59\nIn general, it takes the shape of a cross-polytope.\nThe octahedral &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is a square (without its interior). The octahedral &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is a regular octahedron; hence the name. The octahedral &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak;-sphere is the topological join of &amp;NoBreak;&amp;NoBreak; pairs of isolated points. Intuitively, the topological join of two pairs is generated by drawing a segment between each point in one pair and each point in the other pair; this yields a square. To join this with a third pair, draw a segment between each point on the square and each point in the third pair; this gives a octahedron.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39783", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39783", "title": "Hypercube", "text": "Convex polytope, the n-dimensional analogue of a square and a cube\nIn geometry, a hypercube is an \"n\"-dimensional analogue of a square (\"n\" = 2) and a cube (\"n\" = 3); the special case for \"n\" = 4 is known as a \"tesseract\". It is a closed, compact, convex figure whose 1-skeleton consists of groups of opposite parallel line segments aligned in each of the space's dimensions, perpendicular to each other and of the same length. A unit hypercube's longest diagonal in \"n\" dimensions is equal to formula_1.\nAn \"n\"-dimensional hypercube is more commonly referred to as an n\"-cube or sometimes as an n\"-dimensional cube. The term measure polytope (originally from Elte, 1912) is also used, notably in the work of H. S. M. Coxeter who also labels the hypercubes the \u03b3 polytopes.\nThe hypercube is the special case of a hyperrectangle (also called an \"n-orthotope\").\nA \"unit hypercube\" is a hypercube whose side has length one unit. Often, the hypercube whose corners (or \"vertices\") are the 2\"n\" points in R\"n\" with each coordinate equal to 0 or 1 is called \"the\" unit hypercube.\nConstruction.\nBy the number of dimensions.\nA hypercube can be defined by increasing the numbers of dimensions of a shape:\n0 \u2013 A point is a hypercube of dimension zero.\n1 \u2013 If one moves this point one unit length, it will sweep out a line segment, which is a unit hypercube of dimension one.\n2 \u2013 If one moves this line segment its length in a perpendicular direction from itself; it sweeps out a 2-dimensional square.\n3 \u2013 If one moves the square one unit length in the direction perpendicular to the plane it lies on, it will generate a 3-dimensional cube.\n4 \u2013 If one moves the cube one unit length into the fourth dimension, it generates a 4-dimensional unit hypercube (a unit tesseract).\nThis can be generalized to any number of dimensions. This process of sweeping out volumes can be formalized mathematically as a Minkowski sum: the \"d\"-dimensional hypercube is the Minkowski sum of \"d\" mutually perpendicular unit-length line segments, and is therefore an example of a zonotope.\nThe 1-skeleton of a hypercube is a hypercube graph.\nVertex coordinates.\nA unit hypercube of dimension formula_2 is the convex hull of all the formula_3 points whose formula_2 Cartesian coordinates are each equal to either formula_5 or formula_6. These points are its vertices. The hypercube with these coordinates is also the cartesian product formula_7 of formula_2 copies of the unit interval formula_9. Another unit hypercube, centered at the origin of the ambient space, can be obtained from this one by a translation. It is the convex hull of the formula_3 points whose vectors of Cartesian coordinates are\n formula_11\nHere the symbol formula_12 means that each coordinate is either equal to formula_13 or to formula_14. This unit hypercube is also the cartesian product formula_15. Any unit hypercube has an edge length of formula_6 and an formula_2-dimensional volume of formula_6.\nThe formula_2-dimensional hypercube obtained as the convex hull of the points with coordinates formula_20 or, equivalently as the Cartesian product formula_21 is also often considered due to the simpler form of its vertex coordinates. Its edge length is formula_22, and its formula_2-dimensional volume is formula_3.\nFaces.\nEvery hypercube admits, as its faces, hypercubes of a lower dimension contained in its boundary. A hypercube of dimension formula_2 admits formula_26 facets, or faces of dimension formula_27: a (formula_6-dimensional) line segment has formula_22 endpoints; a (formula_22-dimensional) square has formula_31 sides or edges; a formula_32-dimensional cube has formula_33 square faces; a (formula_31-dimensional) tesseract has formula_35 three-dimensional cubes as its facets. The number of vertices of a hypercube of dimension formula_2 is formula_3 (a usual, formula_32-dimensional cube has formula_39 vertices, for instance).\nThe number of the formula_40-dimensional hypercubes (just referred to as formula_40-cubes from here on) contained in the boundary of an formula_2-cube is\nformula_43, \u00a0\u00a0\u00a0 where formula_44 and formula_45 denotes the factorial of formula_2.\nFor example, the boundary of a formula_31-cube (formula_48) contains formula_35 cubes (formula_32-cubes), formula_51 squares (formula_22-cubes), formula_53 line segments (formula_6-cubes) and formula_55 vertices (formula_5-cubes). This identity can be proven by a simple combinatorial argument: for each of the formula_3 vertices of the hypercube, there are formula_58 ways to choose a collection of formula_40 edges incident to that vertex. Each of these collections defines one of the formula_40-dimensional faces incident to the considered vertex. Doing this for all the vertices of the hypercube, each of the formula_40-dimensional faces of the hypercube is counted formula_62 times since it has that many vertices, and we need to divide formula_63 by this number.\nThe number of facets of the hypercube can be used to compute the formula_64-dimensional volume of its boundary: that volume is formula_26 times the volume of a formula_64-dimensional hypercube; that is, formula_67 where formula_68 is the length of the edges of the hypercube.\nThese numbers can also be generated by the linear recurrence relation.\nformula_69, \u00a0 \u00a0 with formula_70, and formula_71 when formula_72, formula_73, or formula_74.\nFor example, extending a square via its 4 vertices adds one extra line segment (edge) per vertex. Adding the opposite square to form a cube provides formula_75 line segments. \nThe extended f-vector for an \"n\"-cube can also be computed by expanding formula_76 (concisely, (2,1)\"n\"), and reading off the coefficients of the resulting polynomial. For example, the elements of a tesseract is (2,1)4 = (4,4,1)2 = (16,32,24,8,1).\nGraphs.\nAn \"n\"-cube can be projected inside a regular 2\"n\"-gonal polygon by a skew orthogonal projection, shown here from the line segment to the 15-cube.\nRelated families of polytopes.\nThe hypercubes are one of the few families of regular polytopes that are represented in any number of dimensions.\nThe hypercube family is one of three regular polytope families, labeled by Coxeter as \"\u03b3n\". The other two are the hypercube dual family, the cross-polytopes, labeled as \"\u03b2n,\" and the simplices, labeled as \"\u03b1n\". A fourth family, the infinite tessellations of hypercubes, is labeled as \"\u03b4n\".\nAnother related family of semiregular and uniform polytopes is the demihypercubes, which are constructed from hypercubes with alternate vertices deleted and simplex facets added in the gaps, labeled as \"h\u03b3n\".\n\"n\"-cubes can be combined with their duals (the cross-polytopes) to form compound polytopes:\nRelation to (\"n\"\u22121)-simplices.\nThe graph of the \"n\"-hypercube's edges is isomorphic to the Hasse diagram of the (\"n\"\u22121)-simplex's face lattice. This can be seen by orienting the \"n\"-hypercube so that two opposite vertices lie vertically, corresponding to the (\"n\"\u22121)-simplex itself and the null polytope, respectively. Each vertex connected to the top vertex then uniquely maps to one of the (\"n\"\u22121)-simplex's facets (\"n\"\u22122 faces), and each vertex connected to those vertices maps to one of the simplex's \"n\"\u22123 faces, and so forth, and the vertices connected to the bottom vertex map to the simplex's vertices.\nThis relation may be used to generate the face lattice of an (\"n\"\u22121)-simplex efficiently, since face lattice enumeration algorithms applicable to general polytopes are more computationally expensive.\nGeneralized hypercubes.\nRegular complex polytopes can be defined in complex Hilbert space called \"generalized hypercubes\", \u03b3 = \"p\"{4}2{3}...2{3}2, or ... Real solutions exist with \"p\" = 2, i.e. \u03b3 = \u03b3\"n\" = 2{4}2{3}...2{3}2 = {4,3..,3}. For \"p\" &gt; 2, they exist in formula_77. The facets are generalized (\"n\"\u22121)-cube and the vertex figure are regular simplexes.\nThe regular polygon perimeter seen in these orthogonal projections is called a Petrie polygon. The generalized squares (\"n\" = 2) are shown with edges outlined as red and blue alternating color \"p\"-edges, while the higher \"n\"-cubes are drawn with black outlined \"p\"-edges.\nThe number of \"m\"-face elements in a \"p\"-generalized \"n\"-cube are: formula_78. This is \"p\"\"n\" vertices and \"pn\" facets.\nRelation to exponentiation.\nAny positive integer raised to another positive integer power will yield a third integer, with this third integer being a specific type of figurate number corresponding to an \"n\"-cube with a number of dimensions corresponding to the exponential. For example, the exponent 2 will yield a square number or \"perfect square\", which can be arranged into a square shape with a side length corresponding to that of the base. Similarly, the exponent 3 will yield a perfect cube, an integer which can be arranged into a cube shape with a side length of the base. As a result, the act of raising a number to 2 or 3 is more commonly referred to as \"squaring\" and \"cubing\", respectively. However, the names of higher-order hypercubes do not appear to be in common use for higher powers.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39784", "revid": "452002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39784", "title": "Orbital revolution", "text": ""}
{"id": "39788", "revid": "889851", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39788", "title": "Pretty Soldier Sailor Moon", "text": ""}
{"id": "39789", "revid": "20483999", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39789", "title": "Rotation", "text": "Movement of an object which leaves at least one point unchanged\nRotation, rotational or rotary motion is the movement of an object that leaves at least one point unchanged. In 2 dimensions, a plane figure can rotate in either a clockwise or counterclockwise sense around a point called the \"center of rotation\". In 3 dimensions, a solid figure rotates around an imaginary line called an axis of rotation. \nThe special case of a rotation with an internal axis passing through the body's own center of mass is known as a spin (or \"autorotation\"). In that case, the surface intersection of the internal \"spin axis\" can be called a \"pole\"; for example, Earth's rotation defines the geographical poles. \nA rotation around an axis completely external to the moving body is called a revolution (or \"orbit\"), e.g. Earth's orbit around the Sun. The ends of the external \"axis of revolution\" can be called the \"orbital poles\".\nEither type of rotation is involved in a corresponding type of angular velocity (spin angular velocity and orbital angular velocity) and angular momentum (spin angular momentum and orbital angular momentum).\nMathematics.\nMathematically, a rotation is a rigid body movement which, unlike a translation, keeps at least one point fixed. This definition applies to rotations in two dimensions (in a plane), in which exactly one point is kept fixed; and also in three dimensions (in space), in which additional points may be kept fixed (as in rotation around a fixed axis, as infinite line).\nAll rigid body movements are rotations, translations, or combinations of the two.\nA rotation is simply a progressive radial orientation to a common point. That common point lies within the axis of that motion. The axis is perpendicular to the plane of the motion.\nIf a rotation around a point or axis is followed by a second rotation around the same point/axis, a third rotation results. The \"reverse\" (\"inverse\") of a rotation is also a rotation. Thus, the rotations around a point/axis form a group. However, a rotation around a point or axis and a rotation around a different point/axis may result in something other than a rotation, e.g. a translation.\nRotations around the \"x\", \"y\" and \"z\" axes are called \"principal rotations\". Rotation around any axis can be performed by taking a rotation around the \"x\" axis, followed by a rotation around the \"y\" axis, and followed by a rotation around the \"z\" axis. That is to say, any spatial rotation can be decomposed into a combination of principal rotations.\nFixed axis vs. fixed point.\nThe combination of any sequence of rotations of an object in three dimensions about a fixed point is always equivalent to a rotation about an axis (which may be considered to be a rotation in the plane that is perpendicular to that axis). Similarly, the rotation rate of an object in three dimensions at any instant is about some axis, although this axis may be changing over time.\nIn other than three dimensions, it does not make sense to describe a rotation as being around an axis, since more than one axis through the object may be kept fixed; instead, simple rotations are described as being in a plane. In four or more dimensions, a combination of two or more rotations about a plane is not in general a rotation in a single plane.\nAxis of 2-dimensional rotations.\n2-dimensional rotations, unlike the 3-dimensional ones, possess no axis of rotation, only a point about which the rotation occurs. This is equivalent, for linear transformations, with saying that there is no direction in the plane which is kept unchanged by a 2-dimensional rotation, except, of course, the identity.\nThe question of the existence of such a direction is the question of existence of an eigenvector for the matrix \"A\" representing the rotation. Every 2D rotation around the origin through an angle formula_1 in counterclockwise direction can be quite simply represented by the following matrix:\nformula_2\nA standard eigenvalue determination leads to the characteristic equation\n formula_3\nwhich has\n formula_4\nas its eigenvalues. Therefore, there is no real eigenvalue whenever formula_5, meaning that no real vector in the plane is kept unchanged by \"A\".\nRotation angle and axis in 3 dimensions.\nKnowing that the trace is an invariant, the rotation angle formula_6 for a proper orthogonal 3\u00d73 rotation matrix formula_7 is found by\nformula_8\nUsing the principal arc-cosine, this formula gives a rotation angle satisfying formula_9. The corresponding rotation axis must be defined to point in a direction that limits the rotation angle to not exceed 180 degrees. (This can always be done because any rotation of more than 180 degrees about an axis formula_10 can always be written as a rotation having formula_9 if the axis is replaced with formula_12.)\nEvery proper rotation formula_7 in 3D space has an axis of rotation, which is defined such that any vector formula_14 that is aligned with the rotation axis will not be affected by rotation. Accordingly, formula_15, and the rotation axis therefore corresponds to an eigenvector of the rotation matrix associated with an eigenvalue of 1. As long as the rotation angle formula_6 is nonzero (i.e., the rotation is not the identity tensor), there is one and only one such direction. Because A has only real components, there is at least one real eigenvalue, and the remaining two eigenvalues must be complex conjugates of each other (see Eigenvalues and eigenvectors#Eigenvalues and the characteristic polynomial). Knowing that 1 is an eigenvalue, it follows that the remaining two eigenvalues are complex conjugates of each other, but this does not imply that they are complex\u2014they could be real with double multiplicity. In the degenerate case of a rotation angle formula_17, the remaining two eigenvalues are both equal to \u22121. In the degenerate case of a zero rotation angle, the rotation matrix is the identity, and all three eigenvalues are 1 (which is the only case for which the rotation axis is arbitrary).\nA spectral analysis is not required to find the rotation axis. If formula_18 denotes the unit eigenvector aligned with the rotation axis, and if formula_6 denotes the rotation angle, then it can be shown that formula_20. Consequently, the expense of an eigenvalue analysis can be avoided by simply normalizing this vector \"if it has a nonzero magnitude.\" On the other hand, if this vector has a zero magnitude, it means that formula_21. In other words, this vector will be zero if and only if the rotation angle is 0 or 180 degrees, and the rotation axis may be assigned in this case by normalizing any column of formula_22 that has a nonzero magnitude.\nThis discussion applies to a proper rotation, and hence formula_23. Any improper orthogonal 3x3 matrix formula_24 may be written as formula_25, in which formula_7 is proper orthogonal. That is, any improper orthogonal 3x3 matrix may be decomposed as a proper rotation (from which an axis of rotation can be found as described above) followed by an inversion (multiplication by \u22121). It follows that the rotation axis of formula_7 is also the eigenvector of formula_24 corresponding to an eigenvalue of \u22121.\nRotation plane.\nAs much as every tridimensional rotation has a rotation axis, also every tridimensional rotation has a plane, which is perpendicular to the rotation axis, and which is left invariant by the rotation. The rotation, restricted to this plane, is an ordinary 2D rotation.\nThe proof proceeds similarly to the above discussion. First, suppose that all eigenvalues of the 3D rotation matrix \"A\" are real. This means that there is an orthogonal basis, made by the corresponding eigenvectors (which are necessarily orthogonal), over which the effect of the rotation matrix is just stretching it. If we write \"A\" in this basis, it is diagonal; but a diagonal orthogonal matrix is made of just +1s and \u22121s in the diagonal entries. Therefore, we do not have a proper rotation, but either the identity or the result of a sequence of reflections.\nIt follows, then, that a proper rotation has some complex eigenvalue. Let \"v\" be the corresponding eigenvector. Then, as we showed in the previous topic, formula_29 is also an eigenvector, and formula_30 and formula_31 are such that their scalar product vanishes:\nformula_32\nbecause, since formula_33 is real, it equals its complex conjugate formula_34, and formula_35 and formula_36 are both representations of the same scalar product between formula_37 and formula_29.\nThis means formula_30 and formula_31 are orthogonal vectors. Also, they are both real vectors by construction. These vectors span the same subspace as formula_37 and formula_29, which is an invariant subspace under the application of \"A\". Therefore, they span an invariant plane.\nThis plane is orthogonal to the invariant axis, which corresponds to the remaining eigenvector of \"A\", with eigenvalue 1, because of the orthogonality of the eigenvectors of \"A\".\nRotation of vectors.\nA vector is said to be rotating if it changes its orientation. This effect is generally only accompanied when its rate of change vector has non-zero perpendicular component to the original vector. This can be shown to be the case by considering a vector formula_43 which is parameterized by some variable formula_44 for which:\nformula_45\nWhich also gives a relation of rate of change of unit vector by taking formula_43, to be such a vector: formula_47showing that formula_48 vector is perpendicular to the vector, formula_43.\nFrom:\nformula_50,\nsince the first term is parallel to formula_43 and the second perpendicular to it, we can conclude in general that the parallel and perpendicular components of rate of change of a vector independently influence only the magnitude or orientation of the vector respectively. Hence, a rotating vector always has a non-zero perpendicular component of its rate of change vector against the vector itself.\nIn higher dimensions.\nAs dimensions increase the number of rotation vectors increases. Along a four dimensional space (a hypervolume), rotations occur along x, y, z, and w axis. An object rotated on a w axis intersects through various volumes, where each intersection is equal to a self contained volume at an angle. This gives way to a new axis of rotation in a 4d hypervolume, where a 3D object can be rotated perpendicular to the z axis.\nPhysics.\nThe speed of rotation is given by the angular frequency (rad/s) or frequency (turns per time), or period (seconds, days, etc.). The time-rate of change of angular frequency is angular acceleration (rad/s2), caused by torque. The ratio of torque \u03c4 to the angular acceleration \u03b1 is given by the moment of inertia:\nformula_52\nThe angular velocity vector (an \"axial vector\") also describes the direction of the axis of rotation. Similarly, the torque is an axial vector.\nThe physics of the rotation around a fixed axis is mathematically described with the axis\u2013angle representation of rotations. According to the right-hand rule, the direction away from the observer is associated with clockwise rotation and the direction towards the observer with counterclockwise rotation, like a screw.\nCircular motion.\nIt is possible for objects to have periodic circular trajectories without changing their orientation. These types of motion are treated under circular motion instead of rotation, more specifically as a curvilinear translation. Since translation involves displacement of rigid bodies while preserving the orientation of the body, in the case of curvilinear translation, all the points have the same instantaneous velocity whereas relative motion can only be observed in motions involving rotation.\nIn rotation, the orientation of the object changes and the change in orientation is independent of the observers whose frames of reference have constant relative orientation over time. By Euler's theorem, any change in orientation can be described by rotation about an axis through a chosen reference point. Hence, the distinction between rotation and circular motion can be made by requiring an instantaneous axis for rotation, a line passing through instantaneous center of circle and perpendicular to the plane of motion. In the example depicting curvilinear translation, the center of circles for the motion lie on a straight line but it is parallel to the plane of motion and hence does not resolve to an axis of rotation. In contrast, a rotating body will always have its instantaneous axis of zero velocity, perpendicular to the plane of motion.\nMore generally, due to Chasles' theorem, any motion of rigid bodies can be treated as a composition of rotation and translation, called general plane motion. A simple example of pure rotation is considered in rotation around a fixed axis.\nEuler rotations.\nEuler rotations provide an alternative description of a rotation. It is a composition of three rotations defined as the movement obtained by changing one of the Euler angles while leaving the other two constant. Euler rotations are never expressed in terms of the external frame, or in terms of the co-moving rotated body frame, but in a mixture. They constitute a mixed axes of rotation system, where the first angle moves the line of nodes around the external axis \"z\", the second rotates around the line of nodes and the third one is an intrinsic rotation around an axis fixed in the body that moves.\nThese rotations are called precession, nutation, and \"intrinsic rotation\".\nRotational invariance.\nA system which behaves the same regardless of how it is oriented in space is said to be rotationally invariant. According to Noether's theorem, if the action (the integral over time of its Lagrangian) of a physical system is invariant under rotation, then angular momentum is conserved.\nAstronomy.\nIn astronomy, rotation is a commonly observed phenomenon; it includes both spin (auto-rotation) and orbital revolution.\nBlack holes.\nThe rotation or spin of a black hole its only astronomical property other than its mass. The rotation stores enormous amounts of energy, powering relativistic jets of ionized particles extending thousands of parsecs into space and lasting g hundreds of millions of years. The jets are strong enough to alter the evolution of galaxies. Black holes spin much faster than neutron stars despite their similar origin in supernova, suggesting that the spinning magnetic field of the neutron star transfers rotational energy to ionized gases exiting the nova explosion.\nSpin.\nStars, planets and similar bodies may spin around on their axes. The rotation rate of planets in the Solar System was first measured by tracking visual features. Stellar rotation is measured through Doppler shift or by tracking active surface features. An example is sunspots, which rotate around the Sun at the same velocity as the outer gases that make up the Sun.\nUnder some circumstances orbiting bodies may lock their spin rotation to their orbital rotation around a larger body. This effect is called tidal locking; the Moon is tidal-locked to the Earth.\nThis rotation induces a centrifugal acceleration in the reference frame of the Earth which slightly counteracts the effect of gravitation the closer one is to the equator. Earth's gravity combines both mass effects such that an object weighs slightly less at the equator than at the poles. Another is that over time the Earth is slightly deformed into an oblate spheroid; a similar equatorial bulge develops for other planets.\nAnother consequence of the rotation of a planet are the phenomena of precession and nutation. Like a gyroscope, the overall effect is a slight \"wobble\" in the movement of the axis of a planet. Currently the tilt of the Earth's axis to its orbital plane (obliquity of the ecliptic) is 23.44 degrees, but this angle changes slowly (over thousands of years).\nRetrograde rotation.\nMost planets in the Solar System, including Earth, spin in the same direction as they orbit the Sun. The exceptions are Venus and Uranus. Venus may be thought of as rotating slowly backward (or being \"upside down\"). Uranus rotates nearly on its side relative to its orbit. Current speculation is that Uranus started off with a typical prograde orientation and was knocked on its side by a large impact early in its history. The dwarf planet Pluto (formerly considered a planet) is anomalous in several ways, including that it also rotates on its side.\nRevolution.\nWhile \"revolution\" is often used as a synonym for \"rotation\", in many fields, particularly astronomy and related fields, \"revolution\", often referred to as \"orbital revolution\" for clarity, is used when one body moves around another while \"rotation\" is used to mean the movement around an axis. Moons revolve around their planets, planets revolve about their stars (such as the Earth around the Sun); and stars slowly revolve about their galaxial centers. The motion of the components of galaxies is complex, but it usually includes a rotation component.\nApplied.\nFlight dynamics.\nIn flight dynamics, the principal rotations described with Euler angles above are known as \"pitch\", \"roll\" and \"yaw\". The term rotation is also used in aviation to refer to the upward pitch (nose moves up) of an aircraft, particularly when starting the climb after takeoff.\nPrincipal rotations have the advantage of modelling a number of physical systems such as gimbals, and joysticks, so are easily visualised, and are a very compact way of storing a rotation. But they are difficult to use in calculations as even simple operations like combining rotations are expensive to do, and suffer from a form of gimbal lock where the angles cannot be uniquely calculated for certain rotations.\nArrow-flight.\nDifferent roughness on each side of arrow fletching produces spin in arrow-flight. This rotation improves the stability of the arrow in flight and the precision of the trajectory.\nAmusement rides.\nMany amusement rides provide rotation. A Ferris wheel has a horizontal central axis, and parallel axes for each gondola, where the rotation is opposite, by gravity or mechanically. As a result, at any time the orientation of the gondola is upright (not rotated), just translated. The tip of the translation vector describes a circle. A carousel provides rotation about a vertical axis. Many rides provide a combination of rotations about several axes. In Chair-O-Planes the rotation about the vertical axis is provided mechanically, while the rotation about the horizontal axis is due to the centripetal force. In roller coaster inversions the rotation about the horizontal axis is one or more full cycles, where inertia keeps people in their seats.\nSports.\nRotation of a ball or other object, usually called \"spin\", plays a role in many sports, including topspin and backspin in tennis, \"English\", \"follow\" and \"draw\" in billiards and pool, curve balls in baseball, spin bowling in cricket, flying disc sports, etc. Table tennis paddles are manufactured with different surface characteristics to allow the player to impart a greater or lesser amount of spin to the ball.\nRotation of a player one or more times around a vertical axis may be called \"spin\" in figure skating, \"twirling\" (of the baton or the performer) in baton twirling, or \"360\", \"540\", \"720\", etc. in snowboarding, etc. Rotation of a player or performer one or more times around a horizontal axis may be called a flip, roll, somersault, \"heli\", etc. in gymnastics, waterskiing, or many other sports, or a \"one-and-a-half\", \"two-and-a-half\", \"gainer\" (starting facing away from the water), etc. in diving, etc. A combination of vertical and horizontal rotation (back flip with 360\u00b0) is called a \"m\u00f6bius\" in waterskiing freestyle jumping.\nRotation of a player around a vertical axis, generally between 180 and 360 degrees, may be called a \"spin move\" and is used as a deceptive or avoidance manoeuvre, or in an attempt to play, pass, or receive a ball or puck, etc., or to afford a player a view of the goal or other players. It is often seen in hockey, basketball, football of various codes, tennis, etc.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39792", "revid": "1318091345", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39792", "title": "3-sphere", "text": "Mathematical object\nIn mathematics, a hypersphere or 3-sphere is a 4-dimensional analogue of a sphere, and is the 3-dimensional \"n\"-sphere. In 4-dimensional Euclidean space, it is the set of points equidistant from a fixed central point. The interior of a 3-sphere is a 4-ball.\nIt is called a 3-sphere because topologically, the surface itself is 3-dimensional, even though it is curved into the 4th dimension. For example, when traveling on a 3-sphere, you can go north and south, east and west, or along a 3rd set of cardinal directions. This means that a 3-sphere is an example of a 3-manifold.\nDefinition.\nIn coordinates, a 3-sphere with center (\"C\"0, \"C\"1, \"C\"2, \"C\"3) and radius r is the set of all points (\"x\"0, \"x\"1, \"x\"2, \"x\"3) in real, 4-dimensional space (R4) such that\nformula_1\nThe 3-sphere centered at the origin with radius 1 is called the unit 3-sphere and is usually denoted \"S\"3:\nformula_2\nIt is often convenient to regard R4 as the space with 2 complex dimensions (C2) or the quaternions (H). The unit 3-sphere is then given by\nformula_3\nor\nformula_4\nThis description as the quaternions of norm one identifies the 3-sphere with the versors in the quaternion division ring. Just as the unit circle is important for planar polar coordinates, so the 3-sphere is important in the polar view of 4-space involved in quaternion multiplication. See polar decomposition of a quaternion for details of this development of the three-sphere.\nThis view of the 3-sphere is the basis for the study of elliptic space as developed by Georges Lema\u00eetre.\nProperties.\nElementary properties.\nThe 3-dimensional surface volume of a 3-sphere of radius r is\nformula_5\nwhile the 4-dimensional hypervolume (the content of the 4-dimensional region, or ball, bounded by the 3-sphere) is\nformula_6\nEvery non-empty intersection of a 3-sphere with a three-dimensional hyperplane is a 2-sphere (unless the hyperplane is tangent to the 3-sphere, in which case the intersection is a single point). As a 3-sphere moves through a given three-dimensional hyperplane, the intersection starts out as a point, then becomes a growing 2-sphere that reaches its maximal size when the hyperplane cuts right through the \"equator\" of the 3-sphere. Then the 2-sphere shrinks again down to a single point as the 3-sphere leaves the hyperplane.\nIn a given three-dimensional hyperplane, a 3-sphere can rotate about an \"equatorial plane\" (analogous to a 2-sphere rotating about a central axis), in which case it appears to be a 2-sphere whose size is constant.\nTopological properties.\nA 3-sphere is a compact, connected, 3-dimensional manifold without boundary. It is also simply connected. What this means, in the broad sense, is that any loop, or circular path, on the 3-sphere can be continuously shrunk to a point without leaving the 3-sphere. The Poincar\u00e9 conjecture, proved in 2003 by Grigori Perelman, provides that the 3-sphere is the only three-dimensional manifold (up to homeomorphism) with these properties.\nThe 3-sphere is homeomorphic to the one-point compactification of R3. In general, any topological space that is homeomorphic to the 3-sphere is called a topological 3-sphere.\nThe homology groups of the 3-sphere are as follows: H0(\"S\"3, Z) and H3(\"S\"3, Z) are both infinite cyclic, while H\"i\"(\"S\"3, Z) = {} for all other indices i. Any topological space with these homology groups is known as a homology 3-sphere. Initially Poincar\u00e9 conjectured that all homology 3-spheres are homeomorphic to \"S\"3, but then he himself constructed a non-homeomorphic one, now known as the Poincar\u00e9 homology sphere. Infinitely many homology spheres are now known to exist. For example, a Dehn filling with slope on any knot in the 3-sphere gives a homology sphere; typically these are not homeomorphic to the 3-sphere.\nAs to the homotopy groups, we have \u03c01(\"S\"3) = \u03c02(\"S\"3) = 0 and \u03c03(\"S\"3) is infinite cyclic. The higher-homotopy groups (\"k\" \u2265 4) are all finite abelian but otherwise follow no discernible pattern. For more discussion see homotopy groups of spheres.\nGeometric properties.\nThe 3-sphere is naturally a smooth manifold, in fact, a closed embedded submanifold of R4. The Euclidean metric on R4 induces a metric on the 3-sphere giving it the structure of a Riemannian manifold. As with all spheres, the 3-sphere has constant positive sectional curvature equal to where r is the radius.\nMuch of the interesting geometry of the 3-sphere stems from the fact that the 3-sphere has a natural Lie group structure given by quaternion multiplication (see the section below on group structure). The only other spheres with such a structure are the 0-sphere and the 1-sphere (see circle group).\nUnlike the 2-sphere, the 3-sphere admits nonvanishing vector fields (sections of its tangent bundle). One can even find three linearly independent and nonvanishing vector fields. These may be taken to be any left-invariant vector fields forming a basis for the Lie algebra of the 3-sphere. This implies that the 3-sphere is parallelizable. It follows that the tangent bundle of the 3-sphere is trivial. For a general discussion of the number of linear independent vector fields on a n-sphere, see the article vector fields on spheres.\nThere is an interesting action of the circle group T on \"S\"3 giving the 3-sphere the structure of a principal circle bundle known as the Hopf bundle. If one thinks of \"S\"3 as a subset of C2, the action is given by\nformula_7.\nThe orbit space of this action is homeomorphic to the two-sphere \"S\"2. Since \"S\"3 is not homeomorphic to \"S\"2 \u00d7 \"S\"1, the Hopf bundle is nontrivial.\nTopological construction.\nThere are several well-known constructions of the three-sphere. Here we describe gluing a pair of three-balls and then the one-point compactification.\nGluing.\nA 3-sphere can be constructed topologically by \"gluing\" together the boundaries of a pair of 3-balls. The boundary of a 3-ball is a 2-sphere, and these two 2-spheres are to be identified. That is, imagine a pair of 3-balls of the same size, then superpose them so that their 2-spherical boundaries match, and let matching pairs of points on the pair of 2-spheres be identically equivalent to each other. In analogy with the case of the 2-sphere (see below), the gluing surface is called an equatorial sphere.\nNote that the interiors of the 3-balls are not glued to each other. One way to think of the fourth dimension is as a continuous real-valued function of the 3-dimensional coordinates of the 3-ball, perhaps considered to be \"temperature\". We take the \"temperature\" to be zero along the gluing 2-sphere and let one of the 3-balls be \"hot\" and let the other 3-ball be \"cold\". The \"hot\" 3-ball could be thought of as the \"upper hemisphere\" and the \"cold\" 3-ball could be thought of as the \"lower hemisphere\". The temperature is highest/lowest at the centers of the two 3-balls.\nThis construction is analogous to a construction of a 2-sphere, performed by gluing the boundaries of a pair of disks. A disk is a 2-ball, and the boundary of a disk is a circle (a 1-sphere). Let a pair of disks be of the same diameter. Superpose them and glue corresponding points on their boundaries. Again one may think of the third dimension as temperature. Likewise, we may inflate the 2-sphere, moving the pair of disks to become the northern and southern hemispheres.\nOne-point compactification.\nAfter removing a single point from the 2-sphere, what remains is homeomorphic to the Euclidean plane. In the same way, removing a single point from the 3-sphere yields three-dimensional space. \nAn extremely useful way to see this is via stereographic projection. We first describe the lower-dimensional version.\nRest the south pole of a unit 2-sphere on the xy-plane in three-space. We map a point P of the sphere (minus the north pole N) to the plane by sending P to the intersection of the line NP with the plane. Stereographic projection of a 3-sphere (again removing the north pole) maps to three-space in the same manner. (Notice that, since stereographic projection is conformal, round spheres are sent to round spheres or to planes.)\nA somewhat different way to think of the one-point compactification is via the exponential map. Returning to our picture of the unit two-sphere sitting on the Euclidean plane: Consider a geodesic in the plane, based at the origin, and map this to a geodesic in the two-sphere of the same length, based at the south pole. Under this map all points of the circle of radius \u03c0 are sent to the north pole. Since the open unit disk is homeomorphic to the Euclidean plane, this is again a one-point compactification.\nThe exponential map for 3-sphere is similarly constructed; it may also be discussed using the fact that the 3-sphere is the Lie group of unit quaternions.\nCoordinate systems on the 3-sphere.\nThe four Euclidean coordinates for \"S\"3 are redundant since they are subject to the condition that \"x\"02 + \"x\"12 + \"x\"22 + \"x\"32 = 1. As a 3-dimensional manifold one should be able to parameterize \"S\"3 by three coordinates, just as one can parameterize the 2-sphere using two coordinates (such as latitude and longitude). Due to the nontrivial topology of \"S\"3 it is impossible to find a single set of coordinates that cover the entire space. Just as on the 2-sphere, one must use \"at least\" two coordinate charts. Some different choices of coordinates are given below.\nHyperspherical coordinates.\nIt is convenient to have some sort of hyperspherical coordinates on \"S\"3 in analogy to the usual spherical coordinates on \"S\"2. One such choice \u2014 by no means unique \u2014 is to use (\"\u03c8\", \"\u03b8\", \"\u03c6\"), where\nformula_8\nwhere \u03c8 and \u03b8 run over the range 0 to \u03c0, and \u03c6 runs over 0 to 2\u03c0. Note that, for any fixed value of \u03c8, \u03b8 and \u03c6 parameterize a 2-sphere of radius formula_9, except for the degenerate cases, when \u03c8 equals 0 or \u03c0, in which case they describe a point.\nThe round metric on the 3-sphere in these coordinates is given by\nformula_10\nand the volume form by\nformula_11\nThese coordinates have an elegant description in terms of quaternions. Any unit quaternion q can be written as a versor:\nformula_12\nwhere \u03c4 is a unit imaginary quaternion; that is, a quaternion that satisfies \"\u03c4\"2 = \u22121. This is the quaternionic analogue of Euler's formula. Now the unit imaginary quaternions all lie on the unit 2-sphere in Im H so any such \u03c4 can be written:\nformula_13\nWith \u03c4 in this form, the unit quaternion q is given by\nformula_14\nwhere \"x\"0,1,2,3 are as above.\nWhen q is used to describe spatial rotations (cf. quaternions and spatial rotations), it describes a rotation about \u03c4 through an angle of 2\"\u03c8\".\nHopf coordinates.\nFor unit radius another choice of hyperspherical coordinates, (\"\u03b7\", \"\u03be\"1, \"\u03be\"2), makes use of the embedding of \"S\"3 in C2. In complex coordinates (\"z\"1, \"z\"2) \u2208 C2 we write\nformula_15\nThis could also be expressed in R4 as\nformula_16\nHere \u03b7 runs over the range 0 to , and \"\u03be\"1 and \"\u03be\"2 can take any values between 0 and 2\u03c0. These coordinates are useful in the description of the 3-sphere as the Hopf bundle\nformula_17\nFor any fixed value of \u03b7 between 0 and , the coordinates (\"\u03be\"1, \"\u03be\"2) parameterize a 2-dimensional torus. Rings of constant \"\u03be\"1 and \"\u03be\"2 above form simple orthogonal grids on the tori. See image to right. In the degenerate cases, when \u03b7 equals 0 or , these coordinates describe a circle.\nThe round metric on the 3-sphere in these coordinates is given by\nformula_18\nand the volume form by\nformula_19\nTo get the interlocking circles of the Hopf fibration, make a simple substitution in the equations above\nformula_20\nIn this case \u03b7, and \"\u03be\"1 specify which circle, and \"\u03be\"2 specifies the position along each circle. One round trip (0 to 2\u03c0) of \"\u03be\"1 or \"\u03be\"2 equates to a round trip of the torus in the 2 respective directions.\nStereographic coordinates.\nAnother convenient set of coordinates can be obtained via stereographic projection of \"S\"3 from a pole onto the corresponding equatorial R3 hyperplane. For example, if we project from the point (\u22121, 0, 0, 0) we can write a point p in \"S\"3 as\nformula_21\nwhere u = (\"u\"1, \"u\"2, \"u\"3) is a vector in R3 and \u2016\"u\"\u20162 = \"u\"12 + \"u\"22 + \"u\"32. In the second equality above, we have identified p with a unit quaternion and u = \"u\"1\"i\" + \"u\"2\"j\" + \"u\"3\"k\" with a pure quaternion. (Note that the numerator and denominator commute here even though quaternionic multiplication is generally noncommutative). The inverse of this map takes \"p\" = (\"x\"0, \"x\"1, \"x\"2, \"x\"3) in \"S\"3 to\nformula_22\nWe could just as well have projected from the point (1, 0, 0, 0), in which case the point p is given by\nformula_23\nwhere v = (\"v\"1, \"v\"2, \"v\"3) is another vector in R3. The inverse of this map takes p to\nformula_24\nNote that the u coordinates are defined everywhere but (\u22121, 0, 0, 0) and the v coordinates everywhere but (1, 0, 0, 0). This defines an atlas on \"S\"3 consisting of two coordinate charts or \"patches\", which together cover all of \"S\"3. Note that the transition function between these two charts on their overlap is given by\nformula_25\nand vice versa.\nGroup structure.\nWhen considered as the set of unit quaternions, \"S\"3 inherits an important structure, namely that of quaternionic multiplication. Because the set of unit quaternions is closed under multiplication, \"S\"3 takes on the structure of a group. Moreover, since quaternionic multiplication is smooth, \"S\"3 can be regarded as a real Lie group. It is a nonabelian, compact Lie group of dimension 3. When thought of as a Lie group, \"S\"3 is often denoted Sp(1) or U(1, H).\nIt turns out that the only spheres that admit a Lie group structure are \"S\"1, thought of as the set of unit complex numbers, and \"S\"3, the set of unit quaternions (The degenerate case \"S\"0 which consists of the real numbers 1 and \u22121 is also a Lie group, albeit a 0-dimensional one). One might think that \"S\"7, the set of unit octonions, would form a Lie group, but this fails since octonion multiplication is nonassociative. The octonionic structure does give \"S\"7 one important property: \"parallelizability\". It turns out that the only spheres that are parallelizable are \"S\"1, \"S\"3, and \"S\"7.\nBy using a matrix representation of the quaternions, H, one obtains a matrix representation of \"S\"3. One convenient choice is given by the Pauli matrices:\nformula_26\nThis map gives an injective algebra homomorphism from H to the set of 2\u00a0\u00d7\u00a02 complex matrices. It has the property that the absolute value of a quaternion q is equal to the square root of the determinant of the matrix image of q.\nThe set of unit quaternions is then given by matrices of the above form with unit determinant. This matrix subgroup is precisely the special unitary group SU(2). Thus, \"S\"3 as a Lie group is isomorphic to SU(2).\nUsing our Hopf coordinates (\"\u03b7\", \"\u03be\"1, \"\u03be\"2) we can then write any element of SU(2) in the form\nformula_27\nAnother way to state this result is if we express the matrix representation of an element of SU(2) as an exponential of a linear combination of the Pauli matrices. It is seen that an arbitrary element \"U\" \u2208 SU(2) can be written as\nformula_28\nThe condition that the determinant of U is +1 implies that the coefficients \"\u03b1\"1 are constrained to lie on a 3-sphere.\nIn literature.\nIn Edwin Abbott Abbott's \"Flatland\", published in 1884, and in \"Sphereland\", a 1965 sequel to \"Flatland\" by Dionys Burger, the 3-sphere is referred to as an oversphere, and a 4-sphere is referred to as a hypersphere.\nWriting in the \"American Journal of Physics\", Mark A. Peterson describes three different ways of visualizing 3-spheres and points out language in \"The Divine Comedy\" that suggests Dante viewed the Universe in the same way; Carlo Rovelli supports the same idea.\nIn \"Art Meets Mathematics in the Fourth Dimension\", Stephen L. Lipscomb develops the concept of the hypersphere dimensions as it relates to art, architecture, and mathematics.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39803", "revid": "20812102", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39803", "title": "Sailor Moon (character)", "text": "Fictional character from a manga series\n, better known as , is a fictional character and the titular protagonist of the \"Sailor Moon\" franchise created by Naoko Takeuchi. She is introduced in chapter No. 1 of the manga, \"Usagi \u2013 Sailor Moon\" (originally published in Japan's magazine on December 28, 1991), as a carefree Japanese schoolgirl who can transform into the magical \"Guardian of Love and Justice\", Sailor Moon.\nUsagi initially meets Luna, a magical talking black cat who is searching for the Moon Princess. Luna reveals that Usagi is destined to save Earth from the forces of evil and gives her a brooch to transform into Sailor Moon. She asks Usagi to locate the other reincarnated Sailor Guardians, find the princess and protect the \"Silver Crystal\", an item of immense power. After locating her comrades, Usagi later discovers that she is the reincarnation of the Moon Princess, and that her former lover, Prince Endymion of Earth has also been reincarnated in the present as the mysterious hero, Tuxedo Mask. As Usagi matures, she becomes a powerful warrior and protects her adopted home planet, Earth, from villains who wish to harm it. Usagi is depicted as usually carefree and cheerful, but with immature tendencies that show themselves when things do not go her way.\nUsagi appears in every episode, film, video game, and television special of the anime adaptations, \"Sailor Moon\" and \"Sailor Moon Crystal\"; as well as the live action adaptation, \"Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon\", with her trademark twin buns with twin pigtails. She also cameos in the sister series \"\". She has been the subject of parodies and has appeared in special events. Usagi's critical reception has been largely positive and she is recognized as one of the most important and popular female superheroes of all time, and a cultural symbol of Japan.\nConception and creation.\nUsagi and \"Sailor Moon\" series evolved from Naoko Takeuchi's earlier one-shot series called \"Codename: Sailor V\". In Takeuchi's first proposal for the \"Sailor Moon\" series, each of the five heroines had a unique outfit. It was eventually decided that they would instead wear uniforms based on a single theme, whose design was closest to Sailor Moon's original costume concept. Sailor Moon's original had some small differences, including color changes, an exposed midriff, and ribbons around the gloves and boots. She also had a mask, which did appear in a few chapters of the manga before being discarded. These aspects of Sailor Moon's costume are shown in multiple pieces of early artwork, along with a gun and cloak, which were also parts of the original concept.\nOf all the Sailor Guardians, Usagi's personality is closest to Takeuchi's own personality at the time \"Sailor Moon\" was created. Takeuchi also based Usagi's signature hairstyle on a \"good luck charm\" she had during her studies as a university student. Takeuchi would put her hair up in \"odango\" before difficult classes or exams. Sailor Moon has pink hair in the initial sketches, but by the intermediate stages of development, Takeuchi planned to have the character's hair be blonde in civilian form and change to silver when she transformed. Her editor, Fumio Osano, told her that silver hair would be too plain for cover art. Despite this, stylistic use of differently colored hair does sometimes appear in later artwork, and the concept of the heroines' hair changing color when transformed is used in \"Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon\".\nThe kanji of Usagi's surname translate as and . Her given name is in hiragana and so its meaning is not inherent, but the word means \"rabbit\" and this is used as a pun frequently throughout the series, including her hairstyle and possessions. Her name is structured as a pun, as the syllable \"no\" indicates a possessive, so her name can also be understood as \"Rabbit of the Moon\". This derives from a Chinese folktale, popular in Japan, about the rabbit which is said to be visible in the Moon's face, much like the Western Man in the Moon. The Mixx/Tokyopop English-language manga \u2013 along with other localisations \u2013 gives her the nickname \"Bunny\" to partially preserve this pun. \"Usagi\" is not a common given name in Japan.\nDifferences in English and other languages.\nLike other foreign language adaptations, the original North American adaptation of the \"Sailor Moon\" anime by DiC and Cloverway took several liberties with the series, changing various aspects and localizing content to fit North American audiences. Among these were renaming Usagi as \"Serena\", and subsequently referring to Princess Serenity as \"Princess Serena.\" The Sailor Guardians were referred to as \"Sailor Scouts\" and Sailor Moon's transformations were altered to omit the \"Make Up!\" phrase. The names of her attacks were also changed. For example, \"Moon Tiara Action\" was changed to \"Moon Tiara Magic\", \"Moon Healing Escalation\" was changed to \"Moon Healing Activation\" or \"Cosmic Moon Power\", and \"Moon Princess Halation\" was changed to \"Moon Princess Elimination.\" In the later seasons, most attacks were maintained according to their original Japanese names and her family name was retained as \"Tsukino.\"\nThe initial English manga release by Mixx/Tokyopop were made to coincide with the original anime adaptation, so many character names and spellings were kept between the two. However, Usagi's name was changed to \"Bunny\" to match more closely with her Japanese name's meaning.\nAntonia Levi wrote that the two different initial English versions lost some of the meaning behind her name, with the TV version losing the rabbit meaning and the Mixx/Tokyopop name losing the moon meaning.\nThe initial French, German, and Italian dubs renamed Usagi with rabbit puns. The Cantonese version used the name \"Yuet-yeh Toei\" (using the characters , ), which Levi stated kept the meaning of the moon and rabbit themes, but \"unquestionably changed the heroine's nationality\".\nCharacterization.\nUsagi is first introduced as living the life of a normal teenage schoolgirl in 20th century Tokyo. Although well-meaning, she is an underachieving, accident-prone crybaby. One day, Usagi encounters a mysterious cat with a crescent moon on its forehead, who later reveals herself to be Luna, a mentor archetype who introduces Usagi to her new heroic role. Luna gives Usagi a magical brooch and explains how to use it to transform into Sailor Moon, the Guardian of Love and Justice; she tells Usagi that she is a Sailor Guardian who must fight for peace and find her reincarnated comrades, the Sailor Guardians, to locate and protect their charge, the Moon Princess and the mysterious and powerful Silver Crystal, from the forces of evil. Usagi is a reluctant heroine at first, but grows more confident and mature over time. She eventually discovers that she is the reincarnation of the Moon Princess, Princess Serenity, from the ancient civilization known as Silver Millennium, and the bearer of the Silver Crystal. She also learns that her lover from her past life, Prince Endymion of Earth, has been reincarnated in the present as well as the hero Tuxedo Mask, and seeks to reunite with him. As Sailor Moon, she sets out with her comrades to fight the villains from her past life and to protect the Earth using the legendary Silver Crystal. This provides most of the conflict, romance, and drama in both the manga and the anime.\nAs a civilian, Usagi lives in Azabu J\u016bban with her mother, Ikuko Tsukino; her father, Kenji Tsukino; and her brother, Shingo Tsukino; these names reflect those of Naoko Takeuchi's real-life family members. Usagi and her fellow Guardians have diverse backgrounds, and balance their responsibilities as superheroines with their current lives.\nThough Tuxedo Mask's identity is initially hidden from her, his civilian identity is eventually revealed to be Mamoru Chiba, who is later revealed to also be the reincarnation of Princess Serenity's star-crossed lover, Prince Endymion. Finally reunited in the present, Usagi and Mamoru become romantically involved. Mamoru and Usagi's relationship is a significant part of Usagi's personal life, as well as the series as a whole. They date for a long time in the series and the love they share helps her through many challenges. In various adaptations of the series, the two eventually marry, and major plot lines involve discovering that she will become a \"Sovereign of the Earth\", known as Neo-Queen Serenity, by the 30th century, and give birth to her future daughter, Chibiusa.\nUsagi is a glutton, particularly for sweet foods and they easily distract her; the manga lists one of her favorite foods as cake. She also loves playing video games and reading manga. Her favorite subject is listed as home economics. She is said to dislike carrots, and is a poor student in both English and mathematics. She is afraid of dentists, ghosts, and thunder and lightning, and her greatest dream is to someday be a bride. She later becomes a member of the Manga Drawing Club at her school, She stands tall, though her height relative to other characters varies from different design models used in various adaptations.\nIn the manga and anime, Mamoru refers to her as \"odango\" (a kind of rice dumpling), based on her distinctive hairstyle. At first, this is always accompanied with the suffix \"\u2011atama\", meaning \"head\", but this is gradually dropped. Usagi hates the name at first, but it develops into a sign of affection as they become close. Later in the series, Haruka Ten\u014d and K\u014d Seiya, other important figures in her life, adopt the name as well. Since the term does not always have foreign language equivalents, this moniker is altered in various ways across its many foreign translations and adaptations.\nVariations.\nUsagi's character is different between versions of the series. In the manga, she starts out as a crybaby, but quickly matures and embraces the responsibilities of her role. Regardless of her maturity as a heroine, the manga often portrays Usagi as lazy or unmotivated in applying herself in her civilian life, such as making fun of her tendency to use phonetic writing instead of more formal script or consistently receiving low academic marks.\nThe original anime often portrays Usagi as being more childish. She frequently engages in petty squabbles with her friends, usually with Rei, and Chibiusa to the point of developing a friendly rivalry with them or sometimes her little brother Shingo with whom Usagi isn\u2019t shown getting along and shares a sibling rivalry with. Though she is likewise depicted as deeply caring of those around her, and even of her enemies. Repeated themes in the series depict Usagi feeling sympathy for villains she encounters, and working to help redeem them. Her clumsiness and other slovenly aspects are often highlighted for comedy purposes, both as a civilian and while fighting her enemies. Characters often comment on the unlikeliness of someone with as many graceless qualities like Usagi being a fierce warrior like Sailor Moon, but her lack of grace is simultaneously described as charming to those around her. Usagi's gregarious personality is often emphasized as bringing people together, including her friends and allies.\nIn the live-action series, Usagi differs slightly from her manga and anime counterparts. She is more outgoing and extroverted, and makes friends very easily. This immediately puts her personality in conflict with the other Sailor Guardians, each of whom is solitary to some degree. She rarely uses formal speech with those of her age (though she does with adults), and refers to everyone as \"\"given name\"-chan\" (which is very informal and a way of expressing closeness). She teases Ami when Ami continues calling her \"Tsukino-san\" (a formal way of speaking to classmates), saying that it is like they are not friends. Every time a new Sailor Guardian appears, Usagi immediately tries to befriend them, even though almost all of them resist. However, Usagi eventually makes the other Sailor Guardians realize that they are stronger together than alone. Usagi also has a habit of forcing her interests on her new friends. This is prominent in her relationship with Rei, where Usagi repeatedly tries to get Rei to sing.\nAspects and forms.\nBeing a character with a long lifetime (spanning the ancient Silver Millennium era and 30th century), as well as multiple incarnations, special powers and transformations, Usagi has various aliases such as Princess Serenity, Sailor Moon, Princess Sailor Moon, Super Sailor Moon, Eternal Sailor Moon, and Neo-Queen Serenity. In all of her incarnations (barring disguises), Usagi is always depicted with her hair up in twin buns with twin pigtails.\nSailor Moon.\nThe series often refers to Usagi's Sailor Guardian identity, Sailor Moon, as the \"Guardian of Love and Justice\", and once as the \"Guardian of Mystery\". Throughout most of the series, Sailor Moon wears a white and blue \"sailor fuku\" uniform; white and reddish\u2011pink gloves and boots; and crescent\u2011moon earrings. She also wears red hairpieces and white barrettes resembling feathers, both of which can be used for minor attacks. Her personality is no different from when she is a civilian. Though Usagi has some certain abilities as a civilian by way of her true identity as Sailor Moon, she must transform into Sailor Moon to access the vast array of powers available to her.\nThe names for Sailor Moon's attacks center around mythology of the Moon, love, healing, and light. She eventually becomes the most powerful Sailor Guardian in the galaxy, but her capacity for caring for others is shown to be more powerful still. As the reincarnation of Princess Serenity, Sailor Moon also wields the immensely powerful Silver Crystal. The origin of the Silver Crystal is inconsistently depicted in the series, described as a family heirloom early on, and later described as a fundamental part of Sailor Moon as a Sailor Guardian. The Silver Crystal is coveted by many of the series' villains for its limitless abilities, and Sailor Moon often uses it throughout the series to defeat the most difficult of villains, typically at the cost of her own vitality.\nSailor Moon's appearance and title change at key points when she grows stronger or gains additional powers. The first major change takes place during the third story arc \u2013 act 30 of the manga and episode 111 of the original anime \u2013 when she obtains the Holy Grail, an item of vast power, and transforms into the more powerful \"Super Sailor Moon\". In this form, her costume becomes more ornate and her powers are increased. At first she is unable to maintain this form without using the Grail, but she later gains the ability to assume this form permanently. This happens when the mysterious being Pegasus grants both her and Sailor Chibi Moon new transformation brooches \u2013 in arc 34 of the manga and in episode 130 of the original anime.\nSailor Moon receives her third and final form at the end of the fourth story arc, as the combined power of the other Sailor Guardians allows her to transform into \"Eternal Sailor Moon\", whom is described in the series as the closest in power to her future self, Neo-Queen Serenity. Her uniform is radically altered, including more ornate details and the addition of two pairs of angelic wings on her back which replace her back bow. In the manga, this final form coincides with the Silver Crystal evolving into the Silver Moon Crystal.\nPrincess Serenity.\n is a past incarnation of Sailor Moon that lived in the Moon Kingdom during the age of Silver Millennium. She was the daughter of Queen Serenity, who ruled Silver Millennium and watched over the Earth. Princess Serenity's guardians and closest friends were Sailor Mercury, Sailor Mars, Sailor Jupiter, and Sailor Venus, who were princesses of their own respective planets that sometimes lived on the Moon. On one of her visits to Earth, she met and fell in love with Endymion, the crown prince of Earth.\nDuring the attack that caused the Moon Kingdom's downfall, Prince Endymion died protecting Serenity. In the manga, she then commits suicide out of grief, while in the original anime, Queen Metalia killed them both. Queen Serenity was able to seal away the evil that had created the attack, but everyone involved was killed. Before her own death, the Queen used the Silver Crystal to give her daughter (and others) another chance at life by reincarnating them in the future, hoping that Endymion and Serenity would be able to find happiness together in their new lives. In the live-action series, it is Princess Serenity herself who destroys the Moon Kingdom with her uncontrolled uses of the Silver Crystal when Endymion was killed during the war between them in the past.\nUsagi occasionally takes the form of Princess Serenity during the series, often at climactic moments when more strength is needed than Sailor Moon can usually access. Usagi discovers her identity as a princess in act 9 of the manga, episode 34 of the original anime, and act 25 of the live action series. At climactic moments, Serenity sometimes gains a pair of functioning angelic wings, such as the final episodes of \"SuperS\" and \"Sailor Stars\". In the manga, Takeuchi depicts Usagi with white, yellow, and even pink hair, but Princess Serenity is almost always depicted with white hair. In the original anime, Princess Serenity is blond. In the live-action series, Serenity has black hair and brown eyes, just like Usagi, and she wears her hair straight down rather than in pigtails.\nWhile other adaptations of \"Sailor Moon\" depict Princess Serenity as gentle and similar to Usagi, the live-action series depicts Princess Serenity as colder and more severe. When she is reawakened and possesses Usagi, her singleminded infatuation with reuniting with Endymion causes her to callously disregard the safety of the other guardians and remorselessly strike down her enemies, not even caring if the Earth is destroyed.\nPrincess Sailor Moon.\n is a powerful combination of Sailor Moon and Princess Serenity that only exists in the live-action series. She is introduced when Usagi is possessed by the spirit of Princess Serenity.\nPrincess Sailor Moon is not the same person as Usagi and they have completely different personalities. Princess Sailor Moon shows no remorse for the fate of the Four Kings of Heaven and she refers to Mamoru as \"Endymion\" rather than his civilian name. She is always angry, and has no misgivings about causing death or destruction. In one act, Usagi's friend Naru accidentally gets too close to Princess Sailor Moon and has to be hospitalized as a result.\nDuring a confrontation with her current self as Princess Sailor Moon, Serenity tells Usagi that she would have no qualms about destroying the Earth if Endymion were taken from her again. Usagi pleads with Serenity not to overuse her powers, but Serenity refuses. Afraid that she will eventually destroy the world, Usagi tries to suppress her powers. Usagi's internal conflict forces her to undergo endurance training to keep her powers and Princess Serenity persona at bay. Usagi initially succeeds by avoiding negative thoughts. However, when she is forced to kill a possessed Mamoru, Serenity overcomes Usagi's resistance and transforms into Princess Sailor Moon. Serenity even summons her own minions to fight the other Sailor Guardians to prevent them from stopping her. Princess Sailor Moon successfully destroys the world once again, but Serenity eventually realizes the extent to which she is responsible for this and uses the Silver Crystal to undo the harm she has done.\nPrincess Sailor Moon has a sword that can deflect enemy attacks or unleash devastating projectiles. The sword also doubles as a harp with invisible strings that Princess Sailor Moon plays while mourning her lost prince. The harp's main power is the ability to heal people and the land. Other than healing powers, the exact effect of playing the harp is unclear, but it often causes her Silver Crystal to feed the power of Queen Metaria, accelerating the devastation of the planet.\nAs with other characters unique to the live-action series, Takeuchi designed Princess Sailor Moon's outfit. Her sailor outfit is considerably more elaborate than Sailor Moon's, and included a crown, pearls on her gloves, and lace on her skirt.[]\nNeo-Queen Serenity.\nDuring the second story arc, it is revealed that Usagi, as Serenity, will eventually become the queen regnant of a new Silver Millennium called Crystal Tokyo, in the 30th century. This form is called and is first seen in act 16 of the manga and episode 68 of the original anime. Usagi learns that she will be given the title \"Sovereign of Earth\", and Mamoru will become King Endymion alongside her. It is stated in the anime that she becomes Neo-Queen Serenity after warding off a second ice age, though the specifics of this are never discussed.\nThis incarnation is shown to be more mature than the present day Usagi, though she is still childish in some ways. For example, in episode 104, Chibiusa gives the Sailor Guardians a letter from the future in which the Queen asks them to train her, but the letter is simplistic and contains almost no kanji. In episode 146, Diana says that the King and Queen would sometimes play sick to get out of things. Letters she sends through the Door of Space-Time to Chibiusa are sometimes signed with a drawing of herself (and sometimes King Endymion) instead of a name.\nIn the manga, Neo-Queen Serenity tells the present-day Sailor Guardians that after she became queen, she lost her power as a Sailor Guardian. In the second arc of the anime she does not transform (into Sailor Moon) even when the others do. However, she is seen showing great powers in a flashback when the King Endymion of the future describes the great feats of Neo-Queen Serenity during the time she brought about peace. Diana likewise describes Eternal Sailor Moon as the one second in power only to Neo-Queen Serenity. She also demonstrates abilities that allow her to rejuvenate the destroyed city of Crystal Tokyo, grant the Sailor Guardians upgraded powers, and provide her past self with an upgraded transformation brooch and weapon, the Spiral Heart Moon Rod.\nNeo-Queen Serenity wears an altered version of the dress she wore as a princess. The shoulder pieces are omitted and a large, wing-shaped bow replaces the smaller one of the princess outfit. In the manga, Neo-Queen Serenity's dress is similar to her past form's outfit. She also wears a crown and new earrings. The crescent moon is always visible on her forehead, just as it is with her princess form. Her face and facial expressions are drawn to look more mature than the 20th century Usagi, but her iconic hairstyle is retained.\nThis form is the one that Chibiusa considers as truly being her mother, while she sees the Usagi of the past as a sister figure.\nSailor Cosmos.\nIn the manga and \"Crystal\", Chibi-Chibi is a young girl who arrives in the present from the future who turns out to be the ultimate future form of Sailor Moon, named , in disguise. Cosmos is depicted with flowing white hair in heart-shaped hair buns and pigtails, a winged staff, a simplified white sailor fuku and miniskirt with multicolored ribbons, high heel shoes, gold details, and a flowing, white cape.\nCosmos comes from a future which has been destroyed by the battle with Sailor Chaos; after ages of fighting, she despairs and flees to the past as Chibi-Chibi to aid Eternal Sailor Moon in her fight against Sailor Galaxia and to encourage Sailor Moon to destroy the Galaxy Cauldron altogether, ensuring Chaos' destruction. However, Sailor Moon protests after realizing that if the Cauldron is destroyed, no more stars will be born, leaving the Galaxy without a future. Sailor Moon chooses to sacrifice herself to the Cauldron and seal Chaos away, which Cosmos realizes to have been the right decision. Reminded of the strength and courage she needs to have, Cosmos returns to the future with new hope. After the end of the anime adaptation, Takeuchi commented that she wished Cosmos had been used in \"Sailor Moon Sailor Stars\".\nAbilities.\nIn most adaptations, Usagi can transform into a Sailor Guardian by wearing a special device (usually a brooch or compact) and shouting a special command that activates the device. Her original transformation command is . She gains a new basic transformation sequence for each of the five major story arcs. Later in the series, Sailor Moon is able to transform into more powerful forms through the use of items like the Holy Grail or through the combined powers of the other Sailor Guardians.\nMost of the anime adaptations' transformation sequences involve the use of shiny red or pink ribbons that fly out of her brooch and form her uniform. Feathers and wings also figure prominently in some sequences, particularly the transformation into Eternal Sailor Moon.\nAs the protagonist, Usagi has the most special powers of any character in the series. She often uses magical objects for her attacks, such as her tiara or various rods and wands. In the anime, following her attacks' themes of the Moon or love, her attacks are often depicted as firing crescent moon-shaped or heart-shaped energy projectiles at her enemies. While her attacks in the manga tend to simply destroy her enemies, the original anime frequently depicts her attacks as purifying her enemies, restoring possessed victims or objects to their original states of being.\nHer physical attacks, usually one-offs and not always successful, include the occasional use of her hair pins as projectile weapons. One of her techniques is the comedic , which involves using the red shields on her hair buns to amplify her loud crying.\nSilver Crystal.\nThe is a magical crystal that only the members of the Moon Kingdom royal lineage can use. The search for the crystal and subsequent attempts to acquire it form the basis of major conflict throughout the entire series.\nThe Silver Crystal possesses tremendous power, capable of reviving an entire world from ruin and extending the natural lifespan of all people under its protection. Sailor Galaxia describes its regenerative power as unlimited. In the anime, however, the strain of using such power often costs the user her life. The anime shows this happening first when Queen Serenity uses it in the past, again when Sailor Moon defeats Queen Metaria, and again in the Sailor Moon R: The Movie. Other depictions show using the crystal to be taxing, rather than fatal. In the manga, no such claim is made about using the Silver Crystal. In both the manga and anime, the Silver Crystal is described as following the heart of its wielder, to the point of either becoming too powerful in the midst of Usagi's confusion, or as inert as a glass bead with her indecision. In the anime, the Silver Crystal was placed on Sailor Moon's Moon Stick to increase the power of her \"Moon Healing Escalation\" attack. However, Queen Beryl stated that Sailor Moon could not unlock the full potential of the Silver Crystal because she had not awakened as a \"full-fledged princess\" yet.\nAll adaptations portray the Silver Crystal as possibly the single most powerful artifact in the universe, able to focus the energy of its wielder to perform magnificent feats. However, several artifacts rival it in strength, including the Malefic Black Crystal of the Death Phantom, and Sailor Galaxia's Lazurite Crystal. Saphir describes the Silver Crystal as a fearsome item, working across time and space. In the manga, the Silver Crystal is described as so powerful that the present and future versions of it coming into contact with each other could destroy everything.\nBecause Chibiusa comes from the future \u2013 having eventually inherited the Silver Crystal from Usagi \u2013 two versions of it exist in the series. After the first and second story arcs, the owners of the crystals keep them in their respective transformation brooches and only remove them in times of urgent need. The crystal is depicted in a variety of forms: spherical, in the initial anime appearance, and a rounded tear drop in the manga. It later takes a heart shape while stored in her brooch in the anime, and also appears in a petaled flower shape in various adaptations, including when it evolves into the Silver Moon Crystal form.\nAs her Sailor Crystal, the Silver Crystal also gives Sailor Moon the ability to be reborn again and again. So long as a Sailor Guardian's Sailor Crystal remains, their physical forms can be regenerated across numerous incarnations.\nAs Sailor Cosmos.\nSailor Cosmos is described in the manga as a distant future incarnation of Sailor Moon. Her powers are vast, able to transport people across time and space, construct strong protective barriers, and repel villains like Sailor Galaxia, while restoring destroyed environments. Sailor Cosmos comments that Eternal Sailor Moon's actions in the final battle using the combined power of all Sailor Crystals throughout the galaxy is the Cosmos Crystal's true power, called \"Lambda Power\", which is able to restore all things to their original forms. Figuratively, Sailor Cosmos describes her past self, Eternal Sailor Moon, as the true embodiment of Sailor Cosmos for her final act of courage, as opposed to herself, who fled her own timeline after losing faith in her unceasing battle against Sailor Chaos.\nPortrayals in media.\nIn the Japanese version of every \"Sailor Moon\" anime series and subsequent related media, Usagi has been voiced by Kotono Mitsuishi. For this role, Mitsuishi used a higher voice than her natural one. During recording sessions of the early episodes, Mitsuishi had to mentally prepare herself to play Usagi. While Mitsuishi was away during production of episodes 44\u201350, Kae Araki (who would later voice Usagi's own future daughter, Chibiusa) voiced Usagi as a stand-in. Mitsuishi would later reprise her role in \"Sailor Moon Crystal\", the only actress from the original cast to do so.\nIn DIC Entertainment's English dub of \"Sailor Moon\" (produced in association with Optimum Productions), Sailor Moon was voiced by Tracey Moore for the first 14 episodes (edited down to 11) after which Terri Hawkes took over as the voice for the remaining episodes of the DiC produced dub, as well as Pioneer's dub for the three films, though Moore would return to voice the character in two more episodes later on in the first season. Linda Ballantyne was the voice of Sailor Moon in Cloverway's dub of episodes 83\u2013159 of Sailor Moon (produced in association with Optimum Productions). When Ballantyne first recorded the series, Ballantyne attempted to emulate Hawkes, but soon found it difficult to perform. She wanted the character to \"have a lot more fun and just be a goofy teenager.\" Ballantyne cited her performance as \"just more flighty... Until of course the world needed to be saved.\" American singer Jennifer Cihi provided the English vocals for the character's songs in the first English adaptation. Stephanie Sheh provides the voice in Viz Media's dub of the entire original \"Sailor Moon\" series (produced in association with Studiopolis), and also \"Sailor Moon Crystal\".\nIn the stage musicals, Usagi has been played by 16 actresses: Anza Ohyama, Fumina Hara, Miyuki Kanbe (who played the character with a \"cute and high voice\"), Marina Kuroki, Satomi \u014ckubo, Hotaru Nomoto, Sayuri Inoue, Mizuki Yamashita, Shiori Kubo, Kanae Yumemiya, Natsuki Koga, Tomomi Kasai, Riko Takanaka, Nagi Inoue, Satsuki Sugawara and Yui Yokoyama. In the \"SuperS\" Musicals, Sanae Kimura, who played Sailor Uranus, provided the voice of Neo-Queen Serenity during \"Over the Moon\", a duet between Sailor Moon and Neo-Queen Serenity. A third, unknown person, was on stage in Serenity's costume while both Sailor Moon and Uranus were onstage. Uncredited body doubles are common in the musicals to allow the character to appear to transform instantly.\nIn \"Pretty Guardian Sailor Moon\", Usagi was portrayed by Miyuu Sawai.\nIn \"Sailor Moon Cosmos\", Sailor Cosmos is voiced by Keiko Kitagawa. In the musicals, Sailor Cosmos is portrayed by Satomi Okubo, who had also portrayed Usagi from 2013 to 2015.\nReception and legacy.\nSheila Rose Browning describes Sailor Moon as \"one of the most popular and well-known manga characters in Japan\". Usagi influenced the hairstyle and personality of Misato Katsuragi from \"Neon Genesis Evangelion\", and of Gruier Serenity's anime version from \"Bodacious Space Pirates\". Sailor Moon was ranked 9th on IGN's \"Top 25 Anime Characters of All Time\", being the highest-ranking female character in the list. During the 2020 Olympics, Sailor Moon was selected as one of nine internationally recognized anime and manga characters to serve as Tokyo's mascot ambassadors. Rebecca Silverman, writing about the 2011 re-release of the \"Sailor Moon\" manga, felt that Usagi's initial hesitancy about whether she is good enough to be Sailor Moon added authenticity to her claim of being an \"ordinary girl\". Silverman states that along with the characters in \"Itazura na Kiss\" and \"Marmalade Boy\", Usagi gave rise to an \"unintelligent heroine\" character type, but feels that even in the first volume, Usagi's determination sets her apart.\nIn popular culture.\nComedian Samantha Bee portrayed Sailor Moon in a live-action production at the Canadian National Exhibition.\nThe \"Shopkins\" episode, \"Look Within\", features a reference to Sailor Moon's original transformation scene with Lippy Lips (shown to transform into her 'Wild Style'.)\nAt the 2022 WWE Royal Rumble, Sasha Banks entered in an outfit inspired by Sailor Moon.\nInternet memes.\nA social media challenge on Twitter called the #sailormoonredraw gained popularity in May 2018. Artists use a still frame of Sailor Moon taken during the episode \"A Bright Shooting Star! Saturn, and the Messiah\" from the third season of the original Sailor Moon television series, \"Sailor Moon S\", and redraw it in different styles or have another fictional character take her place. A similar phenomenon occurred back in April 2014 four years prior, in the form a humorous online comic with scenes the series premiere of the original television series, \"The Crybaby Usagi's Magnificent Transformation!\", set right after Sailor Moon's first battle with the Youma Morga and Tuxedo Mask's first intervention which originated from Tumblr.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39807", "revid": "50740089", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39807", "title": "Nature versus nurture", "text": "Long-standing debate in biology and society\nNature versus nurture is a long-standing debate in biology and society about the relative influence on human beings of their genetic inheritance or biology (nature) and the environmental conditions of their development (nurture). Nature is what people think of as pre-wiring and is influenced by genetic inheritance and other biological factors. Nurture is generally taken as the influence of external factors after conception e.g. the product of exposure, experience and learning on an individual.\nThe phrase in its modern sense was popularized by the Victorian polymath Francis Galton, the modern founder of eugenics and behavioral genetics when he was discussing the influence of heredity and environment on social advancement. Galton was influenced by \"On the Origin of Species\" written by his half-cousin, the evolutionary biologist Charles Darwin. The complementary combination of the two concepts is an ancient concept ().\nThe view that humans acquire all or almost all their behavioral traits from \"nurture\" was termed \"tabula rasa\" ('blank tablet, slate') by John Locke in 1690. A \"blank slate view\" (sometimes termed \"blank-slatism\") in human developmental psychology, which assumes that human behavioral traits develop almost exclusively from environmental influences, was widely held during much of the 20th century. The debate between \"blank-slate\" denial of the influence of heritability, and the view admitting both environmental and heritable traits, was at the core of an ideological dispute over research agendas throughout the second half of the 20th century. \nToday, the idea of a strong dichotomy of nature \"versus\" nurture is generally considered to have limited relevance. Both \"nature\" and \"nurture\" factors have been found to contribute substantially, often in an inextricable manner, to many processes studied by biologists, psychologists and anthropologists. Feedback loops have been found in which nature and nurture influence one another constantly, as seen in self-domestication. In ecology and behavioral genetics, researchers posit that nurture has an essential influence on the nature of an individual. Similarly in other fields, the dividing line between an inherited and an acquired trait has become unclear, as in epigenetics and fetal development.\nHistory of the debate.\nAccording to \"Records of the Grand Historian\" (94 BC) by Sima Qian, during Chen Sheng Wu Guang uprising in 209 B.C., Chen Sheng asked the rhetorical question as a call to war: \"Are kings, generals, and ministers merely born into their kind?\" (). Though Chen was obviously negative to the question, the phrase has often been cited as an early quest into the nature versus nurture problem.\nJohn Locke's \"An Essay Concerning Human Understanding\" (1690) is often cited as the foundational document of the \"blank slate\" view. In the \"Essay\", Locke specifically criticizes Ren\u00e9 Descartes's claim of an innate idea of God that is universal to humanity. Locke's view was harshly criticized in his own time. Anthony Ashley-Cooper, 3rd Earl of Shaftesbury, complained that by denying the possibility of any innate ideas, Locke \"threw all order and virtue out of the world,\" leading to total moral relativism. By the 19th century, the predominant perspective was contrary to that of Locke's, tending to focus on \"instinct.\" Leda Cosmides and John Tooby noted that William James (1842\u20131910) argued that humans have \"more\" instincts than animals, and that greater freedom of action is the result of having more psychological instincts, not fewer.\nThe question of \"innate ideas\" or \"instincts\" was of some importance in the discussion of free will in moral philosophy. In 18th-century philosophy, this was cast in terms of \"innate ideas\" establishing the presence of a universal virtue, a prerequisite for objective morals. In the 20th century, this argument was in a way inverted, since some philosophers (J. L. Mackie) now argued that the evolutionary origins of human behavioral traits forces us to concede that there is no foundation for ethics, while others (Thomas Nagel) treated ethics as a field of cognitively valid statements in complete isolation from evolutionary considerations.\nEarly to mid-20th century.\nIn the early 20th century, there was an increased interest in the role of one's environment, as a reaction to the strong focus on pure heredity in the wake of the triumphal success of Darwin's theory of evolution. During this time, the social sciences developed as the project of studying the influence of culture in clean isolation from questions related to \"biology. Franz Boas's \"The Mind of Primitive Man\" (1911) established a program that would dominate American anthropology for the next 15 years. In this study, he established that in any given population, biology, language, material, and symbolic culture, are autonomous; that each is an equally important dimension of human nature, but that none of these dimensions is reducible to another.\nPurist behaviorism.\nJohn B. Watson in the 1920s and 1930s established the school of \"purist behaviorism\" that would become dominant over the following decades. Watson is often said to have been convinced of the complete dominance of cultural influence over anything that heredity might contribute. This is based on the following quote which is frequently repeated without context, as the last sentence is frequently omitted, leading to confusion about Watson's position:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and my own specified world to bring them up in and I'll guarantee to take any one at random and train him to become any type of specialist I might select \u2013 doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant-chief and, yes, even beggar-man and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors. I am going beyond my facts and I admit it, but so have the advocates of the contrary and they have been doing it for many thousands of years.During the 1940s to 1960s, Ashley Montagu was a notable proponent of this purist form of behaviorism which allowed no contribution from heredity whatsoever: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Man is man because he has no instincts, because everything he is and has become he has learned, acquired, from his culture ... with the exception of the instinctoid reactions in infants to sudden withdrawals of support and to sudden loud noises, the human being is entirely instinctless.In 1951, Calvin Hall suggested that the dichotomy opposing nature to nurture is ultimately fruitless.\nIn \"African Genesis\" (1961) and \"The Territorial Imperative\" (1966), Robert Ardrey argues for innate attributes of human nature, especially concerning territoriality. Desmond Morris in \"The Naked Ape\" (1967) expresses similar views. Organised opposition to Montagu's kind of purist \"blank-slatism\" began to pick up in the 1970s, notably led by E. O. Wilson (\"On Human Nature\", 1979).\nThe tool of twin studies was developed as a research design intended to exclude all confounders based on inherited behavioral traits. Such studies are designed to decompose the variability of a given trait in a given population into a genetic and an environmental component. Studies using twin neuroimaging methods show that genetic elements explain more of the variation in cognitive processing than emotional regulation which indicates that environmental factors play a greater role in shaping affective traits. Twin studies established that there was, in many cases, a significant heritable component. These results did not, in any way, point to overwhelming contribution of heritable factors, with heritability typically ranging around 40% to 50%, so that the controversy may not be cast in terms of \"purist behaviorism\" vs. \"purist nativism\". Rather, it was \"purist behaviorism\" that was gradually replaced by the now-predominant view that both kinds of factors usually contribute to a given trait, anecdotally phrased by Donald Hebb as an answer to the question \"which, nature or nurture, contributes more to personality?\" by asking in response, \"Which contributes more to the area of a rectangle, its length or its width?\"\nIn a comparable avenue of research, anthropologist Donald Brown in the 1980s surveyed hundreds of anthropological studies from around the world and collected a set of cultural universals. He identified approximately 150 such features, coming to the conclusion there is indeed a \"universal human nature\", and that these features point to what that universal human nature is.\nDeterminism.\nAt the height of the controversy, during the 1970s to 1980s, the debate was highly ideologised. In \"\" (1984), Richard Lewontin, Steven Rose and Leon Kamin criticise \"genetic determinism\" from a Marxist framework, arguing that \"Science is the ultimate legitimator of bourgeois ideology ... If biological determinism is a weapon in the struggle between classes, then the universities are weapons factories, and their teaching and research faculties are the engineers, designers, and production workers.\" The debate thus shifted away from whether heritable traits exist to whether it was politically or ethically permissible to admit their existence. The authors deny this, requesting that evolutionary inclinations be discarded in ethical and political discussions regardless of whether they exist or not.\n1990s.\nHeritability studies became much easier to perform, and hence much more numerous, with the advances of genetic studies during the 1990s. By the late 1990s, an overwhelming amount of evidence had accumulated that amounts to a refutation of the extreme forms of \"blank-slatism\" advocated by Watson or Montagu.\nThis revised state of affairs was summarized in books aimed at a popular audience from the late 1990s. In \"\" (1998), Judith Rich Harris was heralded by Steven Pinker as a book that \"will come to be seen as a turning point in the history of psychology.\" However, Harris was criticized for exaggerating the point of \"parental upbringing seems to matter less than previously thought\" to the implication that \"parents do not matter.\"\nThe situation as it presented itself by the end of the 20th century was summarized in \"\" (2002) by Steven Pinker. The book became a best-seller, and was instrumental in bringing to the attention of a wider public the paradigm shift away from the behaviourist purism of the 1940s to 1970s that had taken place over the preceding decades.\nPinker portrays the adherence to pure \"blank-slatism\" as an ideological dogma linked to two other dogmas found in the dominant view of human nature in the 20th century:\nPinker argues that all three dogmas were held onto for an extended period even in the face of evidence because they were seen as \"desirable\" in the sense that if any human trait is purely conditioned by culture, any undesired trait (such as crime or aggression) may be engineered away by purely cultural (political) means. Pinker focuses on reasons he assumes were responsible for unduly repressing evidence to the contrary, notably the fear of (imagined or projected) political or ideological consequences.\nHeritability estimates.\nThe term \"heritability\" only refers to the degree of genetic variation between people on a trait. It does not refer to the degree to which a trait of a particular individual is due to environmental or genetic factors. The traits of an individual are always a complex interweaving of both. For an individual, even strongly genetically influenced, or \"obligate\" traits, such as eye color, assume the inputs of a typical environment during ontogenetic development (e.g., certain ranges of temperatures, oxygen levels, etc.).\nIn contrast, the \"heritability index\" statistically quantifies the extent to which variation \"between individuals\" on a trait is due to variation in the genes those individuals carry. In animals where breeding and environments can be controlled experimentally, heritability can be determined relatively easily. Such experiments would be unethical for human research. This problem can be overcome by finding existing populations of humans that reflect the experimental setting the researcher wishes to create.\nOne way to determine the contribution of genes and environment to a trait is to study twins. In one kind of study, identical twins reared apart are compared to randomly selected pairs of people. The twins share identical genes, but different family environments. Twins reared apart are not assigned at random to foster or adoptive parents. In another kind of twin study, identical twins reared together (who share family environment and genes) are compared to fraternal twins reared together (who also share family environment but only share half their genes). Another condition that permits the disassociation of genes and environment is adoption. In one kind of adoption study, biological siblings reared together (who share the same family environment and half their genes) are compared to adoptive siblings (who share their family environment but none of their genes).\nIn many cases, it has been found that genes make a substantial contribution, including psychological traits such as intelligence and personality. Yet heritability may differ in other circumstances, for instance environmental deprivation. Examples of low, medium, and high heritability traits include:\nTwin and adoption studies have their methodological limits. For example, both are limited to the range of environments and genes which they sample. Almost all of these studies are conducted in Western countries, and therefore cannot necessarily be extrapolated globally to include non-western populations. Additionally, both types of studies depend on particular assumptions, such as the equal environments assumption in the case of twin studies, and the lack of pre-adoptive effects in the case of adoption studies.\nSince the definition of \"nature\" in this context is tied to \"heritability\", the definition of \"nurture\" has consequently become very wide, including any type of causality that is not heritable. The term has thus moved away from its original connotation of \"cultural influences\" to include all effects of the environment, including; indeed, a substantial source of environmental input to human nature may arise from stochastic variations in prenatal development and is thus in no sense of the term \"cultural\".\nGene\u2013environment interaction.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Rquote/styles.css\"/&gt;{ class=\"rquote pullquote floatright\" role=\"presentation\" style=\"display:table; border-collapse:collapse; border-style:none; float:right; margin:0.5em 0.75em; width:33%; \"The interactions of genes with environment, called \"gene\u2013environment interactions\", are another component of the nature\u2013nurture debate. A classic example of gene\u2013environment interaction is the ability of a diet low in the amino acid phenylalanine to partially suppress the genetic disease phenylketonuria. Yet another complication to the nature\u2013nurture debate is the existence of gene\u2013environment correlations. These correlations indicate that individuals with certain genotypes are more likely to find themselves in certain environments. Thus, it appears that genes can shape (the selection or creation of) environments. Even using experiments like those described above, it can be very difficult to determine convincingly the relative contribution of genes and environment. The analogy \"genetics loads the gun, but environment pulls the trigger\" has been attributed to Judith Stern.\nHeritability refers to the origins of differences between people. Individual development, even of highly heritable traits, such as eye color, depends on a range of environmental factors, from the other genes in the organism, to physical variables such as temperature, oxygen levels etc. during its development or ontogenesis.\nThe variability of trait can be meaningfully spoken of as being due in certain proportions to genetic differences (\"nature\"), or environments (\"nurture\"). For highly penetrant Mendelian genetic disorders such as Huntington's disease virtually all the incidence of the disease is due to genetic differences. Huntington's animal models live much longer or shorter lives depending on how they are cared for.\nAt a molecular level, genes interact with signals from other genes and from the environment. While there are many thousands of single-gene-locus traits, so-called complex traits are due to the additive effects of many (often hundreds) of small gene effects. A good example of this is height, where variance appears to be spread across many hundreds of loci.\nExtreme genetic or environmental conditions can predominate in rare circumstances\u2014if a child is born mute due to a genetic mutation, it will not learn to speak any language regardless of the environment; similarly, someone who is practically certain to eventually develop Huntington's disease according to their genotype may die in an unrelated accident (an environmental event) long before the disease will manifest itself.\nSteven Pinker likewise described several examples:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;[C]oncrete behavioral traits that patently depend on content provided by the home or culture\u2014which language one speaks, which religion one practices, which political party one supports\u2014are not heritable at all. But traits that reflect the underlying talents and temperaments\u2014how proficient with language a person is, how religious, how liberal or conservative\u2014are partially heritable.When traits are determined by a complex interaction of genotype and environment it is possible to measure the heritability of a trait within a population. However, many non-scientists who encounter a report of a trait having a certain percentage heritability imagine non-interactional, additive contributions of genes and environment to the trait. As an analogy, some laypeople may think of the degree of a trait being made up of two \"buckets,\" genes and environment, each able to hold a certain capacity of the trait. But even for intermediate heritabilities, a trait is always shaped by both genetic dispositions and the environments in which people develop, merely with greater and lesser plasticities associated with these heritability measures.\nHeritability measures always refer to the degree of \"variation between individuals in a population\". That is, as these statistics cannot be applied at the level of the individual, it would be incorrect to say that while the heritability index of personality is about 0.6, 60% of one's personality is obtained from one's parents and 40% from the environment. To help to understand this, imagine that all humans were genetic clones. The heritability index for all traits would be zero (all variability between clonal individuals must be due to environmental factors). And, contrary to erroneous interpretations of the heritability index, as societies become more egalitarian (everyone has more similar experiences) the heritability index goes up (as environments become more similar, variability between individuals is due more to genetic factors).\nOne should also take into account the fact that the variables of heritability and environmentality are not precise and vary within a chosen population and across cultures. It would be more accurate to state that the degree of heritability and environmentality is measured in its reference to a particular phenotype in a chosen group of a population in a given period of time. The accuracy of the calculations is further hindered by the number of coefficients taken into consideration, age being one such variable. The display of the influence of heritability and environmentality differs drastically across age groups: the older the studied age is, the more noticeable the heritability factor becomes, the younger the test subjects are, the more likely it is to show signs of strong influence of the environmental factors.\nFor example, one study found no statistically significant difference in self-reported wellbeing between middle-aged monozygotic twins separated at birth and those reared in the same household, suggesting that happiness in middle-aged adults is not based in environmental factors related to family rearing. The same result was also found among middle-aged dizygotic twins. Furthermore, there was significantly more variance in the dizygotic twins' self-reported wellbeing than there was in the monozygotic group. Genetic similarity has thus been estimated to account for around 50% of the variance in adult happiness at a given point in time, and as much as 80% of the variance in long-term happiness stability. Other studies have similarly found the heritability of happiness to be around 0.35\u20130.50.\nSome have pointed out that environmental inputs affect the expression of genes. This is one explanation of how environment can influence the extent to which a genetic disposition will actually manifest.\nObligate vs. facultative adaptations.\nTraits may be considered to be adaptations (such as the umbilical cord), byproducts of adaptations (the belly button) or due to random variation (convex or concave belly button shape). An alternative to contrasting nature and nurture focuses on \"obligate vs. facultative\" adaptations. Adaptations may be generally more obligate (robust in the face of typical environmental variation) or more facultative (sensitive to typical environmental variation). For example, the rewarding sweet taste of sugar and the pain of bodily injury are obligate psychological adaptations\u2014typical environmental variability during development does not much affect their operation.\nOn the other hand, facultative adaptations are somewhat like \"if-then\" statements. An example of a facultative psychological adaptation may be adult attachment style. The attachment style of adults, (for example, a \"secure attachment style,\" the propensity to develop close, trusting bonds with others) is proposed to be conditional on whether an individual's early childhood caregivers could be trusted to provide reliable assistance and attention. An example of a facultative physiological adaptation is tanning of skin on exposure to sunlight (to prevent skin damage). Facultative social adaptation have also been proposed. For example, whether a society is warlike or peaceful has been proposed to be conditional on how much collective threat that society is experiencing.\nAdvanced techniques.\nQuantitative studies of heritable traits throw light on the question.\nDevelopmental genetic analysis examines the effects of genes over the course of a human lifespan. Early studies of intelligence, which mostly examined young children, found that heritability measured 40\u201350%. Subsequent developmental genetic analyses found that variance attributable to additive environmental effects is less apparent in older individuals, with estimated heritability of IQ increasing in adulthood.\nMultivariate genetic analysis examines the genetic contribution to several traits that vary together. For example, multivariate genetic analysis has demonstrated that the genetic determinants of all specific cognitive abilities (e.g., memory, spatial reasoning, processing speed) overlap greatly, such that the genes associated with any specific cognitive ability will affect all others. Similarly, multivariate genetic analysis has found that genes that affect scholastic achievement completely overlap with the genes that affect cognitive ability.\nExtremes analysis examines the link between normal and pathological traits. For example, it is hypothesized that a given behavioral disorder may represent an extreme of a continuous distribution of a normal behavior and hence an extreme of a continuous distribution of genetic and environmental variation. Depression, phobias, and reading disabilities have been examined in this context.\nFor a few highly heritable traits, studies have identified loci associated with variance in that trait, for instance in some individuals with schizophrenia. New research is showing that gene expression can happen in adults due to environmental stimuli. For example, people with schizophrenic gene have a genetic predisposition for this illness but the gene lays dormant in most people. However, if introduced to chronic stress or introducing some amphetamines it caused the methyl groups to stick to hippocampi histones.\nIntelligence.\nHeritability of intelligence.\nCognitive functions have a significant genetic component. A 2015 meta-analysis of over 14 million twin pairs found that genetics explained 57% of the variability in cognitive functions. Evidence from behavioral genetic research suggests that family environmental factors may have an effect upon childhood IQ, accounting for up to a quarter of the variance. The American Psychological Association's report \"\" (1995) states that there is no doubt that normal child development requires a certain minimum level of responsible care. Here, environment is playing a role in what is believed to be fully genetic (intelligence) but it was found that severely deprived, neglectful, or abusive environments have highly negative effects on many aspects of children's intellect development. Beyond that minimum, however, the role of family experience is in serious dispute. On the other hand, by late adolescence this correlation disappears, such that adoptive siblings no longer have similar IQ scores.\nMoreover, adoption studies indicate that, by adulthood, adoptive siblings are no more similar in IQ than strangers (IQ correlation near zero), while full siblings show an IQ correlation of 0.6. Twin studies reinforce this pattern: monozygotic (identical) twins raised separately are highly similar in IQ (0.74), more so than dizygotic (fraternal) twins raised together (0.6) and much more than adoptive siblings (\u22480.0). Recent adoption studies also found that supportive parents can have a positive effect on the development of their children.\nEnvironment's effect on IQ.\nOther studies have focused on environmental factors that may affect IQ. For example, research has shown that factors such as access to education, nutrition, and social support can have a significant impact on IQ. Recent research shows that children who spend time in nature develop better executive functioning and attention skills according to recent meta-analytic studies although the results show small effects that vary between studies.\nPersonality traits.\nPersonality is a frequently cited example of a heritable trait that has been studied in twins and adoptees using behavioral genetic study designs. The most famous categorical organization of heritable personality traits were defined in the 1970s by two research teams led by Paul Costa &amp; Robert R. McCrae and Warren Norman &amp; Lewis Goldberg in which they had people rate their personalities on 1000+ dimensions they then narrowed these down into \"The Big Five\" factors of personality\u2014openness, conscientiousness, extraversion, agreeableness, and neuroticism. Studies have found that extraversion has a genetic component, with estimates of heritability ranging from 30% to 50%. The close genetic relationship between positive personality traits and, for example, our happiness traits are the mirror images of comorbidity in psychopathology. These personality factors were consistent across cultures, and many studies have also tested the heritability of these traits. Personal agency also factors into this debate. While genetic and environmental factors can shape personality, individuals also have agency in shaping their own personality through their choices, behaviors, and attitudes. For example, one study found that college students who participated in study abroad programs scored higher on measures of openness to experience compared to those who did not participate. Another study found that individuals who lived in diverse neighborhoods were more likely to score higher on openness to experience compared to those who lived in more homogenous neighborhoods.\nIdentical twins reared apart are far more similar in personality than randomly selected pairs of people. Likewise, identical twins are more similar than fraternal twins. Also, biological siblings are more similar in personality than adoptive siblings. Each observation suggests that personality is heritable to a certain extent. A supporting article had focused on the heritability of personality (which is estimated to be around 50% for subjective well-being) in which a study was conducted using a representative sample of 973 twin pairs to test the heritable differences in subjective well-being which were found to be fully accounted for by the genetic model of the Five-Factor Model's personality domains. However, these same study designs allow for the examination of environment as well as genes.\nAdoption studies also directly measure the strength of shared family effects. Adopted siblings share only family environment. Most adoption studies indicate that by adulthood the personalities of adopted siblings are little or no more similar than random pairs of strangers. This would mean that shared family effects on personality are zero by adulthood.\nIn the case of personality traits, non-shared environmental effects are often found to out-weigh shared environmental effects. That is, environmental effects that are typically thought to be life-shaping (such as family life) may have less of an impact than non-shared effects, which are harder to identify. One possible source of non-shared effects is the environment of pre-natal development. Random variations in the genetic program of development may be a substantial source of non-shared environment. These results suggest that \"nurture\" may not be the predominant factor in \"environment\". Environment and our situations, do in fact impact our lives, but not the way in which we would typically react to these environmental factors. We are preset with personality traits that are the basis for how we would react to situations. An example would be how extraverted prisoners become less happy than introverted prisoners and would react to their incarceration more negatively due to their preset extraverted personality. Behavioral genes are somewhat proven to exist when we take a look at fraternal twins. When fraternal twins are reared apart, they show the same similarities in behavior and response as if they have been reared together.\nGenetics.\nThe relationship between personality and people's own well-being is influenced and mediated by genes. There has been found to be a stable set point for happiness that is characteristic of the individual (largely determined by the individual's genes). Happiness fluctuates around that setpoint (again, genetically determined) based on whether good things or bad things are happening to us (\"nurture\"), but only fluctuates in small magnitude in a normal human. The midpoint of these fluctuations is determined by the \"great genetic lottery\" that people are born with, which leads them to conclude that how happy they may feel at the moment or over time is simply due to the luck of the draw, or gene. This fluctuation was also not due to educational attainment, which only accounted for less than 2% of the variance in well-being for women, and less than 1% of the variance for men.\nThey consider that the individualities measured together with personality tests remain steady throughout an individual's lifespan. They further believe that human beings may refine their forms or personality but can never change them entirely. Darwin's Theory of Evolution steered naturalists such as George Williams and William Hamilton to the concept of personality evolution. They suggested that physical organs and also personality is a product of natural selection.\nWith the advent of gene sequencing, it has become possible to search for and identify specific gene polymorphisms that affect traits such as IQ and personality. These techniques work by tracking the association of differences in a trait of interest with differences in specific molecular markers or functional variants. An example of a visible human trait for which the precise genetic basis of differences are relatively well known is eye color.\nIn contrast to views developed in 1960s that gender identity is primarily learned (which led to a protocol of surgical sex changes in male infants with injured or malformed genitals, such as David Reimer), genomics has provided solid evidence that both sex and gender identities are primarily influenced by genes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;It is now clear that genes are vastly more influential than virtually any other force in shaping sex identity and gender identity ... The growing consensus in medicine is that ... children should be assigned to their chromosomal (i.e., genetic) sex regardless of anatomical variations and differences\u2014with the option of switching, if desired, later in life.\u2014\u200a\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39816", "revid": "1280905828", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39816", "title": "Dub, King of Scotland", "text": "King of Alba from 962 to 967\nDub mac Ma\u00edl Coluim (Modern Gaelic: \"Dubh mac Mhaoil Chaluim\", ), \"Dub mac Ma\u00edl Coluim\" is the Mediaeval Gaelic form. The modern form, \"Dubh\", has the sense of \"dark\" or \"black\". Sometimes anglicised as Duff MacMalcolm, this form was used in older histories, but is not commonly used today called D\u00e9n, \"the Vehement\" Duan Albanach, and \"the Black\" a direct translation of his name to modern English is Black Malcolmson (c. 928\u2013967) was king of Alba. He was son of Malcolm I and succeeded to the throne when Indulf was killed in 962.\nWhile later chroniclers such as John of Fordun supplied a great deal of information on Dub's life and reign, and Hector Boece in his \"The history and chronicles of Scotland\" tell tales of witchcraft and treason, almost all of them are rejected by modern historians. There are very few sources for the reign of Dub, of which the \"Chronicle of the Kings of Alba\" and a single entry in the \"Annals of Ulster\" are the closest to contemporary.\nThe Chronicle records that during Dub's reign bishop Fothach, most likely bishop of St Andrews or of Dunkeld, died. The remaining report is of a battle between Dub and Cuil\u00e9n, son of king Ildulb. Dub won the battle, fought \"upon the ridge of Crup\", in which Dunchad (Duncan), abbot of Dunkeld, sometimes supposed to be an ancestor of Cr\u00edn\u00e1n of Dunkeld, and Dubdon, the mormaer of Atholl, died.\nThe various accounts differ on what happened afterwards. The Chronicle claims that Dub was driven out of the kingdom. The Latin material interpolated in Andrew of Wyntoun's \"Orygynale Cronykl\" states that he was murdered at Forres, and links this to an eclipse of the sun which can be dated to 20 July 966. The Annals of Ulster report only: \"Dub mac Ma\u00edl Coluim, king of Alba, was killed by the Scots themselves\"; the usual way of reporting a death in internal strife, and place the death in 967. It has been suggested that Sueno's Stone, near Forres, may be a monument to Dub, erected by his brother Kenneth II (Cin\u00e1ed mac Ma\u00edl Coluim). It is presumed that Dub was killed or driven out by Cuil\u00e9n, who became king after Dub's death, or by his supporters.\nIt is related that his body was hidden under the bridge of Kinloss, and the sun did not shine till it was found and buried. An eclipse on 10 July 967 may have originated or confirmed this story.\nDub left at least one son, Kenneth III (Cin\u00e1ed mac Dub). Although his descendants did not compete successfully for the kingship of Alba after Kenneth was killed in 1005, Dub is likely an ancestor of the MacDuib (MacDuff) family who held the mormaerdom, and later earldom of Fife, until 1371.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39817", "revid": "29330520", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39817", "title": "William Rowan Hamilton", "text": "Irish mathematician and physicist (1805\u20131865)\nSir William Rowan Hamilton (4 August 1805 \u2013 2 September 1865) was an Irish mathematician, physicist, and astronomer who made numerous major contributions to algebra, classical mechanics, and optics. His theoretical works and mathematical equations are considered fundamental to modern theoretical physics, particularly his reformulation of Lagrangian mechanics. His research included the analysis of geometrical optics, Fourier analysis, and quaternions, the last of which made him one of the founders of modern linear algebra. \nHamilton was Andrews Professor of Astronomy at Trinity College Dublin. He was also the third director of Dunsink Observatory from 1827 to 1865. The Hamilton Institute at Maynooth University is named after him. He received the Cunningham Medal twice, in 1834 and 1848, and the Royal Medal in 1835.\nHe remains arguably the most influential Irish physicist, along with Ernest Walton. Since his death, Hamilton has been commemorated throughout the country, with several institutions, streets, monuments, and stamps bearing his name.\nBiography.\nEarly life.\nWilliam Rowan Hamilton was born on 4 August 1805 in Dublin, Ireland, the fourth of nine children of Archibald Hamilton (1778\u20131819) and Sarah Hutton who lived at 29 Dominick Street (later renumbered to 36). Archibald, who was from Dublin, worked as a solicitor. By the age of 3, Hamilton had been sent to live with his uncle James Hamilton, a graduate of Trinity College Dublin who ran a school in Talbots Castle in Trim, County Meath.\nHamilton is said to have shown talent at an early age. His uncle observed that Hamilton, from a young age, had displayed an uncanny ability to acquire languages \u2014 a claim which has been disputed by some historians, who claim he had only a basic understanding of them. At the age of seven, he had already made progress in Hebrew, and before he was 13, he had acquired, under the care of his uncle, a dozen languages: classical and modern European languages, Persian, Arabic, Hindustani, Sanskrit, Marathi and Malay. The emphasis of Hamilton's early education on languages is attributed to the wish of his father to see him employed by the British East India Company.\nAn expert mental calculator, the young Hamilton was capable of working out some calculations to many decimal places. In September 1813, the American calculating prodigy Zerah Colburn was being exhibited in Dublin. Colburn was 9, a year older than Hamilton. The two were pitted against each other in a mental arithmetic contest, with Colburn emerging as the clear victor.\nIn reaction to his defeat, Hamilton spent less time studying languages, and more on mathematics. At age ten, he stumbled across a Latin copy of Euclid; and at twelve he studied Newton's \"Arithmetica Universalis\". By age 16, he had covered much of the \"Principia\", as well as some more recent works on analytic geometry and differential calculus.\nEducation.\nIn mid-1822, Hamilton began a systematic study of Laplace's \"M\u00e9canique C\u00e9leste\". During this period, he encountered what he believed to be a logical error in \"M\u00e9canique C\u00e9leste\", an observation which led Hamilton to be introduced to John Brinkley, then Royal Astronomer of Ireland. In November and December of 1822, he completed his first three original mathematical papers. On his first visit to Dunsink Observatory, he showed two of them to Brinkley, who requested that the papers be developed further. Hamilton complied, and early in 1823, Brinkley approved the amended version. In July of 1823, Hamilton earned a place at Trinity College Dublin by examination, at age 17. His tutor there was Charles Boyton, a family friend, who brought to his attention the contemporary mathematics published by the group at the \u00c9cole Polytechnique in Paris. John Brinkley remarked of the precocious Hamilton, \"This young man, I do not say \"will be\", but \"is\", the first mathematician of his age.\"\nThe college awarded Hamilton two \"optime\"s, or off-the-chart grades, in Greek and in physics. He was first in every subject and at every examination. He aimed to win a Trinity College fellowship by competitive examination, but this did not happen. Instead, after Brinkley was made Bishop of Cloyne in 1826, Hamilton was appointed to the vacant posts left by Brinkley's departure the following year: Andrews Professor of Astronomy and Royal Astronomer of Ireland. Despite having his undergraduate career cut short in this way, he earned degrees in both classics and mathematics (BA in 1827, MA in 1837).\nDunsink Observatory.\nHamilton, now Royal Astronomer of Ireland, took up residence at Dunsink Observatory, where he spent the rest of his life. He was there from 1827 until his death in 1865. In his early years at Dunsink, he observed the heavens quite regularly; He left routine observation to his assistant Charles Thompson. His sisters also supported the observatory's work.\nThe introductory lectures by Hamilton in astronomy were celebrated; in addition to his students, they attracted scholars, poets, and women. Felicia Hemans wrote her poem \"The Prayer of the Lonely Student\" after hearing one of his lectures.\nHamilton invited his four sisters to come and live at the observatory in 1827, and they ran the household until his marriage in 1833. They included Eliza Mary Hamilton (1807\u20131851), the poet. In 1827, Hamilton wrote to his sister Grace about \"some of\" the Lawrence sisters having met his sister Eliza in Dublin.\nNewly appointed to the observatory, Hamilton set off on a tour in Ireland and England with Alexander Nimmo, who was coaching him on latitude and longitude. One call was to Sarah Lawrence's school at Gateacre, near Liverpool, where Hamilton had a chance to assess the calculator Master Noakes. They visited William Wordsworth at Rydal Mount in September of that year, where the writer Caesar Otway was also present. After the visit, Hamilton sent numerous poems to Wordsworth, becoming a \"poetic disciple\".\nWhen Wordsworth visited Dublin in the summer of 1829, in a party with John Marshall and his family, he stayed at Dunsink with Hamilton. On a second tour in England with Nimmo in 1831, Hamilton parted from him at Birmingham, to visit the Lawrence sisters and family on his mother's side in the Liverpool area. They met up again in the Lake District, where they climbed Helvellyn and had tea with Wordsworth. Hamilton returned to Dublin, via Edinburgh and Glasgow.\nLater life and death.\nHamilton retained his faculties unimpaired to the last, and continued the task of finishing the \"Elements of Quaternions\" which had occupied the last six years of his life. He died on 2 September 1865 at the age of 60, following a severe attack of gout. He is buried in Mount Jerome Cemetery in Dublin.\nResearch.\nPhysics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHamilton made outstanding contributions to classical mechanics and optics.\nHis first discovery was in an early paper that he communicated in 1823 to John Brinkley, who presented it under the title of \"Caustics\" in 1824 to the Royal Irish Academy. It was referred as usual to a committee, which recommended further development and simplification before publication. Between 1825 and 1828 the paper was expanded, and became a clearer exposition of a novel method. Over this period, Hamilton gained an appreciation for the nature and importance of optics.\nIn 1827, Hamilton presented a theory of a single function, now known as Hamilton's principal function, that brings together mechanics and optical theory. It helped to establish the foundations of the wave theory of light in mathematical physics. He proposed it when he first predicted its existence in the third supplement to his \"Systems of Rays\", read in 1832.\nThe Royal Irish Academy paper was finally entitled \"Theory of Systems of Rays\" (23 April 1827), and the first part was printed in 1828 in the \"Transactions of the Royal Irish Academy\". The more important contents of the second and third parts appeared in the three voluminous supplements (to the first part) which were published in the same Transactions, and in the two papers \"On a General Method in Dynamics\", which appeared in the \"Philosophical Transactions\" in 1834 and 1835. In these papers, Hamilton developed his central principle of \"Varying Action\".\nA result of this work is a prediction for transparent biaxial crystals (i.e. monoclinic, orthorhombic or triclinic crystals). A ray of light entering such a crystal at a certain angle would emerge as a hollow cone of rays. This discovery was known as conical refraction. Hamilton found it from the geometry of the wave surface introduced by Augustin-Jean Fresnel, which has singular point. There is a basic mathematical explanation of the phenomenon, namely that the wave surface is not the boundary of a convex body. A fuller understanding awaited the microlocal analysis of the middle of the 20th century,\nThe step from optics to dynamics in the application of the method of \"Varying Action\" was made in 1827, and communicated to the Royal Society, in whose \"Philosophical Transactions\" for 1834 and 1835 there are two papers on the subject.\nContext and importance of the work.\nHamiltonian mechanics was a powerful new technique for working with equations of motion. Hamilton's advances enlarged the class of mechanical problems that could be solved. His principle of \"Varying Action\" was based on the calculus of variations, in the general class of problems included under the principle of least action which had been studied earlier by Pierre Louis Maupertuis, Euler, Joseph Louis Lagrange and others. Hamilton's analysis uncovered a deeper mathematical structure than had been previously understood, in particular a symmetry between momentum and position. The credit for discovering what are now called the Lagrangian and Lagrange's equations also belongs to Hamilton.\nBoth the Lagrangian mechanics and Hamiltonian approaches have proven important in the study of continuous classical systems in physics, and quantum mechanical systems: the techniques find use in electromagnetism, quantum mechanics, relativity theory and quantum field theory. In the \"Dictionary of Irish Biography\" David Spearman writes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The formulation that he devised for classical mechanics proved to be equally suited to quantum theory, whose development it facilitated. The Hamiltonian formalism shows no signs of obsolescence; new ideas continue to find this the most natural medium for their description and development, and the function that is now universally known as the Hamiltonian, is the starting point for calculation in almost any area of physics.\nMany scientists, including Liouville, Jacobi, Darboux, Poincar\u00e9, Kolmogorov, Prigogine and Arnold, have extended Hamilton's work, in mechanics, differential equations and symplectic geometry.\nMathematics.\nHamilton's mathematical studies seem to have been undertaken and carried to their full development without collaboration, and his writings do not belong to any particular school. He was intended by the university authorities who elected him to the Professorship of Astronomy to spend his time as he best could for the advancement of science, without restrictions.\nQuaternions.\nHamilton made his discovery of the algebra of quaternions in 1843. Among much prior related work, in 1840 Benjamin Olinde Rodrigues had reached a result that amounted to their discovery in all but name.\nHamilton was looking for ways of extending complex numbers (which can be viewed as points on a 2-dimensional Argand diagram) to higher spatial dimensions. In working with four dimensions, rather than three, he created quaternion algebra. According to Hamilton, on 16 October he was out walking along the Royal Canal in Dublin with his wife when the solution in the form of the equation\n\"i\"2 = \"j\"2 = \"k\"2 = \"ijk\" = \u22121\noccurred to him; Hamilton then carved this equation using his penknife into the side of the nearby Broom Bridge (which Hamilton called Brougham Bridge).\nThe quaternions involved abandoning the commutative law, a radical step for the time. In the context of this prototype geometric algebra, Hamilton also introduced the cross and dot products of vector algebra, the quaternion product being the cross product minus the dot product as scalar. Hamilton also described a quaternion as an ordered four-element multiple of real numbers, and described the first element as the \"scalar\" part, and the remaining three as the \"vector\" part. He coined the neologisms \"tensor\" and \"scalar\", and was the first to use the word \"vector\" in the modern sense.\nOther mathematical works.\nHamilton looked into the solution of the quintic in the theory of equations, examining the results arrived at by Niels Henrik Abel, George Jerrard and others in their respective research. There is Hamilton's paper on fluctuating functions in Fourier analysis, and the invention of the hodograph. Of his investigations into the solutions, especially by numerical approximation, of certain classes of physically important differential equations, only parts were published, at intervals, in the \"Philosophical Magazine\".\nHamilton also introduced the icosian game or \"Hamilton's puzzle\" in 1856. It is based on the concept of a Hamiltonian path in graph theory.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1824, Hamilton was introduced at Edgeworthstown to the novelist Maria Edgeworth, by The Rev. Richard Butler, vicar of Trim, County Meath, to whom his uncle James Hamilton was curate. During the same period, his uncle introduced him to the Disney family at Summerhill House, County Meath. The Disney sons attended Trinity College, and Hamilton had friends among them. At Summerhill, he met Catherine Disney, their sister.\nHamilton was attracted to Catherine Disney, but her family did not approve and Catherine was required to marry the Rev. William Barlow, a brother of her elder sister's husband. The wedding took place in 1825. Hamilton wrote in 1826 about his feelings for her in an extended poem, \"The Enthusiast\". Over twenty years later, in 1847, he confided in John Herschel that during this period he might have become a poet.\nIn 1825, Hamilton met Arabella Lawrence, younger sister of Sarah Lawrence, a significant correspondent and frank critic of his poetry. It was a contact he made through Maria Edgeworth's circle.\nHamilton visited Samuel Taylor Coleridge at Highgate, in 1832, helped by an unexpected letter of introduction given to him by Sarah Lawrence on a visit to Liverpool in March of that year. He also paid a call, with Arabella, on the family of William Roscoe, who had died in 1831.\nHamilton was a Christian, described as \"a lover of the Bible, an orthodox and attached member of the Established Church\", and as having a \"profound conviction of the truth of revealed religion\".\nWhile attending Trinity College, Hamilton proposed to a friend's sister, whose refusal drove the young Hamilton to depression and illness, even to the verge of suicide. He proposed again in 1831 to Ellen de Vere, a sister of the poet Aubrey De Vere, who declined as well. \nHamilton married Helen Bayly, the daughter of The Rev. Henry Bayly, rector of Nenagh, County Tipperary, in 1833; she was a sister of neighbours to the observatory. They had three children: the journalist William Edwin Hamilton (born 1834), Archibald Henry (born 1835) and Helen Eliza Amelia (born 1840). Helen stayed with her widowed mother at Bayly Farm, Nenagh for extended periods, until her mother's death in 1837. She also was away from Dunsink, staying with sisters, for much of the time from 1840 to 1842. Hamilton's married life was reportedly difficult. In the troubled period of the early 1840s, his sister Sydney ran his household; when Helen returned, he was happier after some depression.\nAwards and honours.\nHamilton was twice awarded the Cunningham Medal of the Royal Irish Academy. The first award, in 1834, was for his work on conical refraction, for which he also received the Royal Medal of the Royal Society the following year. He would win the Cunningham Medal again in 1848.\nIn 1835, being secretary to the meeting of the British Association which was held that year in Dublin, Hamilton was knighted by the Lord Lieutenant. Other honours rapidly succeeded, among which his election in 1837 to the president's chair in the Royal Irish Academy, and the rare distinction of being made a corresponding member of the Saint Petersburg Academy of Sciences. Later, in 1864, the newly established National Academy of Sciences elected its first Foreign Associates, and decided to put Hamilton's name on top of their list.\nCommemorations.\nA plaque under the Broom Bridge, associated with the discovery of quaternions, was unveiled by Taoiseach \u00c9amon de Valera on 13 November 1958. Since 1989, the National University of Ireland, Maynooth, has organised a pilgrimage called the Hamilton Walk, in which mathematicians take a walk from Dunsink Observatory to the bridge, where no trace of the carving remains, though a stone plaque does commemorate the discovery.\nThe Hamilton Institute is an applied mathematics research institute at Maynooth University and the Royal Irish Academy holds the annual public Hamilton lecture, at which Murray Gell-Mann, Frank Wilczek, Andrew Wiles, and Timothy Gowers have all spoken. 2005 was the 200th anniversary of Hamilton's birth and the Irish government designated that the \"Hamilton Year, celebrating Irish science\". Trinity College Dublin marked the year by launching the Hamilton Mathematics Institute.\nTwo commemorative stamps valued \u00bd and 2\u00bd pence were issued by the Irish postal service on 13 November 1943 to mark the centenary of the announcement of quaternions. A 10-euro commemorative silver proof coin was issued by the Central Bank of Ireland in 2005 to commemorate 200 years since his birth.\nIn literature.\nIt is believed by some modern mathematicians that Hamilton's work on quaternions was satirized by Charles Lutwidge Dodgson in \"Alice in Wonderland\". In particular, the Mad Hatter's tea party was meant to represent the folly of quaternions and the need to revert to Euclidean geometry. In September 2022 evidence was presented to counter this suggestion, which appears to have been based on an incorrect understanding of both quaternions and their history.\nPublications.\nHamilton introduced, as a method of analysis, both quaternions and biquaternions, the extension to eight dimensions by the introduction of complex number coefficients. When his work was assembled in 1853, the book \"Lectures on Quaternions\" had \"formed the subject of successive courses of lectures, delivered in 1848 and subsequent years, in the Halls of Trinity College, Dublin\". Hamilton confidently declared that quaternions would be found to have a powerful influence as an instrument of research.\nWhen he died, Hamilton was working on a definitive statement of quaternion science. His son, William Edwin Hamilton, brought the \"Elements of Quaternions\", a hefty volume of 762 pages, to publication in 1866. As copies ran short, a second edition was prepared by Charles Jasper Joly, when the book was split into two volumes, the first appearing in 1899 and the second in 1901. The subject index and footnotes in this second edition improved the \"Elements\" accessibility.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39824", "revid": "48885933", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39824", "title": "Sigismund II Augustus", "text": "Ruler of Poland and Lithuania from 1529 to 1572\nSigismund II Augustus (, ; 1 August 1520 \u2013 7 July 1572) was King of Poland and Grand Duke of Lithuania, the son of Sigismund I the Old, whom Sigismund II succeeded in 1548. He was the first ruler of the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and the last male monarch from the Jagiellonian dynasty.\nSigismund was elder of two sons of Italian-born Bona Sforza and Sigismund the Old, and the only one to survive infancy. From the beginning he was groomed and extensively educated as a successor. In 1529 he was chosen as king in \"vivente rege\" election while his father was still alive. Sigismund Augustus continued a tolerance policy towards minorities and maintained peaceful relations with neighbouring countries, with the exception of the Northern Seven Years' War which aimed to secure Baltic trade. Under his patronage, culture flourished in Poland; he was a collector of tapestries from the Low Countries and collected military memorabilia as well as swords, armours and jewellery. Sigismund Augustus' rule is widely considered as the apex of the Polish Golden Age; he established the first regular Polish navy and the first regular postal service in Poland, known today as Poczta Polska. In 1569, he oversaw the signing of the Union of Lublin between Poland and the Grand Duchy of Lithuania, which formed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth and introduced an elective monarchy.\nSigismund Augustus married three times; his first wife, Elizabeth of Austria, died in 1545 at just eighteen. He was then involved in several relationships with mistresses, the most famous being Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142, who became Sigismund's second wife and Queen of Poland in spite of his mother's disapproval. The marriage was deemed scandalous and was fiercely opposed by the royal court and the nobility. Barbara died five months after her coronation, due to heavy illness. Sigismund finally wedded Catherine of Austria. Neither marriage resulted in living children.\nSigismund Augustus was the last male member of the Jagiellonian dynasty. Following the death of his sister Anna in 1596 the Jagiellonian dynasty came to an end.\nEarly life.\nSigismund Augustus was born in Krak\u00f3w on 1 August 1520 to Sigismund I the Old and Bona Sforza of Milan. His paternal grandparents were Casimir IV Jagiellon, King of Poland, and Elizabeth of Austria. Sigismund's maternal grandparents, Gian Galeazzo Sforza and Isabella of Aragon, daughter of King Alfonso II of Naples, both ruled the Duchy of Milan until Sforza's suspicious death in 1494.\nThroughout his youth, Sigismund Augustus was under the careful watch of his mother, Bona. Being the only surviving legitimate male heir to the Polish throne throughout his father's reign, he was well educated and taught by the most renowned scholars in the country. It was also his mother's wish to name her son Augustus, after the first Roman Emperor Augustus. However, this decision was met with Sigismund the Old's strong disapproval, who hoped for a lineage of Sigismunds on the Polish throne. Consequently, it was established that the child would bear two names to settle the conflict. The tradition of adopting Augustus as a second or middle name was also observed during the coronation of Stanis\u0142aw Antoni Poniatowski who became King Stanis\u0142aw II Augustus in 1764.\nOn 18 October 1529, Sigismund Augustus was inaugurated as Grand Duke of Lithuania and the ceremony was held in the Vilnius grand ducal palace. He was named King of Poland alongside his father on 18 December the same year.\nIn 1530, the ten-year-old Sigismund Augustus was crowned by Primate Jan \u0141aski in accordance with the \"vivente rege\" law. Sigismund the Old hoped to secure his son's succession to the throne and maintain the Jagiellonian dynasty's position in Poland. The move was crucial to silence the members of nobility who were against the Jagiellons and viewed the action as a step towards absolutism. The law was officially abolished by the Henrician Articles, or the new constitution adopted between the nobles and the newly elected King Henry of Valois in 1573.\nSigismund Augustus began his reign as the active Grand Duke of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania in 1544 and initially opposed the Polish\u2013Lithuanian union, thus hoping to leave his throne to his heirs, as Lithuanian throne was hereditary, while Polish one was not, hence the grasp of Jagiellon dynasty on Poland was uncertain.\nFirst marriage.\nWhen Sigismund Augustus was co-crowned, Chancellor Krzysztof Szyd\u0142owiecki organized a preliminary marriage treaty between the young king and Elizabeth of Austria, daughter of King Ferdinand of Bohemia and Hungary. The marriage was signed on 10\u201311 November 1530 in Pozna\u0144, however, the arrangement was delayed by Queen Bona Sforza, who detested the new bride. The treaty was renewed on 16 June 1538 in Wroc\u0142aw by Johannes Dantiscus and the betrothal ceremony took place on 17 July 1538 in Innsbruck. Bona continued to lobby against the marriage and instead proposed Margaret of France to potentially form an alliance with the French against the Habsburgs.\nOn 5 May 1543, Elizabeth's escorted convoy entered Krak\u00f3w and was greeted with enthusiasm by both the nobles and the townsfolk. The same day 16-year-old Elizabeth married 22-year-old Sigismund Augustus, whom she met for the first time shortly before marriage vows. The ceremony was performed at the Wawel Cathedral and the wedding continued for two weeks. Bona began to plot against the new queen. As a result, the newly wedded couple decided to reside in Vilnius, far from the royal court.\nDespite the initial euphoria demonstrated by royal subjects, the marriage was unsuccessful from the very beginning. Sigismund Augustus did not find Elizabeth attractive and continued to have extramarital affairs with several mistresses, the most famous being Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142. Elizabeth was also known to be timid, meek and apprehensive due to strict upbringing. The young and garrulous king was also repulsed by Elizabeth's newly diagnosed epilepsy and subsequent seizures. Only Sigismund the Old and some nobles showed compassion towards the new Queen, who was disregarded by her husband and scorned by Bona. Sigismund Augustus was indifferent to her health condition; when the seizures continued to intensify he abandoned Elizabeth and returned to Krak\u00f3w to collect her dowry. He also sent for Ferdinand's doctors to travel the long distance from Vienna knowing that Elizabeth was ailing and deteriorating fast. She eventually died unattended and exhausted from the epileptic attacks on 15 June 1545 at the age of 18.\nSecond marriage.\nFrom the outset of his reign, Sigismund Augustus came into collision with the country's privileged nobility, who had already begun curtailing the power of the great families. The ostensible cause of the nobility's animosity to the King was his second marriage, secretly contracted before his accession to the throne, with the Lithuanian noblewoman and former mistress, Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142, the daughter of Hetman Jerzy Radziwi\u0142\u0142. The marriage was announced by the king himself on 2 February 1548 in Piotrk\u00f3w Trybunalski.\nThe young and beautiful Barbara was despised by Queen Bona, who attempted to annul the marriage at any cost. The agitation was also abundant at Sigismund's first Sejm (parliament) sitting on 31 October 1548 where the deputies threatened to renounce their allegiance unless the new king repudiated Barbara. The nobles portrayed Barbara as an opportunistic prostitute that charmed the king for her own benefit. That perception was shared with Bona Sforza, who decisively eliminated all her rivals by any means to stay in power. The young monarch even considered abdicating. By 1550, when Sigismund summoned his second Sejm, the nobles had begun to be in his favor; the nobility was rebuked by Marshal Piotr Kmita Sobie\u0144ski, who accused them of attempting to unduly diminish the legislative prerogatives of the Polish Crown. Furthermore, Bona departed from Wawel and went to Mazovia where she established her own small courtly entourage.\nUnlike her predecessor, Barbara was disliked by the royal court and led a more secluded life with Sigismund Augustus, who was deeply in love with her. On the other hand, she was ambitious, intelligent, perceptive and had an exemplar taste in fashion. She always wore precious pearl necklaces when sitting for portraits. The mutual admiration between Sigismund and Barbara made the relationship \"one of the greatest love affairs in Polish history\". While still married to Elizabeth, Sigismund Augustus ordered the construction of a secret passage connecting the Royal Castle in Vilnius with the nearby Radziwi\u0142\u0142 Palace so that the couple could meet frequently and discreetly.\nDue to her unpopularity in Poland, Barbara often expressed her wish to reside permanently in the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. To ease the situation, Sigismund Augustus provided a luxurious lifestyle and expensive gifts for his wife at Wawel Castle since her arrival in Krak\u00f3w on 13 February 1549. The monarch also granted Barbara several provinces to administer and provide income. Although ambitious and bright, she showed lack of interest in political life, but had some influence over decisions made by Sigismund. This also caused an uproar among the nobility. To avoid an armed rebellion, Sigismund was forced to form an alliance with his former father-in-law, Emperor Ferdinand I. This allowed for Barbara's coronation as Queen of Poland on 7 December 1550 by Primate Miko\u0142aj Dzierzgowski. Queen Bona eventually succumbed to her son's demand and accepted the marriage sending a messenger in 1551 who informed Barbara of her decision.\nDuring their marriage, the Queen complained of poor health, particularly stomach and abdominal pain. After the coronation her condition deteriorated rapidly. She was tormented by strong fever, diarrhea, nausea and lack of appetite. After careful observation by hired medics, a lump was discovered on her stomach filled with pus. Sigismund Augustus gravely despaired and sent for doctors and even folk healers from the entire country. He personally tended to his sick wife despite her foul smell and dedicated himself when necessary; the king hoped to take Barbara to the hunting castle at Niepo\u0142omice and ordered to demolish the small city gate so her carriage could pass freely. However, Barbara died on 8 May 1551 in Krak\u00f3w after continuous pain and agony. It was her dying wish that she'd be buried in Lithuania, her homeland. The body was transported to Vilnius Cathedral, where she was finally buried on 23 June next to Elizabeth of Austria. Her death was a major blow to Sigismund; he often attended her coffin on foot while being transported to Vilnius in hot weather. Sigismund also became more serious and reserved; he avoided balls, temporarily renounced his mistresses and dressed in black until his death.\nThe cause of Barbara's death is debatable. Her opponents and family members suggested sexually transmitted diseases due to a number of affairs she had before marrying Sigismund. There were also persistent rumors that she was poisoned by Queen Bona Sforza, who had a long history of eliminating her rivals or enemies quickly and efficiently. However, contemporary historians and experts agree on cervical or ovarian cancer.\nIt is possible that marriage resulted in two pregnancies as Barbara reportedly miscarried on 20 November 1547 and is speculated to be pregnant (and lost baby) in spring 1548.\nThird marriage.\nThe death of Queen Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142, five months after her coronation and under distressing circumstances, compelled Sigismund to contract a third, purely political union with his first cousin, the Austrian archduchess Catherine, to avoid an Austro-Russian alliance. She was also the sister of his first wife, Elizabeth, who had died within a year of her marriage to him, before his accession. Catherine, unlike previous queens, was considered dull and obese. Sigismund Augustus found her immensely unattractive despite accepting the marriage and organizing a pompous wedding ceremony on 30 July 1553. On the other hand, Catherine showed resentment towards Sigismund because of how he treated her sister, Queen Elizabeth. She accused him of negligence and indifference during her sudden illness, which caused premature death. The correspondence between the two remained purely formal and political for the remainder of their lives.\nSince her coronation, Catherine acted as Austria's puppet at the Polish court; she was tasked with espionage and obtaining important information for the benefit of the Habsburgs. Sigismund Augustus was aware of the scheme, but, by marrying Catherine, he obtained a promise from Austria to stay neutral and abandon plans with Russia. This neutrality was undermined by Catherine's actions, who followed her father's policy and objected the return of John Sigismund Z\u00e1polya and Isabella Jagiellon (Sigismund's sister) to Hungary. She would conspire with the Habsburg envoys prior to an audience with the king. She would also dictate what and how the envoys should express their views. When Sigismund Augustus found out of Catherine's intrigues, he sent her to Radom and excluded her from political life.\nAs Sigismund lost all hope of children by his third bride, he was the last male Jagiellon in the direct line so the dynasty was threatened with extinction. He sought to remedy this by adultery with two of the most beautiful of his countrywomen, Barbara Giza (said to physically resemble late queen Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142) and Anna Zaj\u0105czkowska. Barbara ultimately gave birth to a daughter, also named Barbara, whom Sigismund acknowledged as his child.\nThe King's marriage was a matter of great political import to Protestants and Catholics alike. The Polish Protestants hoped that he would divorce and remarry and thus bring about a breach with Rome at the very crisis of the religious struggle in Poland. He was not free to remarry until Catherine's death on 28 February 1572, but he followed her to the grave less than six months later.\nHis illegitimate daughter by Giza was adopted by her mother's new husband (Micha\u0142 Woroniecki) and given her stepfather's surname.\nHealth and final years.\nUnlike his father, Sigismund Augustus was frail and sickly. Shortly before turning 50, his health rapidly declined. Being involved in many affairs and holding a large number of mistresses, historians agree that the king had venereal disease which caused him to have fertility issues. By 1558 Sigismund had gout and since 1568 he also suffered from kidney stones, which triggered immense pain. He employed numerous medics, healers or even quack doctors and imported expensive ointments from Italy. By the end of his life, the king was losing teeth and vigour, possibly due to tuberculosis. Antonio Maria Graziani recalls that Sigismund was unable to keep standing without a cane when greeting Cardinal Giovanni Francesco Commendone.\nDuring spring 1572, Sigismund Augustus became feverish. Untreated tuberculosis made him feeble and impotent, but he was able to travel to his private retreat in Knyszyn. While at Knyszyn, he corresponded with his diplomats and nobles, highlighting that he was feeling well and hoped to recover. Great Marshal Jan Firlej denied these claims and reported that the king was bleeding severely due to consumption and was troubled by pain in the chest and lumbar.\nSigismund died in Knyszyn on 7 July 1572 at 6pm, surrounded by a group of senators and envoys. The official cause of death given by the medics was consumption. His body placed on a catafalque and remained at the nearby Tykocin Castle until 10 September 1573 when it was transported back to Krak\u00f3w through Warsaw. After transporting the remains of Barbara Radziwi\u0142\u0142 from Krak\u00f3w to Vilnius, Sigismund was building a church in the Vilnius Castle Complex which should have served as his family's mausoleum, however it was still uncompleted in 1572. Consequently, he was laid to rest at the Wawel Cathedral on 10 February 1574. The stately funeral ceremony, attended by his sister Anna Jagiellon, was the last spectacle of its kind in the Kingdom of Poland. No other Polish monarch was buried with such pomp and splendour. His death introduced an elective monarchy in Poland which lasted until the final partition at the end of the 18th century.\nSigismund Augustus was the last male member of the Jagiellonian dynasty. The death of his childless sister, Anna, in 1596 marked the end of the dynasty.\nIn addition to his family connections, Sigismund II Augustus was allied to the Habsburgs as member of the Order of the Golden Fleece.\nReign.\nSigismund's reign was marked by a period of temporary stability and external expansion. He witnessed the bloodless introduction of the Protestant Reformation into Poland and Lithuania, and the \"peero-cratic\" upheaval that placed most political power in the hands of the Polish nobility; he saw the collapse of the Knights of the Sword in the north, which led to the Commonwealth's acquisition of Livonia as a Lutheran duchy and the consolidation of Ottoman power in the southeast. A less imposing figure than his father, the elegant and refined Sigismund II Augustus was nevertheless an even more effective statesman than the stern and majestic Sigismund I the Old.\nSigismund II possessed to a high degree the tenacity and patience that seem to have characterized all the Jagiellons, and he added to these qualities a dexterity and diplomatic finesse. No other Polish king seems to have so thoroughly understood the nature of the Polish Sejm and national assembly. Both the Austrian ambassadors and the papal legates testify to the care with which he controlled his nation. According to diplomats, everything went as Sigismund wished and he seemed to know everything in advance. He managed to obtain more funds from the Sejm than his father ever could, and at one of the parliament sittings he won the hearts of the assembled envoys by unexpectedly appearing in the simple grey coat of a Mazovian lord. Like his father, a pro-Austrian by conviction, he contrived even in this respect to carry with him the nation, often distrustful of the Germans. He also avoided serious complications and skirmishes with the powerful Turks.\nLivonia.\nDuring Sigismund Augustus' reign, Livonia was in political turmoil. His father, Sigismund I, permitted Albert of Prussia to introduce the Protestant Reformation and secularize the southern part of the Teutonic Order State. Albert then established Europe's first Protestant state in the Duchy of Prussia in 1525, but under Polish suzerainty. However, his efforts to introduce Protestantism to the Livonian Brothers of the Sword in the northernmost part of the region was met with fierce resistance and divided the Livonian Confederation. When Albert's brother Wilhelm and Archbishop of Riga attempted to implement a Lutheran church order in his diocese, the Catholic estates rebelled and arrested both Wilhelm and his bishop coadjutor, Christopher, Duke of Mecklenburg.\nAs Prussia was a tributary state of the Polish Crown, Sigismund Augustus, a Catholic, was forced to intervene in favour of Protestant Albert and his brother Wilhelm. In July 1557 the Polish forces left for Livonia. The armed intervention proved to be successful; the Catholic Livonians surrendered and signed the Treaty of Pozvol on 14 September 1557. The agreement placed most Livonian territories under Polish protection and \"de facto\" became part of Poland. Gotthard Kettler, the last Master of the Order, was granted the newly established Duchy of Courland and Semigallia. Wilhelm was restored to his former position as archbishop on Sigismund's demand, with the Lutheran church order being enacted.\nThe incorporation of Courland into the Polish sphere of influence created an alliance which threatened Russia's plans of expanding into the Baltic coast. Sigismund directed the alliance against Ivan the Terrible to protect lucrative trade routes in Livonia, thus creating a new valid \"casus belli\" against the Russian Tsardom. On 22 January 1558, Ivan invaded the Baltic states and started the Livonian War, which lasted 25 years until 1583. Russia's eventual defeat in the war legally partitioned Livonia between Poland (Latvia, southern Estonia) and Sweden (central-northern Estonia). The Polish sector became subsequently known as Polish Livonia or \"Inflanty\"; it was settled with colonists from Poland proper resulting in systematic polonisation of these lands.\nNorthern Seven Years' War.\nWhen the Kalmar Union between Sweden and Denmark was disbanded in 1523 due to Swedish resentment of Danish tyranny, Baltic trade became threatened. The port city of Gda\u0144sk (Danzig), Poland's wealthiest city, faced difficulties due to ongoing conflict on the sea and piracy. The capital, Krak\u00f3w, was also affected as the trade route from the Baltic ran through Gda\u0144sk and along the Vistula river to the southern province of Lesser Poland. Gda\u0144sk, which was privileged with its own army and government, resisted against Sigismund's order of sending privateers and creating the first Polish Admiralty in their city. Most of the deputies in the city council were merchants and tradesmen of German descent or Protestants who were either politically leaning towards Sweden or fighting for the status of an independent 'city state'. 11 Polish privateers sent by Sigismund were eventually executed, which greatly angered the king. Poland then joined Denmark against Sweden for Baltic domination.\nThe war ended as \"status quo ante bellum\" in 1570 with the Treaty of Stettin, which was signed by Bishop Martin Kromer on behalf of Sigismund Augustus. However, the ineffective conflict did have its input in establishing Poland's first registered naval fleet (Naval Commission) in 1568.\nUnion of Lublin.\nSigismund's most striking legacy may have been the Union of Lublin, which united Poland and Lithuania into one state, the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, jointly with German-speaking Royal Prussia and Prussian cities. This achievement might well have been impossible without the monarch's personal approach to politics and ability to mediate.\nAt first, the treaty was perceived as a threat to Lithuanian sovereignty. Lithuanian magnates were afraid of losing their powers, since the proposed union would lower their rank and status to an equivalent with petty nobility rather than wealthier Polish aristocracy. On the other hand, the unification would provide a strong alliance against Russian (Muscovite) attack from the east. Lithuania was ravaged by the Muscovite-Lithuanian Wars which endured for over 150 years. During the Second War, Lithuania lost of its territory to Russia, and the final defeat in the Livonian War would result in the country's incorporation into the Russian Tsardom. Furthermore, the Poles were reluctant to aid Lithuania without a \"quid pro quo\". The most vocal opponent of the union was Sigismund's brother-in-law, Miko\u0142aj \"the Red\" Radziwi\u0142\u0142 (), who viewed the agreement as \"peaceful annexation of Lithuania\" by Poland. He also resisted polonisation policies which forced ethnic Lithuanians to change their names and native language to Polish or Latin.\nAs another war with Russia loomed, Sigismund Augustus pressed the members of parliament (Sejm) for the union, gradually gaining more followers due to his persuasive abilities and auspicious diplomacy. The potential union agreement would lead to the eviction of Lithuanian landowners who opposed the transition of territory from multi-ethnic Lithuania to Poland. Such terms were causing an outrage among the most renowned members of Lithuanian upper classes, but Sigismund was decisive and ruthless in this matter. Moreover, the personal union between the two countries created by the marriage of Jadwiga with Jogaila in 1385 was not entirely constitutional. Being the last male member of the Jagiellons, childless Sigismund sought to preserve his dynasty's legacy. The newly proposed constitutional union would create one large Commonwealth state, with one elected monarch who would simultaneously reign over both domains.\nThe initial Sejm negotiations on unity in January 1569, near the Polish city of Lublin, were futile. The right of Poles to settle and own land in the Grand Duchy was questioned by Lithuanian envoys. Following Miko\u0142aj Radziwi\u0142\u0142's departure from Lublin on 1 March 1569, Sigismund announced the incorporation of then-Lithuanian Podlachia, Volhynia, Podolia and Kiev provinces into Poland, with strong approval from the local Ruthenian (Ukrainian) gentry. Those historic regions, which once belonged to the Kievan Rus', were disputed between Lithuania and Russia. However, the Ruthenian nobles were eager to capitalise on the political or economic potential offered by the Polish sphere and agreed to the terms. Previously, the Kingdom of Ruthenia or \"Ukraine\" was abolished in 1349, after Poland and Lithuania split modern-day Ukraine in the aftermath of the Galicia\u2013Volhynia Wars. Now, under the Union of Lublin, all Ukrainian and Ruthenian territories which were alien in culture, customs, religion and language to the Polish people would be annexed by Catholic Poland. Strong westernisation and polonisation would follow, including the clandestine suppression of the Ukrainian Eastern Orthodox Church by future King Sigismund III. Ruthenia remained under Polish rule until the Cossack uprisings against Polish domination and the Partitions of Poland, when Ukraine was annexed by the Russian Empire.\nThe Lithuanians were compelled to return to the Sejm negotiations under Jan Hieronim Chodkiewicz and continue negotiations. The Polish nobility once again pressed for the full incorporation of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania into Poland, however, the Lithuanians disapproved. The parties eventually agreed on a federal state on 28 June 1569 and on 1 July 1569 the Union of Lublin was signed at Lublin Castle, thus establishing the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth. Sigismund Augustus ratified the unification act on 4 July, and henceforth governed one of the largest and multicultural countries of 16th-century Europe.\nReligion.\nIn comparison to his staunchly Catholic father, Sigismund Augustus paid little attention to the matters of faith and religion. Having a large number of mistresses before, during and after being married, he was viewed by the clergy as an adulterer and libertine. Sigismund was also reasonably tolerant towards minorities and supported nobles of different faith and nationality to be part of the national assembly, the Sejm. He continued his father's policies, but was more accepting of the Protestant Reformation in Poland (only to the status of a minority religion). Several magnates converted to Calvinism or Lutheranism during the Reformation started by Martin Luther and John Calvin, most notably Stanis\u0142aw Zamoyski, Jan Zamoyski, Miko\u0142aj Rej, Andrzej Frycz Modrzewski, Johannes a Lasco (Jan \u0141aski) and Miko\u0142aj \"the Black\" Radziwi\u0142\u0142.\nThroughout the 16th century, Frycz Modrzewski advocated for renouncing Rome's authority and establishing a separate and independent Polish Church. His initiative was chiefly inspired by the creation of the Anglican Church by Henry VIII in 1534. Sigismund Augustus was lenient towards the idea, particularly due to the sudden spread of Protestantism among courtiers, advisors, nobles and peasants. Calvinism became especially popular among the upper classes as it promoted democratic freedoms and called for rebellion against absolutism, which the privileged Polish nobility favoured. During the 1555 Sejm session in Piotrk\u00f3w, the nobles intensively discussed the rights of priests in the newly proposed Polish Church and demanded the abolition of celibacy. Some Catholic bishops were supportive of the concepts and acknowledged the need for uniting Poland, Lithuania, Prussia and their vassals under a common religion. Sigismund agreed to the postulates, however, under the condition that Pope Paul IV agreed. Instead, Paul IV was enraged that such a proposition emerged for him to accept; he declined and refused to grant consent. Facing potential excommunication, the assembly were forced to abandon their plans. Nevertheless, Protestantism continued to flourish and spread. In 1565, the Polish Brethren came into existence as a Nontrinitarian sect of Calvinism.\nOne year after Sigismund's death the Warsaw Confederation was adopted as the first European act granting religious freedoms. Despite this, Protestantism in Poland ultimately declined during the fierce Counter-Reformation measures under the despotic and arch-Catholic Sigismund III Vasa, who ruled for nearly 45 years. For instance, the Polish Brethren were banned, hunted down and its leaders executed.\nPatronage.\nSigismund Augustus carried on with the development of several royal residencies including Wawel, Vilnius Castle, Niepo\u0142omice and the Royal Castle in Warsaw. In the 1560s he acquired the Tykocin Castle and rebuilt it in Renaissance style. During the reign of Sigismund Augustus the structure served as a royal residence with an impressive treasury and library as well as the main arsenal of the crown.\nSigismund Augustus was a passionate collector of jewels and gemstones. According to nuncio Bernardo Bongiovanni's relation, his collection was cached in 16 chests. Among the precious items in his possession was Charles V's ruby of 80,000 scudos' worth, as well as the Emperor's diamond medal with Habsburgs Eagle on one side and two columns with a sign \"Plus Ultra\" on the other side. In 1571, after the death of his nephew John Sigismund Z\u00e1polya, he inherited the \"Hungarian Crown\" used by some Hungarian monarchs. A \"Swedish Crown\" was also made for him. The Polish king treated those crowns as family keepsakes, and kept them in a private vault in the Tykocin Castle. He had also a sultan's sword of 16,000 ducats' worth, 30 precious horse trappings and 20 different private-use armours. The king's possession included a rich collection of tapestries (360 pieces), commissioned by him in Brussels in the years 1550\u20131560.\nThe king enjoyed reading, especially short stories, poems and satires. Under the influence of bishop Piotr Myszkowski, Poland's then greatest writer and poet Jan Kochanowski joined the royal court in 1563. It is uncertain whether Sigismund and Kochanowski were friends, however, Kochanowski's correspondence clearly highlights that the two had close contact and he assisted the monarch at most important occasions, including military maneuvers in Lithuania in 1567. Kochanowski was also present during the signing of Lublin Union in 1569.\nSigismund was fond of foreign craft-makers and employed Italian goldsmiths, jewellers and medalists, very much like his father. One of the more renowned figures brought to Poland was Giovanni Jacopo Caraglio. In Italy, Caraglio was one of the first reproductive printmakers. In Poland, Sigismund tasked him with the production of cameos, medallions, coins and jewellery. Numerous medals and roundels from this period feature the last members of the Jagiellonian dynasty. When Sigismund's mother Bona died in 1557, Sigismund had to collect his inheritance from the Italian estates. On 18 October 1558, the king granted the right to arrange the first regular Polish postal service operating from Krak\u00f3w to Venice, thus establishing Poczta Polska (Polish Post). All maintenance costs were borne by the Crown and the post was mostly managed by Italians or Germans. Additional couriers travelled between Krak\u00f3w, Warsaw and Vilnius. Since 1562, the postal route also encompassed Vienna and cities in the Holy Roman Empire, which enabled continuous correspondence with the Habsburgs.\nIn 1573, the first permanent bridge over the Vistula river in Warsaw and also the longest wooden bridge in Europe at the time was named in Sigismund's honour.\nCitations and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39825", "revid": "47406457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39825", "title": "Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory", "text": "National laboratory for plasma physics and nuclear fusion science at Princeton, New Jersey\nThe Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) is a United States Department of Energy national laboratory for plasma physics and nuclear fusion science. Its primary mission is research into and development of fusion as an energy source. It is known for the development of the stellarator and tokamak designs, along with numerous fundamental advances in plasma physics and the exploration of many other plasma confinement concepts.\nPPPL grew out of the top-secret Cold War project to control thermonuclear reactions, called Project Matterhorn. The focus of this program changed from H-bombs to fusion power in 1951, when Lyman Spitzer developed the stellarator concept and was granted funding from the Atomic Energy Commission to study the concept. This led to a series of machines in the 1950s and 1960s. In 1961, after declassification, Project Matterhorn was renamed the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory.\nPPPL's stellarators proved unable to meet their performance goals. In 1968, Soviet's claims of excellent performance on their tokamaks generated intense scepticism, and to test it, PPPL's Model C stellarator was converted to a tokamak. It verified the Soviet claims, and since that time, PPPL has been a worldwide leader in tokamak theory and design, building a series of record-breaking machines including the Princeton Large Torus, TFTR and many others. Dozens of smaller machines were also built to test particular problems and solutions, including the ATC, NSTX, and LTX.\nPPPL is operated by Princeton University on the Forrestal Campus in Plainsboro Township, New Jersey.\nHistory.\nFormation.\nIn 1950, John Wheeler was setting up a secret H-bomb research lab at Princeton University. Lyman Spitzer, Jr., an avid mountaineer, was aware of this program and suggested the name \"Project Matterhorn\".\nSpitzer, a professor of astronomy, had for many years been involved in the study of very hot rarefied gases in interstellar space. While leaving for a ski trip to Aspen in February 1951, his father called and told him to read the front page of the \"New York Times\". The paper had a story about claims released the day before in Argentina that a relatively unknown German scientist named Ronald Richter had achieved nuclear fusion in his Huemul Project. Spitzer ultimately dismissed these claims, and they were later proven erroneous, but the story got him thinking about fusion. While riding the chairlift at Aspen, he struck upon a new concept to confine a plasma for long periods so it could be heated to fusion temperatures. He called this concept the stellarator.\nLater that year he took this design to the Atomic Energy Commission in Washington. As a result of this meeting and a review of the invention by scientists throughout the nation, the stellarator proposal was funded in 1951. As the device would produce high-energy neutrons, which could be used for breeding weapon fuel, the program was classified and carried out as part of Project Matterhorn. Matterhorn ultimately ended its involvement in the bomb field in 1954, becoming entirely devoted to the fusion power field.\nIn 1958, this magnetic fusion research was declassified following the United Nations International Conference on the Peaceful Uses of Atomic Energy. This generated an influx of graduate students eager to learn the \"new\" physics, which in turn influenced the lab to concentrate more on basic research.\nThe early figure-8 stellarators included: Model-A, Model-B, Model-B2, Model-B3. Model-B64 was a square with round corners, and Model-B65 had a racetrack configuration. The last and most powerful stellarator at this time was the \"racetrack\" Model\u00a0C (operating from 1961 to 1969).\nTokamak.\nBy the mid-1960s it was clear something was fundamentally wrong with the stellarators, as they leaked fuel at rates far beyond what theory predicted, rates that carried away energy from the plasma that was far beyond what the fusion reactions could ever produce. Spitzer became extremely skeptical that fusion energy was possible and expressed this opinion in very public fashion in 1965 at an international meeting in the UK. At the same meeting, the Soviet delegation announced results about 10 times better than any previous device, which Spitzer dismissed as a measurement error.\nAt the next meeting in 1968, the Soviets presented considerable data from their devices that showed even greater performance, about 100 times the Bohm diffusion limit. An enormous argument broke out between the AEC and the various labs about whether this was real. When a UK team verified the results in 1969, the AEC suggested PPPL to convert their Model\u00a0C to a tokamak to test it, as the only lab willing to build one from scratch, Oak Ridge, would need some time to build theirs. Seeing the possibility of being bypassed in the fusion field, PPPL eventually agreed to convert the Model\u00a0C to what became the Symmetric Tokamak (ST), quickly verifying the approach.\nTwo small machines followed the ST, exploring ways to heat the plasma, and then the Princeton Large Torus (PLT) to test whether the theory that larger machines would be more stable was true. Starting in 1975, PLT verified these \"scaling laws\" and then went on to add neutral beam injection from Oak Ridge that resulted in a series of record-setting plasma temperatures, eventually topping out at 78\u00a0million kelvins, well beyond what was needed for a practical fusion power system. Its success was major news.\nWith this string of successes, PPPL had little trouble winning the bid to build an even larger machine, one specifically designed to reach \"breakeven\" while running on an actual fusion fuel, rather than a test gas. This produced the Tokamak Fusion Test Reactor, or TFTR, which was completed in 1982. After a lengthy breaking-in period, TFTR began slowly increasing the temperature and density of the fuel, while introducing deuterium gas as the fuel. In April 1986, it demonstrated a combination of density and confinement, the so-called fusion triple product, well beyond what was needed for a practical reactor. In July, it reached a temperature of 200\u00a0million kelvins, far beyond what was needed. However, when the system was operated with both of these conditions at the same time, a high enough triple product and temperature, the system became unstable. Three years of effort failed to address these issues, and TFTR never reached its goal. The system continued performing basic studies on these problems until being shut down in 1997. Beginning in 1993, TFTR was the first in the world to use 1:1 mixtures of deuterium\u2013tritium. In 1994 it yielded an unprecedented 10.7\u00a0megawatts of fusion power.\nLater designs.\nIn 1999, the National Spherical Torus Experiment (NSTX), based on the spherical tokamak concept, came online at the PPPL. \nOdd-parity heating was demonstrated in the 4\u00a0cm radius PFRC-1 experiment in 2006. PFRC-2 has a plasma radius of 8\u00a0cm. Studies of electron heating in PFRC-2 reached 500\u00a0eV with pulse lengths of 300\u00a0ms.\nIn 2015, PPPL completed an upgrade to NSTX to produce NSTX-U that made it the most powerful experimental fusion facility, or tokamak, of its type in the world.\nIn 2017, the group received a Phase II NIAC grant along with two NASA STTRs funding the RF subsystem and superconducting coil subsystem.\nIn 2024, the lab announced MUSE, a new stellarator. MUSE uses rare-earth permanent magnets with a field strength that can exceed 1.2 teslas. The device uses quasiaxisymmetry, a subtype of quasisymmetry. The research team claimed that its use of quasisymmetry was more sophisticated than prior devices. Also in 2024, PPL announced a reinforcement learning model that could forecast tearing mode instabilities up to 300 milliseconds in advance. That is enough time for the plasma controller to adjust operating parameters to prevent the tear and maintain H-mode performance.\nDirectors.\nThe following persons served as the Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory director:\nTable notes:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther domestic and international research activities.\nLaboratory scientists are collaborating with researchers on fusion science and technology at other facilities, including DIII-D in San Diego, EAST in China, JET in the United Kingdom, KSTAR in South Korea, the LHD in Japan, the Wendelstein 7-X (W7-X) device in Germany, and the International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor (ITER) in France. \nPPPL manages the U.S. ITER project activities together with Oak Ridge National Laboratory and Savannah River National Laboratory. The lab delivered 75% of components for the fusion energy experiment's electrical network in 2017 and has been leading the design and construction of six diagnostic tools for analyzing ITER plasmas. The PPPL physicist Richard Hawryluk served as ITER Deputy Director-General from 2011 to 2013. In 2022, PPPL staff developed with researchers from other national labs and universities over several months a US ITER research plan during the joint Fusion Energy Sciences Research Needs Workshop. \nStaff are applying knowledge gained in fusion research to a number of theoretical and experimental areas including materials science, solar physics, chemistry, and manufacturing. PPPL also aims to speed the development of fusion energy through the development of an increased number of public-private partnerships.\nTransportation.\nTiger Transit's Route 3 runs to Forrestal Campus and terminates at PPPL.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39826", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39826", "title": "PPPL", "text": ""}
{"id": "39827", "revid": "2542622", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39827", "title": "Project Matterhorn", "text": ""}
{"id": "39830", "revid": "17750005", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39830", "title": "Net profit", "text": ""}
{"id": "39831", "revid": "12975570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39831", "title": "Battering ram", "text": "Siege engine originating in ancient times\nA battering ram is a siege engine that originated in ancient times and was designed to break open the masonry walls of fortifications or splinter their wooden gates. In its simplest form, a battering ram is just a large, heavy log carried by several people and propelled with force against an obstacle; the ram would be sufficient to damage the target if the log were massive enough and/or it were moved quickly enough (that is, if it had enough momentum). Later rams encased the log in an arrow-proof, fire-resistant canopy mounted on wheels. Inside the canopy, the log was swung from suspensory chains or ropes.\nRams proved effective weapons of war because at the time wall-building materials such as stone and brick were weak in tension, and therefore prone to cracking when impacted with force. With repeated blows, the cracks would grow steadily until a hole was created. Eventually, a breach would appear in the fabric of the wall, enabling armed attackers to force their way through the gap and engage the inhabitants or garrison of the fortified place.\nThe introduction in the later Middle Ages of siege cannons, which harnessed the explosive power of gunpowder to propel weighty stone or iron balls against fortified obstacles, spelled the end of battering rams and other traditional siege weapons. Smaller, hand-held versions of battering rams are still used today by law enforcement officers and military personnel to break open locked doors.\nA capped ram is a battering ram that has an accessory at the head (usually made of iron or steel and sometimes punningly shaped into the head and horns of an ovine ram) to do more damage to a building. It was much more effective at destroying enemy walls and buildings than an uncapped ram but was heavier to carry.\nDesign.\nThe earliest depiction of a possible battering ram is from the tomb of the 11th Dynasty Egyptian noble Khety, where a pair of soldiers advance towards a fortress under the protection of a mobile roofed structure, carrying a long pole that may represent a simple battering ram.\nDuring the Iron Age, in the ancient Middle East and Mediterranean, the battering ram's log was slung from a wheeled frame by ropes or chains so that it could be made more massive and be more easily bashed against its target. Frequently, the ram's point would be reinforced with a metal head or cap while vulnerable parts of the shaft were bound with strengthening metal bands. Vitruvius details in his text that Ceras the Carthaginian was the first to make a ram with a wooden base with wheels and a wooden superstructure, with the ram hung within. This structure moved so slowly, however, that he called it the \"testudo\" (Latin for \"tortoise\").\nAnother type of ram was one that maintained the normal shape and structure, but the support beams were instead made of saplings that were lashed together. The frame was then covered in hides as normal to defend from fire. The only solid beam present was the ram that was hung from the frame. The frame itself was so light that it could be carried on the shoulders of the men transporting the ram, and the same men could beat the ram against the wall when they reached it.\nMany battering rams had curved or slanted wooden roofs and side-screens, covered in protective materials, usually fresh wet hides. These canopies reduced the risk of the ram being set on fire, and protected the operators of the ram from arrow and javelin volleys launched from above.\nAn image of an Assyrian battering ram depicts how sophisticated attacking and defensive practices had become by the 9th century BC. The defenders of a town wall are trying to set the ram alight with torches and have also put a chain under it. The attackers are trying to pull on the chain to free the ram, while the aforementioned wet hides on the canopy provide protection against the flames.\nBy the time the Kushites made their incursions into Egypt, c.\u2009715\u00a0BC, walls, siege tactics and equipment had undergone many changes. Early shelters protecting sappers armed with poles trying to breach mudbrick ramparts gave way to battering rams.\nThe first confirmed use of rams in the Occident happened from 503 to 502 BC when Opiter Verginius became consul of the Romans during the fight against Aurunci people:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The following consuls, Opiter Virginius and Sp. Cassius, first endeavored to take Pometia by storm, and afterwards by raising battering rams (vineae) and other works.\u2014\u200a\nThe second known use was in 427 BC, when the Spartans besieged Plataea. The first use of rams within the Mediterranean Basin, featuring in this case the simultaneous employment of siege towers to shelter the rammers from attack, occurred on the island of Sicily in 409 BC, at the Selinus siege.\nDefenders manning castles, forts or bastions would sometimes try to foil battering rams by dropping obstacles in front of the ram, such as a large sack of sawdust, just before the ram's head struck a wall or gate, or by using grappling hooks to immobilize the ram's log. Alternatively, the ram could be set ablaze, doused in fire-heated sand, pounded by boulders dropped from battlements or invested by a rapid sally of troops.\nSome battering rams were not slung from ropes or chains, but were instead supported by rollers. This allowed the ram to achieve a greater speed before striking its target, making it more destructive. Such a ram, as used by Alexander the Great, is described by Vitruvius.\nAlternatives to the battering ram included the drill, the sapper's mouse, the pick, the siege hook, and the hunting ram. These devices were smaller than a ram and could be used in confined spaces.\nNotable sieges.\nBattering rams had an important effect on the evolution of defensive walls, which were constructed ever more ingeniously in a bid to nullify the effects of siege engines. Historical instances of the usage of battering rams in sieges of major cities include:\nThere is a popular myth in Gloucester, England that the well known children's rhyme, Humpty Dumpty, is about a battering ram used in the siege of Gloucester in 1643, during the Civil War. However, the story is almost certainly untrue; during the siege, which lasted only one month, no battering rams were used, although many cannons were. The idea seems to have originated in a spoof history essay by Professor David Daube written for \"The Oxford Magazine\" in 1956, which was widely believed despite obvious improbabilities (e.g., planning to cross the River Severn by running the ram down a hill at speed, although the river is about 30 m (100 feet) wide at this point).\nModern use.\nBattering rams still have a use in modern times. Police forces often employ small, one-man or two-man metal rams, known as enforcers, for forcing open locked portals or effecting a door breaching. Modern battering rams sometimes incorporate a pneumatic cylinder and piston driven by compressed air, which are triggered by striking a hard object and enhance the momentum of the impact significantly.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "39833", "revid": "372290", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39833", "title": "Charles I of Anjou", "text": "King of Sicily from 1266 to 1285\nCharles I (; early 1226/1227\u00a0\u2013 7 January 1285), commonly called Charles of Anjou or Charles d'Anjou, was King of Sicily from 1266 to 1285. He was a member of the Capetian dynasty and the founder of the House of Anjou-Sicily. Between 1246 and 1285, he was Count of Provence and Forcalquier in the Holy Roman Empire and Count of Anjou and Maine in France. In 1272 he was proclaimed King of Albania, in 1277 he purchased a claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, and in 1278 he became Prince of Achaea after the previous ruler, William of Villehardouin, died without heirs.\nThe youngest son of Louis VIII of France and Blanche of Castile, Charles was destined for a church career until the early 1240s. He acquired Provence and Forcalquier through his marriage to Beatrice. His attempts to restore central authority brought him into conflict with his mother-in-law, Beatrice of Savoy, and the nobility. He relinquished control of Forcalquier to his mother-in-law in 1248, although she returned it to him in 1256. Charles received Anjou and Maine from his brother, Louis IX of France, in appanage. He accompanied Louis during the Seventh Crusade to Egypt. Shortly after he returned to Provence in 1250, Charles forced three wealthy autonomous cities\u2014Marseille, Arles and Avignon\u2014to acknowledge his suzerainty.\nCharles supported Margaret II, Countess of Flanders and Hainaut, against her eldest son, John, in exchange for Hainaut in 1253. Two years later, Louis IX persuaded him to renounce the county, but instructed Margaret to pay him 160,000 marks as compensation. Charles forced the rebellious Proven\u00e7al nobles and towns into submission and expanded his suzerainty over a dozen towns and lordships in the Kingdom of Arles. In 1263, after years of negotiations, he accepted the offer of the Holy See to seize the Kingdom of Sicily from the Hohenstaufens. This kingdom, including the island of Sicily and southern Italy to well north of Naples, was known as the Regno. Pope Urban IV declared a crusade against the incumbent Manfred of Sicily and assisted Charles in raising funds for the military campaign.\nCharles was crowned king in Rome on 5 January 1266. He annihilated Manfred's army and occupied the Regno almost without resistance. His victory over Manfred's young nephew, Conradin, at the Battle of Tagliacozzo in 1268 strengthened his rule. In 1270, he took part in the Eighth Crusade organised by Louis IX and forced the Hafsid Caliph Muhammad I to pay a yearly tribute to him. Charles's victories secured his undisputed leadership among the Papacy's Italian partisans (known as Guelphs), but his influence on papal elections and his strong military presence in Italy disturbed the popes. They tried to channel his ambitions towards other territories and assisted him in acquiring claims to Achaea, Jerusalem and Arles through treaties. In 1281, Pope Martin IV authorised Charles to launch a crusade against the Byzantine Empire. Charles's ships were gathering at Messina, ready to begin the campaign when the Sicilian Vespers rebellion broke out on 30March 1282 which put an end to Charles's rule on the island of Sicily. He was able to defend the mainland territories (or the Kingdom of Naples) with the support of France and the Holy See. Charles died while making preparations for an invasion of Sicily.\nEarly life.\nChildhood.\nCharles was the youngest child of King Louis VIII of France and Blanche of Castile. The date of his birth has not survived, but he was probably born posthumously in early 1227. Charles was Louis' only surviving son to be \"born in the purple\" (after his father's coronation), a fact he often emphasised in his youth, as the contemporaneous chronicler Matthew Paris noted in his . He was the first Capetian to be named for Charlemagne.\nLouis VIII died in November 1226 and his eldest son, Louis IX, succeeded him. The late king willed that his youngest sons were to be prepared for a career in the Roman Catholic Church. The details of Charles's tuition are unknown, but he received a good education. He understood the principal Catholic doctrines and could identify errors in Latin texts. His passion for poetry, medical sciences, and law is well documented.\nCharles later said that his mother had a strong impact on her children's education; in reality, Blanche was fully engaged in state administration, and could likely spare little time for her youngest children. Charles lived at the court of a brother, Robert I, Count of Artois, from 1237. About four years later he was put into the care of his youngest brother, Alphonse, Count of Poitiers. His participation in his brothers' military campaign against Hugh X of Lusignan, Count of La Marche, in 1242 showed that he was no longer destined for a Church career.\nProvence and Anjou.\nRaymond Berengar V of Provence died in August 1245, bequeathing Provence and Forcalquier to his youngest daughter, Beatrice, allegedly because he had given generous dowries to her three sisters. The dowries were actually not fully discharged, causing two of her sisters, Margaret (Louis IX's wife) and Eleanor (the wife of Henry III of England), to believe that they had been unlawfully disinherited. Their mother, Beatrice of Savoy, claimed that Raymond Berengar had willed the usufruct of Provence to her.\nThe Hohenstaufen Emperor Frederick II (whom Pope Innocent IV had recently excommunicated for his alleged \"crimes against the Church\"), Count Raymond VII of Toulouse and other neighbouring rulers proposed themselves or their sons as husbands for the young Countess. Her mother put her under the protection of the Holy See. Louis IX and Margaret suggested that Beatrice should be given in marriage to Charles. To secure the support of France against Frederick II, Pope Innocent IV accepted their proposal. Charles hurried to Aix-en-Provence at the head of an army to prevent other suitors from invading Provence, and married Beatrice on 31January 1246. Provence was a part of the Kingdom of Arles and so of the Holy Roman Empire, but Charles never swore fealty to the emperor. He ordered a survey of the counts' rights and revenues, outraging both his subjects and his mother-in-law, who regarded this action as an attack against her rights.\nBeing a younger child, destined for a church career, Charles had not received an appanage (a hereditary county or duchy) from his father. Louis VIII had willed that his fourth son, John, should receive Anjou and Maine upon reaching the age of majority, but John died in 1232. Louis IX knighted Charles at Melun in May 1246 and three months later bestowed Anjou and Maine on him. Charles rarely visited his two counties and appointed baillies (or regents) to administer them.\nWhile Charles was absent from Provence, Marseille, Arles and Avignon\u2014three wealthy cities, directly subject to the emperor\u2014formed a league and appointed a Proven\u00e7al nobleman, Barral of Baux, as the commander of their combined armies. Charles's mother-in-law put the disobedient Proven\u00e7als under her protection. Charles could not deal with the rebels as he was about to join his brother's crusade. To pacify his mother-in-law he acknowledged her right to rule Forcalquier and granted a third of his revenues from Provence to her.\nSeventh Crusade.\nIn December 1244 Louis IX took a vow to lead a crusade. Ignoring their mother's strong opposition, his three brothers\u2014Robert, Alphonse and Charles\u2014also took the cross. Preparations for the crusade lasted for years, with the crusaders embarking at Aigues-Mortes on 25August 1248. After spending several months in Cyprus they invaded Egypt on 5June 1249. They captured Damietta and decided to attack Cairo in November. During their advance Louis's biographer Jean de Joinville noted Charles's personal courage which saved dozens of crusaders' lives. Robert of Artois died fighting against the Egyptians at Al Mansurah. His three brothers survived, but they had to abandon the campaign. While withdrawing from Egypt, they fell into captivity on 6April 1250. The Egyptians released Louis, Charles and Alphonse in exchange for 800,000 bezants and the surrender of Damietta on 6May. During their voyage to Acre, Charles outraged Louis by gambling while the king was mourning Robert's death. Louis remained in the Holy Land, but Charles returned to France in October 1250.\nWider ambitions.\nConflicts and consolidation.\nCharles's officers continued the survey of the counts' rights and revenues in Provence, provoking a new rebellion during his absence. On his return he applied both diplomacy and military force to deal with them. The Archbishop of Arles and the Bishop of Digne ceded their secular rights in the two towns to Charles in 1250. He received military assistance from his brother, Alphonse. Arles was the first town to surrender to them in April 1251. In May they forced Avignon to acknowledge their joint rule. A month later Barral of Baux also capitulated. Marseilles was the only town to resist for several months, but it also sought peace in July 1252. Its burghers acknowledged Charles as their lord, but retained their self-governing bodies.\nCharles's officials continued to ascertain his rights, visiting each town and holding public enquiries to obtain information about all claims. The count's salt monopoly (or ) was introduced in the whole county. Income from the salt trade made up about 50% of state revenues by the late 1250s. Charles abolished local tolls and promoted shipbuilding and grain trade. He ordered the issue of new coins, called , to enable the use of the local currency in smaller transactions.\nEmperor Frederick II, who was also the ruler of Sicily, died in 1250. The Kingdom of Sicily, also known as the Regno, included the island of Sicily and southern Italy nearly as far as Rome. Pope Innocent IV claimed that the Regno had reverted to the Holy See. The Pope first offered it to Richard of Cornwall, but Richard did not want to fight against Frederick's son, Conrad IV of Germany. Then the Pope proposed to enfeoff Charles with the kingdom. Charles sought instructions from Louis IX, who forbade him to accept the offer, because he regarded Conrad as the lawful ruler. After Charles informed the Holy See on 30October 1253 that he would not accept the Regno, the Pope offered it to Edmund of Lancaster.\nQueen Blanche, who had administered France during Louis' crusade, died on 1December 1252. Louis made Alphonse and Charles co-regents, so that he could remain in the Holy Land. Margaret II, Countess of Flanders and Hainaut, had come into conflict with her son by her first marriage, John of Avesnes. After her sons by her second marriage were captured in July 1253, she needed foreign assistance to secure their release. Ignoring Louis IX's 1246 ruling that Hainaut should pass to John, she promised the county to Charles. He accepted the offer and invaded Hainaut, forcing most local noblemen to swear fealty to him. After his return to France, Louis IX insisted that his ruling was to be respected. In November 1255 he ordered Charles to restore Hainaut to Margaret, but her sons were obliged to swear fealty to Charles. Louis also ruled that she was to pay 160,000 marks to Charles over the following 13 years.\nCharles returned to Provence, which had again become restive. His mother-in-law continued to support the rebellious Boniface of Castellane and his allies, but Louis IX persuaded her to return Forcalquier to Charles and relinquish her claims for a lump sum payment from Charles and a pension from Louis in November 1256. A coup by Charles's supporters in Marseilles resulted in the surrender of all political powers there to his officials. Charles continued to expand his power along the borders of Provence in the next four years. He received territories in the Lower Alps from the Dauphin of Vienne. Raymond I of Baux, Count of Orange, ceded the title of regent of the Kingdom of Arles to him. The burghers of Cuneo\u2014a town strategically located on the routes from Provence to Lombardy\u2014sought Charles's protection against Asti in July 1259. Alba, Cherasco, Savigliano and other nearby towns acknowledged his rule. The rulers of Mondov\u00ec, Ceva, Biandrate and Saluzzo did homage to him.\nEmperor Frederick II's illegitimate son, Manfred, had been crowned king of Sicily in 1258. After the English barons had announced that they opposed a war against Manfred, Pope Alexander IV annulled the 1253 grant of Sicily to Edmund of Lancaster. Alexander's successor, Pope Urban IV, was determined to put an end to the Emperor's rule in Italy. He sent his notary, Albert of Parma, to Paris to negotiate with Louis IX for Charles to be placed on the Sicilian throne. Charles met with the Pope's envoy in early 1262.\nTaking advantage of Charles's absence, Boniface of Castellane stirred up a new revolt in Provence. The burghers of Marseilles expelled Charles's officials, but Barral of Baux stopped the spread of the rebellion before Charles's return. Charles renounced Ventimiglia in favour of the Republic of Genoa to secure her neutrality. He defeated the rebels and forced Castellane into exile. The mediation of James I of Aragon brought about a settlement with Marseilles: its fortifications were dismantled and the townspeople surrendered their arms, but the town retained its autonomy.\nConquest of the Regno.\nLouis IX decided to support Charles's military campaign in Italy in May 1263. Pope Urban IV promised to proclaim a crusade against Manfred, while Charles pledged that he would not accept any offices in the Italian towns. Manfred staged a coup in Rome, but the Guelphs elected Charles senator (or the head of the civil government of Rome). He accepted the office, at which a group of cardinals requested that the Pope revoke the agreement with him, but the Pope, being otherwise defenceless against Manfred, could not break with Charles.\nIn the spring of 1264 Cardinals Simon of Brie and Guy Foulquois were sent to France to reach a compromise and start raising support for the crusade. Charles sent troops to Rome to protect the Pope against Manfred's allies. At Foulquois' request, Charles's sister-in-law Margaret (who had not abandoned her claims to her dowry) pledged that she would not take actions against Charles during his absence. Foulquois also persuaded the French and Proven\u00e7al prelates to offer financial support for the crusade. Pope Urban died before the final agreement was concluded. Charles made arrangements for his campaign against Sicily during the interregnum; he concluded agreements to secure his army's route across Lombardy and had the leaders of the Proven\u00e7al rebels executed.\nFoulquois was elected pope in February 1265; he soon confirmed Charles's senatorship and urged him to come to Rome. Charles agreed that he would hold the Kingdom of Sicily as the popes' vassal for an annual tribute of 8,000 ounces of gold. He also promised that he would never seek the imperial title. He embarked at Marseilles on 10May and landed at Ostia ten days later. He was installed as senator on 21June and four cardinals invested him with the Regno a week later. To finance further military actions he borrowed money from Italian bankers with the Pope's assistance, who had authorised him to pledge Church property. Five cardinals crowned him king of Sicily on 5January 1266. The crusaders from France and Provence\u2014reportedly 6,000 fully equipped mounted warriors, 600 mounted bowmen and 20,000 foot-soldiers\u2014arrived in Rome ten days later.\nCharles decided to invade southern Italy without delay, because he was unable to finance a lengthy campaign. He left Rome on 20January 1266. He marched towards Naples, but changed his strategy after learning of a muster of Manfred's forces near Capua. He led his troops across the Apennines towards Benevento. Manfred also hurried to the town and reached it before Charles. Worried that further delays might endanger his subjects' loyalty, Manfred attacked Charles's army, then in disarray from the crossing of the hills, on 26February 1266. In the ensuing battle, Manfred's army was defeated and he was killed.\nResistance throughout the Regno collapsed and towns surrendered even before Charles's troops reached them. The Saracens of Lucera\u2014a Muslim colony established during Frederick II's reign\u2014paid homage to him. His commander, Philip of Montfort, took control of the island of Sicily. Manfred's widow, Helena of Epirus, and their children were captured. Charles laid claim to her dowry\u2014the island of Corfu and the region of Durazzo (now Durr\u00ebs in Albania)\u2014by right of conquest. His troops seized Corfu before the end of the year.\nConradin.\nCharles was lenient with Manfred's supporters, but they did not believe that this conciliatory policy could last. They knew that he had promised to return estates to the Guelph lords expelled from the Regno. Neither could Charles gain the commoners' loyalty, partly because he continued enforcing the despite the popes declaring it an illegal charge. He introduced a ban on the use of foreign currency in large transactions and made a profit of the compulsory exchange of foreign coinage for locally minted currency. He also traded in grain, spices and sugar, through a joint venture with Pisan merchants.\nPope Clement censured Charles for his methods of state administration, describing him as an arrogant and obstinate monarch. The consolidation of Charles's power in northern Italy also alarmed Clement. To appease the Pope, Charles resigned his senatorship in May 1267. His successors, Conrad Monaldeschi and Luca Savelli, demanded the re-payment of the money that Charles and the Pope had borrowed from the Romans.\nVictories by the Ghibellines, the imperial family's supporters, forced the Pope to ask Charles to send his troops to Tuscany. Charles's troops ousted the Ghibellines from Florence in April 1267. After being elected the (ruler) of Florence and Lucca for seven years, Charles hurried to Tuscany. Charles's expansionism along the Papal States' borders alarmed Pope Clement and he decided to change the direction of Charles's ambitions. The Pope summoned him to Viterbo, forcing him to promise that he would abandon all claims to Tuscany in three years. He persuaded Charles to conclude agreements with William of Villehardouin, Prince of Achaea, and the titular Latin emperor Baldwin II in late May. According to the first treaty, Villehardouin acknowledged Charles's suzerainty and made Charles's younger son, Philip, his heir, also stipulating that Charles would inherit Achaea if Philip died childless. Baldwin confirmed the first agreement and renounced his claims to suzerainty over his vassals in favour of Charles. Charles pledged that he would assist Baldwin in recapturing Constantinople from the Byzantine emperor, Michael VIII Palaiologos, in exchange for one third of the conquered lands.\nCharles returned to Tuscany and laid siege to the fortress of Poggibonsi, but it did not fall until the end of November. Manfred's staunchest supporters had meanwhile fled to Bavaria to attempt to persuade Conrad IV's 15-year-old son Conradin to assert his hereditary right to the Kingdom of Sicily. After Conradin accepted their proposal, Manfred's former vicar in Sicily, Conrad Capece, returned to the island and stirred up a revolt. At Capece's request Muhammad I al-Mustansir, the Hafsid caliph of Tunis, allowed Manfred's former ally, Frederick of Castile, to invade Sicily from North Africa. Frederick's brother, Henry\u2014who had been elected senator of Rome\u2014also offered support to Conradin. Henry had been Charles's friend, but Charles had failed to repay a loan to him.\nConradin left Bavaria in September 1267. His supporters' revolt was spreading from Sicily to Calabria; the Saracens of Lucera also rose up. Pope Clement urged Charles to return to the Regno, but he continued his campaign in Tuscany until March 1268, when he met with the Pope. In April, the Pope made Charles imperial vicar of Tuscany \"during the vacancy of the empire\", a move of dubious legality. Charles marched to southern Italy and laid siege to Lucera, but he then had to hurry north to prevent Conradin's invasion of Abruzzo in late August. At the Battle of Tagliacozzo, on 23August 1268, it appeared that Conradin had won the day, but a sudden charge by Charles's reserve routed Conradin's army.\nThe burghers of Potenza, Aversa and other towns in Basilicata and Apulia massacred their fellows who had agitated on Conradin's behalf, but the Sicilians and the Saracens of Lucera did not surrender. Charles marched to Rome where he was again elected senator in September. He appointed new officials to administer justice and collect state revenues. New coins bearing his name were struck. During the following decade, Rome was ruled by Charles's vicars, each appointed for one year.\nConradin was captured at Torre Astura. Most of his retainers were summarily executed, but Conradin and his friend, Frederick I, Margrave of Baden, were brought to trial for robbery and treason in Naples. They were sentenced to death and beheaded on 29October. Conrad of Antioch was Conradin's only partisan to be released, but only after his wife threatened to execute the Guelph lords she held captive in her castle. The Ghibelline noblemen of the Regno fled to the court of Peter III of Aragon, who had married Manfred's daughter Constance.\nMediterranean empire.\nItaly.\nCharles's wife, Beatrice of Provence, had died in July 1267. The widowed Charles married Margaret of Nevers in November 1268. She was co-heiress to her father, Odo, the eldest son of Hugh IV, Duke of Burgundy. Pope Clement died on 29November 1268. The papal vacancy lasted for three years, which strengthened Charles's authority in Italy, but it also deprived him of the ecclesiastic support that only a pope could provide.\nCharles returned to Lucera to personally direct its siege in April 1269. The Saracens and the Ghibellines who had escaped to the town resisted until starvation forced them to surrender in August 1269. Charles sent Philip and Guy of Montfort to Sicily to force the rebels there into submission, but they could only capture Augusta. Charles made William l'Estandart the commander of the army in Sicily in August 1269. L'Estandart captured Agrigento, forcing Frederick of Castile and Frederick Lancia to seek refuge in Tunis. After L'Estandart's subsequent victory at Sciacca, only Capece resisted, but he also had to surrender in early 1270.\nCharles's troops forced Siena and Pisa\u2014the last towns to resist him in Tuscany\u2014to sue for peace in August 1270. He granted privileges to the Tuscan merchants and bankers which strengthened their position in the Regno. His influence was declining in Lombardy, because the Lombard towns no longer feared an invasion from Germany after Conradin's death. In May 1269 Charles sent Walter of La Roche to represent him in the province, but this failed to strengthen his authority. In October Charles's officials convoked an assembly at Cremona, and invited the Lombard towns to attend. The Lombard towns accepted the invitation, but some towns\u2014Milan, Bologna, Alessandria and Tortona\u2014only confirmed their alliance with Charles, without acknowledging his rule.\nEighth Crusade.\nLouis IX never abandoned the idea of the liberation of Jerusalem, but he decided to begin his new crusade with a military campaign against Tunis. According to his confessor, Geoffrey of Beaulieu, Louis was convinced that al-Mustansir of Tunis was ready to convert to Christianity. The 13th-century historian Saba Malaspina stated that Charles persuaded Louis to attack Tunis, because he wanted to secure the payment of the tribute that the rulers of Tunis had paid to the former Sicilian monarchs.\nThe French crusaders embarked at Aigues-Mortes on 2July 1270; Charles departed from Naples six days later. He spent more than a month in Sicily, waiting for his fleet. By the time he landed at Tunis on 25August, dysentery and typhoid fever had decimated the French army. Louis died the day Charles arrived.\nThe crusaders twice defeated Al-Mustansir's army, forcing him to sue for peace. According to the peace treaty, signed on 1November, Al-Mustansir agreed to fully compensate Louis' son and successor, Philip III of France, and Charles for the expenses of the military campaign and to release his Christian prisoners. He also promised to pay a yearly tribute to Charles and to expel Charles's opponents from Tunis. The gold from Tunis, along with silver from the newly opened mine at Longobucco, enabled Charles to mint new coins, known as , in the Regno.\nCharles and Philip departed Tunis on 10November. A storm dispersed their fleet at Trapani and most of Charles's galleys were lost or damaged. Genoese ships returning from the crusade were also sunk or forced to land in Sicily. Charles seized the damaged ships and their cargo, ignoring all protests from the Ghibelline authorities of Genoa. Before leaving Sicily he granted temporary tax concessions to the Sicilians, because he realised that the conquest of the island had caused much destruction.\nAttempts to expand.\nCharles accompanied Philip III as far as Viterbo in March 1271. Here they failed to convince the cardinals to elect a new pope. Charles's brother, Alphonse of Poitiers, fell ill. Charles sent his best doctors to cure him, but Alphonse died. He claimed the major part of Alphonse's inheritance, including the Marquisate of Provence and the County of Poitiers, because he was Alphonse's nearest kin. After Philip III objected, he took the case to the Parlement of Paris. In 1284 the court ruled that appanages escheated to the French crown if their rulers died without descendants.\nAn earthquake destroyed the walls of Durazzo in the late 1260s or early 1270s. Charles's troops took possession of the town with the assistance of the leaders of the nearby Albanian communities. Charles concluded an agreement with the Albanian chiefs, promising to protect them and their ancient liberties in February 1272. He adopted the title of King of Albania and appointed Gazzo Chinardo as his vicar-general. He also sent his fleet to Achaea to defend the principality against Byzantine attacks.\nCharles hurried to Rome to attend the enthronement of Pope Gregory X on 27March 1272. The new pope was determined to put an end to the conflicts between the Guelphs and the Ghibellines. While in Rome Charles met with the Guelph leaders who had been exiled from Genoa. After they offered him the office of captain of the people, Charles promised military assistance to them. In November 1272 Charles commanded his officials to take prisoner all Genoese within his territories, except for the Guelphs, and to seize their property. His fleet occupied Ajaccio in Corsica. Pope Gregory condemned his aggressive policy, but proposed that the Genoese should elect Guelph officials. Ignoring the Pope's proposal, the Genoese made alliance with Alfonso X of Castile, William VII of Montferrat and the Ghibelline towns of Lombardy in October 1273.\nThe conflict with Genoa prevented Charles from invading the Byzantine Empire, but he continued to forge alliances in the Balkan Peninsula. The Bulgarian ruler, Konstantin Tih, was the first to conclude a treaty with him in 1272 or 1273. John I Doukas of Thessaly and Stefan Uro\u0161 I, King of Serbia, joined the coalition in 1273. However, Pope Gregory forbade Charles to attack, because he hoped to unify the Orthodox and Catholic churches with the assistance of Emperor Michael VIII.\nThe renowned theologian Thomas Aquinas died unexpectedly near Naples on 7March 1274, before departing to attend the Second Council of Lyon. According to a popular legend, immortalised by Dante Alighieri, Charles had him poisoned, because he feared that Aquinas would make complaint against him. The historian Steven Runciman emphasises that \"there is no evidence for supposing that the great doctor's death was not natural\". Southern Italian churchmen at the council accused Charles of tyrannical acts. Their report reinforced the Pope's attempt to reach a compromise with Rudolf of Habsburg, who had been elected king of Germany by the prince-electors of the Holy Roman Empire. In June, the Pope acknowledged Rudolf as the lawful ruler of both Germany and Italy. Charles's sisters-in-law, Margaret and Eleanor, approached Rudolf, claiming that they had been unlawfully disinherited in favour of Charles's late wife.\nMichael VIII's personal envoy announced at the Council of Lyon on 6July that he had accepted the Catholic creed and papal primacy. About three weeks later, Pope Gregory again prohibited Charles from launching military actions against the Byzantine Empire. The Pope also tried to mediate a truce between Charles and Michael, but the latter chose to attack several smaller states in the Balkans, including Charles's vassals. The Byzantine fleet took control of the maritime routes between Albania and southern Italy in the late 1270s. Gregory only allowed Charles to send reinforcements to Achaea. The organisation of a new crusade to the Holy Land remained the Pope's principal object. He persuaded Charles to start negotiations with Maria of Antioch about purchasing her claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The High Court of Jerusalem had already rejected her in favour of Hugh III of Cyprus, but the Pope had a low opinion of Hugh.\nThe war with Genoa and the Lombard towns increasingly occupied Charles's attention. He appointed his nephew Robert II of Artois as his deputy in Piedmont in October 1274, but Artois could not prevent Vercelli and Alessandria from joining the Ghibelline League. The following summer, a Genoese fleet plundered Trapani and the island of Gozo. Convinced that only Rudolf I could achieve a compromise between the Guelphs and Ghibellines, the Pope urged the Lombard towns to send envoys to him. He also urged Charles to renounce Tuscany. In the autumn of 1275 the Ghibellines offered to make peace with Charles, but he did not accept their terms. Early the next year the Ghibellines defeated his troops at Col de Tende, forcing them to withdraw to Provence.\nPapal elections.\nPope Gregory X died on 10January 1276. After the hostility he experienced during Gregory's pontificate, Charles was determined to secure the election of a pope willing to support his plans. Gregory's successor, Pope Innocent V, had always been Charles's partisan and he rapidly confirmed Charles as senator of Rome and imperial vicar of Tuscany. He also mediated a peace treaty between Charles and Genoa, which was signed in Rome on 22June 1276. Charles restored the privileges of the Genoese merchants and renounced his conquests, and the Genoese acknowledged his rule in Ventimiglia.\nPope Innocent died on 30June 1276. After the cardinals assembled in the Lateran Palace, Charles's troops surrounded it, enabling only his allies to communicate with other cardinals and with outsiders. On 11July the cardinals elected Charles's old friend, Ottobuono de' Fieschi, pope, but he died on 18August. The cardinals met again, this time at Viterbo. Although Charles was staying in the nearby Vetralla, he could not directly influence the election, because his vehement opponent, Cardinal Giovanni Gaetano Orsini, dominated the papal conclave. Pope John XXI, who was elected on 20September, excommunicated Charles's opponents in Piedmont and prohibited Rudolf from coming to Lombardy, but did not forbid the Lombardian Guelph leaders swearing fealty to Rudolf. The Pope also confirmed the treaty concluded by Charles and Maria of Antioch on 18March which transferred her claims to Jerusalem to Charles for 1,000 bezants and a pension of 4,000 .\nCharles appointed Roger of San Severino to administer the Kingdom of Jerusalem as his bailiff. San Severino landed at Acre on 7June 1277. Hugh III's bailiff, Balian of Arsuf, surrendered the town without resistance. Although initially only the Knights Hospitaller and the Venetians acknowledged Charles as the lawful ruler, the barons of the realm also paid homage to San Severino in January 1278, after he had threatened to confiscate their estates. The Mamluks of Egypt had already confined the kingdom to a coastal strip covering and Charles had ordered San Severino to avoid conflicts with Egypt.\nPope John died on 20May 1277. Charles was ill and could not prevent the election of Giovanni Gaetano Orsini as Pope Nicholas III on 25November. The Pope soon declared that no foreign prince could rule in Rome and reminded Charles that he had been elected senator for ten years. Charles swore fealty to the new pope on 24May 1278 after lengthy negotiations. He had to pledge that he would renounce both the senatorship of Rome and the vicariate of Tuscany in four months. On the other hand, Nicholas III confirmed the excommunication of Charles's enemies in Piedmont and started negotiations with Rudolf to prevent him from making an alliance against Charles with Margaret of Provence and her nephew, Edward I of England. The negotiations with Rudolf lay behind Nicholas' refusal to renew Charles's vicariate in Tuscany, to which Rudolf had appointed his own vicar.\nCharles announced his resignation from the senatorship and the vicariate on 30August 1278. He was succeeded by the Pope's brother, Matteo Orsini, in Rome, and by the Pope's nephew, Cardinal Latino Malabranca, in Tuscany. To ensure that Charles fully abandoned his ambitions in central Italy the Pope started negotiations with Rudolf about the restoration of the Kingdom of Arles for Charles's grandson, Charles Martel. Margaret of Provence sharply opposed the plan, but Philip III of France did not stand by his mother. After lengthy negotiations, in the summer of 1279 Rudolf recognised Charles as the lawful ruler of Provence without demanding his oath of fealty. An agreement about Charles Martel's rule in Arles and his marriage to Rudolf's daughter, Clemence, was signed in May 1280. The plan disturbed the rulers of the lands along the Upper Rhone, especially Duke Robert II and Count Otto IV of Burgundy.\nCharles had meanwhile inherited the Principality of Achaea from William II of Villehardouin, who had died on 1May 1278. He appointed the unpopular of Sicily, Galeran of Ivry, as his baillif in Achaea. Galeran could not pay his troops who started to pillage the peasants' homes. John I de la Roche, Duke of Athens, had to lend money to him to finance their salaries. Nicephoros I of Epirus acknowledged Charles's suzerainty on 14March 1279 to secure his assistance against the Byzantines. Nicephoros also ceded three towns\u2014Butrinto, Sopotos and Panormos\u2014to Charles.\nPope Nicholas died on 22August 1280. Charles sent agents to Viterbo to promote the election of one of his supporters, taking advantage of the rift between the late Pope's relatives and other Italian cardinals. When a riot broke out in Viterbo, after the cardinals had not reached a decision for months, Charles's troops took control of the town. On 22February 1281 his staunchest supporter, Simon of Brie, was elected pope. Pope Martin IV dismissed his predecessor's relatives and made Charles the senator of Rome again. Guido I da Montefeltro rose up against the Pope, but Charles's troops under Jean d'Eppe stopped the spread of the rebellion at Forl\u00ec. Charles also sent an army to Piedmont, but Thomas I, Marquess of Saluzzo, annihilated it at Borgo San Dalmazzo in May.\nCrusade against Byzantium.\nPope Martin excommunicated Emperor Michael VIII on 10April 1281 because the Emperor had not imposed the Church union in his empire. The Pope soon authorised Charles to invade the empire. Charles's vicar in Albania, Hugh of Sully, had already laid siege to the Byzantine fortress of Berat. A Byzantine army of relief under Michael Tarchaneiotes and John Synadenos arrived in March 1281. Sully was ambushed and captured, his army put to flight and the interior of Albania was lost to the Byzantines. On 3July 1281 Charles and his son-in-law, Philip of Courtenay, the titular Latin emperor, made an alliance with Venice \"for the restoration of the Roman Empire\". They decided to start a full-scale campaign early the next year.\nMargaret of Provence called Robert and Otto of Burgundy and other lords who held fiefs in the Kingdom of Arles to a meeting at Troyes in the autumn of 1281. They were willing to unite their troops to prevent Charles's army from taking possession of the kingdom, but Philip III of France strongly opposed his mother's plan and Edward I of England would not promise any assistance to them. Charles acknowledged that his wife held the County of Tonnerre and her other inherited estates as a Burgundian fief, which appeased Robert of Burgundy. Charles's ships started to assemble at Marseilles to sail up the Rhone in the spring of 1282. Another fleet was gathering at Messina to start the crusade against the Byzantine Empire.\nThe empire's collapse.\nSicilian Vespers.\nAlways in need of funds, Charles could not cancel the , although it was the most unpopular tax in the Regno. Instead he granted exemptions to individuals and communities, especially to the French and Proven\u00e7al colonists, which increased the burden on those who did not enjoy such privileges. The yearly, or occasionally more frequent, obligatory exchange of the \u2014the coins almost exclusively used in local transactions\u2014was also an important, and unpopular, source of revenue for the royal treasury. Charles took out forced loans whenever he needed \"immediately a large sum of money for certain arduous and pressing business\", as he explained in one of his decrees.\nPurveyances, the requisitioning of goods, increased the unpopularity of Charles's government in southern Italy and Sicily. His subjects were also liable to be forced to guard prisoners or lodge soldiers in their homes. The restoration of old fortresses, bridges and aqueducts and the building of new castles required the employment of craftsmen, although most of them were unwilling to participate in such lengthy projects. Thousands of people were forced to serve in the army in foreign lands, especially after 1279. Trading in salt was declared a royal monopoly. In December 1281, Charles again ordered the collection of the , requiring the payment of 150 per cent of the customary amount.\nCharles did not pay attention to the island of Sicily, although it had been the centre of resistance against him in 1268. He transferred the capital from Palermo to Naples. He did not visit the island after 1271, preventing Sicilians from directly informing him of their grievances. Sicilian noblemen were seldom employed as royal officials, although he often appointed their southern Italian peers to represent him in his other realms. Furthermore, having seized large estates on the island in the late 1260s Charles almost exclusively employed French and Proven\u00e7al clerics to administer them.\nPopular stories credited John of Procida\u2014Manfred of Sicily's former chancellor\u2014with staging an international plot against Charles. Rumour has it that he visited in disguise Constantinople, Sicily and Viterbo between 1279 and 1280 where he convinced the emperor Michael VIII, the Sicilian barons and Pope Nicholas III to support a revolt. Michael VIII's own autobiographical memoirs make a claim that it was he who became \"God's instrument in bringing freedom to the Sicilians\" and not a plot orchestrated by John of Procida. At that time, still Byzantium's wealth could indeed have enabled him to set in motion a trans-national enterprise by bribing the discontented Sicilian barons. Peter III of Aragon decided to lay claim to the Kingdom of Sicily in late 1280: he did not hide his disdain for the Angevin even when he met with Charles's son, Charles, Duke of Salerno, in Toulouse in December 1280, even though it was the papacy that had sold the title of the kingdom of Naples to Charles I Anjou. Peter began to assemble a fleet on the pretext of a crusade against Tunis.\nRioting broke out in Sicily after a burgher of Palermo killed a drunken French soldier who had insulted his wife before the Church of the Holy Spirit on Easter Monday (30March) of 1282. When the soldier's comrades attacked the murderer, the mob turned against them and started to massacre all the French in the town. The riot, known since the 16th century as the Sicilian Vespers, developed into an uprising and most of Charles's officials were killed or forced to flee the island. Charles ordered the transfer of soldiers and ships from Achaea to Sicily, but could not stop the spread of the revolt to Calabria. San Severino also had to return to Italy, accompanied by the major part of the garrison at Acre. Odo Poilechien, who succeeded him in Acre, had limited authority.\nThe burghers of the major Sicilian towns established communes which sent delegates to Pope Martin, asking him to take them under the protection of the Holy See. Instead of accepting their offer, the Pope excommunicated the rebels on 7May. Charles issued an edict on 10June, accusing his officials of having ignored his instructions on good administration, but he failed to promise fundamental changes. In July he sailed to Sicily and laid siege to Messina.\nWar with Aragon.\nPeter III of Aragon's envoy, William of Castelnou, started negotiations with the rebels' leaders in Palermo. Realizing that they could not resist without foreign support, they acknowledged Peter and Constance as their king and queen. They appointed envoys to accompany Castelnou to Collo where the Aragonese fleet was assembling. After a short hesitation, Peter decided to intervene on the rebels' behalf and sailed to Sicily. He was declared king of Sicily at Palermo on 4September. Thereafter two realms, each ruled by a monarch styled king (or queen) of Sicily, coexisted for more than a century, with Charles and his successors ruling in southern Italy (known as the Kingdom of Naples) while Peter and his descendants ruled the island of Sicily.\nIn the face of the Aragonese landing, Charles was compelled to withdraw from the island, but the Aragonese moved swiftly and destroyed part of his army and most of his baggage. Peter took control of the whole island and sent troops to Calabria, but they could not prevent Charles of Salerno from leading an army of 600 French knights to join his father at Reggio Calabria. Further French troops arrived under the command of Charles's nephews, Robert II of Artois and Peter of Alen\u00e7on, in November. In the same month, the Pope excommunicated Peter.\nNeither Peter nor Charles could afford to wage a lengthy war. Charles made an astonishing proposal in late December 1282, challenging Peter to a judicial duel. Peter insisted that the war should be continued, but agreed that a battle between the two kings, each accompanied by 100 knights, should decide the possession of Sicily. The duel was set to take place at Bordeaux on 1June 1283, but they did not fix the hour. Charles appointed Charles of Salerno to administer the Regno during his absence. To secure the loyalty of the local lords in Achaea, he made one of their peers, Guy of Dramelay, baillif. Pope Martin declared the war against the Sicilians a crusade on 13January 1283. Charles met with the Pope in Viterbo on 9 March, but he ignored the Pope's ban on his duel with Peter of Aragon. After visiting Provence and Paris in April, he left for Bordeaux to meet with Peter. The duel turned into a farce; the two kings each arriving at different times on the same day, declaring a victory over their absent opponent, and departing.\nSkirmishes and raids continued to occur in southern Italy. Aragonese guerrillas attacked Catona and killed Peter of Alen\u00e7on in January 1283; the Aragonese seized Reggio Calabria in February; and the Sicilian admiral, Roger of Lauria, defeated a newly raised Proven\u00e7al fleet at Malta in April. However, tensions arose between the Aragonese and the Sicilians and in May 1283 one of the leaders of the anti-Angevin rebellion, Walter of Caltagirone, was executed for his secret correspondence with Charles's agents. Pope Martin declared the war against Aragon a crusade and conferred the kingdom upon Philip III of France's son, Charles of Valois, on 2February 1284.\nCharles started to raise new troops and a fleet in Provence, and instructed his son, Charles of Salerno, to maintain a defensive posture until his return. Roger of Lauria based a small squadron on the island of Nisida to blockade Naples in May 1284. Charles of Salerno attempted to destroy the squadron, but most of his fleet was captured, and he himself was taken prisoner after a short, sharp fight on 5June. News of the reverse caused a riot in Naples, but the papal legate, Gerard of Parma, crushed it with the assistance of local noblemen. Charles learnt of the disaster when he landed at Gaeta on 6June. He was furious at Charles of Salerno and his disobedience. He allegedly stated that \"Who loses a fool loses nothing\", referring to his son's capture.\nCharles left Naples for Calabria on 24June 1284. A large army\u2014reportedly 10,000 mounted warriors and 40,000 foot-soldiers\u2014accompanied him as far as Reggio Calabria. He laid siege to the town by sea and land in late July. His fleet approached the coast of Sicily, but his troops could not land in the island. After Lauria landed troops near Reggio Calabria, Charles had to lift the siege and retreat from Calabria on 3August.\nDeath.\nCharles went to Brindisi and made preparations for a campaign against Sicily in the new year. He dispatched orders to his officials for the collection of the . However, he fell seriously ill before travelling to Foggia on 30December. He made his last will on 6January 1285, appointing Robert II of Artois regent for his grandson, Charles Martel, who was to rule his realms until Charles of Salerno was released. He died in the morning of 7January. He was buried in a marble sepulchre in Naples, but his heart was placed at the Couvent Saint-Jacques in Paris. His corpse was moved to a chapel of the newly built Naples Cathedral in 1296.\nFamily.\nAll records show that Charles was a faithful husband and a caring father. His first wife, Beatrice of Provence, gave birth to at least six children. According to contemporaneous gossips, she persuaded Charles to claim the Kingdom of Sicily, because she wanted to wear a crown like her sisters. Before she died in July 1267, she had willed the usufruct of Provence to Charles.\nThe widowed Charles first proposed himself to Margaret of Hungary. However, Margaret, who had been brought up in a Dominican nunnery, did not want to marry. According to legend, she disfigured herself to prevent the marriage. Charles and his second wife, Margaret of Nevers, had several children, but none survived to adulthood.\nLegacy.\nThe works of two 13th-century historians, Bartholomaeus of Neocastro and Saba Malaspina, strongly influenced modern views about Charles, although they were biased. The former described Charles as a tyrant to justify the Sicilian Vespers, the latter argued for the cancellation of the crusade against Aragon in 1285. Charles had continued his imperial predecessors' policies in several fields, including coinage, taxation, and the employment of unpopular officials from Amalfi. Nevertheless, the monarchy underwent a \"Frenchification\" or \"Proven\u00e7alistion\" during his reign. He donated estates in the Regno to about 700 noblemen from France or Provence. He did not adopt the rich ceremonial robes, inspired by Byzantine and Islamic royal styles, of earlier Sicilian kings, but dressed like other western European monarchs, or as \"a simple knight\", as it was observed by the chronicler Thomas Tuscus who visited Naples in 1267.\nAround 1310, the Florentine historian, Giovanni Villani, stated that Charles had been the most powerful Christian monarch in the late 1270s. Luchetto Gattilusio, a Genoese poet, compared Charles directly with Charlemagne. Both reports demonstrate that Charles was regarded almost as an emperor. Among modern historians, Runciman says that Charles tried to build an empire in the eastern Mediterraneum; G\u00e9rard Siv\u00e9ry writes that he wanted to dominate the west; and Jean Dunbabin argues that his \"agglomeration of lands was in the process of forming an empire\".\nThe historian Hiroshi Takayama concludes that Charles's dominion \"was too large to control\". Nevertheless, economic links among his realms strengthened during his reign. Proven\u00e7al salt was transported to his other lands, grain from the Regno was sold in Achaea, Albania, Acre and Tuscany, and Tuscan merchants settled in Anjou, Maine, Sicily and Naples. His highest-ranking officials were transferred from their homelands to represent him in other territories: his senechals in Provence were from Anjou; French and Proven\u00e7al noblemen held the highest offices in the Regno; and he chose his vicars in Rome from among southern Italian and Proven\u00e7al nobles. Although his empire collapsed before his death, his son retained southern Italy and Provence.\nCharles always emphasised his royal rank, but did not adopt \"imperial rhetoric\". His renowned justiciar, Marino de Caramanico, developed a new political theory. Traditional interpretators of Roman law were convinced that the Holy Roman Emperors had a monopoly on law-making. In contrast with them, Caramanico stated that an emperor could not claim sovereignty over a king and emphasised Charles full competence to issue decrees. To promote legal education Charles paid high salaries\u201420\u201350 ounces of gold in a year\u2014to masters of law at the University of Naples. Masters of medicine received similar remunerations, and the university became a principal centre of medical science. Charles's personal interest in medicine grew during his life and he borrowed Arabic medical texts from the rulers of Tunis to have them translated. He employed at least one Jewish scholar, Moses of Palermo, who could translate texts from Arabic to Latin. Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi's medical encyclopaedia, known as , was one of the books translated at Charles's order.\nCharles was also a poet, which distinguished him from his Capetian relatives. He composed love songs and a \"jeu-parti\" (the latter with Pierre d'Angicourt). In 1269, he wrote a single Occitan \"cobla\" (stanza) in an exchange with the troubadour Sordello. He was requested to judge two poetic competitions in his youth, but modern scholars do not esteem his poetry. The Proven\u00e7al troubadours were mostly critical when writing of Charles, but French poets were willing to praise him. Bertran d'Alamanon wrote a poem against the salt tax and Raimon de Tors de Marseilha rebuked Charles for invading the Regno. The trouv\u00e8re Adam de la Halle dedicated an unfinished epic poem, entitled \"The King of Sicily\", to Charles and Jean de Meun glorified his victories in the \"Romance of the Rose\". Dante described Charles\u2014\"who bears a manly nose\"\u2014singing peacefully together with his one-time rival, Peter III of Aragon, in Purgatory.\nCharles also showed interest in architecture. He designed a tower in Brindisi, but it soon collapsed. He ordered the erection of the Castel Nuovo in Naples, of which only the palatine chapel survives from his work. He is also credited with the introduction of French-style stained glass windows in southern Italy.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39834", "revid": "50235320", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39834", "title": "Correlation does not imply causation", "text": "Refutation of a logical fallacy\nThe phrase \"correlation does not imply causation\" refers to the inability to legitimately deduce a cause-and-effect relationship between two events or variables solely on the basis of an observed association or correlation between them. The idea that \"correlation implies causation\" is an example of a questionable-cause logical fallacy, in which two events occurring together are taken to have established a cause-and-effect relationship. This fallacy is also known by the Latin phrase cum hoc ergo propter hoc (\"with this, therefore because of this\"). This differs from the fallacy known as \"post hoc ergo propter hoc\" (\"after this, therefore because of this\"), in which an event following another is seen as a necessary consequence of the former event, and from conflation, the errant merging of two events, ideas, databases, etc., into one.\nAs with any logical fallacy, identifying that the reasoning behind an argument is flawed does not necessarily imply that the resulting conclusion is false. Statistical methods have been proposed that use correlation as the basis for hypothesis tests for causality, including the Granger causality test and convergent cross mapping. The Bradford Hill criteria, also known as Hill's criteria for causation, are a group of nine principles that can be useful in considering the epidemiologic evidence of a causal relationship. Ultimately, assumptions are always required to draw causal conclusions, and modern causal inference frameworks focus on interrogating the strength of these assumptions.\nUsage and meaning of terms.\n\"Imply\".\nIn casual use, the word \"implies\" loosely means \"suggests\", rather than \"requires\". However, in logic, the technical use of the word \"implies\" means \"is a \"sufficient condition\" for.\" That is the meaning intended by statisticians when they say causation is not certain. Indeed, \"p implies q\" has the technical meaning of the material conditional: \"if p then q\" symbolized as \"p\u00a0\u2192\u00a0q\". That is, \"if circumstance \"p\" is true, then \"q\" follows.\" In that sense, it is always correct to say \"Correlation does not \"imply\" causation.\" \n\"Cause\".\nThe word \"cause\" (or \"causation\") has multiple meanings in English. In philosophical terminology, \"cause\" can refer to necessary, sufficient, or contributing causes. In examining correlation, \"cause\" is most often used to mean \"one contributing cause\" (but not necessarily the only contributing cause).\nExamples of illogically inferring causation from correlation.\nB causes A (reverse causation or reverse causality).\nReverse causation or reverse causality or wrong direction is an informal fallacy of questionable cause where cause and effect are reversed. The cause is said to be the effect and vice versa.\nThe faster that windmills are observed to rotate, the more wind is observed.\nTherefore, wind is caused by the rotation of windmills. (Or, simply put: windmills, as their name indicates, are machines used to produce wind.)\nIn this example, the correlation (simultaneity) between windmill activity and wind velocity does not imply that wind is caused by windmills. It is rather the other way around, as suggested by the fact that wind does not need windmills to exist, while windmills need wind to rotate. Wind can be observed in places where there are no windmills or non-rotating windmills\u2014and there are good reasons to believe that wind existed before the invention of windmills.\nLow cholesterol is associated with an increase in mortality.\nTherefore, low cholesterol increases your risk of mortality.\nCausality is actually the other way around, since some diseases, such as cancer, cause low cholesterol due to a myriad of factors, such as weight loss, and they also cause an increase in mortality. This can also be seen in alcoholics. As alcoholics become diagnosed with cirrhosis of the liver, many quit drinking. However, they also experience an increased risk of mortality. In these instances, it is the diseases that cause an increased risk of mortality, but the increased mortality is attributed to the beneficial effects that follow the diagnosis, making healthy changes look unhealthy.\nExample 3\nIn other cases it may simply be unclear which is the cause and which is the effect. For example:\n\"Children that watch a lot of TV are the most violent. Clearly, TV makes children more violent\".\nThis could easily be the other way round; that is, violent children like watching more TV than less violent ones.\nExample 4\nA correlation between recreational drug use and psychiatric disorders might be either way around: perhaps the drugs cause the disorders, or perhaps people use drugs to self medicate for preexisting conditions. Gateway drug theory may argue that marijuana usage leads to usage of harder drugs, but hard drug usage may lead to marijuana usage (see also \"confusion of the inverse\"). Indeed, in the social sciences where controlled experiments often cannot be used to discern the direction of causation, this fallacy can fuel long-standing scientific arguments. One such example can be found in education economics, between the screening/signaling and human capital models: it could either be that having innate ability enables one to complete an education, or that completing an education builds one's ability.\nExample 5\nA historical example of this is that Europeans in the Middle Ages believed that lice were beneficial to health since there would rarely be any lice on sick people. The reasoning was that the people got sick because the lice left. The real reason however is that lice are extremely sensitive to body temperature. A small increase of body temperature, such as in a fever, makes the lice look for another host. The medical thermometer had not yet been invented and so that increase in temperature was rarely noticed. Noticeable symptoms came later, which gave the impression that the lice had left before the person became sick.\nIn other cases, two phenomena can each be a partial cause of the other; consider poverty and lack of education, or procrastination and poor self-esteem. One making an argument based on these two phenomena must however be careful to avoid the fallacy of circular cause and consequence. Poverty is \"a\" cause of lack of education, but it is not the \"sole\" cause, and vice versa.\nThird factor C (the common-causal variable) causes both A and B.\nThe third-cause fallacy (also known as \"ignoring a common cause\" or \"questionable cause\") is a logical fallacy in which a spurious relationship is confused for causation. It asserts that X causes Y when in reality, both X and Y are caused by Z. It is a variation on the \"post hoc ergo propter hoc\" fallacy and a member of the questionable cause group of fallacies.\nAll of those examples deal with a lurking variable, which is simply a hidden third variable that affects both of the variables observed to be correlated. That third variable is also known as a confounding variable, with the slight difference that confounding variables need not be hidden and may thus be corrected for in an analysis. Note that the Wikipedia link to lurking variable redirects to confounding. A difficulty often also arises where the third factor, though fundamentally different from A and B, is so closely related to A and/or B as to be confused with them or very difficult to scientifically disentangle from them (see Example 4).\nSleeping with one's shoes on is strongly correlated with waking up with a headache.\nTherefore, sleeping with one's shoes on causes headache.\nThe above example commits the correlation-implies-causation fallacy, as it prematurely concludes that sleeping with one's shoes on causes headache. A more plausible explanation is that both are caused by a third factor, in this case going to bed drunk, which thereby gives rise to a correlation. So the conclusion is false.\nYoung children who sleep with the light on are much more likely to develop myopia in later life.\nTherefore, sleeping with the light on causes myopia.\nThis is a scientific example that resulted from a study at the University of Pennsylvania Medical Center. Published in the May 13, 1999, issue of \"Nature\", the study received much coverage at the time in the popular press. However, a later study at Ohio State University did not find that infants sleeping with the light on caused the development of myopia. It did find a strong link between parental myopia and the development of child myopia, also noting that myopic parents were more likely to leave a light on in their children's bedroom. In this case, the cause of both conditions is parental myopia, and the above-stated conclusion is false.\nAs ice cream sales increase, the rate of drowning deaths increases sharply.\nTherefore, ice cream consumption causes drowning.\nThis example fails to recognize the importance of time of year and temperature to ice cream sales. Ice cream is sold during the hot summer months at a much greater rate than during colder times, and it is during these hot summer months that people are more likely to engage in activities involving water, such as swimming. The increased drowning deaths are simply caused by more exposure to water-based activities, not ice cream. The stated conclusion is false.\nA hypothetical study shows a relationship between test anxiety scores and shyness scores, with a statistical \"r\" value (strength of correlation) of +.59.\nTherefore, it may be simply concluded that shyness, in some part, causally influences test anxiety.\nHowever, as encountered in many psychological studies, another variable, a \"self-consciousness score\", is discovered that has a sharper correlation (+.73) with shyness. This suggests a possible \"third variable\" problem, however, when three such closely related measures are found, it further suggests that each may have bidirectional tendencies (see \"bidirectional variable\", above), being a cluster of correlated values each influencing one another to some extent. Therefore, the simple conclusion above may be false.\nSince the 1950s, both the atmospheric CO2 level and obesity levels have increased sharply.\nHence, atmospheric CO2 causes obesity.\nRicher populations tend to eat more food and produce more CO2.\nHDL (\"good\") cholesterol is negatively correlated with incidence of heart attack.\nTherefore, taking medication to raise HDL decreases the chance of having a heart attack.\nFurther research has called this conclusion into question. Instead, it may be that other underlying factors, like genes, diet and exercise, affect both HDL levels and the likelihood of having a heart attack; it is possible that medicines may affect the directly measurable factor, HDL levels, without affecting the chance of heart attack.\nBidirectional causation: A causes B, and B causes A.\nCausality is not necessarily one-way; \nin a predator-prey relationship, predator numbers affect prey numbers, but prey numbers, i.e. food supply, also affect predator numbers. Another well-known example is that cyclists have a lower Body Mass Index than people who do not cycle. This is often explained by assuming that cycling increases physical activity levels and therefore decreases BMI. Because results from prospective studies on people who increase their bicycle use show a smaller effect on BMI than cross-sectional studies, there may be some reverse causality as well. For example, people with a lower BMI may be more likely to want to cycle in the first place.\nThe relationship between A and B is coincidental.\nThe two variables are not related at all, but correlate by chance. The more things are examined, the more likely it is that two unrelated variables will appear to be related. For example:\nUse of correlation as scientific evidence.\nMuch of scientific evidence is based upon a correlation of variables that are observed to occur together. Scientists are careful to point out that correlation does not necessarily mean causation. The assumption that A causes B simply because A correlates with B is not accepted as a legitimate form of argument.\nHowever, sometimes people commit the opposite fallacy of dismissing correlation entirely. That would dismiss a large swath of important scientific evidence. Since it may be difficult or ethically impossible to run controlled double-blind studies to address certain questions, correlational evidence from several different angles may be useful for \"prediction\" despite failing to provide evidence for \"causation\". For example, social workers might be interested in knowing how child abuse relates to academic performance. Although it would be unethical to perform an experiment in which children are randomly assigned to receive or not receive abuse, researchers can look at existing groups using a non-experimental correlational design. If in fact a negative correlation exists between abuse and academic performance, researchers could potentially use this knowledge of a statistical correlation to make predictions about children outside the study who experience abuse even though the study failed to provide causal evidence that abuse decreases academic performance. The combination of limited available methodologies with the dismissing correlation fallacy has on occasion been used to counter a scientific finding. For example, the tobacco industry has historically relied on a dismissal of correlational evidence to reject a link between tobacco smoke and lung cancer, as did biologist and statistician Ronald Fisher (frequently on the industry's behalf).\nCorrelation is a valuable type of scientific evidence in fields such as medicine, psychology, and sociology. Correlations must first be confirmed as real, and every possible causative relationship must then be systematically explored. In the end, correlation alone cannot be used as evidence for a cause-and-effect relationship between a treatment and benefit, a risk factor and a disease, or a social or economic factor and various outcomes. It is one of the most abused types of evidence because it is easy and even tempting to come to premature conclusions based upon the preliminary appearance of a correlation.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39838", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39838", "title": "Jan Bos", "text": "Dutch speed skater and cyclist\nJan Bos (born 29 March 1975) is a Dutch former speedskater and sprint cyclist. In the late 1990s he was world champion in speed skating and he competed in the 1998, 2002, 2006 and 2010 Winter Olympics.\nSpeed skater.\nIn 1998 Bos both became the world champion sprint and won the silver medal that year in the 1000 meter sprint during the Winter Olympics in Nagano. He won the silver medal on that same distance in Salt Lake City.\nHe competed at the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens in the team sprint track cycling event, together with his brother Theo Bos, who won the silver at the individual sprint, and Teun Mulder. The Dutch finished sixth after being knocked out by Japan.\nBos ended his career as a competitive speed skater in 2011.\nCyclist.\nIn 2012 Bos (in cooperation with the Human Power Team from Delft) tried to become the fastest cyclist in the world during the World Human Powered Speed Challenge in Battle Mountain, Nevada. At the time, the International Human Powered Vehicle Association record was 133\u00a0km/h, held by the Canadian Sam Whittingham. Bos used a recumbent bicycle specially developed for the occasion by students of the Delft University of Technology and the Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, but only managed a maximum speed of 126.5\u00a0km/h. In September 2013, his teammate Sebastiaan Bowier did manage to break the record, reaching a speed of 133.78 kilometres per hour (83.13\u00a0mph)"}
{"id": "39841", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39841", "title": "Gerard van Velde", "text": "Dutch speed skater (born 1971)\nGerard Pieter Hendrik van Velde (born 30 November 1971) is a Dutch retired speed skater who specialised in sprinting. He won an Olympic gold medal in 2002.\nBiography.\nVan Velde was considered the best Dutch sprinter during the early 1990s, but did not manage to win a medal in either the 1992 or 1994 Winter Olympics. Particularly frustrating were the 1992 Games, where he missed a bronze medal by one-hundredth of a second.\nDuring the late 1990s, clap skates became standard in Olympic competition. Van Velde had such difficulty adjusting to the techniques required with these new skates that he retired from skating and became a car salesman. However, he was not finished with the skating world.\nRintje Ritsma, another Dutch skater invited Van Velde to be his training partner, and, during training, he mastered the clap skate techniques. He decided to try out for the 2002 Winter Olympics, in spite of the arrival of a new generation of Dutch sprinters such as Jan Bos, Erben Wennemars and Jakko Jan Leeuwangh. Van Velde became the fourth sprinter to qualify for the games.\nIn Salt Lake City, he started before all the other favorites and raced to a world record finish. His time of 1:07.18 shaved more than half a second from the previous best world time, and more than a second from his personal best. The skaters who followed were unable to best him, and he won the gold medal.\nIn December 2005, at the Dutch Olympic trials in Heerenveen, van Velde failed to qualify for the 2006 Winter Olympics in Turin. In retirement he became a coach."}
{"id": "39842", "revid": "473593", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39842", "title": "Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences", "text": "Professional organization in the film industry\nThe Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS, often pronounced ; also known as simply the Academy or the Motion Picture Academy) is a professional honorary organization in Beverly Hills, California, U.S., with the stated goal of advancing the arts and sciences of motion pictures. The Academy's corporate management and general policies are overseen by a board of governors, which includes representatives from each of the craft branches.\nAs of April 2020, the organization was estimated to consist of around 9,921 motion picture professionals. The Academy is an international organization and membership is open to qualified filmmakers around the world.\nThe Academy is known around the world for its annual Academy Awards, both officially and popularly known as \"The Oscars\".\nIn addition, the Academy holds the Governors Awards annually for lifetime achievement in film; presents Scientific and Technical Awards annually; gives Student Academy Awards annually to filmmakers at the undergraduate and graduate level; awards up to five Nicholl Fellowships in Screenwriting annually; and operates the Margaret Herrick Library (at the Fairbanks Center for Motion Picture Study) in Beverly Hills, and the Pickford Center for Motion Picture Study in Hollywood, Los Angeles. The Academy opened the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures in Los Angeles in 2021.\nHistory.\nThe notion of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) began with Louis B. Mayer, head of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer (MGM). He said he wanted to create an organization that would mediate labor disputes without unions and improve the film industry's image. In other words, the Academy was originally founded as a company union. He met with actor Conrad Nagel, director Fred Niblo, and the head of the Association of Motion Picture Producers, Fred Beetson to discuss these matters. The idea of this elite club having an annual banquet was discussed, but no mention of awards at that time. They also established that membership into the organization would only be open to people involved in one of the five branches of the industry: actors, directors, writers, technicians, and producers.\nAfter their brief meeting, Mayer gathered up a group of thirty-six people involved in the film industry and invited them to a formal banquet at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles on January 11, 1927. That evening Mayer presented to those guests what he called the International Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Everyone in the room that evening became a founder of the Academy. Between that evening and when the official Articles of Incorporation for the organization were filed on May 4, 1927, the \"International\" was dropped from the name, becoming the \"Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences\".\nSeveral organizational meetings were held prior to the first official meeting held on May 6, 1927. Their first organizational meeting was held on May 11 at the Biltmore Hotel. At that meeting Douglas Fairbanks, Sr. was elected as the first president of the Academy, while Fred Niblo was the first vice-president, and their first roster, composed of 230 members, was printed. That night, the Academy also bestowed its first honorary membership, to Thomas Edison. Initially, the Academy was broken down into five main groups, or branches, although this number of branches has grown over the years. The original five were: Producers, Actors, Directors, Writers and Technicians.\nThe initial concerns of the group had to do with labor. However, as time went on, the organization moved \"further away from involvement in labor-management arbitrations and negotiations.\" During the Great Depression, the Academy lost all credibility among studio employee members with respect to labor issues when it took the side of the major film studios in the latter's efforts to convince employees to agree to voluntary reductions in wages and salaries. The Academy thus evolved into its modern role as an honorary organization.\nOne of several committees formed in the Academy's initial days was for \"Awards of Merit\", but it was not until May 1928 that the committee began to have serious discussions about the structure of the awards and the presentation ceremony. By July 1928, the board of directors had approved a list of 12 awards to be presented. During July the voting system for the Awards was established, and the nomination and selection process began. This \"award of merit for distinctive achievement\" is what we know now as the Academy Awards.\nThe initial location of the organization was 6912 Hollywood Boulevard. In November 1927, the Academy moved to the Roosevelt Hotel at 7010 Hollywood Boulevard, which was also the month the Academy's library began compiling a complete collection of books and periodicals dealing with the industry from around the world. In May 1928, the Academy authorized the construction of a state of the art screening room, to be located in the Club lounge of the hotel. The screening room was not completed until April 1929.\nWith the publication of Academy Reports (No. 1): \"Incandescent Illumination\" in July 1928, the Academy began a long history of publishing books to assist its members. Research Council of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences trained Signal Corps officers, during World War II, who later won two Oscars, for \"Seeds of Destiny\" and \"Toward Independence\".\nIn 1929, Academy members, in a joint venture with the University of Southern California, created America's first film school to further the art and science of moving pictures. The school's founding faculty included Fairbanks (President of the Academy), D. W. Griffith, William C. deMille, Ernst Lubitsch, Irving Thalberg, and Darryl F. Zanuck.\n1930 saw another move, to the Hollywood Professional Building, in order to accommodate the enlarging staff, and by December of that year the library was acknowledged as \"having one of the most complete collections of information on the motion picture industry anywhere in existence.\" They remained at that location until 1935 when further growth caused them to move once again. This time, the administrative offices moved to one location, to the Taft Building at the corner of Hollywood and Vine, while the library moved to 1455 North Gordon Street.\nIn 1934, the Academy began publication of the \"Screen Achievement Records Bulletin\", which today is known as the \"Motion Picture Credits Database\". This is a list of film credits up for an Academy Award, as well as other films released in Los Angeles County, using research materials from the Academy's Margaret Herrick Library. Another publication of the 1930s was the first annual \"Academy Players Directory\" in 1937. The Directory was published by the Academy until 2006 when it was sold to a private concern. The Academy had been involved in the technical aspects of film making since its founding in 1927, and by 1938, the Science and Technology Council consisted of 36 technical committees addressing technical issues related to sound recording and reproduction, projection, lighting, film preservation, and cinematography.\nIn 1946, the Academy found it necessary to move to a new headquarters, and it acquired the Marquis Theatre at 9038 Melrose Avenue in West Hollywood, which it renamed the Academy Awards Theatre, utilizing the building for both offices and an entertainment venue. The renaming turned out to be fortuitous, as the 21st Academy Awards, held March 24, 1949, were moved there at the last minute.\nThe Academy acquired property at 8949 Wilshire Boulevard in Beverly Hills in 1972, and built its current headquarters building on the site; the new facilities opened in 1975.\nIn 2009, the inaugural Governors Awards were held, at which the Academy presents the Academy Honorary Award, the Jean Hersholt Humanitarian Award and the Irving G. Thalberg Memorial Award.\nIn 2016, the Academy became the target of criticism for its failure to recognize the achievements of minority professionals. For the second year in a row, all 20 nominees in the major acting categories were white. The president of the Academy, Cheryl Boone Isaacs, the first African American and third woman to lead the Academy, denied in 2015 that there was a problem. When asked if the Academy had difficulty with recognizing diversity, she replied \"Not at all. Not at all.\" When the nominations for acting were all white for a second year in a row Gil Robertson IV, president of the African American Film Critics Association called it \"offensive.\" The actors' branch is \"overwhelmingly white\" and the question is raised whether conscious or unconscious racial biases played a role.\nSpike Lee, interviewed shortly after the all-white nominee list was published, pointed to Hollywood leadership as the root problem, \"We may win an Oscar now and then, but an Oscar is not going to fundamentally change how Hollywood does business. I'm not talking about Hollywood stars. I'm talking about executives. We're not in the room.\" Boone Isaacs also released a statement, in which she said \"I am both heartbroken and frustrated about the lack of inclusion. This is a difficult but important conversation, and it's time for big changes.\" After Boone Isaac's statement, prominent African-Americans such as director Spike Lee, actors Will Smith and Jada Pinkett Smith, and activist Rev. Al Sharpton called for a boycott of the 2016 Oscars for failing to recognize minority achievements, the board voted to make \"historic\" changes to its membership. The Academy stated that by 2020 it would double its number of women and minority members. While the Academy has addressed a higher profile for African-Americans, it has yet to raise the profile of other people of color artists, in front of and behind the camera.\nIn 2018, the Academy invited a record 928 new members.\nCasting director David Rubin was elected President of the Academy in August, 2019.\nIn 2020, \"Parasite\" became the first non-English language film to win Best Picture. In June 2022, Bill Kramer was named the CEO of the Academy. Also in 2022, Janet Yang was elected as the first Asian American President of the Academy.\nGalleries and theaters.\nThe Academy's numerous and diverse operations are housed in three facilities in the Los Angeles area: the headquarters building in Beverly Hills, which was constructed specifically for the Academy, and two Centers for Motion Picture Study \u2013 one in Beverly Hills, the other in Hollywood \u2013 which were existing structures restored and transformed to contain the Academy's Library, Film Archive and other departments and programs.\nCurrent.\nAcademy Headquarters.\nThe Academy Headquarters Building in Beverly Hills once housed two galleries that were open free to the public. The Grand Lobby Gallery and the Fourth Floor Gallery offered changing exhibits related to films, film-making and film personalities. These galleries were closed in preparation for the construction of the Academy Museum of Motion Pictures, which opened in 2021.\nThe building includes the Samuel Goldwyn Theater, which seats 1,012, and was designed to present films at maximum technical accuracy, with state-of-the-art projection equipment and sound system. The theater is busy year-round with the Academy's public programming, members-only screenings, movie premieres and other special activities (including the live television broadcast of the Academy Awards nominations announcement every January). The building once housed the Academy Little Theater, a 67-seat screening facility, but this was converted to additional office space in a building remodel.\nPickford Center for Motion Picture Study.\nThe Pickford Center for Motion Picture Study, located at 1313 Vine Street in Hollywood and named for legendary actress and Academy co-founder Mary Pickford, houses several Academy departments, including the Academy Film Archive, the Science and Technology Council, Student Academy Awards and Grants, and the Nicholl Fellowships in Screenwriting. The building, originally dedicated on August 18, 1948, is the oldest surviving structure in Hollywood that was designed specifically with television in mind. Additionally, it is the location of the Linwood Dunn Theater, which seats 286 people.\nFairbanks Center for Motion Picture Study.\nThe Fairbanks Center for Motion Picture Study is located at 333 S. La Cienega Boulevard in Beverly Hills and is named for legendary actor and Academy co-founder Douglas Fairbanks. It is home to the Academy's Margaret Herrick Library, a world-renowned, non-circulating reference and research collection devoted to the history and development of the motion picture as an art form and an industry. Established in 1928, the library is open to the public and used year-round by students, scholars, historians and industry professionals. The library is named for Margaret Herrick, the Academy's first librarian who also played a major role in the Academy's first televised broadcast, helping to turn the Oscar ceremony into a major annual televised event.\nThe building itself was built in 1928, where it was originally built to be a water treatment plant for Beverly Hills. Its \"bell tower\" held water-purifying hardware.\nThe Academy Museum of Motion Pictures.\nThe Academy Museum of Motion Pictures, the newest facility associated with the Academy, is the United States' first large-scale museum dedicated to the film industry. It opened to the public on September 30, 2021, and it contains over of galleries, exhibition spaces, movie theaters, educational areas, and special event spaces. The museum is located at 6067 Wilshire Boulevard at Fairfax Avenue in Los Angeles, in the historic May Company Building, now named the Saban Building.\nFormer.\nAcademy Theater in New York.\nThe Academy also had a New York City-based East Coast showcase theater, the Academy Theater at Lighthouse International. The 220-seat venue was redesigned in 2011 by renowned theater designer Theo Kalomirakis, including an extensive installation of new audio and visual equipment. The theater was in the East 59th Street headquarters of Lighthouse International, a non-profit vision loss organization. In July 2015, it was announced that the Academy was forced to move out, due to Lighthouse International selling the property the theater was in.\nMembership.\nAcademy membership is divided into 19 branches which represent different disciplines in motion pictures in addition to a separate category for artist representatives. Members may not belong to more than one branch. Members whose work does not fall within one of the branches may belong to a group known as \"Members at Large\". Members at Large have all the privileges of branch membership except for representation on the Board. Associate members are those closely allied to the industry but not actively engaged in motion picture production. They are not represented on the Board and do not vote on Academy Awards. As of 2024[ [update]], the Academy's confirmed membership is 10,894, comprising 9,905 voting members, 949 non-voting emeritus members, and 40 associate members. The largest Academy branch is the actors branch, which in 2024 stood at 1,258 members, or 12.7% of the total membership.\nMembership in the Academy comes only through an invitation from the Board of Governors. An individual may be recommended to the board by two current members in the branch they would prospectively join, and anyone who is nominated for an Oscar is considered for membership by special committees of the various branches. Each spring, the Board will meet to consider who to extend invitations to, and new invitees are announced in a press release. Once accepted, membership does not expire.\nIn 2012, the \"Los Angeles Times\", sampling over 5,000 of the Academy's then-5,765 members, found that membership at the time was 94% white, 77% male, 86% age 50 or older, and had a median age of 62. A third of members were previous winners or nominees of Academy Awards themselves. On June 29, 2016, a paradigm shift began in the Academy's selection process, resulting in a new class comprising 46% women and 41% people of color. The effort to diversify the Academy was led by social activist and Broadway Black managing-editor April Reign. Reign created the Twitter hashtag #OscarsSoWhite as a means of criticizing the dearth of non-white nominees for the 2015 Academy Awards. Though the hashtag drew widespread media attention, the Academy remained obstinate on the matter of adopting a resolution that would make demonstrable its efforts to increase diversity. With the 2016 Academy Awards, many, including April Reign, were dismayed by the Academy's indifference about representation and inclusion, as the 2016 nominees were once again entirely white. April Reign revived #OscarsSoWhite, and renewed her campaign efforts, which included multiple media appearances and interviews with reputable news outlets. As a result of Reign's campaign, the discourse surrounding representation and recognition in film spread beyond the United States and became a global discussion . Faced with mounting pressure to expand the Academy membership, the Academy capitulated and instituted new policies to ensure that future Academy membership invitations would better represent the demographics of modern film-going audiences. The A2020 initiative was announced in January 2016 to double the number of women and people of color in membership by 2020. As of 2020[ [update]], 25 of the Academy's 54 members of the Board of Governors are female.\nThe Samuel Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills, California, screens many new films for Academy members. Since 2021, films in contention for awards are made available to members through a designated streaming app, replacing physical screeners.\nExpulsions.\nFive people are known to have been expelled from the Academy. Academy officials acknowledge that other members have been expelled in the past, most for selling their Oscar tickets, but no numbers are available.\nResignations.\nThe following members have voluntarily resigned from the organization:\nBranches.\nThe branches of the Academy are:\nBoard of governors.\nAs of April\u00a02020[ [update]], the board of governors consists of 57 governors: three governors from each of the 19 Academy branches and three governors-at-large. The Makeup Artists and Hairstylists Branch, created in 2006, had only one governor until July 2013. The Casting Directors Branch, created in 2013, elected its first three governors in Fall 2013.\nThe board of governors is responsible for corporate management, control, and general policies. The board of governors also appoints a CEO and a COO to supervise the administrative activities of the Academy.\nOriginal 36 founders.\nFrom the original formal banquet, which was hosted by Louis B. Mayer in 1927, everyone invited became a founder of the Academy:\nPresidents.\nPresidents are elected for one-year terms and may not be elected for more than four consecutive terms.\nSource: \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Sister-inline/styles.css\"/&gt; Media related to at Wikimedia Commons"}
{"id": "39843", "revid": "44909914", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39843", "title": "Margaret, Maid of Norway", "text": "Queen of Scots (disputed) from 1286 to 1290\nMargaret (, ; March or April 1283 \u2013 September 1290), known as the Maid of Norway, was the queen-designate of Scotland from 1286 until her death. As she was never inaugurated, her status as monarch is uncertain and has been debated by historians.\nMargaret was the daughter of King Eric II of Norway and Margaret of Scotland. By the end of her maternal grandfather's reign, King Alexander III of Scotland, she was his only surviving descendant and recognized heir presumptive. Alexander III died in 1286, his posthumous child was stillborn, and Margaret inherited the crown. \nOwing to her young age, she remained in Norway rather than go to Scotland. Her father and the Scottish leaders negotiated her marriage to Edward of Caernarfon, son of King Edward I of England. She was finally sent to Great Britain in September 1290 but died in Orkney, sparking the succession dispute between thirteen competitors for the crown of Scotland.\nInfancy.\nMargaret, Maid of Norway, was the only child of King Eric II of Norway and his first wife, Margaret, daughter of King Alexander III of Scotland. She was born in T\u00f8nsberg, a coastal town in southeastern Norway, between March and 9 April 1283, when her mother died, apparently from the complications of childbirth. \nAged fifteen and possessing little royal authority, King Eric did not have much say about his daughter's future. The infant Margaret was instead in the custody of the leading Norwegian magnate, Narve, Bishop of Bergen. Margaret's upbringing in the city of Bergen shows that her future marriage was expected to be important to the kingdom's foreign policy. \nThe 1281 treaty arranging the marriage of Eric of Norway and Margaret of Scotland specified that the Scottish princess and her children would succeed to the throne of Scotland if King Alexander died leaving no legitimate sons and if no legitimate son of King Alexander left legitimate children. It also stated that the couple's daughters could inherit the Norwegian throne \"if it is the custom\". The Scottish party seems to have been deceived because the succession law of Norway, codified in 1280, provided only for male succession, meaning that the Maid could not have succeeded to her father's kingdom.\nHeir presumptive.\nAlexander, brother of Margaret's mother and the last surviving child of the King of Scotland, died on 28 January 1284. The Maid was left as the only living descendant of Alexander III. The King did not wait to discover whether his son's widow, Margaret of Flanders, was pregnant. Already, on 5 February, he had all thirteen earls, twenty-four barons, and three clan chiefs come to Scone and swear to recognize his granddaughter as his successor if he died leaving neither son nor daughter and if no posthumous child was born to his son. By April it had presumably become clear that the young Alexander's widow was not expecting a child and that Margaret was the heir presumptive. \nAlexander III's wife, another Margaret, sister of King Edward I of England, had died in 1275, and the oath he exacted strongly implied that he now intended to remarry. When Edward expressed his condolence to Alexander III that month for the death of his son, the latter responded that \"much good may come to pass yet through your kinswoman, the daughter of your niece ... who is now our heir\", suggesting that the two kings may have already been discussing a suitable marriage for Margaret. Alexander and his magnates may have hoped for an English match.\nKing Alexander took a new wife, Yolanda of Dreux, on 14 October 1285, hoping to father another child. On the evening of 18 March 1286, he set out, in stormy weather on horseback, against advice, to meet with Queen Yolanda, only to be found dead with a broken neck the next day.\nLady and queen.\nFollowing the unexpected death of King Alexander, Scottish magnates gathered to discuss the kingdom's future. They swore to preserve the throne for the right heir and chose six regents, known as guardians of Scotland, to govern the country. Although the succession had been laid out by the time King Alexander III died, Margaret's accession was not yet assured: her stepgrandmother, Queen Yolanda, was pregnant and the child was expected to succeed to the throne. \nThere was a dispute in parliament in April involving Robert Bruce, 5th Lord of Annandale, and John Balliol, Lord of Galloway. Bruce may have opposed the Maid's succession, or the two men may have both claimed to be next in line to the throne after Yolanda's child and Margaret. \nQueen Yolanda delivered a stillborn child in November, and within a few months King Eric's most prominent councillor, , arrived in Scotland to claim the kingdom for Margaret. Bruce raised a rebellion with his son, Robert, Earl of Carrick, but was defeated in early 1287. The precariousness of the situation made King Eric reluctant to see his three-year-old daughter leave Norway for Scotland.\nMarriage negotiations.\nIn May 1289, Eric II sent envoys to Edward I as part of the kings' unfolding discussion about the future of Margaret, whom they called \"lady and queen\". The Scots could only observe the negotiations between the two kings as Margaret was still with her father. \nEric was indebted to Edward, and Edward was determined to make the most of the situation. The guardians, accompanied by Bruce, finally met with English and Norwegian envoys at Salisbury in October. The Treaty of Salisbury was drawn up on 6 November 1289, stating that Eric and Margaret, \"queen and heir of the kingdom\", asked Edward to intervene on behalf of his grandniece so \"that she could ordain and enjoy therein as other kings do in their kingdoms\". \nMargaret was to be sent, by 1 November 1290, to England directly or via Scotland. Once the Scots could assure Edward that Scotland was peaceful and safe, he would send her to them. Margaret was allowed to choose her husband, though her father retained the right to veto the choice. At Edward's request, a papal dispensation permitting Margaret to marry her granduncle's son, Edward of Caernarfon, was issued on 16 November 1289. \nThe guardians and other prelates and magnates wrote that they were firmly in favour of the English match for \"the lady Margaret queen of Scotland, our lady\". It was strongly implied that Margaret's husband would be king, and Edward insisted on referring to Margaret as queen to speed up the accession of his own son, although the Scots themselves normally described her only as their lady.\nNegotiations about Margaret's marriage, dower, succession, and the nature of the intended personal union between England and Scotland continued into 1290. A lavishly provisioned ship failed to fetch the Maid in May because of diplomatic difficulties. The Treaty of Birgham, agreed on 18 July, provided that Scotland was to remain fully independent despite the personal union and that Margaret alone would be inaugurated as monarch at Scone.\nFatal journey.\nBy late August 1290, Margaret was preparing to sail from Bergen to the island of Great Britain or was already at sea. The ship was her father's but he did not accompany her; the most prominent men in her entourage were Bishop Narve and Baron Tore H\u00e5konsson. She presumably embarked in good health but became ill during her journey. The ship landed in Orkney, a Norwegian archipelago off the coast of Scotland, on about 23 September. \nHaving suffered on Orkney for up to a week from either food poisoning or, less likely, motion sickness, Margaret died between 26 and 29 September 1290 in the arms of Bishop Narve. The Scottish magnates, who had assembled at Scone for the child queen's inauguration, learned about her death in October. Her body was returned to Bergen, where King Eric insisted on having the coffin opened to confirm his daughter's identity. He then had it buried in the north wall of the chancel of Christ Church, now destroyed.\nLegacy.\nMargaret was the last legitimate scion of the line of King William the Lion. Thirteen men laid claim to succession, most notably Bruce and Balliol. King Eric half-heartedly claimed the Scottish crown as well and died in 1299. In 1301 she was impersonated by a German woman, False Margaret, who was burned at the stake.\nHistorians debate whether Margaret should be considered a queen and included in the list of Scottish monarchs. She was never inaugurated, and her contemporaries in Scotland described her as queen very rarely, referring to her instead as their \"lady\". She was usually called Scotland's \"lady\", \"heir\", or \"lady and heir\" and rarely as \"queen\" during the deliberations of the Great Cause after her death. One of her biographers, Archie Duncan, argues that because she was \"never inaugurated, she was never queen of Scots\".\nOn the other hand, documents issued from late 1286 no longer refer to the \"king whosoever he may be\", indicating that Margaret may have already been regarded as queen. Another of her biographers, Norman H. Reid, insists that Margaret was \"accepted as queen\" by her contemporaries but that, owing to the lack of Inauguration, \"[her] reign never started\". Pope Nicholas IV considered Margaret to be the monarch of Scotland and treated her as such, sending to her a bull regarding the episcopal election of Matthew de Crambeth. In modern historiography she is nearly unanimously called \"queen\", and reference books give 19 March 1286, the date of Alexander III's death, as the start of her reign.\nFamily tree.\nMargaret's family ties resulted from the marital diplomacy that sought to ensure peace among the three kingdoms on the North Sea \u2013 Norway, Scotland, and England, and placed her at the centre of the Scottish succession intrigues. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39845", "revid": "29738728", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39845", "title": "Roman villa", "text": "Historical residential structure\nA Roman villa was typically a farmhouse or country house in the territory of the Roman Republic and the Roman Empire, sometimes reaching extravagant proportions.\nNevertheless, the term \"Roman villa\" generally covers buildings with the common features of being extra-urban (i.e. located outside urban settlements, unlike the \"domus\" which was inside them) and residential, with accommodation for the owner. The definition also changed with time: the earliest examples are mostly humble farmhouses in Italy, while from the Republican period a range of larger building types are included.\nTypology and distribution.\nThe present meaning of \"villa\" is partially based on the fairly numerous ancient Roman written sources and on archaeological remains, though many of these are poorly preserved.\nThe most detailed ancient text on the meaning of \"villa\" is by Varro (116\u201327 BC) dating from the end of the Republican period, which is used for most modern considerations. But Roman authors (e.g. Columella [4-70 AD], Cato the Elder [234-149 BC]) wrote in different times, with different objectives and for aristocratic readers and hence had specific interpretations of \"villa\".\nThe Romans built many kinds of villas and any country house with some decorative features in the Roman style may be called a \"villa\" by modern scholars. \nThree kinds of villas were generally described:\nOther examples of \"villae urbanae\" were the middle and late Republican villas that encroached on the Campus Martius, at that time on the edge of Rome, the one at Rome's Parco della Musica or at Grottarossa in Rome, and those outside the city walls of Pompeii which demonstrate the antiquity and heritage of the \"villa urbana\" in Central Italy.\nOther type of villa was a large commercial estate called \"latifundium\" which produced and exported agricultural produce; such villas might lack luxuries (e.g. Cato) but many were very sumptuous (e.g. Varro).\nThe whole estate of a villa was also called a \"praedium\", \"fundus\" or sometimes, \"rus\".\nA \"villa rustica\" had 2 or 3 parts:\nUnder the Empire, many patrician villas were built on the coasts (\"villae maritimae\") such as those on picturesque sites overlooking the Bay of Naples like the Villa of the Papyri at Herculaneum, or on the isle of Capri, at Circeii and at Antium. Wealthy Romans also escaped the summer heat in the hills within easy reach of Rome, especially around Frascati and including the imperial Hadrian's Villa-palace at Tivoli. Cicero allegedly possessed no fewer than seven villas, the oldest of them, which he inherited, near Arpinum in Latium. Pliny the Younger had three or four which are well known from his descriptions.\nBy the 4th century, \"villa\" could simply connote an agricultural holding: Jerome translated in the Gospel of Mark (xiv, 32) \"chorion\", describing the olive grove of Gethsemane, with villa, without an inference that there were any dwellings there at all.\nArchitecture of the villa complex.\nBy the first century BC, the \"classic\" villa took many architectural forms, with many examples employing an atrium or peristyle for interior spaces open to light and air.\nVillas were often furnished with heated bath suites (\"thermae\") and many would have had under-floor heating known as the hypocaust.\nSocial history.\nThe late Roman Republic witnessed an explosion of villa construction in central Italy (current regions of Toscana, Umbria, Lazio, and Campania), especially in the years following the dictatorship of Sulla (81 BC).\nFor example the villa at Settefinestre from the 1st century BC was the centre of one of the \"latifundia\" involved in large-scale agricultural production in Etruria.\nIn the imperial period villas sometimes became quite palatial, such as the villas built on seaside slopes overlooking the Gulf of Naples at Baiae and those at Stabiae and the Villa of the Papyri and its library at Herculaneum preserved by the ashfall from the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79. \nAreas within easy reach of Rome offered cool lodgings in the heat of summer. Hadrian's Villa at Tibur (Tivoli) was in an area popular with Romans of rank. Cicero had several villas. Pliny the Younger described his villas in his letters. The Romans invented the seaside villa: a vignette in a frescoed wall at the House of Marcus Lucretius Fronto in Pompeii still shows a row of seafront villas, all with porticos along the front, some rising up in porticoed tiers to an \"altana\" at the top that would catch a breeze.\nVillas were centres of a variety of economic activity such as mining, pottery factories, or horse raising such as those found in northwestern Gaul. Villas specialising in the seagoing export of olive oil to Roman legions in Germany became a feature of the southern Iberian province of Hispania Baetica.\nIn some cases villas survived the fall of the Empire into the Early Middle Ages; large working villas were donated by aristocrats and territorial magnates to individual monks, often to become the nucleus of famous monasteries. For example, Saint Benedict established a monastery in the ruins of a villa at Subiaco that had belonged to Nero. Around 590, Saint Eligius was born in a highly placed Gallo-Roman family at the 'villa' of Chaptelat near Limoges, in Aquitaine. The abbey at Stavelot was founded ca 650 on the domain of a former villa near Li\u00e8ge and V\u00e9zelay Abbey had a similar founding. As late as 698, Willibrord established Echternach Abbey at a Roman villa near the city of Trier which Irmina of Oeren, daughter of Dagobert II, king of the Franks, presented to him.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39846", "revid": "41131169", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39846", "title": "Outboard motor", "text": "Self-contained propulsion system for boats\nAn outboard motor is a propulsion system for boats, consisting of a self-contained unit that includes engine, gearbox and propeller or jet drive, designed to be affixed to the outside of the transom. They are the most common motorised method of propelling small watercraft. As well as providing propulsion, outboards provide steering control, as they are designed to pivot over their mountings and thus control the direction of thrust. The skeg also acts as a rudder when the engine is not running. Unlike inboard motors, outboard motors can be easily removed for storage or repairs.\nIn order to eliminate the chances of hitting bottom with an outboard motor, the motor can be tilted up to an elevated position either electronically or manually. This helps when traveling through shallow waters where there may be debris that could potentially damage the motor as well as the propeller. If the electric motor required to move the pistons which raise or lower the engine is malfunctioning, every outboard motor is equipped with a manual piston release which will allow the operator to drop the motor down to its lowest setting.\nAdvantages and disadvantages.\nLarge ships, boats and yachts will inevitably have inboard engines. Medium size vessels may have either inboards or outboards, and small vessels rarely have inboard motors. If one has a choice, these factors should be noted:\nGeneral use.\nLarge outboards.\nLarge outboards are affixed to the transom using clamps and are either tiller steered or controlled from the helm. Generally motors of 100\u00a0hp plus are linked to controls at the helm. These range from 2-, 3-, and 4-cylinder models generating suitable for hulls up to in length to powerful V6 and V8 cylinder blocks rated up to ., with sufficient power to be used on boats of or longer.\nPortable.\nSmall outboard motors, up to or so, are easily portable. They are affixed to the boat via clamps and thus easily moved from boat to boat. These motors typically use a manual start system, with throttle and gearshift controls mounted on the body of the motor, and a tiller for steering. The smallest of these weigh as little as , have integral fuel tanks, and provide sufficient power to move a small dinghy at around \nThis type of motor is typically used:\nElectric-powered.\nElectric outboard motors are self-contained propulsory units for boats, first invented in 1973 by Morton Ray of Ray Electric Outboards. These are not to be confused with trolling motors, which are not designed as a primary source of power. Most electric outboard motors have 0.5- to 4-kilowatt direct-current (DC) electric motors, operated at 12 to 60 volts DC. Recently developed outboard motors are powered with an alternating current (AC) or DC electric motor in the power head like a conventional petrol engine. With this setup, a motor can produce 10\u00a0kW output or more and is able to replace a petrol engine of 15 HP or more. The advantage of the induction or asynchronous motor is the power transfer to the rotor by means of electromagnetic induction. As these engines do not use permanent magnets, they require less maintenance and develop more torque at lower propeller speeds.\nPump-jet.\nPump-jet propulsion is available as an option on most outboard motors. Although less efficient than an open propeller, they are particularly useful in applications where the ability to operate in very shallow water is important. They also eliminate the laceration dangers of an open propeller.\nPropane.\nPropane outboard motors are available from several manufacturers. These products have several advantages such as lower emissions, absence of ethanol-related issues, and no need for choke once the system is pressurized. Lehr is regarded as the first manufacturer to have brought a propane-powered outboard motor to market by \"Popular Mechanics\" and other boating publications.\nHistory and developments.\nThe first known outboard motor was a small 11 pound (5\u00a0kg) electric unit designed around 1870 by Gustave Trouv\u00e9, and patented in May 1880 (Patent N\u00b0 136,560). Later about 25 petrol powered outboards may have been produced in 1896 by American Motors Co\u2014but neither of these two pioneering efforts appear to have had much impact.\nThe Waterman outboard engine appears to be the first gasoline-powered outboard offered for sale in significant numbers. It was developed from 1903 in Grosse Ile, Michigan, with a patent application filed in 1905 Starting in 1906, the company went on to make thousands of his \"Porto-Motor\" units, claiming 25,000 sales by 1914. The inboard boat motor firm of Caille Motor Company of Detroit were instrumental in making the cylinder and engines.\nThe most successful early outboard motor, was created by Norwegian-American inventor Ole Evinrude in 1909. Historically, a majority of outboards have been two-stroke powerheads fitted with a carburetor due to the design's inherent simplicity, reliability, low cost and light weight. Drawbacks include increased pollution, due to the high volume of unburned gasoline and oil in their exhaust, and louder noise.\nFour-stroke outboards.\nFour-stroke outboards have been sold since the late 1920s, such as the Roness and Sharland. In 1962 Homelite introduced a four-stroke outboard a motor, based on the four-cylinder Crosley automobile engine. This outboard was called the Bearcat and was later purchased by Fischer-Pierce, the makers of Boston Whaler, for use in their boats because of their advantages over two-stroke engines. In 1964, Honda Motor Co. introduced its first four-stroke powerhead. In 1984, Yamaha introduced their first four-stroke outboards, which were only available in the low-power range. In 1990 Honda released 35\u00a0hp and 45\u00a0hp four-stroke models. They continued to lead in the development of four-stroke engines throughout the 1990s as US and European exhaust emissions regulations such as CARB (California Air Resources Board) led to the proliferation of four-stroke outboards. At first, North American manufacturers such as Mercury and OMC used engine technology from Japanese manufacturers such as Yamaha and Suzuki until they were able to develop their own four-stroke engine. The inherent advantages of four-stroke motors included: lower pollution (especially oil in the water), noise reduction, increased fuel economy, and increased torque at low engine speeds.\nHonda Marine Group, Mercury Marine, Mercury Racing, Nissan Marine, Suzuki Marine, Tohatsu Outboards, Yamaha Marine, and China Oshen-Hyfong marine have all developed new four-stroke engines. Some are carburetted, usually the smaller engines. The balance are electronically fuel-injected. Depending on the manufacturer, newer engines benefit from advanced technology such as multiple valves per cylinder, variable camshaft timing (Honda's VTEC), boosted low end torque (Honda's BLAST), 3-way cooling systems, and closed loop fuel injection. Mercury Verado four-strokes are unique in that they are supercharged.\nMercury Marine, Mercury Racing, Tohatsu, Yamaha Marine, Nissan and Evinrude each developed computer-controlled direct-injected two-stroke engines. Each brand boasts a different method of DI.\nFuel economy on both direct-injected and four-stroke outboards measures from a 10 percent to 80 percent improvement compared with conventional two-strokes.\nHowever, the gap between two-stroke and four-stroke outboard fuel economy is beginning to narrow. Two-stroke outboard motor manufacturers have recently introduced technologies that help to improve two-stroke fuel economy.\nLPG outboards.\nIn 2012, Lehr inc. introduced some small (&lt;5\u00a0hp) outboards based on modified Chinese petrol engines to run on propane gas. Tohatsu currently also produces propane powered models, all rated 5\u00a0hp. Conversion of larger outboards to run on Liquified petroleum gas is considered unusual and exotic although some hobbyists continue to experiment.\nOutboard motor selection.\nIt is important to select a motor that is a good match for the hull in terms of power and shaft length.\nPower requirements.\nWhether using a displacement or planing vessel, one should select an appropriate power level; too much power is wasteful (adding unnecessary weight), and may often be dangerous. Boats built in the US have \"Coast Guard Rating Plates\", which specify the maximum recommended engine powers for the hulls. In the united kingdom, boats have CE plates on the transoms which specify maximum engine power, shaft length, maximum engine weight and maximum number of persons or maximum load.\nShaft length.\nOutboard motor shaft lengths are standardized to fit 15-, 20- and 25-inch (-, - and -centimeter) transoms. If the shaft is too long it will extend farther into the water than necessary creating drag, which will impair performance and fuel economy. If the shaft is too short, the motor will be prone to ventilation. Even worse, if the water intake ports on the lower unit are not sufficiently submerged, engine overheating is likely, which can result in severe damage.\nGeneral dimensions.\nDifferent outboard engine brands require different transom dimensions and sizes. This affects performance and trim.\nOperational considerations.\nMotor mounting height.\nMotor height on the transom is an important factor in achieving optimal performance. The motor should be as high as possible without ventilating or loss of water pressure. This minimizes the effect of hydrodynamic drag while underway, allowing for greater speed. Generally, the antiventilation plate should be about the same height as, or up to two inches higher than, the keel, with the motor in neutral trim.\nTrim.\nTrim is the angle of the motor in relation to the hull, as illustrated below. The ideal trim angle is the one in which the boat rides level, with most of the hull on the surface instead of plowing through the water.\nIf the motor is trimmed out too far, the bow will ride too high in the water. With too little trim, the bow rides too low. The optimal trim setting will vary depending on many factors including speed, hull design, weight and balance, and conditions on the water (wind and waves). Many large outboards are equipped with \"power trim\", an electric motor on the mounting bracket, with a switch at the helm that enables the operator to adjust the trim angle on the fly. In this case, the motor should be trimmed fully in to start, and trimmed out (with an eye on the tachometer) as the boat gains momentum, until it reaches the point just before ventilation begins or further trim adjustment results in an increase in engine speed with no increase in travel speed. Motors not equipped with power trim are manually adjustable using a pin called a topper tilt lock.\nVentilation.\nVentilation is a phenomenon that occurs when surface air or exhaust gas (in the case of motors equipped with through-hub exhaust) is drawn into the spinning propeller blades. With the propeller pushing mostly air instead of water, the load on the engine is greatly reduced, causing the engine to race and the propeller to spin fast enough to result in cavitation, at which point little thrust is generated at all. The condition continues until the prop slows enough for the air bubbles to rise to the surface. The primary causes of ventilation are: motor mounted too high, motor trimmed out excessively, damage to the antiventilation plate, damage to propeller, foreign object lodged in the diffuser ring.\nSafety.\nIf the helmsman goes overboard, the boat may continue under power but uncontrolled, risking serious or fatal injuries to the helmsman and others in the water. A safety measure is a \"kill cord\" attached to the boat and helmsman, which cuts the motor if the helmsman falls overboard.\nCooling system.\nThe most common type of cooling used on outboards of all eras use a rubber impeller to pump water from below the waterline up into the engine. This design has remained the standard due mainly to the efficiency and simplicity of its design. One disadvantage to this system is that if the impeller is run dry for a length of time (such as leaving the engine running when pulling the boat out of the water or in some cases tilting the engine out of the water while running), the impeller is likely to be ruined in the process.\nAir-cooled outboards.\nAir-cooled outboard engines are currently produced by some manufacturers. These tend to be small engines of less than . Outboard engines made by Briggs &amp; Stratton are air-cooled.\nClosed-loop cooling.\nOutboards manufactured by Seven Marine use a closed-loop cooling system with a heat exchanger. This means saltwater is not pumped through the engine block, as is the case with most outboard motors, but instead engine coolant and outside water are pumped through (opposite sides of) the heat exchanger.\nEngine Stalls.\nAn outboard engine may stall if it does not have the correct inputs. Common problems that lead to stalling are electrical issues, low quality fuel or clogged fuel filer. Other issues may include a damaged carburetor oil switch.\nUse in long-tail boats.\nIn Vietnam and other parts of southeast Asia long-tail boats use outboard motors altered to extend their propellers far from the rest of the motor. In Vietnam these outboards are called (\"shrimp tail motor\"), which are smallish air-cooled or water-cooled gasoline, diesel or even modified automotive engines bolted to a welded steel tube frame, with another long steel tube up to 3\u00a0m long to hold an extended drive shaft driving a conventional propeller. The frame that holds the motor has a short, swiveling steel pin/tube approximately 15\u00a0cm long underneath, to be inserted into a corresponding hole on the transom, or a solid block or wood purposely built-in thereof.\nThis drop-in arrangement enables extremely quick transfer of the motor to another boat or for storage\u00a0\u2013 all that is needed is to lift it out. The pivoting design allows the outboard motor to be swiveled by the operator in almost all directions: Sideways for direction, up and down to change the thrust line according to speed or bow lift, elevate completely out of water for easy starting, placing the drive shaft and the propeller forward along the side of the boat for reverse, or put them inside the boat for propeller replacement, which can be a regular occurrence to the cheap cast aluminum propellers on the often debris-prone inland waterways.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39847", "revid": "35498457", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39847", "title": "Roman conquest of Britain", "text": "First century AD invasion of Britain by the Romans\nThe Roman conquest of Britain was the Roman Empire's conquest of most of the island of Britain, which was inhabited by the Celtic Britons. It began in earnest in AD 43 under Emperor Claudius, and was largely completed in the southern half of Britain (most of what is now called England and Wales) by AD 87, when the Stanegate was established. The conquered territory became the Roman province of Britannia. \nFollowing Julius Caesar's invasions of Britain in 54 BC, some southern British chiefdoms had become allies of the Romans. The exile of their ally Verica gave the Romans a pretext for invasion. The Roman army was recruited in Italia, Hispania, and Gaul and used the newly-formed fleet \"Classis Britannica\". Under their general Aulus Plautius, the Romans pushed inland from the southeast, defeating the Britons in the Battle of the Medway. By AD 47, the Romans held the lands southeast of the Fosse Way. British resistance was led by the chieftain Caratacus until his defeat in AD 50. The isle of Mona, a stronghold of the druids, was attacked in AD 60. This was interrupted by an uprising led by Boudica, in which the Britons destroyed Camulodunum, Verulamium and Londinium. The Romans put down the rebellion by AD 61. \nThe conquest of Wales lasted until c.\u2009AD 77. Roman general Gnaeus Julius Agricola conquered much of northern Britain during the following seven years. In AD 84, Agricola defeated a Caledonian army, led by Calgacus, at the Battle of Mons Graupius. However, the Romans soon withdrew from northern Britain. After Hadrian's Wall was established as the northern border, tribes in the region repeatedly rebelled against Roman rule and forts continued to be maintained across northern Britain to protect against these attacks.\nBackground.\nIn common with other regions on the edge of the empire, Britain had enjoyed diplomatic and trading links with the Romans in the century since Julius Caesar's expeditions in 55 and 54\u00a0BC, and Roman economic and cultural influence was a significant part of the British late pre-Roman Iron Age, especially in the south.\nBetween 55\u00a0BC and the 40s\u00a0AD, the \"status quo\" of tribute, hostages, and client states without direct military occupation, begun by Caesar's invasions of Britain, largely remained intact. Augustus prepared invasions in 34\u00a0BC, 27\u00a0BC and 25\u00a0BC. The first and third were called off due to revolts elsewhere in the empire, the second because the Britons seemed ready to come to terms. According to Augustus's \"Res Gestae\", two British kings, Dubnovellaunus and Tincomarus, fled to Rome as supplicants during his reign, and Strabo's \"Geographica\", written during this period, says Britain paid more in customs and duties than could be raised by taxation if the island were conquered.\nBy the 40s\u00a0AD, the political situation within Britain was in ferment. The Catuvellauni had displaced the Trinovantes as the most powerful kingdom in south-eastern Britain, taking over the former Trinovantian capital of Camulodunum (Colchester). The Atrebates tribe whose capital was at Calleva Atrebatum (Silchester) had friendly trade and diplomatic links with Rome and Verica was recognised by Rome as their king, but Caratacus' Catuvellauni conquered the entire kingdom some time after AD 40 and Verica was expelled from Britain.\nCaligula may have planned a campaign against the Britons in AD 40, but its execution was unclear: according to Suetonius' \"The Twelve Caesars\", he drew up his troops in battle formation facing the English Channel and, once his forces had become quite confused, ordered them to gather seashells, referring to them as \"plunder from the ocean due to the Capitol and the Palace\". Alternatively, he may have told them to gather \"huts\", since the word \"musculi\" was also soldier's slang for engineers' huts and Caligula himself was very familiar with the Empire's soldiers. In any case this readied the troops and facilities that would make Claudius' invasion possible three years later. For example, Caligula built a lighthouse at Bononia (modern Boulogne-sur-Mer), the \"Tour d'Ordre\", that provided a model for the one built soon after at Dubris (Dover).\nPreparations for the invasion under Claudius.\nIn 43, possibly by reassembling Caligula's troops from 40, Claudius mounted an invasion force under overall charge of Aulus Plautius, a distinguished senator. A pretext of the invasion was to reinstate Verica, the exiled king of the Atrebates.\nIt is unclear how many legions were sent: only the \", commanded by future emperor Vespasian, was directly attested to have taken part.\nThe ', the ' (later styled ') and the ' (later styled \") are known to have served during the Boudican revolt of 60\u201361, and were probably there since the initial invasion, but the Roman army was flexible, with cohorts and auxiliary units being moved around whenever necessary.\nThree other men of appropriate rank to command legions are known from the sources to have been involved in the invasion. Cassius Dio mentions Gnaeus Hosidius Geta, who probably led the \"IX Hispana\", and Vespasian's brother Titus Flavius Sabinus the Younger. He wrote that Sabinus was Vespasian's lieutenant, but as Sabinus was the older brother and preceded Vespasian into public life, he could hardly have been a military tribune. Eutropius mentions Gnaeus Sentius Saturninus, although as a former consul he may have been too senior, and perhaps accompanied Claudius later.\nCrossing and landing.\nThe main invasion force under Aulus Plautius crossed in three divisions. The port of departure is usually taken to have been Bononia (Boulogne), and the main landing at Rutupiae (Richborough, on the east coast of Kent). Neither of these locations is certain. Dio does not mention the port of departure, and although Suetonius says that the secondary force under Claudius sailed from Boulogne it does not necessarily follow that the entire invasion force did. Richborough had a large natural harbour, which would have been suitable, and archaeology shows Roman military occupation at about the right time. However Dio says the Romans sailed east to west, and a journey from Boulogne to Richborough is south to north. Some historians suggest a sailing from Boulogne to the Solent, landing in the vicinity of Noviomagus (Chichester) or Southampton, in territory formerly ruled by Verica.\nRiver battles.\nBritish resistance was led by Togodumnus and Caratacus, sons of the late king of the Catuvellauni, Cunobeline. A substantial British force met the Romans at a river crossing thought to be near Rochester on the River Medway. The Battle of the Medway raged for two days. Gnaeus Hosidius Geta was almost captured, but recovered and turned the battle so decisively that he was awarded the Roman triumph. At least one division of auxiliary Batavian troops swam across the river as a separate force.\nThe British were pushed back to the Thames. They were pursued by the Romans across the river, causing some Roman losses in the marshes of Essex. Whether the Romans made use of an existing bridge for this purpose or built a temporary one is uncertain.\nTogodumnus died shortly after the battle on the Thames. Plautius halted and sent word for Claudius to join him for the final push. Cassius Dio presents this as Plautius needing the emperor's assistance to defeat the resurgent British, who were determined to avenge Togodumnus. However, Claudius was no military man. The Praetorian cohorts accompanied Emperor Claudius to Britain in AD 43. The Arch of Claudius in Rome says he received the surrender of eleven British kings with no losses, and Suetonius' \"The Twelve Caesars\" says that Claudius received the surrender of the Britons without battle or bloodshed. It is likely that the Catuvellauni were already as good as beaten, allowing the emperor to appear as conqueror on the final march on Camulodunum. Cassius Dio relates that he brought war elephants and heavy armaments which would have overawed any remaining native resistance, though the claim Claudius brought elephants to Britain has been doubted by modern historians, and may refer to a military machine, perhaps a siege tower, instead. Eleven tribes of South East Britain surrendered to Claudius and the Romans prepared to move further west and north. The Romans established their new capital at Camulodunum and Claudius returned to Rome to celebrate his victory. Caratacus escaped with his family, retainers, and treasure, to continue his resistance further west.\nAfter the invasion, Verica may have been restored as king of the Atrebates although by this time he would have been very elderly. In any case a new ruler for their region, Cogidubnus, soon appeared as his heir and as king of a number of territories following the first stage of the conquest as a reward as a Roman ally.\nAD\u00a044\u201360.\nVespasian took a force westwards, subduing tribes and capturing \"oppida\" settlements as he went. The force proceeded at least as far as Exeter, which became a base for the Roman legion, Legio II Augusta, from 55 until 75. Legio IX Hispana was sent north towards Lincoln () and by 47 it is likely that an area south of a line from the Humber to the Severn Estuary was under Roman control. That this line is followed by the Roman road of the Fosse Way has led many historians to debate the route's role as a convenient frontier during the early occupation. It is unlikely that the border between Roman and Iron Age Britain was fixed with modern precision during this period.\nLate in 47 the new governor of Britain, Publius Ostorius Scapula, began a campaign against the tribes of modern-day Wales, and the Cheshire Gap. The Silures of southeast Wales caused considerable problems to Ostorius and fiercely defended their border country. Caratacus himself led this guerilla campaign but was defeated when he finally chose to offer a decisive battle; he fled to the Roman client tribe of the Brigantes who occupied the Pennines. Their queen Cartimandua was unable or unwilling to protect him however, given her own accommodation with the Romans, and handed him over to the invaders. Ostorius died and was replaced by Aulus Didius Gallus who brought what are now the Welsh borders under control but did not move further north or west, probably because Claudius was keen to avoid what he considered a difficult and drawn-out war for little material gain in the mountainous terrain of upland Britain. When Nero became emperor in 54, he seems to have decided to continue the invasion and appointed Quintus Veranius as governor, a man experienced in dealing with the troublesome hill tribes of Anatolia. Veranius and his successor Gaius Suetonius Paulinus mounted a successful campaign across North Wales, famously killing many druids when he invaded the island of Anglesey in 60. Final occupation of Wales was postponed however when the rebellion of Boudica forced the Romans to return to the south east in 60 or 61.\nAD\u00a060\u201378.\nFollowing the successful suppression of Boudica's uprising in 60 or 61, new Roman governors continued the conquest by edging north.\nConquests to the North.\nThe casus belli presented itself in 69 when Cartimandua queen of the Brigantes following a rebellion by her husband Venutius was forced to ask the Romans for aid, who evacuated her leaving Venutius in power. About Venutius one speculation is that he might have been a Carvetian and may therefore have been responsible for the incorporation of Cumbria into a Brigantian federation whose territory straddled Britain along the Solway-Tyne line; furthermore Cartimandua may have ruled the Brigantian peoples east of the Pennines (possibly with a centre at Stanwick, Yorkshire), while Venutius was the chief of the Brigantes west of the Pennines (or Carvetii), in Cumbria (with a possible centre based at Clifton Dykes).\nIn any case Tacitus says that in 71 Cerialis (governor AD\u00a071\u201374) waged a successful war against the Brigantes. He praises both Cerialis and his successor, Julius Frontinus (governor 75\u201378).\nMuch of the conquest of the north may have been achieved under the governorships of Vettius Bolanus (governor AD 69\u201371), and of Quintus Petillius Cerialis. From other sources it seems that Bolanus had possibly dealt with Venutius and penetrated into Scotland, and evidence from the carbon-dating of the gateway timbers of the Roman fort at Carlisle (Luguvalium) suggests that they were felled in AD 72, during the governorship of Cerialis. Lead ingots from Deva Victrix, the Roman fortress at Chester, indicate that construction there was probably under way by AD 74. \nNevertheless, Gnaeus Julius Agricola played his part in the west as commander of the legion XX Valeria Victrix (71\u201373), while Cerialis led the IX Hispania in the east. In addition, the Legio II Adiutrix sailed from Chester up river estuaries to surprise the enemy. The western thrust was started from Lancaster, where there is evidence of a Cerialian foundation, and followed the line of the Lune and Eden river valleys through Low Borrow Bridge and Brougham (Brocavum). On the Cumbrian coast, Ravenglass and Blennerhasset were probably involved from evidence of one of the earliest Roman occupations in Cumbria. Beckfoot and Maryport may also have featured early on. At some point between 72 and 73, part of Cerialis's force moved across the Stainmore Pass from Corbridge westwards to join Agricola, as evidenced by campaign camps (which may have been previously set up by Bolanus) at Rey Cross, Crackenthorpe, Kirkby Thore and Plumpton Head. Signal- or watch-towers are also in evidence across the Stainmore area: Maiden Castle, Bowes Moor and Roper Castle, for example. The two forces then moved up from the vicinity of Penrith to Carlisle, establishing the fort there in AD\u00a072\u201373.\nFrontinus.\nFrontinus (who was sent into Roman Britain in 74 to succeed Cerialis as governor) returned to the conquest of Wales interrupted years before and with steady and successful progress finally subdued the Silures (around 76) and other hostile tribes, establishing a new base at Caerleon for Legio II \"Augusta\" (Isca Augusta) in 75 and a network of smaller forts apart for his auxiliary units. During his tenure, he probably established the fort at Pumsaint in west Wales, largely to exploit the gold deposits at Dolaucothi. He left the post in 78, and was later appointed water commissioner in Rome.\nCampaigns of Agricola (AD\u00a078\u201384).\nThe new governor was Agricola, returning to Britain, and made famous through the highly laudatory biography of him written by his son-in-law, Tacitus. Arriving in mid-78, Agricola completed the conquest of Wales in defeating the Ordovices who had destroyed a cavalry ala of Roman auxiliaries stationed in their territory. Knowing the terrain from his prior military service in Britain, he was able to move quickly to subdue them. He then invaded Anglesey, forcing the inhabitants to sue for peace.\nThe following year he moved against the Brigantes of northern England and the Selgovae along the southern coast of Scotland, using overwhelming military power to establish Roman control.\nAgricola in Caledonia.\nTacitus says that after a combination of force and diplomacy quieted discontent among the Britons who had been conquered previously, Agricola built forts in their territories in 79. In 80, he marched to the Firth of Tay (some historians hold that he stopped along the Firth of Forth in that year), not returning south until 81, at which time he consolidated his gains in the new lands that he had conquered, and in the rebellious lands that he had re-conquered. In 82, he sailed to either Kintyre or the shores of Argyll, or to both. In 83 and 84, he moved north along Scotland's eastern and northern coasts using both land and naval forces, campaigning successfully against the inhabitants and winning a significant victory over the northern British peoples led by Calgacus at the Battle of Mons Graupius. Archaeology has shown the Romans built military camps in the north along Gask Ridge, controlling the glens that provided access to and from the Scottish Highlands, and also throughout the Scottish Lowlands in northeastern Scotland.\nAgricola built a network of military roads and forts to secure the Roman occupation. Existing forts were strengthened and new ones planted in northeastern Scotland along the Highland Line, consolidating control of the glens that provided access to and from the Scottish Highlands. The line of military communication and supply along southeastern Scotland and northeastern England (i.e., Dere Street) was well-fortified. In southernmost Caledonia, the lands of the Selgovae (approximating to modern Dumfriesshire and the Stewartry of Kirkcudbright) were heavily planted with forts, not only establishing effective control there, but also completing a military enclosure of south-central Scotland (most of the Southern Uplands, Teviotdale, and western Tweeddale). In contrast to Roman actions against the Selgovae, the territories of the Novantae, Damnonii, and Votadini were not planted with forts, and there is nothing to indicate that the Romans were at war with them. Agricola was recalled to Rome in 84.\nArchaeology.\nIn 2019 a marching camp dating to the 1st century AD was found, thought to have been used by Roman legions during the invasion of Agricola. Clay-domed ovens and 26 fire pits dated to AD 77\u201390 were also found, loaded with burnt objects and charcoal contents. The fire pits were 30 metres (98 feet) apart in two parallel lines. Archaeologists suggested that this site had been chosen as a strategic location for the Roman conquest of Ayrshire.\nAD\u00a084\u2013117.\nAgricola's successors are not named in any surviving source, but it seems they were unable or unwilling to further subdue the far north. The fortress at Inchtuthil was dismantled before its completion and the other fortifications of the Gask Ridge in Perthshire, erected to consolidate the Roman presence in Scotland in the aftermath of Mons Graupius, were abandoned within the space of a few years. It is equally likely that the costs of a drawn-out war outweighed any economic or political benefit and it was more profitable to leave the Caledonians alone and only under \"de jure\" submission.\nWith the decline of imperial ambitions in Scotland (and Ireland) by AD 87 (the withdrawal of the 20th legion), consolidation based on the line of the Stanegate road (between Carlisle and Corbridge) was settled upon. Carlisle was the seat of a \"centurio regionarius\" (or district commissioner). When the Stanegate became the new frontier it was augmented by large forts as at Vindolanda and additional forts at half-day marching intervals were built at Newbrough, Magnis (Carvoran) and Brampton Old Church.\nThe period from 87 to 117 was used for consolidation and only a few sites north of the Stanegate line were maintained, while the signs are that an orderly withdrawal to the Solway-Tyne line was made.\nModifications to the Stanegate line, with the reduction in the size of the forts and the addition of fortlets and watchtowers between them, seem to have taken place from the mid-90s onwards. Apart from the Stanegate line, other forts existed along the Solway Coast at Beckfoot, Maryport, Burrow Walls (near the present town of Workington) and Moresby (near Whitehaven). Other forts in the region were built to consolidate Roman presence (Beckfoot for example may date from the late 1st century). A fort at Troutbeck may have been established from the period of Emperor Trajan (r.98\u2013117) onwards. Other forts that may have been established during this period include Ambleside (Galava), positioned to take advantage of ship-borne supply to the forts of the Lake District. From here, a road was constructed during the Trajanic period to Hardknott Roman Fort. A road between Ambleside to Old Penrith and/or Brougham, going over High Street, may also date from this period.\nFrom AD 117.\nUnder Hadrian (r.117\u2013138), Roman occupation was withdrawn to a defensible frontier in the River Tyne-Solway Firth frontier area by the construction of Hadrian's Wall from around 122.\nWhen Antoninus Pius rose to the throne, he moved quickly to reverse the empire limit system put in place by his predecessor. Following his defeat of the Brigantes in 139 AD, Quintus Lollius Urbicus, the Roman Governor of Britannia, was ordered by Antoninus Pius to march north of Hadrian's Wall to conquer the Caledonian Lowlands which were settled by the Otadini, Selgovae, Damnonii and the Novantae, and to push the frontier further north. Lollius Urbicus moved three legions into position initially establishing his supply routes from Coria and Bremenium and moved three legions, the Legio II Augusta from Caerleon, the Legio VI Victrix from Eboracum, and the Legio XX Valeria Victrix from Deva Victrix into the theatre between 139 and 140 AD, and thereafter moved his army, a force of at least 16,500 men, north of Hadrian's Wall.\nThe Selgovae, having settled in the regions of present-day Kirkcudbrightshire and Dumfriesshire immediately northwest of Hadrian's Wall, were amongst the first of the Caledonian tribes to face Lollius Urbicus's legions together with the Otadini. The Romans, who were well versed in warfare on hilly terrain since their founding, moved quickly to occupy strategic points and high ground, some of which had already been fortified by the Caledonians with hill forts. One such was Burnswark Hill which was strategically located commanding the western route north further into Caledonia and where significant evidence of the battle has been found.\nBy 142 the Romans had occupied the entire area and had successfully moved the frontier north to the River Clyde-River Forth area when the Antonine Wall was constructed. This was abandoned in 162 and only subsequently re-occupied on an occasional basis. Meanwhile, the Romans retreated to the earlier and stronger Hadrian's Wall.\nRoman troops penetrated far into the north of modern Scotland several more times. There is a greater density of Roman marching camps in Scotland than anywhere else in Europe as a result of at least four major attempts to subdue the area.\n3rd and 4th centuries.\nThe most notable later expedition was in 209 when the emperor Septimius Severus, claiming to be provoked by the belligerence of the Maeatae tribe, campaigned against the Caledonian Confederacy, a coalition of Brittonic Pictish tribes of the north of Britain. He used the three legions of the British garrison (augmented by the recently formed 2nd Parthica legion), 9000 imperial guards with cavalry support, and numerous auxiliaries supplied from the sea by the British fleet, the Rhine fleet and two fleets transferred from the Danube for the purpose. According to Dio Cassius, he inflicted genocidal depredations on the natives and incurred the loss of 50,000 of his own men to the attrition of guerrilla tactics before having to withdraw to Hadrian's Wall. He repaired and reinforced the wall with a degree of thoroughness that led most subsequent Roman authors to attribute the construction of the wall to him. During the negotiations to purchase the truce necessary to secure the Roman retreat to the wall, Septimius Severus's wife, Julia Domna, criticised the sexual morals of the Caledonian women; the wife of Argentocoxos, a Caledonian chief, replied: \"We consort openly with the best of men while you allow yourselves to be debauched in private by the worst\". This is the first recorded utterance confidently attributable to a native of the area now known as Scotland. The emperor Septimius Severus died at York while planning to renew hostilities, and these plans were abandoned by his son Caracalla.\nEmperor Constantius came to Britain in 306, despite his poor health, with an army aiming to invade northern Britain, after the provincial defences had been rebuilt following the Carausian Revolt. Little is known of his campaigns with scant archaeological evidence, but fragmentary historical sources suggest he reached the far north of Britain and won a major battle in early summer before returning south. His son Constantine (later Constantine the Great) spent a year in northern Britain at his father's side, campaigning against the Picts beyond Hadrian's Wall in the summer and autumn.\nLater excursions into Scotland by the Romans were generally limited to the scouting expeditions of \"exploratores\" in the buffer zone that developed between the walls, trading contacts, bribes to purchase truces from the natives, and eventually the spread of Christianity. The degree to which the Romans interacted with the Goidelic-speaking island of Hibernia (modern Ireland) is still unresolved amongst archaeologists in Ireland.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39848", "revid": "2300502", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39848", "title": "Chevrolet", "text": "American automobile division of General Motors\nChevrolet is an American automobile division of the manufacturer General Motors (GM). In North America, Chevrolet produces and sells a wide range of vehicles, from subcompact automobiles to medium-duty commercial trucks. Due to the prominence and name recognition of Chevrolet as one of General Motors' global marques, \"Chevrolet\" or its affectionate nickname Chevy is used at times as a synonym for General Motors or its products, one example being the GM LS1 engine, commonly known by the name or a variant thereof of its progenitor, the Chevrolet small-block engine.\nLouis Chevrolet (1878\u20131941), Arthur Chevrolet (1884\u20131946) and ousted General Motors founder William C. Durant (1861\u20131947) started the company on November 3, 1911 as the Chevrolet Motor Car Company. Durant used the Chevrolet Motor Car Company to acquire a controlling stake in General Motors with a reverse merger occurring on May 2, 1918, and propelled himself back to the GM presidency. After Durant's second ousting in 1919, Alfred Sloan, with his maxim \"a car for every purse and purpose\", picked the Chevrolet brand to become the volume leader in the General Motors family, selling mainstream vehicles to compete with Henry Ford's Model T in 1919 and overtaking Ford as the best-selling car in the United States by 1929 with the Chevrolet International.\nChevrolet-branded vehicles are sold in most automotive markets worldwide. In Oceania, Chevrolet was represented by Holden Special Vehicles (HSV), having returned to the region in 2018 after a 50-year absence with the launching of the Camaro and Silverado pickup truck (HSV was partially and formerly owned by GM subsidiary Holden, which GM retired in 2021). In 2021, General Motors Specialty Vehicles took over the distribution and sales of Chevrolet vehicles in Oceania, starting with the Silverado. In 2005, Chevrolet was relaunched in Europe, primarily selling vehicles built by GM Daewoo of South Korea with the tagline \"Daewoo has grown up enough to become Chevrolet\", a move rooted in General Motors' attempt to build a global brand around Chevrolet. With the reintroduction of Chevrolet to Europe, GM intended Chevrolet to be a mainstream value brand, while GM's traditional European standard-bearers, Opel of Germany and Vauxhall of the United Kingdom, were to be moved upmarket. However, GM reversed this move in late 2013, announcing that the brand would be withdrawn from Europe from 2016 onward, with the exception of the Camaro and Corvette. Chevrolet vehicles were to continue to be marketed in the CIS states, including Russia. After General Motors fully acquired GM Daewoo in 2011 to create GM Korea, the last usage of the Daewoo automotive brand was discontinued in its native South Korea and succeeded by Chevrolet.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistory.\nOn November 8, 1911, the Chevrolet Motor Car Company was incorporated. It was founded by Swiss race car driver and automotive engineer Louis Chevrolet with his brother Arthur Chevrolet, William C. Durant and investment partners William Little (maker of the Little automobile), former Buick owner James H. Whiting, Edwin R. Campbell (son-in-law of Durant) and in 1912 R. S. McLaughlin CEO of General Motors in Canada. Former Buick officers were also employed, including Curtis R. Hatheway as secretary.\nDurant was dismissed from his senior management position at General Motors in 1910, a company that he had founded in 1908. In 1904 he had taken over the Flint Wagon Works and Buick Motor Company of Flint, Michigan. He also incorporated the Mason and Little companies. As head of Buick, Durant had hired Louis Chevrolet to drive Buicks in promotional races. Durant planned to use Chevrolet's reputation as a racer as the foundation for his new automobile company. The first factory location was in Flint, Michigan at the corner of Wilcox and Kearsley Street, now known as \"Chevy Commons\" at coordinates , along the Flint River, across the street from Kettering University.\nOne of the technical advancements Chevrolet benefited from was the implementation of an overhead valve engine from the very beginning, as the company was developed by the former owner of Buick, which had patented the overhead valve and cross-flow cylinder design as being more efficient than the conventional use of the flathead engine.\nActual design work for the first Chevy, the costly Series C Classic Six, was drawn up by Etienne Planche, following instructions from Louis. The first C prototype was ready months before Chevrolet was actually incorporated. However, the first actual production was not until the 1913 model. So in essence there were no 1911 or 1912 production models, only one pre-production model was made and fine tuned throughout the early part of 1912. Then in the fall of that year the new 1913 model was introduced at the New York auto show.\nChevrolet first used the \"bowtie emblem\" logo in 1914 on the H series models (Royal Mail and Baby Grand) and The L Series Model (Light Six). It may have been designed from wallpaper Durant once saw in a French hotel room. More recent research by historian Ken Kaufmann presents a case that the logo is based on a logo of the \"Coalettes\" coal company. An example of this logo as it appeared in an advertisement for Coalettes appeared in the Atlanta Constitution on November 12, 1911. Others claim that the design was a stylized Swiss cross, in tribute to Chevrolet's home country. Over time, Chevrolet used several different iterations of the bowtie logo at the same time, often using blue for passenger cars, gold for trucks, and an outline (often in red) for cars that had performance packages. Chevrolet eventually unified all vehicle models with the gold bowtie in 2004, for both brand cohesion as well as to differentiate itself from Ford (with its blue oval logo) and Dodge (who has often used red for its imaging), its two primary domestic rivals.\nLouis Chevrolet had differences with Durant over design and in 1914 sold Durant his share in the company. By 1916, Chevrolet was profitable enough with successful sales of the cheaper Series 490 to allow Durant to repurchase a controlling interest in General Motors. After the deal was completed in 1918, Durant became president of General Motors, and Chevrolet was merged into GM as a separate division. In 1919, Chevrolet's factories were located at Flint, Michigan; branch assembly locations were sited in Tarrytown, N.Y., Norwood, Ohio, St. Louis, Missouri, Oakland, California, Ft. Worth, Texas, and Oshawa, Ontario General Motors of Canada Limited. McLaughlin's were given GM Corporation stock for the proprietorship of their Company article September 23, 1933 Financial Post page 9. In the 1918 model year, Chevrolet introduced the Series D, a V8-powered model in four-passenger roadster and five-passenger tourer models. Sales were poor and it was dropped in 1919.\nBeginning also in 1919, GMC commercial grade trucks were rebranded as Chevrolet, and using the same chassis of Chevrolet passenger cars and building light-duty trucks, sharing an almost identical appearance with GMC products. Until 1921, Chevrolet Corporate headquarters were located at 57th and Broadway in New York City until April when the office was relocated to the General Motors Building at Cadillac Place in Detroit. In January 1921 a General Motors management survey recommended that the Chevrolet Division be cancelled, but Alfred P. Sloan Jr. recommended that the division be saved and William S. Knudsen, a former Ford employee who oversaw production of the Model T, was made Vice President of Operations and performance improved In May 1925 the Chevrolet Export Boxing plant at Bloomfield, New Jersey was repurposed from a previous owner where Knock-down kits for Chevrolet, Oakland, Oldsmobile, Buick and Cadillac passenger cars, and both Chevrolet and G. M. C. truck parts are crated and shipped by railroad to the docks at Weehawken, New Jersey for overseas GM assembly factories.\nChevrolet continued into the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s competing with Ford, and after the Chrysler Corporation formed Plymouth in 1928, Plymouth, Ford, and Chevrolet were known as the \"Low-priced three\". In 1929 they introduced the famous \"Stovebolt\" overhead-valve inline six-cylinder engine, giving Chevrolet a marketing edge over Ford, which was still offering a lone flathead four (\"A Six at the price of a Four\"). In 1933 Chevrolet launched the Standard Six, which was advertised in the United States as the cheapest six-cylinder car on sale. During the Great Depression the Chevrolet Master introduced a streamlined appearance, showing Art Deco influences and before and after the World War II era, the Chevrolet Deluxe and Chevrolet Fleetline found many buyers.\nChevrolet had a great influence on the American automobile market during the 1950s and 1960s. In 1953 it produced the Corvette, a two-seater sports car with a fiberglass body. In 1957 Chevy introduced its first fuel injected engine, the Rochester Ramjet option on Corvette and Chevrolet Bel Air passenger cars, priced at $484 ($ today). In 1960 Chevrolet joined the newly popular \"compact car\" market by introducing the Corvair, with a rear-mounted air-cooled engine. In 1963 one out of every ten cars sold in the United States was a Chevrolet.\nDuring the 1960s and early 1970s, the standard Chevrolet, particularly the deluxe Chevrolet Impala series, became one of the United States' best-selling lines of automobiles in history. During that era, the mid-sized Chevrolet Chevelle which was used to introduce the Chevrolet Monte Carlo, and the economically priced Chevrolet Nova, which was the basis for the Chevrolet Camaro, all were commercially successful and included family sedans, practical station wagons, and sporty coupes and convertibles. As the popularity of small, fuel efficient imported vehicles began to find buyers in the US during the 1970s and 1980s, the Chevrolet Vega was introduced while the Chevrolet Chevette was the result of international collaboration. By the mid-1980s, the Vega was gone and the Chevette was about to be discontinued.\nLacking a line of competitive small cars, Chevrolet imported several Japanese models and re-badged them as Chevrolets. The Suzuki-sourced Chevrolet Sprint and the Isuzu-supplied Chevrolet Spectrum were a better match to compete against the popular Toyota Corolla and Honda Civic. The Chevrolet Citation was the division's first compact sized front-wheel-drive car along with the Chevrolet Cavalier, followed up by the Chevrolet Celebrity. Chevrolet during the 1990s formed a partnership with Toyota and introduced the Geo Prizm while also offering the domestically produced Chevrolet Corsica. As mid-sized family sedans began to gain popularity, the Chevrolet Lumina found many buyers and as minivans began to find buyers, the Chevrolet Venture followed the popular selling Chevrolet Trailblazer and Chevrolet Traverse SUV's.\nThe basic Chevrolet small-block V8 design has remained in continuous production since its debut in 1955, longer than any other mass-produced engine in the world, although current versions share few if any parts interchangeable with the original. Descendants of the basic small-block OHV V8 design platform in production today have been much modified with advances such as aluminium block and heads, electronic engine management, and sequential port fuel injection. Depending on the vehicle type, Chevrolet V8s are built in displacements from 4.3 to 9.4 litres with outputs ranging from to as installed at the factory. The engine design has also been used over the years in GM products built and sold under the Pontiac, Oldsmobile, Buick, Hummer, Opel (Germany), and Holden (Australia) nameplates.\nIn 2000, Chevrolet brought back the iconic Impala, although unlike its predecessors, this car was a mid-sized front-wheel drive four door sedan. It was produced until 2020, and the last generation (2014-2020) was larger and classified as a full-size passenger car. In 2005, General Motors re-launched the Chevrolet marque in Europe, using rebadged versions of the Daewoo cars produced by GM Korea.\nThe Chevrolet division largely recovered from the economic downturn of 2007\u20132010 through launching new vehicles and improving existing lines. GM began developing more fuel efficient cars and trucks to compete with foreign automakers. In late 2010 General Motors began production of the plug-in hybrid Chevrolet Volt, sold as the Opel/Vauxhall Ampera in Europe, which received multiple awards including the 2012 North American Car of the Year, European Car of the Year, and World Green Car of the Year. The Volt/Ampera family was the world's best selling plug-in electric car in 2012 with 31,400 units sold. The Opel/Vauxhall Ampera was Europe's top selling plug-in electric car in 2012 with 5,268 units, representing a market share of 21.5% of the region's plug-in electric passenger car segment. Combined global Volt/Ampera sales passed the 100,000 unit milestone in October 2015. As of \u00a02016[ [update]], the Volt family of vehicles ranks as the world's all-time top selling plug-in hybrid, and it is also the third-best-selling plug-in electric car ever, after the Nissan Leaf and the Tesla Model S. Volt sales in the American market passed the 100,000 milestone in July 2016.\nIn October 2016, GM began production of the Chevrolet Bolt EV, the first ever affordable mass market all-electric car with a range over . The Chevrolet Bolt won several awards including the 2017 Motor Trend Car of the Year award, the 2017 AutoGuide.com Reader's Choice Green Car of the Year, Green Car Reports Best Car To Buy 2017, Green Car Journal's 2017 Green Car of the Year, and was listed in \"Time\" magazine's Best 25 Inventions of the Year of 2016.\nOn February 14, 2021, Chevrolet unveiled the 2022 Bolt EUV and redesigned Bolt EV.\nInternational operations.\nAs of 2010[ [update]] Chevrolet had operations in over 140 countries, and global sales in 2011 set a record with 4.76\u00a0million vehicles sold worldwide.\nNorth America.\nMexico.\nMexico has a mix of Chevrolet models from different GM brands and platforms branded as Chevrolet. The models come from Chevrolet USA, GM Korea, Mexico and other origins.\nExamples of Opel-sourced vehicles are Vectra, Astra, Corsa, Meriva, Zafira and Captiva (Opel Antara). Mexico also has some cars of its own, such as the Chevy C2, which is a reworked older-generation Corsa B. Vehicles based on US platforms are the Avalanche, the Suburban, the Equinox, the Tahoe, the Cheyenne (which is similar to the Silverado), the Aveo, the HHR, the Traverse, the Malibu, the Camaro and the Corvette. The Chevrolet Optra, assembled in South Korea by GM Korea, was also sold in Mexico. The second-generation Epica was sold as a business-only vehicle. In the past, GM also assembled the Suburban and Avalanche in Mexico for export to other markets, chiefly the U.S. and Canada.\nAsia.\nChina.\nIn 2009 China became Chevrolet's third-largest market, with sales of 332,774 vehicles, behind only the United States and Brazil (1,344,629 and 595,500 vehicles respectively). By 2010, Chevy sold just over half a million, with the Cruze being its best seller there. A total of 673,376 locally-manufactured Chevrolets were sold in China in 2018 (down from a record of 767,001 in 2014).\nIn 2018, Chevrolet held just 2.90% share of the Chinese market (down from a record market share of 5.33% in 2012).\nThe best-selling Chevrolet models in China by 2019 were the Cavalier (~ 10 000 units per month). Malibu (~ 3500 units per month), Equinox (~ 2000 units per month), Cruze - at one time the best-selling model (~ 1500 units per month), Sail (~ 1200 units per month), new Orlando (~ 1000 units per month), Malibu XL (~ 800 units per month), Trax (~ 100 units per month), Lova RV (~ 100 units per month), representing just 9 of the staggering total of 628 (sic) models of passenger cars being produced in China by February 2019.\nIndia.\nUntil 2003, GM India\u2014originally a joint venture with Hindustan Motors, sold the Opel Corsa, Opel Astra and the Opel Vectra. Launched by GM's India operations, Chevrolet officially began business in India on June 6, 2003. The Corsa and Astra were built at a plant in Halol, Gujarat.\nChevrolet sold the Chevrolet Cruze, Chevrolet Spark, Chevrolet Optra, Chevrolet Aveo, Chevrolet Tavera, Chevrolet Captiva, Chevrolet SRV, Chevrolet Beat, Chevrolet Sail and Chevrolet Aveo U-VA. The Chevrolet Forester, a rebadged Subaru, was imported directly from Fuji Heavy Industries in Japan until 2005. The Cruze and Tavera were built at the Halol plant. Chevrolet also was the sole engine supplier for the Formula Rolon single-seater series in India. In 2017, GM ceased the production and sale of Chevrolet cars in India, but it continues to run service centers.\nIndonesia.\nIn 1999, Opel was rebranded to Chevrolet as a coincidence of Chevy's entry to Indonesia. Chevrolet stopped selling cars and ceased production in Indonesia by the end of March 2020.\nJapan.\nFrom 1995 to 2000 Toyota in an agreement with GM sold the third-generation model Chevrolet Cavalier as the Toyota Cavalier in Japan in exchange for the Geo/Chevrolet Prism in an effort to avoid additional restrictions on their exports to the US. The OHV Chevrolet Stovebolt engine was used and reverse-engineered by Toyota when they created the Toyota Type A engine when GM had a factory manufacturing GM cars in Japan at Osaka Assembly during the 1920s. In the mid-2000s, Suzuki imported and marketed the Chevrolet TrailBlazer and the Chevrolet Optra wagon in Japan. Suzuki, a GM partner, also assembled and marketed the Chevrolet MW microvan. The MW was originally a rebadged Suzuki Wagon R+ and later a rebadged Suzuki Solio. Suzuki had also marketed the Chevrolet Cruze subcompact in the past.\nIn the 2010s, General Motors Japan Limited distributed and marketed the Sonic, Captiva, Camaro, and Corvette in limited numbers through an agreement with Yanase Co., Ltd. dealerships. In the 2000s, General Motors Asia Pacific (Japan) had distributed and marketed the TrailBlazer also. As of 2010[ [update]], Mitsui Bussan Automotive distributes and markets the Chevrolet Tahoe, Chevrolet Express, Chevrolet HHR, Silverado, and Traverse.\nPreviously, it had also marketed the Starcraft versions of the G-Van and Chevrolet TrailBlazer. Mitsui Bussan Automotive had been importing and distributing certain GM models since 1992, but will cease their GM import business in November 2011, as GM Japan wants to consolidate the distribution channels. The Chevrolet models that have been imported by Mitsui will no longer be sold once existing inventories are depleted. As of 2022, General Motors Japan imports and distributes the Camaro and right-hand-drive Corvette in Japan.\nKazakhstan.\nKazakhstan-based Allure Group of Companies and Uzbekistan-based UzAuto Motors opened an assembly plant for the manufacture of Chevrolet-branded cars in March 2020, in the city of Kostanay. As of 2024, the vehicles are assembled from semi-knocked-down or complete-knocked-down kits. Assembly of the Chevrolet Onix from complete knock-down kits commenced at the plant in March 2024. A separate dealer in Almaty, authorized by GM, imports and sells the Tahoe and Traverse.\nKyrgyzstan.\nUzbekistan-based UzAuto Motors and Kyrgyz supplier DT Technikis are opening an assembly plant near Bishkek in the summer of 2024. Components will initially be imported from Uzbekistan, with plans to build components independently in the coming years. The plant will assemble Chevrolet and Isuzu vehicles. The Chevrolet brand has been licensed from GM. The plant will assemble 10,000 cars from semi-knocked-down kits within the first twenty months, with increased production expected. The Chevrolet Cobalt compact sedan will be the first Chevrolet-branded vehicle to be assembled at the plant, with plans to expand to many other models in the coming years.\nMalaysia.\nChevrolet entered the Malaysian market in 2003, replacing Opel. Between 2003 and 2009, a joint-venture between GM and DRB-HICOM called Hicomobil, marketed the Chevrolet Aveo, Chevrolet Optra, Chevrolet Nabira and Chevrolet Lumina. The joint venture was ended and Naza was taking over Chevrolet's dealership as Naza Quest Sdn Bhd in 2010. The lineup of Chevrolet cars available were Chevrolet Sonic, Chevrolet Cruze, Chevrolet Malibu, Chevrolet Captiva, Chevrolet Orlando and Chevrolet Colorado.\nIn 2018, Naza Quest Sdn Bhd ceased to distribute new Chevrolet vehicles in Malaysia, but continues to provide warranty support and aftersales service for existing Chevrolet customers.\nMiddle East.\nIn the Middle East, Chevrolet-badged cars, trucks, SUVs, and crossovers are sourced from GM Korea (in South Korea) and GM in North America. Formerly, some models were sourced from GM Holden in Australia. The Middle Eastern market has a separate division called Chevrolet Special Vehicles, which (as of December 2007) sourced the high-performance CR8 sedan from Holden Special Vehicles. The Holden Commodore was badged as the Chevrolet Lumina in the Middle East, as well as South Africa. The longer wheelbase Holden Caprice was sold as the Chevrolet Caprice in the Middle East. The Middle East fleet (particularly Saudi Arabia) includes the likes of the Groove, Captiva, Blazer, Tahoe, and Traverse in the SUV/crossover category, and the Silverado in the truck category. Previously, the Cruze, Malibu, Sonic, and Avalanche, among other models, were offered in the Middle East.\nPakistan.\nIn Pakistan, Chevrolet introduced its cars in collaboration with a local automobile manufacturer called Nexus Automotive. The lineup from Chevrolet Pakistan included the Chevrolet Optra, Chevrolet Spark, Chevrolet Joy, Chevrolet Aveo, Chevrolet Cruze, and Chevrolet Colorado.\nPhilippines.\nChevrolet has been in the Philippines for a long time, assembling the Chevrolet Bel-Air, Chevrolet Impala, Chevrolet Malibu and even the 1st generation Chevrolet Camaro by the Yutivo family-owned General Motors plant. Other than Chevrolets, the plant also assembled Opels, Pontiacs, Holdens, Buicks, and Vauxhalls for the Filipino market.\nGM withdrew from the Philippines in 1985 and returned in 2000. During Chevrolet's absence in the market, many cars like the Chevrolet Suburban and the Chevrolet Astro have been imported new in the country via grey-market and sold to retailers.\nChevrolet's current Philippine operations are under the control of The Covenant Car Company Inc. The company was officially incorporated on July 1, 2009 and assumed business operations on October 1, 2009. There are at least 24 dealerships around the country as of 2020. Its current lineup include the Chevrolet Spark, Chevrolet Sail, Chevrolet Cruze, Chevrolet Malibu, Chevrolet Colorado, Chevrolet Trax, Chevrolet Trailblazer, Chevrolet Suburban, and the Chevrolet Tahoe.\nIn 2018, the Corvette was added to the roster, making it the most expensive vehicle in the lineup. It is legally imported, as the government has seized and destroyed expensive vehicles that were bought into the country illegally. In 2019, the Camaro returned to the Philippines with a 2.0-liter turbo engine at 275\u00a0hp and 398Nm to compete with the Ford Mustang ever since it was introduced in 2010.\nSouth Korea.\nMany global-market Chevrolet vehicles are designed and manufactured by GM Korea of South Korea, but they had been sold under the Daewoo Motors brand in South Korea until February 2011. The Daewoo brand was fully replaced by Chevrolet in March 2011. All Daewoo products relaunched under the Chevrolet brand, with the release of the Chevrolet Camaro, Chevrolet Orlando and Chevrolet Aveo. In 2015, the Impala was added to the lineup as Chevrolet began importing the American-built sedan to South Korea for the first time. In 2018, Gunsan plant was shut down on May 31 and VIDAMCO plant in Hanoi, Vietnam was sold by Vinfast in June. Chevrolet Cruze and Chevrolet Orlando was discontinued on May 31. Also Chevrolet Captiva discontinued in July 2018. Their best-selling vehicle is Chevrolet Spark and Chevrolet Malibu.\nThailand.\nThe American-built Chevrolet Colorado pickup is also manufactured in Rayong, Thailand. Starting in 2003, the Holden Commodore was badged as the Chevrolet Lumina in Thailand for the VY and VZ model series. Exports lasted until 2005. \nGeneral Motors is currently exploring cost-cutting options as part of its restructuring plan. One of these options involves expanding the Rayong, Thailand plant to add additional capacity to export Colorados to the US. This would allow the Shreveport, Louisiana plant to be closed (where the Colorado is also produced). This scenario is plausible only if a free-trade agreement is signed between the U.S. and Thailand, as the American tariff on imported pickup trucks from non-FTA countries is currently 25%. The United Auto Workers is the most vocal opponent to a change in the tariff structure. \nIn addition to the Colorado pickup trucks, General Motors began assembling Chevrolet Captiva sport utility vehicle in its Rayong plant during June 2007. The Thai-assembled Captiva is based on THETA platform under the program code C100. Also produced at the General Motors' Rayong plant are the Chevrolet Aveo (launched in September 2009 under the platform T100) and Chevrolet Cruze (launched in November 2010 under the platform GLOBAL DELTA). \nChevrolet stopped selling its vehicles throughout Thailand in 2020, and sold the Rayong plant to Great Wall. Aftermarket sales, repairs and warranties will be honored for its Thai customers through authorized shops.\nUzbekistan.\nUzAuto Motors (formerly GM Uzbekistan and Uz-DaewooAuto) is an automotive manufacturer owned by the Government of Uzbekistan. It is based in Asaka, Uzbekistan. It manufactures vehicles under the marques Chevrolet and Ravon, for domestic sales and export. GM Uzbekistan was partly owned (25%) by General Motors and, in 2019, it was acquired by the Government of Uzbekistan and renamed UzAuto Motors.\nGeneral Motors Uzbekistan, or GM Uzbekistan, became the new name of Uz-Daewoo Auto in March 2008 as part of a new joint venture owned by Uzavtosanoat JSC (75%) and General Motors Corporation (25%) with a factory in Asaka producing a variety of Chevrolet models. In the 2010s, the Damas (N150), Matiz (M150), Nexia (N150), Spark (M300), Epica, Malibu, and Captiva were assembled at the plant.\nAustralia.\nEven though the Australian market of today mainly consists of Australia's own automotive companies alongside European and Asian automobile brands, Australia once had its fair share of American cars as well.\nBodies for the local assembly of Chevrolets were built in Australia as early as 1918 and by 1926 the newly created General Motors (Australia) Pty Ltd had established assembly plants in five Australian states to produce Chevrolet and other GM vehicles using bodies supplied by Holden Motor Body Builders. \nThe merger of General Motors (Australia) Pty Ltd with the troubled Holden Motor Body Builders in 1931 saw the creation of General Motors-Holden and the ongoing production of various GM products including Chevrolet. GMH departed from traditional US body styles with the release of the Chevrolet Coupe Utility in 1934 and the Chevrolet \"Sloper\" Coupe in 1935. Post-war production recommenced in 1946. From 1949 Australian Chevrolets were to be locally assembled from components imported from Chevrolet in Canada although local production of the Coupe Utility body continued until 1952. 1968 was the last full year of Chevrolet assembly in Australia.\nClassic Chevrolet models such as Bel Air, Biscayne, Impala etc., are still found in many states around Australia. From the early 1970s to the early 1980s the Chevrolet name was also used on various light commercials in Australia. These ranged from the LUV (a rebadged Isuzu KB) to the third-generation C-series trucks. From 1998 to 2001 the Chevrolet Suburban was sold in Australia as the Holden Suburban, which is expected to return under the Chevrolet badge with the twelfth generation models.\nChevrolet and Holden share a number of models and model names including Malibu, Caprice, Colorado, Volt, Spark/Barina Spark, Sonic/Barina, Cruze, Equinox, and VF Commodore/Chevrolet SS. The Holden Commodore (VF) was exported from Australia to the United States as the Chevrolet SS until Holden ended production in May 2017 during its transition to a distribution platform of vehicles that are sourced from GM's American and international plants that is expected to badge as Holden vehicles.\nIn 2018, the Chevrolet brand returned to Australia and New Zealand with the launch of the Camaro 2SS Coupe and the Silverado 2500HD/3500HD. These vehicles retained the Chevrolet badge and nameplate, and converted to RHD in Australia. In addition to the relaunch, Holden Special Vehicles added the Camaro and Silverado to their performance lineup.\nWith the Holden brand retired in 2021, GM continues to export Chevrolet models to the region under the \"General Motors Specialty Vehicles\" network, in order to expand more American models in that region. The imported Silverado pickup trucks are re-manufactured as right-hand-drive vehicles in Australia before distribution. Chevrolet is also looking at making the Camaro part of the V8 Supercar Series in 2023, where it would succeed the Holden ZB Commodore after its contracts with both Holden and the teams involved with the series expire in 2022.\nIn Australia and New Zealand Chevrolets are often called Chevs as well as Chevys.\nSouth Africa.\nIn South Africa, Chevrolet was GM's main brand name until 1982, with a number of Vauxhall Motors and Holden derivatives being built under the Chevy name from 1965. In the 1970s, the advertising jingle \"braaivleis, rugby, sunny skies and Chevrolet\" (adapted from the US \"Baseball, Hot Dogs, Apple Pies and Chevrolet\") came to epitomise the ideal lifestyle of white male South Africans. Holden in Australia used the jingle \"Football, Meat Pies, Kangaroos and Holden cars\". Originally, Chevrolets were CKD kits of US models assembled in their plant in Port Elizabeth. However, since South Africa was right-hand drive and the US was left-hand drive, along with encouragement by the South African government to use local content, Chevrolets such as the Biscayne were eventually made entirely in South Africa, along with GM's \"own car for South Africa\": the Ranger.\nBy the 1970s, larger South African Chevrolets were based on Australian General Motors-Holden's models, the Kommando being based on the Holden Kingswood and the Constantia on the Statesman, while the smaller Firenza was based on the Vauxhall Viva. The Chevrolet Nomad sold in South Africa was entirely different from the Nomad sold in the US; whereas the American Nomad was originally conceived as a station wagon version of the Corvette and eventually became the station wagon version of the Bel Air, the South African Nomad was an SUV of truck proportions before SUVs were popular. Due to local content laws the cars usually received different engines than in their home markets.\nHowever, these were replaced by Opel models like the Rekord, Commodore, and Senator, and in 1982 the Chevrolet brand name was dropped in favour of Opel. Because of the political climate at the time, GM decided to divest from South Africa in 1986, and a local group eventually bought out GM's South African operations (including the Port Elizabeth plant) and renamed the company Delta Motor Corporation, which concentrated on Opels, Isuzus, and Suzukis, built under licence.\nHowever, thanks to an improved political climate in the 1990s, GM decided to reenter South Africa, eventually buying out the whole of Delta. In 2001, the Chevrolet name made a comeback, used on the Lumina, a rebadged Holden Commodore, and later on, on the Daewoo range of cars. Current Chevrolets (2013) include the Spark Lite (a rebadged Daewoo Matiz), Spark (a third-generation Matiz based on the 2007 Chevrolet Beat), Aveo Sedan and Hatch, the Sonic Sedan and Hatch (the second generation Aveo), Cruze Sedan and Hatch (underpinned by the front-wheel drive GM Delta II platform), the Lumina Sedan (including the Ute model), the Chevrolet Orlando (a five-door, seven-seat compact MPV manufactured by GM Korea under the Chevrolet division for worldwide markets), the Chevrolet Captiva a mid-size sport utility vehicle (SUV) developed by GM Daewoo (now GM Korea) the South Korean subsidiary of General Motors (GM) and sold under the Chevrolet brand, the Chevrolet TrailBlazer (a mid-size sport utility vehicle produced by the Chevrolet division of American automaker General Motors and based on a pickup truck chassis in this case the 2012 Chevrolet Colorado), and a pick-up version which was previously based on the Opel Corsa known as the Corsa Ute; but the current model which in collaboration with GM Brazil who developed it, is the Chevrolet Utility which is based on the Chevrolet Agila platform (a vehicle developed in Brazil and built in Argentina).\nIn 2017, GM withdrew from South Africa, with its truck division and its plant changing hands to Isuzu while at the same time ending all sales and the dealership network of the Chevrolet brand. GM worked with both Isuzu and PSA (the new owners of Opel, which GM spun off the division to) to ensure existing customers receive parts and technical support during and after the company exit the country.\nEurope.\nUntil 2005, Chevrolet Europe sold a few models, mostly United States domestic market (USDM) models modified to suit European regulations. Among them were the Chevrolet Alero (which was a rebadged Oldsmobile Alero) and the Chevrolet Trans Sport (which was a Chevrolet Venture with the front end of the Pontiac Trans Sport). Among other models sold were the Camaro, the Corsica/Beretta, the Corvette, the Blazer, and the TrailBlazer. North American\u2013built Chevrolet Impala V8 sedans have also been available in Europe in recent years, marketed as both large family sedans and more economically priced alternatives as high-performance executive cars.\nFrom 2005 all models from GM Daewoo were rebranded as Chevrolet in Europe. In the rest of the world, most Daewoo models have worn the Chevrolet badge since 2003. Exceptions include the use of the Suzuki badge in the United States and Canada, the Pontiac badge in Canada, the Holden badge in Australia and New Zealand, and the Buick badge in China.\nDuring the mid-2000s, the Corvette and Cadillac range were marketed in Europe through a separate distribution channel operated by Netherlands-based Kroymans Corporation Group but following its bankruptcy in 2010, General Motors established a new Swiss based subsidiary to relaunch Chevrolet in Europe and add the Corvette, Camaro and Malibu models to the European range.\nFrom the beginning of 2016, General Motors reduced its presence in Europe only to its iconic models, such as the Corvette, in order to strengthen its Opel and Vauxhall brands. Although announcing that they will maintain a broad presence in Russia and the Commonwealth of Independent States, General Motors later reduced their line-up to the iconic models in Russia, and more, the Opel division also exited the Russian market in 2015, while also abandoning production at their Saint Petersburg plant. As of March 2016, only the US-built Corvette Stingray and Tahoe, as well as the Russian-built Niva, were being offered on the Russian market.\nChevrolet sales in Western and Central Europe ranged around 200,000 units per year since 2005, peaking at 216,160 units in 2007, while the market share achieved its highest of 1.28 percent in 2012. In Russia, sales grew constantly over the same period, from 67,000 units in 2005 to 205,040 units in 2012, Chevrolet holding a market share of 6.84 percent and being the top import car brand. In 2012, the top markets for Chevrolet in Europe, by the number of registrations, were Italy (31,150), Germany (29,694), France (24,613), Turkey (18,492) and Spain (15,165). The best selling model during the same year was the Aveo (54,800), followed by the Spark (47,600) and the Cruze (40,500).\nCurrently, as of 2022, only the Corvette Stingray is available in most countries in Europe. In the Commonwealth of Independent States countries where Chevrolet vehicles are officially sold, the vehicles are mostly or wholly sourced from Uzbekistan-based UzAuto Motors, a former General Motors-Uzbekistan joint venture. UzAuto Motors is now a state-owned enterprise with a license to assemble and sell Chevrolet-branded vehicles in several CIS member nations. Chevrolet vehicles are also assembled in Kazakhstan from semi-knocked-down kits supplied by UzAuto Motors.\nPoland.\nDuring World War II in Poland, the Home Army of the Polish resistance movement built an improvised armoured car \u2013 Kubu\u015b which was based on the chassis of a civilian Chevrolet 157 truck, license-built in pre-war Poland by the Lilpop, Rau i Loewenstein company. The car was used against the German army in Warsaw during the Warsaw Uprising in 1944. The damaged Kubu\u015b survived the war and in 1945 was towed to the Polish Army Museum where it is currently on exhibition. A full-scale operational replica was created in 2004 by Juliusz Siudzi\u0144ski and is, as of 2009, on exhibition at the Warsaw Uprising Museum.\nBetween the autumn of 2007 and the beginning of 2011, the Chevrolet Aveo was produced at the FSO plant in Warsaw, in collaboration with the Ukrainian company UkrAVTO, in both hatchback and sedan body styles. Between 2005 and 2014 GM sold some 60,000 cars under Chevrolet brand that represented 0.5\u20131% market share compere to Opel's 7% market share each year.\nRussia.\nGM-AvtoVAZ was a joint venture between GM and the Russian company AvtoVAZ established in 2001, which produced the Chevrolet Niva, an SUV especially designed for the Russian market and conditions. The venture ended in December 2019, after AvtoVAZ acquired all General Motors' stake in it. General Motors also operated the GM Avto factory, located in Saint Petersburg and opened in 2008. It was upgraded in 2012 and has produced the Opel Antara and Chevrolet Captiva SUVs, the Chevrolet Cruze from late 2009, and the TrailBlazer from semi-knocked down kits. It ceased production in July 2015, before Chevrolet's exit from the Russian market at the end of the year. In collaboration with the Russian company GAZ, the second generation Chevrolet Aveo was produced at the plant in Nizhny Novgorod for the Russian market, starting from the beginning of 2013, until 2015. Chevrolet vehicles were also produced at the Avtotor plant, located in Kaliningrad. The models produced here were the Lacetti, Aveo, Epica, Captiva, Orlando and Tahoe. As of December 2017, the Chevrolet Tahoe, Chevrolet Camaro, Chevrolet Corvette, and Chevrolet Niva were officially available for sale in Russia. In the first quarter of 2022, there were two distinct sales channels in Russia for Chevrolet vehicles. The first, operated by General Motors, sold the Tahoe and the Trailblazer. The second sales channel sold economical mass-market Chevrolet-branded vehicles assembled by UzAuto Motors in Uzbekistan. Both sales channels stopped selling Chevrolet vehicles in Russia in April 2022 due to U.S. and South Korean sanctions resulting from the Russo-Ukrainian War.\nSouth America.\nHistorically, many Latin American-market vehicles from GM were modified derivatives of older models from GM's North American and European operations. The current S-10 and Blazer exemplify this strategy. However, more modern vehicles are now being marketed as market conditions change and competition increases. Besides those older models made in Mexico, Ecuador, Colombia, and Mercosur countries, Korean-sourced cars from former Daewoo factories in some markets also get Korean- and U.S.-made Chevrolets on top of their local line-ups.\nArgentina.\nIn 1924, General Motors de Argentina, the local GM subsidiary, started importing Chevrolet Double Phaeton models which were welcomed with great demand. In 1925, in order to reduce costs in the Argentine market, General Motors decided to manufacture in Argentina and started producing a sedan, a roadster, a truck chassis and the Chevrolet Double Phaeton, now called \"Especial Argentino\", a model exclusively designed for the Argentine market. Sales increased and soon the Oldsmobile, Oakland and Pontiac units were incorporated to the assembly line.\nWhen the Second World War broke out the operations were complicated. In 1941 the Chevrolet number 250,000 was made, but the shortage of products made car production impossible. The last Chevrolet went out of the plant in August 1942. In order to avoid the total stoppage, the company made electrical and portable refrigerators and car accessories amongst other items. After the war, GM started producing the Oldsmobile and Pontiac lines and later Chevrolet was added.\nIn 1959, manufacturing plants are enlarged and set up to produce cars, pick-ups and trucks. On January 25, 1960, the first Argentine Chevrolet pick-up was introduced. The following year the national government approves the investment plan for 45\u00a0million dollars which included a plant of 12,000 m2. On March 12, 1962, the first Chevrolet 400 was made based on the North American Chevy II. The original plan considered a national integration of 50% during the first year of production; this amount had to be 90% in 1964 with a production of 15,000 units. By 1969, the Chevy line, derived from the American Chevy Nova, was presented.\nIn the middle of the seventies, General Motors market share was reduced sharply from 9% in 1976 to 2% in 1978. Losses exceeded $30 million and the head company in the USA decided to halt production activities in Argentina.\nThe Chevrolet trademark reappeared in 1985 for the production of the pick-up in its versions C-20 and D-20. In 1995, a plan for the manufacturing destined for export specially to Brazil and other countries of Mercosur materialized with the building of a new facility near Rosario, Santa Fe, for the production of the Opel-based Chevrolet Corsa and the Suzuki-based Chevrolet Grand Vitara 4x4.\nBy 2010, the range was based on a variety of GM Korea based cars, together with the Brazilian Chevrolet Prisma.\nBrazil.\nIn Brazil, the Chevrolet Opala was based on the German Opel Rekord and American Chevrolet Nova from the late 1960s, continuing in production until the early 1990s, when it was replaced by a version of the Opel Omega. The basic version had a 151 four-cylinder engine with 82\u00a0hp and 143.2 lb-ft. The top-of-the-line version was called Opala SS and used the GM engine 250-S inline six-cylinder and possessed solid lifters with 171\u00a0hp and 278.5 lb-ft, which led to the record-breaking South American speed road cars in 1976, with 118.36\u00a0mph (190.47\u00a0km/h), beating the Puma GTB (which also used the GM 250 engine inline six-cylinder, but without solid lifters) and the Brazilian version of the Dodge Charger R / T 318 and Ford Maverick V8 302 quadrijet. Other smaller Chevrolets in Brazil, such as the Kadett and Monza, were based on the Opel Kadett and Ascona respectively.\nChevrolet's product line-up in Brazil comprised some exclusive designs like the Corsa \"B\" based Celta, which was sold in Argentina under the Suzuki brand, the Astra, and a Brazilian-designed Vectra based on the Opel Astra H. The passenger car range currently includes the Cruze, the Captiva, the Agile hatchback, Chevrolet Onix. The latest home-grown product is the Chevrolet Prisma MKII, released in 2013.\nUtility and four-wheel drive vehicles line-up includes the S-10, the Blazer, and the Montana. The Montana is a compact pickup truck, based on the Agile, that is also sold in other Latin American markets. From the 1960s to the mid-1980s, there was also a large station wagon, derived from the C10 truck (somewhat similar to the Suburban), called the Veraneio.\nChile.\nChile has a mix of Chevrolet models from different GM brands and platforms branded as Chevrolet. The models come from Chevrolet USA, GM Korea, Mexico, India and other origins. Chevrolet production in Chile began in 1962, although at first through local partners (in this case, Avayu with the Nova II). The Chevrolet C/K truck was manufactured in Chile between 1975\u201388.\nEcuador.\nChevrolet has been operating in Ecuador for 80 years. GM Ecuador sells US Chevrolets alongside GM Korea sourced models. It also sells the 1983 Suzuki Supercarry under the Chevrolet name, and the Isuzu Rodeo was sold as the Chevrolet Rodeo throughout the 1990s.\nVenezuela.\nIn Venezuela, Chevrolet has been operating since 1948, when truck production began in Caracas. In 1979 production moved to a plant in Valencia that was purchased from Chrysler. Chevrolet assembled more than 1,500,000 vehicles in its first 50 years in Venezuela.\nColombia.\nThe Colombian Automotive Factory SA (Colmotores) was founded in 1956 and initially produced vehicles in Austin; in the 1960s, Simca and Dodge automobiles (its first car manufactured was a Coronet 440); and then, in 1980, began producing Chevrolet cars. Currently, Colmotores has more than 75% of the domestic market, with models from GM Korea and Suzuki. Particularly worthy of mention is the Aveo, Optra and the Spark.\nTrinidad and Tobago.\nSince the early 1920s, Chevrolet cars and trucks were marketed in this country. The Master Deluxe Sedan of the late 1930s was considered to be a pinnacle of luxury. All cars sold through the local dealer, Neal and Massey (also franchisee for Vauxhall and Buick), were right-hand-drive, and imported from Canada and Australia. Throughout the 1940s and 1950s, GM maintained a market presence with the Bel Air, Impala and Fleetline. During the late 1960s and early 1970s, Australian Holden DeVilles badged as Chevrolet Caprices were sold, though a few \"Islander\" limited edition American Chevrolet Caprices were imported. Neal and Massey gave up the GM franchise in 1974 and the brand left the market.\nDuring the period 1998\u20132001, Southern Sales Ltd. imported the Chevy Monza and Joy. Based on the Opel Corsa platform and assembled in Mexico, these were the cheapest new cars available. Poor build quality, unprofessional dealer service, and a limited spare parts supply saw these cars exit the market with only a few units being sold.\nIn 2003, the local Renault dealer marketed the Aveo sedan and hatchback, as well as the Optra sedan (a rebadged Suzuki Forenza), with limited success.\nA more intensive marketing campaign by a subsequent Chevrolet dealer, Lifestyle Motors, met with moderately more success. The models available were the Chevrolet Colorado (Isuzu D-Max twin), Spark (micro-car based on the Daewoo Matiz), Aveo sedan and hatchback, Optra sedan, hatchback and wagon, the Captiva SUV, and the Epica large saloon. \nIn March 2011, the Cruze was added to the lineup and features a 1.8 litre gasoline engine. It bridged the gap between Optra and Epica models. \nOnce the Optra was phased out, a 1.6 litre Cruze was made available.\nSport.\nChevrolet enters a variety of cars in sporting events around the world and is particularly well known in NASCAR, IndyCar, and the FIA World Touring Car Championship.\nNASCAR.\nMajor teams include Hendrick Motorsports, Richard Childress Racing, and Trackhouse Racing Team, who all drive Chevrolet Camaro ZL1 1LE-branded cars. Hendrick has twelve championships, Childress has six championships, and former Chevrolet team Stewart\u2013Haas Racing has two. Chevrolet is the most successful manufacturer to be involved in NASCAR with thirty-nine manufacturer's titles and the most recorded wins by a manufacturer. Previously, the Lumina, Monte Carlo, Impala, and the SS were used in both the NASCAR Cup Series and NASCAR Xfinity Series.\nChevrolet teams in the NASCAR Cup Series currently use the Camaro ZL1 1LE, while Xfinity teams run the Camaro SS and NASCAR Craftsman Truck Series organizations race with the Silverado.\nIndyCar.\nChevrolet claimed six consecutive Indianapolis 500 wins from 1988 to 1993 and five consecutive CART Series championships from 1988 to 1992, with notable drivers such as Rick Mears, Al Unser Jr., Michael Andretti, Danny Sullivan, Arie Luyendyk, Emerson Fittipaldi, and Bobby Rahal.\nChevrolet replaced Oldsmobile as the General Motor brand at the IndyCar Series from 2002 to 2005. H\u00e9lio Castroneves won the Indianapolis 500 and Sam Hornish Jr. the championship, but the American brand had little success the next years.\nChevrolet returned to IndyCar in 2012. After several years of Honda being the only engine provider, Chevrolet rejoined the series in 2012. Major teams include Team Penske, KV Racing, Chip Ganassi Racing and CFH Racing who all use Chevy engines. Chevrolet won several races including the Indianapolis 500 in 2013, 2015, 2018\u20132019, 2023\u20132024, as well as seven drivers championships.\nTudor United SportsCar Championship.\nThe Corvette runs in the GT LeMans class for Tudor United SportsCar Championship, which was, until 2014, the American Le Mans Series in the GT class, when ALMS merged with Grand-Am to form Tudor United SportsCar Championship. Corvette Racing started in 1999 at the Daytona 24-hour race and has since won eight consecutive ALMS GT1 manufacturers and team championships and seven ALMS GT1 drivers' titles. The Corvette also takes part in the French\n24 Hours of Le Mans race.\nFIA World Touring Car Championship.\nIn 2005, when the Chevrolet brand was re-launched in Europe, Chevrolet took part in the WTCC with a version of the Lacetti, developed by the UK-based Ray Mallock Ltd (RML). In 2009 the Cruze replaced the Lacetti and won the Drivers' and Manufacturers' championship from 2010 to 2012.\nBritish Touring Car Championship.\nChevrolet participated in the British Touring Car Championship with the Cruze between 2010 and 2011.\nBritish football.\nIn May 2012, Chevrolet replaced Audi as the official automotive sponsor of the English football team Manchester United. From the start of the 2014\u201315 season Chevrolet became the team's principal shirt sponsor. The deal is contracted to run for seven years, worth a world-record $560\u00a0million USD.\nIn July 2012, Chevrolet and English Premier League football team Liverpool F.C. announced a four-year partnership that made Chevrolet the official automotive partner of the club. The deal ended two years prematurely, in 2014, following GM pulling the Chevrolet brand out of Europe. GM's subsidiary in the UK, Vauxhall Motors, took over from Chevrolet as the club's automotive sponsor.\nVisual image.\nChevrolet bowtie logo.\nThe Chevrolet bowtie logo was introduced by company co-founder William C. Durant in late 1913. According to an official company publication titled \"The Chevrolet Story\" of 1961, the logo originated in Durant's imagination when, as a world traveler in 1908, he saw the pattern marching off into infinity as a design on wallpaper in a French hotel. He tore off a piece of the wallpaper and kept it to show friends, with the thought that it would make a good nameplate for a car. However, in an interview with Durant's widow, Catherine, published in a 1986 issue of \"Chevrolet Pro Management Magazine\", Catherine recalled how she and her husband were on holiday in Hot Springs, Virginia, in 1912. While reading a newspaper in their hotel room, Durant spotted a design and exclaimed, \"I think this would be a very good emblem for the Chevrolet.\" Unfortunately, at the time, Mrs. Durant didn't clarify what the motif was or how it was used. Ken Kaufmann, historian and editor of \"The Chevrolet Review\", discovered in a November 12, 1911, edition of the \"Atlanta Constitution\" newspaper, an advertisement from the Southern Compressed Coal Company for \"Coalettes\", a refined fuel product for fires. The Coalettes logo, as published in the ad, had a slanted bowtie form, very similar to the shape that soon became the Chevrolet icon. The date of the paper was just nine days after the incorporation of the Chevrolet Motor Co. One other explanation attributes the design to a stylized version of the cross of the Swiss flag. Louis Chevrolet was born in Switzerland at La Chaux-de-Fonds, Canton of Neuch\u00e2tel, to French parents, on Christmas Day 1878. An October 2, 1913, edition of \"The Washington Post\" seems, so far, to be the earliest known example of the symbol being used to advertise the brand.\nThe first bowtie logo without embedded text first appeared in 1985, as part of the Heartbeat of America ad campaign. In 2004, Chevrolet began to phase-in the gold bowtie that serves as the brand identity for all of its cars and trucks marketed globally, where previously the logo was blue for passenger cars and gold for trucks.\nTypography.\nThe Klavika Condensed font was designed by type design studio Process Type Foundry under the art direction of Aaron Car\u00e1mbula for General Motors marketer FutureBrand as part of Chevrolet's 2006 redesign. After the expiry of the exclusivity period, the commercial version of the font (Klavika Condensed) was released to the public in the fall of 2008. In the Young Creative Chevrolet corporate identity guidelines, Klavika is listed for use in all communication materials. Klavika was phased out beginning in 2012 and replaced by Knockout (from Hoefler &amp; Frere-Jones) while the campaign was still ongoing. Currently, Goodby, Silverstein &amp; Partners is utilizing the typeface families \"Louis\", a group of simplified, legible grotesque gothics named after co-founder Louis Chevrolet, and \"Durant\", a roman group, just as simplified and legible, named after co-founder William Durant, on print, television and Chevrolet's website advertisements.\n100th anniversary.\nAs part of Chevrolet's 100th anniversary in 2011, a dedicated channel was created by the American internet based Pandora Radio station, playing the Top 100 songs mentioning the brand. Beginning on November 3, 2011, Chevrolet celebrated the countdown to its 100th birthday by encouraging its customers and fans to tell their Chevy stories, vote for their favorite Chevrolet cars and trucks, and take the birthday party to their communities with the help of Chevrolet and its dealers.\nA feature-length documentary titled 'Chevy100, An American Story', produced by Roger Sherman, was premiered on November 3, 2011 at Detroit Institute of Arts in downtown Detroit, featuring drivers, collectors, restorers, racers and journalists with a passion for cars and trucks. In honor of the 100th birthday of Chevrolet, Indianapolis Motor Speedway, Chevrolet and Indianapolis businessman David Ring have arranged to properly mark the grave of Arthur Chevrolet, brother of Chevrolet co-founder Louis Chevrolet.\nLogo evolution.\nThe logo through the years:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nMarketing.\nAdvertising.\nEarlier marketing efforts touted efficiency combined with savings \u2013 (\"enormous buying power\", 1914; \"Quality at low cost\", 1923, \"A Six for the Price of a Four\", 1929), interspersed with what could be described as \"loftier\" messages (positioning the automobile \u2013and Chevy by extension\u2014as \"Man's conquest of time\", 1923). Of the marketing campaigns from more recent decades, \"See the U.S.A. in Your Chevrolet\" (used in the 1950s and 1960s) was one of the longest lasting. In 1949, Chevy sponsored \"Inside USA\" on CBS; while this was a short-lived show, the tune created for it got new life in 1951, when Chevy began sponsoring the Dinah Shore show and Shore sang it at the close of every show.\nA selection of Chevrolet's more recent marketing campaigns includes the following:\nControversy over reliability claims.\nChevrolet's advertisement promoting reliability has been pulled after recent backlash.\nIn the advertisement (which is part of their \"Real People. Not Actors\" campaign), Chevrolet spokesperson Potsch Boyd claims that \"based on a recent nationwide survey (by Ipsos), Chevy is more reliable than Toyota, Honda, and Ford.\" However, Chevrolet included a disclaimer stating that the survey was based on 2015 model year vehicles; several of these vehicles have been updated (facelifted and/or redesigned) since then. According to the \"Detroit Free Press\" and \"Detroit News\", Ford, Honda and Toyota all challenged the accuracy of the claim. Furthermore, these claims were challenged by \"Consumer World\", which noted that independent studies by \"J. D. Power\" and \"Consumer Reports\" contradicted them.\nMarketing agency.\nFutureBrand, an Interpublic Group of Companies company, has been working with General Motors since 2000, who also involved the commissioning of a font that was later sold as Klavika Condensed, as part of re-design of Chevrolet in 2006.\nIn 2010, General Motors replaced the advertising agency Campbell Ewald, also of Interpublic Group of Companies, with Publicis Worldwide. Campbell-Ewald had served Chevrolet since 1919. In May 2010 Chevrolet's advertising account was awarded to Goodby, Silverstein and Partners.\nAs part of the attempt to attract 18- to 24-year-old drivers, General Motors hired MTV Scratch. Some of the collaboration results include Chevy ads showing their cars skydiving, bungee jumping, doing other stunts. The commercial was produced with consultations from students from UCLA, Pepperdyne and high schools. Some of the footage was later used in Chevrolet Sonic ad titled 'Stunt Anthem' during Super Bowl XLVI.\nIn March 2012, two competing agencies, San Francisco-based Goodby, Silverstein and Partners (part of Omnicom Group), and New York-based McCann Erickson Worldwide (part of Interpublic Group), joined to form an equal joint venture company called Commonwealth to handle most of Chevrolet's ads. Prior to the joint venture, Goodby, Silverstein and Partners performed marketing in the US, including the \"Chevy Runs Deep\" campaign; McCann handled Chevrolet ads in China, Latin America, Mexico, Canada and other markets. Commonwealth handled and supervised creative work worldwide out of Detroit for all markets except China, India and Uzbekistan, where GM has joint auto-making ventures. McCann continued to handle ads in China and India, and Uzbekistan will be contracted as needed. MacLaren McCann continued on as AOR for the entire GM brand in Canada, but the Chevrolet brand will act as a \"spoke\" to Detroit's creative hub, with content and messaging flowing through Commonwealth, but adapted for the Canadian market.\nPerformance Marketing Group Incorporated manages Chevrolet Racing's experiential marketing properties for its at-track activation platforms in conjunction with the NASCAR Sprint Cup Series, the IZOD IndyCar Series, and the American Le Mans Series with Team Corvette.\nChevrolet-only naming attempt.\nIn 2010, a memo signed by Chevrolet sales and service vice president Alan Batey and General Motors marketing division vice president Jim Campbell was sent to Chevrolet employees at its Detroit headquarters, instructing employees to only use Chevrolet when addressing the brand, in order to present a consistent brand message. A postscript to the memo says a sort of cuss jar - a plastic \"Chevy\" can - has been placed in the hallway. \"Every time someone uses 'Chevy' rather than Chevrolet\", the note said, the employee is expected to put a quarter in the can. The proceeds were to be spent on \"a team building activity\". Paul Worthington, head of strategy for Wolff Olins, said that the branding effort ran counter to a trend in which corporate names had become more casual.\nIan Beavis of Nielsen Automotive Group said that marketers cannot control what consumers call their products, but nicknames do not work in new markets where Chevrolet is trying to get a start. Following the release of the memo, General Motors published a statement claiming the note was in no way discouraging customers or fans from using the Chevy name. Following the 2010 memo incident, Chevy Runs Deep campaign remains to use the 'Chevy' name, while Driving Our World Forward and Find New Roads campaigns uses the 'Chevrolet' name.\nWatches.\nIn 2007, General Motors allowed AJS-Production SA to register the Louis Chevrolet trademark for a line of premium quality Swiss watches watch marketed under the Louis Chevrolet brand name. Although the watches bear the name of Louis Chevrolet, they are not marketed or produced in association with General Motors.\nThe watch brand pays tribute to Louis Chevrolet, co-founder of the Chevrolet automobile company, whose father was a watchmaker and in his childhood helped his father at the workbench. The collection was called Frontenac, the name inherited from the race car company founded by Louis Chevrolet. The Chevrolet watch collection comprises automatic, manually wound and quartz models, equipped with ETA and Ronda movements.\nThe Louis Chevrolet Frontenac watches, manufactured in Porrentruy, the Swiss Jura region, feature the styling cues suggested by the Chevrolet cars. The collection was developed while applying the same materials as used in the car industry. Pearled appliques on the Chevrolet watches' dials remind the metal forms of the old dashboards. The number \"8\", Chevrolet's racing number, is sported on the case back.\nBranding by other manufacturers.\nIn December 2019, after AvtoVAZ acquired General Motors' stake in their former GM-AvtoVAZ joint venture and as part of the deal, AvtoVAZ kept using the Chevrolet branding for the Niva models. The Chevrolet branding by AvtoVAZ continued until August 2020, when it was replaced with Lada.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\nstyle=\"width:100%\" class=\"wraplinks\""}
{"id": "39849", "revid": "66", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39849", "title": "Kate OFlaherty Chopin", "text": ""}
{"id": "39856", "revid": "173030", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39856", "title": "Biosalinity", "text": "Use of salty water for irrigation\nBiosalinity is the study and practice of using saline (salty) water for irrigating agricultural crops.\nMany arid and semi-arid areas actually do have sources of water, but the available water is usually brackish (0.5\u20135g/L salt) or saline (30\u201350g/L salt). The water may be present in underground aquifers or as seawater along coastal deserts. With traditional farming practices, saline water results in soil salinization, rendering it unfit for raising most crop plants. Indeed, many arid and semi-arid areas were simply considered unsuitable for agriculture, and agricultural development of these areas was not systematically attempted until the second half of the 20th century.\nResearch in biosalinity includes studies of the biochemical and physiological mechanisms of salt tolerance in plants, breeding and selection for salt tolerance (halotolerance), discovery of periods in a crop plant's life cycle when it may be less sensitive to salt, use of saline irrigation water to increase desirable traits (such as sugar concentration in a fruit) or to control the ripening process, study of the interaction between salinity and soil properties, and development of naturally salt-tolerant plant species (halophytes) into useful agricultural crops. See also halophile bacteria, which thrive under conditions of high salinity.\nWhen properly applied (watering well in excess of evapotranspiration, maintaining soil structure for excellent drainage), brackish-water irrigation does not result in increased salinization of the soil. Sometimes this means that farmers have to add extra water after a rainstorm, to carry salts back down to below the root zone."}
{"id": "39862", "revid": "41833184", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39862", "title": "Entrepreneur", "text": "Person who owns and operates a business"}
{"id": "39864", "revid": "34573757", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39864", "title": "Business plan", "text": "Formal written document containing the goals of a business\nA business plan is a formal written document containing the goals of a business, the methods for attaining those goals, and the time-frame for the achievement of the goals. It also describes the nature of the business, background information on the organization, the organization's financial projections, and the strategies it intends to implement to achieve the stated targets. In its entirety, this document serves as a road-map (a plan) that provides direction to the business.\nWritten business plans are often required to obtain a bank loan or other kind of financing. Templates and guides, such as the ones offered in the United States by the Small Business Administration can be used to facilitate producing a business plan.\nAudience.\nBusiness plans may be internally or externally focused. Externally-focused plans draft goals that are important to outside stakeholders, particularly financial stakeholders. These plans typically have detailed information about the organization or the team making effort to reach its goals. With for-profit entities, external stakeholders include investors and customers, for non-profits, external stakeholders refer to donors and clients, for government agencies, external stakeholders are the tax-payers, higher-level government agencies, and international lending bodies such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, various economic agencies of the United Nations, and development banks.\nInternally-focused business plans target intermediate goals required to reach the external goals. They may cover the development of a new product, a new service, a new IT system, a restructuring of finance, the refurbishing of a factory or the restructuring of an organization. An internally-focused business plan is often developed in conjunction with a balanced scorecard or OGSM or a list of critical success factors. This allows the success of the plan to be measured using non-financial measures.\nBusiness plans that identify and target internal goals, but provide only general guidance on how they will be met are called strategic plans.\nOperational plans describe the goals of an internal organization, working group or department. Project plans, sometimes known as project frameworks, describe the goals of a particular project. They may also address the project's place within the organization's larger strategic goals.\nContent.\nBusiness plans are decision-making tools. The content and format of the business plan are determined by the goals and audience. For example, a business plan for a non-profit might discuss the fit between the business plan and the organization's mission. Banks are quite concerned about defaults, so a business plan for a bank loan will build a convincing case for the organization's ability to repay the loan. Venture capitalists are primarily concerned about initial investment, feasibility, and exit valuation. A business plan for a project requiring equity financing will need to explain why current resources, upcoming growth opportunities, and sustainable competitive advantage will lead to a high exit valuation.\nPreparing a business plan draws on a wide range of knowledge from many different business disciplines: finance, human resource management, intellectual property management, supply chain management, operations management, and marketing, among others. It can be helpful to view the business plan as a collection of sub-plans, one for each of the main business disciplines.\n\"... a good business plan can help to make a good business credible, understandable, and attractive to someone who is unfamiliar with the business. Writing a good business plan can't guarantee success, but it can go a long way toward reducing the odds of failure.\"\nThe creation of a business plan entails five distinct steps. The first step in creating a business plan is to lay out the main business concept. The second step is to gather data regarding how doable your idea is, including more specifics about what your business entails. Third is to take the information you gathered from step three and add some focus and polish your plan. After you do that, you can begin to create an outline of what your business plan is, including specifics regarding your business idea. The fifth and final step in the process is to take your information and write it out in a way what your investors will be inclined to invest in your business.\nPresentation.\nThe format of a business plan depends on its presentation context. It is common for businesses, especially start-ups, to have three or four formats for the same business plan.\nAn \"elevator pitch\" is a short summary of the plan's executive summary. This is often used as a teaser to awaken the interest of potential investors, customers, or strategic partners. It is called an elevator pitch as it is supposed to be content that can be explained to someone else quickly in an elevator. The elevator pitch should be between 30 and 60 seconds.\nA pitch deck is a slide show and oral presentation that is meant to trigger discussion and interest potential investors in reading the written presentation. The content of the presentation is usually limited to the executive summary and a few key graphs showing financial trends and key decision-making benchmarks. If a new product is being proposed and time permits, a demonstration of the product may be included.\nA written presentation for external stakeholders is a detailed, well written, and pleasingly formatted plan targeted at external stakeholders.\nAn internal operational plan is a detailed plan describing planning details that are needed by management but may not be of interest to external stakeholders. Such plans have a somewhat higher degree of candor and informality than the version targeted at external stakeholders and others.\nBusiness plans for start-ups.\nTypical structure for a business plan for a start-up venture \nTypical questions addressed by a business plan for a start-up venture \nRevising the business plan.\nCost overruns and revenue shortfalls.\nCost and revenue estimates are central to any business plan for deciding the viability of the planned venture. But costs are often underestimated and revenues overestimated resulting in later cost overruns, revenue shortfalls, and possibly non-viability. During the dot-com bubble 1997-2001 this was a problem for many technology start-ups. Reference class forecasting has been developed to reduce the risks of cost overruns and revenue shortfalls and thus generate more accurate business plans.\n*Wikiversity has a project where students of all ages can collaborate with designing and revising business models and practice evaluating them to learn practical business planning techniques and methodology\nUses.\nFundraising is the primary purpose of many business plans since they are related to the inherent probable success/failure of the company risk.\n*Angel investors\n*Business loans\n*Grants\n*Startup company funding\n*Venture capital\n*Management by objectives (MBO) is a process of agreeing upon objectives (as can be detailed within business plans) within an organization so that management and employees agree to the objectives and understand what they are in the organization.\n*Strategic planning is an organization's process of defining its strategy, or direction, and making decisions on allocating its resources to pursue this strategy, including its capital and people. Business plans can help decision-makers see how specific projects relate to the organization's strategic plan.\n*Total quality management (TQM) is a business management strategy aimed at embedding awareness of quality in all organizational processes. TQM has been widely used in manufacturing, education, call centers, government, and service industries, as well as NASA space and science programs.\nNot for-profit businesses.\nThe business goals may be defined both for non-profit or for-profit organizations. For-profit business plans typically focus on financial goals, such as profit or creation of wealth. Non-profit, as well as government agency business plans tend to focus on the \"organizational mission\" which is the basis for their governmental status or their non-profit, tax-exempt status, respectively\u2014although non-profits may also focus on optimizing revenue.\nThe key distinction between for-profit and non-profit organizations lies in their core objectives. For-profit organizations aim to maximize wealth, while non-profits focus on serving the greater good of society. In non-profits, a creative tension often arises as they strive to balance their mission-driven goals with the need to generate revenue or maintain financial sustainability.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39867", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39867", "title": "Petrus peregrinus", "text": ""}
{"id": "39870", "revid": "50309544", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39870", "title": "Horoscope", "text": "Astrological chart or diagram\nA horoscope (or other commonly used names for the horoscope in English include natal chart, astrological chart, astro-chart, celestial map, sky-map, star-chart, cosmogram, vitasphere, radical chart, radix, chart wheel or simply chart) is an astrological chart or diagram representing the positions of the Sun, Moon, planets, astrological aspects and angles at the time of an event, such as the moment of a person's birth. The word horoscope is derived from the Greek words \"\u014dra\" and \"scopos\" meaning \"time\" and \"observer\" (\"horoskopos\", pl. \"horoskopoi\", or \"marker(s) of the hour\"). It is claimed by proponents of astrology that a horoscope can be used as a method of divination regarding events relating to the point in time it represents, and it forms the basis of the horoscopic traditions of astrology, although practices surrounding astrology have been recognized as pseudoscientific since the 18th century. Horoscope columns are often featured in print and online newspapers.\nIn common usage, horoscope often refers to an astrologer's interpretation, usually based on a system of solar Sun sign astrology, based strictly on the position of the Sun at the time of birth or on the calendar significance of an event, as in Chinese astrology. In particular, many newspapers and magazines carry predictive columns, written in prose that may be written more for increasing readership than tied directly to the Sun or other aspects of the Solar System, allegedly based on celestial influences in relation to the zodiacal placement of the Sun on the month of birth, cusp (two days before or after any particular sign, an overlap), or decant (the month divided into three ten-day periods) of the person's month of birth, identifying the individual's Sun sign or \"star sign\" based on the tropical zodiac.\nIn Hindu astrology, birth charts are called kundali, and they are claimed to be based on the movement of stars and the Moon. Auspicious events and rituals are started after checking a person's kundali, including marriage, in which the birth charts of the boy and girl are matched.\nNo scientific studies have shown support for the accuracy of horoscopes, and the methods used to make interpretations are considered examples of pseudoscience. In the modern scientific framework, no known interaction exists that could be responsible for the transmission of the alleged influence between a person and the position of stars in the sky at the moment of birth. In all tests completed, keeping strict methods to include a control group and proper blinding between experimenters and subjects, horoscopes have shown no effect beyond pure chance. Furthermore, some psychological tests have shown that it is possible to construct personality descriptions and foretelling generic enough to satisfy most members of a large audience simultaneously, referred to as the Forer or Barnum effect.\nIntroduction.\nThe horoscope serves as a stylized map of the heavens over a specific location at a particular moment in time. In most applications the perspective is geocentric (heliocentric astrology being one exception). The positions of the actual planets (including Sun and Moon) are placed in the chart, along with those of purely calculated factors such as the lunar nodes, the house cusps including the midheaven and the ascendant, zodiac signs, fixed stars and the lots. Angular relationships between the planets themselves and other points, called aspects, are typically determined. The emphasis and interpretation of these factors vary with tradition. This means however the stars were placed at the time of birth for a person shows their characteristics and personality, including weakness.\nEtymology.\nThe Latin word \"horoscopus\", ultimately from Greek \"nativity, horoscope\", \"observer of the hour [of birth]\", from \"time, hour\" and \"observer, watcher\". In Middle English texts from the 11th century, the word appears in the Latin form and is anglicized to horoscope in Early Modern English. The noun horoscopy for \"casting of horoscopes\" has been in use since the 17th century (OED). In Greek, in the sense of \"ascendant\" \u2013 not only of the time of someone's birth, but more generally of any significant event \u2013 and \"observation of the ascendant\" has been in use since Ptolemy.\nConcepts in Western astrology.\nAngles.\nThere are four primary angles in the horoscope which are thought to influence key areas and moments in a native's lifetime, or within a given day or time. These are, in order of power:\nThe ascendant is the easternmost (or sunrise point) where the ecliptic and horizon intersect; the ascendant and the midheaven are considered the most important angles in the horoscope by the vast majority of astrologers. In most systems of house division, the ASC is the cusp of the 1st house and the MC is the cusp of the 10th house. \nGenerally, on an astrological chart, each of these four angles are roughly 90\u00b0 from the next, forming a cross shape (two oppositions, 180\u00b0 each, forming a 360\u00b0 sphere). This cross formation is made up of the points of east-west, north-south, or 1st house-7th house, 10th house-4th house (give or take, based on speed of orbit and degree). A simplistic comparison would be a clock face, with the 1st house and 7th house being placed at 9 and 3 o'clock, and the 10th and 4th houses placed at 12 and 6 o'clock, respectively. The placement of the planetary ruler of the ascendant, called the Chart Ruler, is also considered to be significant; The point in the west diametrically opposing the ascendant is called the descendant, normally the cusp of the 7th house; and the point opposing the MC is the cusp of the 4th house, the northernmost point of the chart, called the Imum Coeli or IC.\nIn creating a horoscope, the ascendant is traditionally placed at the \"nine o'clock\" position on the left-hand side of the chart wheel (though traditional rectangular chart formats need not follow this convention). During the course of a day, because of the Earth's rotation, the entire circle of the ecliptic will pass through the ascendant and will be advanced by about 1\u00b0. In an astrological chart, the ascendant progresses and changes zodiac signs roughly every two hours (give or take), advancing about one degree every five minutes. This movement provides us with the term \"rising\" sign, which is the sign of the zodiac \"rising\" over the eastern horizon at the moment of birth. This point is thought to affect how we are perceived by others, based on the zodiac sign on the ascendant at the time of birth. The point on the ecliptic that is 90\u00b0 above the plane of the horizon at the time is called the Midheaven, or Medium Coeli (MC), placed at the \"twelve o'clock position\" effectively where the Sun would be if the birth time was midday. This area is thought to have greatest significance on one's career and public image.\nThe Zodiac.\nThe Zodiac, or \"circle of animals\" is a zone or belt in space projected onto the celestial sphere through which, from our viewpoint, the planets move. A symbolic geometric construction around 16 degrees wide, it is divided into 12 signs, each of 30 degrees longitude (making 360 degrees, a full circle), with the ecliptic, the apparent path of the Sun, as its middle line. The tropical zodiac used by most Western astrologers has its beginning at the exact moment that the Sun crosses the celestial equator and enters the zodiacal sign of Aries. Some Western astrologers use the sidereal zodiac favored by Indian (\"Jyotish\") astrologers, which is based more closely on actual positions of constellations in the heavens, as opposed to the tropical zodiac, which is a moveable format based on the seasons.\nThe tropical zodiac defines the vernal point (the first day of spring in the northern hemisphere) as the first degree of Aries, but the sidereal zodiac allows it to precess. This difference may cause confusion among beginner and casual astrologers. Because of a \"wobble\" in the Earth's axis of rotation over a period of about 26,000 years (often called a \"great year\"), the rate at which the vernal equinox precesses in the heavens is approximately 0 deg, 0 min, 50.23 seconds a year, drifting by one degree every 72 years. Precession of the equinoxes thus occurs at a rate of roughly 5 arc minutes of a degree every 6 years. The tropical signs relate to the seasons and not the stars. Here is an example: a person born on, say August 28, 2002, would come to understand that their Sun sign was in Virgo according to Western astrology (conventional Sun sign dates August 23, to September 22, of every year), but Sun on that same calendar date of the year 2002 was in the constellation Leo (where it had been since August 10, 2002, and would remain until September 15, when it would then finally cross into Virgo).\nThe sidereal signs and the tropical signs are both geometrical conventions of 30\u00b0 each, whereas the zodiacal constellations are pictorial representations of mythological figures projected onto the celestial sphere based on patterns of visible star groupings, none of which occupy precisely 30\u00b0 of the ecliptic. So constellations and signs are not the same, although for historical reasons they might have the same names.\nSome astrologers do not use the signs of the zodiac at all, focusing more instead on the astrological aspects and other features of the horoscope. The sun sign is the sign of the zodiac in which the Sun is located for the native. This is the single astrological fact familiar to most people. If an event occurs at sunrise the ascendant and sun sign will be the same; other rising signs can then be estimated at two-hour intervals from there. A cusp is the boundary between two signs or houses. For some, the cusp includes a small portion of the two signs or houses under consideration.\nConstruction of a horoscope in Western astrology.\nTo create a horoscope, an astrologer first has to ascertain the exact time and place of the subject's birth, or the initiation of an event. The local standard time (adjusting for any daylight saving time or war time) is then converted into Greenwich Mean Time or Universal Time at that same instant. The astrologer then has to convert this into the local sidereal time at birth in order to be able to calculate the ascendant and midheaven. The astrologer will next consult a set of tables called an ephemeris, which lists the location of the Sun, Moon and planets for a particular year, date and sidereal time, with respect to the northern hemisphere vernal equinox or the fixed stars (depending on which astrological system is being used). The astrologer then adds or subtracts the difference between the longitude of Greenwich and the longitude of the place in question to determine the true local mean time (LMT) at the place of birth to show where planets would be visible above the horizon at the precise time and place in question. Planets hidden from view beneath the Earth are also shown in the horoscope.\nUsing the above process, practitioners of astrology commonly construct a composite chart when two people meet and form a relationship. According to astrologers, the composite chart will give clues as to the nature and function of the relationship.\nThe horoscope features 12 sectors around the circle of the ecliptic, starting from the eastern horizon with the ascendant or rising sign. These 12 sectors are called the houses and numerous systems for calculating these divisions exist. Tables of houses have been published since the 19th Century to make this otherwise demanding task easier.\nHouses.\nThe chart thus begins with a framework of 12 houses. Upon this the signs of the zodiac are superimposed. In the equal house system the cusp between any two houses will fall at the same degree for each of them: at 12\u00b0 of Leo, the second house will begin at 12\u00b0 of Virgo, the third at 12\u00b0 Libra, and so on. In house systems that take into consideration the effects of the angle of intersection between the planes of the horizon and the ecliptic, the calculations are more complicated. For these calculations it is essential to know the latitude of the event. Tables are available for these calculations, but they are now commonly calculated by computer. Most astrology computer programs allow the user to choose from a variety of house systems.\nPlacements of the planets.\nHaving established the relative positions of the signs in the houses, the astrologer positions the Sun, Moon, and planets at their proper celestial longitudes. Some astrologers also take note of minor planetary bodies, fixed stars, asteroids (for example, Chiron) and other mathematically calculated points and angles such as the vertex, equatorial ascendant, etc. Many astrologers also use what are commonly referred to as Arabic parts (or Greek Lots), the most common of which is the Part of Fortune (Pars Fortunae).\nAspects.\nTo complete the horoscope the astrologer will consider the aspects or relative angles between pairs of planets. More exact aspects are considered more important. The difference between the exact aspect and the actual aspect is called the orb. Those generally recognized by the astrological community are Conjunction (0\u00b0), Opposition (180\u00b0), Square (90\u00b0), Trine (120\u00b0), Sextile (60\u00b0), Semi-Square (45\u00b0), Sesquisquare (135\u00b0), and Quincunx (150\u00b0). Understandably these aspects are more significant when they are exact, but they are considered to function within an orb of influence, the size of which varies according to the importance of each aspect. Thus conjunctions are believed to operate with a larger orb than sextiles. Most modern astrologers use an orb of 8\u00b0 or less for aspects involving the Sun, Moon, and Jupiter and smaller orbs for the other points. Some astrologers, such as practitioners of Cosmobiology, and Uranian astrology, use minor aspects (15\u00b0, 22.5\u00b0, 67.5\u00b0, 72\u00b0, 75\u00b0, 105\u00b0, 112.5\u00b0, 157.5\u00b0, 165\u00b0) with much narrower orbs.\nThe major astrological system regarded universally is Vedic Hindu Astrology. As per this, all planets see just opposite i.e. 180 degree aspect. But Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn have special aspects. Mars sees the houses 4th and 8 too from its place in the horoscope, Saturn sees the houses 3 and 10 too from its place, and Jupiter sees 5 and 9 from its place in the horoscope i.e. the house in which they are posited in the lagna chart.\nAscendant.\nThe ascendant (ASC) is a point on the ecliptic that rises on the eastern horizon at sunrise and changes as the earth rotates on its axis. The ascendant is very important in astrological chart interpretation. It exerts more power than the Sun, Moon and planets because it infiltrates everything in the natal chart.\nThe ascendant is the first point of energy in the natal chart and it represents the way we view life. The sign on the ascendant characterises our expression of \"who we are\" when dealing with others, and our initial action when dealing with day-to-day concerns. Longitude is necessary in order to determine the position of the Ascendant because horoscopes use local time. Having constructed the horoscope, the astrologer can begin the task of interpreting the chart. This interpretation depends upon which branch of horoscopic astrology is being used.\nChinese horoscopes.\nIn Chinese astrology, horoscopes are based on the symbolism of the Chinese zodiac, a system of elements and animals associated with each year according to a Sexagenary cycle. Chinese horoscopes often appear in horoscope sections in newspapers and magazine alongside Western horoscopes.\nCriticism.\nInterest in horoscopes and the zodiac sign have been very popular throughout history and today. There are many faithful followers, from celebrities to the general public.\nPsychological criticism.\nNatal birth charts, or zodiac signs, are often used to predict a person's personality traits. However, the use of natal birth charts to predict personality is not valid or reliable. In a double-blind study that tested the zodiac's reliability to predict personality, an astrologer had to match a person's zodiac sign to their CPI (California Psychological Inventory) result. The CPI is a reliable method to determine an individual's personality. It was found that the astrologers were not able to correctly match the zodiac sign to the CPI result beyond random assignment. This means that astrology is no more than a test of chance and it is not a reliable way to predict personality.\nSimilarly, the zodiac sign can be used to create horoscopes that predict the events that will happen in an individual's life. However, like using the zodiac sign for personality traits, using it for horoscopes is also unreliable. One astrologer's prediction for a horoscope is typically completely unrelated to the prediction of another astrologer. However, many people still believe their horoscope perfectly aligns with the events in their lives. There are some possible explanations for this. Horoscopes have vague wording and are based on typical everyday activities. Due to this, it is easier for people to relate to these claims and increase their belief that it is a real science. Also, a person's expectations typically lead them to bias the way they perceive information, so their expectations are confirmed. In a study, participant's horoscopes were paired with the events of their previous day. When the horoscopes were presented with the participant's zodiac sign, other participants were more likely to report that the horoscope matched the previous day's events compared to when their zodiac sign was not present. This shows how individuals will bias their perceptions based on the expectations. This makes horoscopes seem reliable, when they are not valid.\nScientific criticism.\nAlthough it has its proponents, astrology has been rejected by the scientific community. Some horoscopes base their predictions on the \"movement\" of stars. However, this is inaccurate as stars actually do not move but appear to because the Earth rotates on its axis and orbits around the Sun. Furthermore, none of the answers given by astrology are actually based on science. According to American astronomer, the reason why people rely on horoscopes is explained by a psychological phenomenon known as \"self-selection bias\", which is the tendency of humans to look for interpretations or confirmations for what they already hope to be true. Hence, the reason why astrology may seem like it works is because human brains are wired to look for patterns, even when none exists. Many practitioners of astrology claim that astrology is indeed a science however, despite many trial and experiments, the effectiveness and scientific evidence of astrology is still yet to be demonstrated. In conclusion, astrology has no verifiable mechanism behind it and astrologers follow no sort of scientific method in their process hence it cannot be classified as science.\nChristian criticism.\nIn Christianity, many say that people should not use horoscopes or practice astrology in general, citing Deuteronomy 4:19, Deuteronomy 18:10\u201312, and Isaiah 47:13\u201314 from the Bible. Evangelist and minister Billy Graham said, \"God did make the stars (as well as everything else in the universe), but he intended them to be a witness to his power and glory, not as a means to guide us or foretell the future.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n "}
{"id": "39872", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39872", "title": "Scholasticism", "text": "Medieval school of philosophy\nScholasticism was a medieval European philosophical movement or methodology that was the predominant education in Europe from about 1100 to 1700. It is known for employing logically precise analyses and reconciling classical philosophy and Catholic Christianity.\nThe Scholastics, also known as Schoolmen, used dialectical reasoning predicated upon Aristotelianism and the Ten Categories. Scholasticism emerged within the monastic schools that translated medieval Judeo-Islamic philosophies, and \"rediscovered\" the collected works of Aristotle. Endeavoring to harmonize Aristotle's metaphysics and Latin Catholic theology, these monastic schools became the basis of the earliest European medieval universities, and thus became the bedrock for the development of modern science and philosophy in the Western world. The rise of scholasticism was closely associated with these schools that flourished in Italy, France, Portugal, Spain and England.\nScholasticism is a method of learning more than a philosophy or a theology, since it places a strong emphasis on dialectical reasoning to extend knowledge by inference and to resolve contradictions. Scholastic thought is also known for rigorous conceptual analysis and the careful drawing of distinctions. In the classroom and in writing, it often takes the form of explicit disputation: a topic drawn from the tradition is broached in the form of a proposition on a question to be debated, oppositional responses are given, a counterproposal is argued and oppositional arguments rebutted. Because of its emphasis on rigorous dialectical method, scholasticism was eventually applied to many other fields of study.\nScholasticism was initially a program conducted by medieval Christian thinkers attempting to harmonize the various authorities of their own tradition, and to reconcile Christian theology with classical and late antique philosophy, especially that of Aristotle but also of Neoplatonism. Prominent scholastic figures include Anselm of Canterbury (\"the father of scholasticism\"), Peter Abelard, Alexander of Hales, Albertus Magnus, Duns Scotus, William of Ockham, Bonaventure, and Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas's masterwork, \"Summa Theologica\" (1265\u20131274), is widely considered to be the pinnacle of scholastic, medieval, and Christian philosophy. Important work in the scholastic tradition has been carried on well past Aquinas's time, such as with English scholastics Robert Grosseteste and his student Roger Bacon, by Francisco Su\u00e1rez and Luis de Molina, and also among Lutheran and Reformed thinkers.\nEtymology.\nThe terms \"scholastic\" and \"scholasticism\" derive from the Latin word ', the Latinized form of the Greek ('), an adjective derived from (\"\"), \"school\". \"Scholasticus\" means \"of or pertaining to schools\". The \"scholastics\", therefore, were roughly \"schoolmen\".\nHistory.\nThe foundations of Christian scholasticism were laid by Boethius through his logical and theological essays. Later forerunners (and then companions) to scholasticism were Islamic Ilm al-Kal\u0101m, meaning \"science of discourse\", and Jewish philosophy, especially Jewish Kalam.\nEarly scholasticism.\nThe first significant renewal of learning in the West came with the Carolingian Renaissance of the Early Middle Ages. Charlemagne, advised by Peter of Pisa and Alcuin of York, attracted the scholars of England and Ireland, where some Greek works continued to survive in the original. By a 787 decree, he established schools at every abbey in his empire. These schools, from which the name \"scholasticism\" derived, became centers of medieval learning.\nDuring this period, knowledge of Ancient Greek had vanished in the West except in Ireland, where its teaching and use was fairly common in its monastic schools. Irish scholars had a considerable presence in the Frankish court, where they were renowned for their learning. Among them was Johannes Scotus Eriugena (815\u2013877), one of the founders of scholasticism. Eriugena was the most significant Irish intellectual of the early monastic period and an outstanding philosopher in terms of originality. He had considerable familiarity with the Greek language and translated many works into Latin, affording access to the Cappadocian Fathers and the Greek theological tradition. Three other primary founders of scholasticism were the 11th-century archbishops Lanfranc and Anselm of Canterbury in England and Peter Abelard in France.\nThis period saw the beginning of the \"rediscovery\" of many Greek works which had been lost to the Latin West. As early as the latter half of the 10th century, the Toledo School of Translators in Muslim Spain had begun translating Arabic texts into Latin. After a successful burst of Reconquista in the 12th century, Spain opened even further for Christian scholars and, as these Europeans encountered Judeo-Islamic philosophies, they opened a wealth of Arab and Judaic knowledge of mathematics and astronomy. The Latin translations of the 12th century also included figures like Constantine the African in Italy and James of Venice in Constantinople. Scholars such as Adelard of Bath traveled to Spain and Sicily, translating works on astronomy and mathematics, including the first complete translation of Euclid's \"Elements\" into Latin.\nAt the same time, the School of Chartres produced Bernard of Chartres's commentaries on Plato's \"Timaeus\" and a range of works by William of Conches that attempted to reconcile the use of classical pagan and philosophical sources in a medieval Christian concept using the kludge of , treating the obviously heretical surface meanings as coverings disguising a deeper (and more orthodox) truth. Abelard himself was condemned by Bernard of Clairvaux at the 1141 Council of Sens and William avoided a similar fate through systematic self-bowdlerization of his early work, but his commentaries and encyclopedic and were miscredited to earlier scholars like Bede and widely disseminated. Anselm of Laon systematized the production of the gloss on Scripture, followed by the rise to prominence of dialectic (the middle subject of the medieval trivium) in the work of Abelard. Peter Lombard produced a collection of \"Sentences,\" or opinions of the Church Fathers and other authorities.\nMore recently, Leinsle, Novikoff, and others have argued against the idea that scholasticism primarily derived from philosophical contact, emphasizing its continuity with earlier Patristic Christianity. This remains, however, a minority viewpoint.\nHigh scholasticism.\nThe 13th and early 14th centuries are generally seen as the high period of scholasticism. The early 13th century witnessed the culmination of the recovery of Greek philosophy. Schools of translation grew up in Italy and Sicily, and eventually in the rest of Europe. Powerful Norman kings gathered men of knowledge from Italy and other areas into their courts as a sign of their prestige. William of Moerbeke's translations and editions of Greek philosophical texts in the middle half of the thirteenth century helped form a clearer picture of Greek philosophy, particularly of Aristotle, than was given by the Arabic versions on which they had previously relied. Edward Grant writes \"Not only was the structure of the Arabic language radically different from that of Latin, but some Arabic versions had been derived from earlier Syriac translations and were thus twice removed from the original Greek text. Word-for-word translations of such Arabic texts could produce tortured readings. By contrast, the structural closeness of Latin to Greek, permitted literal, but intelligible, word-for-word translations.\"\nUniversities developed in the large cities of Europe during this period, and rival clerical orders within the church began to battle for political and intellectual control over these centers of educational life. The two main orders founded in this period were the Franciscans and the Dominicans. The Franciscans were founded by Francis of Assisi in 1209. Their leader in the middle of the century was Bonaventure, a traditionalist who defended the theology of Augustine and the philosophy of Plato, incorporating only a little of Aristotle in with the more neoplatonist elements. Following Anselm, Bonaventure supposed that reason can only discover truth when philosophy is illuminated by religious faith. Other important Franciscan scholastics were Duns Scotus, Peter Auriol and William of Ockham.\nBy contrast, the Dominican order, a teaching order founded by St Dominic in 1215, to propagate and defend Christian doctrine, placed more emphasis on the use of reason and made extensive use of the new Aristotelian sources derived from the East and Moorish Spain. The great representatives of Dominican thinking in this period were Albertus Magnus and (especially) Thomas Aquinas, whose artful synthesis of Greek rationalism and Christian doctrine eventually came to define Catholic philosophy. \nAquinas's masterwork, \"Summa Theologica\" (1265\u20131274), is considered to be the pinnacle of scholastic, medieval, and Christian philosophy. It began while Aquinas was regent master at the \"studium provinciale\" of Santa Sabina in Rome, the forerunner of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas. Aquinas placed more emphasis on reason and argumentation, and was one of the first to use the new translation of Aristotle's metaphysical and epistemological writing. This was a significant departure from the Neoplatonic and Augustinian thinking that had dominated much of early scholasticism. Aquinas showed how it was possible to incorporate much of the philosophy of Aristotle without falling into the \"errors\" of the Commentator, Averroes.\nPost-scholasticism.\nPhilosopher Johann Beukes has suggested that from 1349 to 1464, the era between the deaths of William of Ockham and Nicholas of Cusa, there was a distinct period characterized by \"robust and independent philosophers\" who departed from high scholasticism on issues such as institutional criticism and materialism but retained scholasticism's method. These philosophers include Marsilius of Padua, Thomas Bradwardine, John Wycliffe, Catherine of Sienna, Jean Gerson, Gabriel Biel and ended with Nicholas of Cusa.\nReformed scholasticism.\nFollowing the Reformation, Calvinists largely adopted the scholastic method of theology, while differing regarding sources of authority and content of theology.\nNeo-scholasticism.\nThe revival and development from the second half of the 19th century of medieval scholastic philosophy is sometimes called neo-Thomism.\nThomistic scholasticism.\nAs J. A. Weisheipl O.P. emphasizes, within the Dominican Order Thomistic scholasticism has been continuous since the time of Aquinas: \"Thomism was always alive in the Dominican Order, small as it was after the ravages of the Reformation, the French Revolution, and the Napoleonic occupation. Repeated legislation of the General Chapters, beginning after the death of St. Thomas, as well as the Constitutions of the Order, required all Dominicans to teach the doctrine of St. Thomas both in philosophy and in theology.\"\n\"Thomistic scholasticism\" or \"scholastic Thomism\" identifies with the philosophical and theological tradition stretching back to the time of St. Thomas Aquinas. It focuses not only on exegesis of the historical Aquinas but also on the articulation of a rigorous system of orthodox Thomism to be used as an instrument of critique of contemporary thought. Due to its suspicion of attempts to harmonize Aquinas with non-Thomistic categories and assumptions, scholastic Thomism has sometimes been called, according to philosophers like Edward Feser, \"Strict Observance Thomism\". A discussion of recent and current Thomistic scholasticism can be found in \"La Metafisica di san Tommaso d'Aquino e i suoi interpreti\" (2002) by Battista Mondin, which includes such figures as Sofia Vanni Rovighi (1908\u20131990), Cornelio Fabro (1911\u20131995), Carlo Giacon (1900\u20131984), Tomas Tyn O.P. (1950\u20131990), Abelardo Lobato O.P. (1925\u20132012), Leo Elders (1926\u2013 ) and Giovanni Ventimiglia (1964\u2013 ), among others. Fabro in particular emphasizes Aquinas' originality, especially with respect to the \"actus essendi\" or act of existence of finite beings by participating in being itself. Other scholars such as those involved with \"Il Progetto Tommaso\" seek to establish an objective and universal reading of Aquinas' texts.\nThomistic scholasticism in the English speaking world went into decline in the 1970s when the Thomistic revival that had been spearheaded by Jacques Maritain, \u00c9tienne Gilson, and others, diminished in influence. Partly, this was because this branch of Thomism had become a quest to understand the historical Aquinas after the Second Vatican Council.\nAnalytical scholasticism.\nA renewed interest in the \"scholastic\" way of doing philosophy has recently awoken within analytic philosophy. Attempts emerged to combine elements of scholastic and analytic methodology in pursuit of a contemporary philosophical synthesis. Proponents of various incarnations of this approach include Anthony Kenny, Peter King, Thomas Williams or David Oderberg.\nScholastic method.\nCornelius O'Boyle explained that Scholasticism focuses on how to acquire knowledge and how to communicate effectively so that it may be acquired by others. It was thought that the best way to achieve this was by replicating the discovery process (\"modus inveniendi\").\nThe scholasticists would choose a book by a renowned scholar, \"auctor\" (author), as a subject for investigation. By reading it thoroughly and critically, the disciples learned to appreciate the theories of the author. Other documents related to the book would be referenced, such as Church councils, papal letters and anything else written on the subject, be it ancient or contemporary. The points of disagreement and contention between multiple sources would be written down in individual sentences or snippets of text, known as sententiae. Once the sources and points of disagreement had been laid out through a series of dialectics, the two sides of an argument would be made whole so that they would be found to be in agreement and not contradictory. (Of course, sometimes opinions would be totally rejected, or new positions proposed.) This was done in two ways. The first was through philological analysis. Words were examined and argued to have multiple meanings. It was also considered that the \"auctor\" might have intended a certain word to mean something different. Ambiguity could be used to find common ground between two otherwise contradictory statements. The second was through logical analysis, which relied on the rules of formal logic \u2013 as they were known at the time \u2013 to show that contradictions did not exist but were subjective to the reader.\nScholastic instruction.\nScholastic instruction consisted of several elements. The first was the \"lectio\": a teacher would read an authoritative text followed by a commentary, but no questions were permitted. This was followed by the \"meditatio\" (meditation or reflection) in which students reflected on and appropriated the text. Finally, in the \"quaestio\" students could ask questions (\"quaestiones\") that might have occurred to them during \"meditatio\". Eventually the discussion of \"quaestiones\" became a method of inquiry apart from the \"lectio\" and independent of authoritative texts. \"Disputationes\" were arranged to resolve controversial \"quaestiones\".\nQuestions to be disputed were ordinarily announced beforehand, but students could propose a question to the teacher unannounced \u2013 \"disputationes de quodlibet\". In this case, the teacher responded and the students rebutted; on the following day the teacher, having used notes taken during the disputation, summarised all arguments and presented his final position, riposting all rebuttals.\nThe \"quaestio\" method of reasoning was initially used especially when two authoritative texts seemed to contradict one another. Two contradictory propositions would be considered in the form of an either/or question, and each part of the question would have to be approved (\"sic\") or denied (\"non\"). Arguments for the position taken would be presented in turn, followed by arguments against the position, and finally the arguments against would be refuted. This method forced scholars to consider opposing viewpoints and defend their own arguments against them.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39877", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39877", "title": "DNS (disambiguation)", "text": "DNS is the Domain Name System, a network system used to translate names into IP addresses.\nDNS may also refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "39878", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39878", "title": "Domain name", "text": "Identification string in the Internet\nIn the Internet, a domain name is a string that identifies a realm of administrative autonomy, authority, or control. Domain names are often used to identify services provided through the Internet, such as websites, email services, and more. Domain names are used in various networking contexts and for application-specific naming and addressing purposes. In general, a domain name identifies a network domain or an Internet Protocol (IP) resource, such as a personal computer used to access the Internet, or a server computer.\nDomain names are formed by the rules and procedures of the Domain Name System (DNS). Any name registered in the DNS is a domain name. Domain names are organized in subordinate levels (\"subdomains\") of the DNS root domain, which is nameless. The first-level set of domain names are the \"top-level domains\" (TLDs), including the \"generic top-level domains\" (gTLDs), such as the prominent domains com, info, net, edu, and org, and the \"country code top-level domains\" (ccTLDs). Below these top-level domains in the DNS hierarchy are the second-level and third-level domain names that are typically open for reservation by end-users who wish to connect local area networks to the Internet, create other publicly accessible Internet resources or run websites, such as \"wikipedia.org\". \nThe registration of a second- or third-level domain name is usually administered by a domain name registrar who sell its services to the public.\nA \"fully qualified domain name\" (FQDN) is a domain name that is completely specified with all labels in the hierarchy of the DNS, having no parts omitted. Traditionally a FQDN ends in a dot (.) to denote the top of the DNS tree. Labels in the Domain Name System are case-insensitive, and may therefore be written in any desired capitalization method, but most commonly domain names are written in lowercase in technical contexts.\nA \"hostname\" is a domain name that has at least one associated IP address.\nPurpose.\nDomain names serve to identify Internet resources, such as computers, networks, and services, with a text-based label that is easier to memorize than the numerical addresses used in the Internet protocols. A domain name may represent entire collections of such resources or individual instances. Individual Internet host computers use domain names as host identifiers, also called hostnames. The term \"hostname\" is also used for the leaf labels in the domain name system, usually without further subordinate domain name space. Hostnames appear as a component in Uniform Resource Locators (URLs) for Internet resources such as websites (e.g., en.wikipedia.org).\nDomain names are also used as simple identification labels to indicate ownership or control of a resource. Such examples are the realm identifiers used in the Session Initiation Protocol (SIP), the Domain Keys used to verify DNS domains in e-mail systems, and in many other Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs).\nAn important function of domain names is to provide easily recognizable and memorizable names to numerically addressed Internet resources. This abstraction allows any resource to be moved to a different physical location in the address topology of the network, globally or locally in an intranet. Such a move usually requires changing the IP address of a resource and the corresponding translation of this IP address to and from its domain name.\nDomain names are used to establish a unique identity. Organizations can choose a domain name that corresponds to their name, helping Internet users to reach them easily.\nA generic domain is a name that defines a general category, rather than a specific or personal instance, for example, the name of an industry, rather than a company name. Some examples of generic names are \"books.com\", \"music.com\", and \"travel.info\". Companies have created brands based on generic names, and such generic domain names may be valuable.\nDomain names are often simply referred to as \"domains\" and domain name registrants are frequently referred to as \"domain owners\", although domain name registration with a registrar does not confer any legal ownership of the domain name, only an exclusive right of use for a particular duration of time. The use of domain names in commerce may subject them to trademark law.\nHistory.\nThe practice of using a simple memorable abstraction of a host's numerical address on a computer network dates back to the ARPANET era, before the advent of today's commercial Internet. In the early network, each computer on the network retrieved the hosts file (\"host.txt\") from a computer at SRI (now SRI International), which mapped computer hostnames to numerical addresses. The rapid growth of the network made it impossible to maintain a centrally organized hostname registry and in 1983 the Domain Name System was introduced on the ARPANET and published by the Internet Engineering Task Force as RFC 882 and RFC 883.\nThe following table shows the first five .com domains with the dates of their registration:\nand the first five .edu domains:\nDomain name space.\nToday, the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) manages the top-level development and architecture of the Internet domain name space. It authorizes domain name registrars, through which domain names may be registered and reassigned.\nThe domain name space consists of a tree of domain names. Each node in the tree holds information associated with the domain name. The tree sub-divides into \"zones\" beginning at the DNS root zone.\nDomain name syntax.\nA domain name consists of one or more parts, technically called \"labels\", that are conventionally concatenated, and delimited by dots, such as \"example.com\".\nTop-level domains.\nWhen the Domain Name System was devised in the 1980s, the domain name space was divided into two main groups of domains. The country code top-level domains (ccTLD) were primarily based on the two-character territory codes of ISO-3166 country abbreviations. In addition, a group of seven generic top-level domains (gTLD) was implemented which represented a set of categories of names and multi-organizations. These were the domains gov, edu, com, mil, org, net, and int. These two types of top-level domains (TLDs) are the highest level of domain names of the Internet. Top-level domains form the DNS root zone of the hierarchical Domain Name System. Every domain name ends with a top-level domain label.\nDuring the growth of the Internet, it became desirable to create additional generic top-level domains. As of October 2009, 21 generic top-level domains and 250 two-letter country-code top-level domains existed. In addition, the ARPA domain serves technical purposes in the infrastructure of the Domain Name System.\nDuring the 32nd International Public ICANN Meeting in Paris in 2008, ICANN started a new process of TLD naming policy to take a \"significant step forward on the introduction of new generic top-level domains.\" This program envisions the availability of many new or already proposed domains, as well as a new application and implementation process. Observers believed that the new rules could result in hundreds of new top-level domains to be registered. In 2012, the program commenced, and received 1930 applications. By 2016, the milestone of 1000 live gTLD was reached.\nThe Internet Assigned Numbers Authority (IANA) maintains an annotated list of top-level domains in the DNS root zone database.\nFor special purposes, such as network testing, documentation, and other applications, IANA also reserves a set of special-use domain names. This list contains domain names such as example, local, localhost, and test. Other top-level domain names containing trade marks are registered for corporate use. Cases include brands such as BMW, Google, and Canon.\nSecond-level and lower level domains.\nBelow the top-level domains in the domain name hierarchy are the second-level domain (SLD) names. These are the names directly to the left of .com, .net, and the other top-level domains. As an example, in the domain \"example.co.uk\", \"co\" is the second-level domain.\nNext are third-level domains, which are written immediately to the left of a second-level domain. There can be fourth- and fifth-level domains, and so on, with virtually no limitation. Each label is separated by a full stop (dot). An example of an operational domain name with four levels of domain labels is \"sos.state.oh.us\". 'sos' is said to be a sub-domain of 'state.oh.us', and 'state' a sub-domain of 'oh.us', etc. In general, subdomains are domains subordinate to their parent domain. An example of very deep levels of subdomain ordering are the IPv6 reverse resolution DNS zones, e.g., 1.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.0.ip6.arpa, which is the reverse DNS resolution domain name for the IP address of a loopback interface, or the localhost name.\nSecond-level (or lower-level, depending on the established parent hierarchy) domain names are often created based on the name of a company (e.g., \"bbc\".co.uk), product or service (e.g. \"hotmail\".com). Below these levels, the next domain name component has been used to designate a particular host server. Therefore, \"ftp.example.com\" might be an FTP server, \"www.example.com\" would be a World Wide Web server, and \"mail.example.com\" could be an email server, each intended to perform only the implied function. Modern technology allows multiple physical servers with either different (cf. load balancing) or even identical addresses (cf. anycast) to serve a single hostname or domain name, or multiple domain names to be served by a single computer. The latter is very popular in Web hosting service centers, where service providers host the websites of many organizations on just a few servers.\nThe hierarchical DNS labels or components of domain names are separated in a fully qualified name by the full stop (dot, \".\").\nInternationalized domain names.\nThe character set allowed in the Domain Name System is based on ASCII and does not allow the representation of names and words of many languages in their native scripts or alphabets. ICANN approved the Internationalized domain name (IDNA) system, which maps Unicode strings used in application user interfaces into the valid DNS character set by an encoding called Punycode. For example, k\u00f8benhavn.eu is mapped to xn--kbenhavn-54a.eu. Many registries have adopted IDNA.\nDomain name registration.\nDNS history.\nThe first commercial Internet domain name, in the TLD \"com\", was registered on 15 March 1985 in the name symbolics.com by Symbolics Inc., a computer systems firm in Massachusetts.\nBy 1992, fewer than 15,000 \"com\" domains had been registered.\nIn the first quarter of 2015, 294 million domain names had been registered. A large fraction of them are in the \"com\" TLD, which as of December 21, 2014, had 115.6 million domain names, including 11.9 million online business and e-commerce sites, 4.3 million entertainment sites, 3.1 million finance related sites, and 1.8 million sports sites. As of July 15, 2012, the \"com\" TLD had more registrations than all of the ccTLDs combined.\nAs of \u00a031, 2023,[ [update]] 359.8 million domain names had been registered.\nAdministration.\nThe right to use a domain name is delegated by domain name registrars, which are accredited by the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), the organization charged with overseeing the name and number systems of the Internet. In addition to ICANN, each top-level domain (TLD) is maintained and serviced technically by an administrative organization operating a registry. A registry is responsible for maintaining the database of names registered within the TLD it administers. The registry receives registration information from each domain name registrar authorized to assign names in the corresponding TLD and publishes the information using a special service, the WHOIS protocol and its successor Registration Data Access Protocol (RDAP).\nRegistries and registrars usually charge an annual fee for the service of delegating a domain name to a user and providing a default set of name servers. Often, this transaction is termed a sale or lease of the domain name, and the registrant may sometimes be called an \"owner\", but no such legal relationship is actually associated with the transaction, only the exclusive right to use the domain name. More correctly, authorized users are known as \"registrants\" or as \"domain holders\".\nICANN publishes the complete list of TLD registries and domain name registrars. Registrant information associated with domain names is maintained in an online database accessible with the WHOIS protocol. For most of the 250 country code top-level domains (ccTLDs), the domain registries maintain the WHOIS or RDAP (Registrant, name servers, expiration dates, etc.) information.\nSome domain name registries, often called \"network information centers\" (NIC), also function as registrars to end-users. The major generic top-level domain registries, such as for the \"com\", \"net\", \"org\", \"info\" domains and others, use a registry-registrar model consisting of hundreds of domain name registrars (see lists at ICANN or VeriSign). In this method of management, the registry only manages the domain name database and the relationship with the registrars. The \"registrants\" (users of a domain name) are customers of the registrar, in some cases through additional layers of resellers.\nThere are also a few other alternative DNS root providers that try to compete or complement ICANN's role of domain name administration, however, most of them failed to receive wide recognition, and thus domain names offered by those alternative roots cannot be used universally on most other internet-connecting machines without additional dedicated configurations.\nTechnical requirements and process.\nIn the process of registering a domain name and maintaining authority over the new name space created, registrars use several key pieces of information connected with a domain:\nA domain name consists of one or more labels, each of which is formed from the set of ASCII letters, digits, and hyphens (a\u2013z, A\u2013Z, 0\u20139, -), but not starting or ending with a hyphen. The labels are case-insensitive; for example, 'label' is equivalent to 'Label' or 'LABEL'. In the textual representation of a domain name, the labels are separated by a full stop (period).\nBusiness models.\nDomain names are often seen in analogy to real estate in that domain names are foundations on which a website can be built, and the highest \"quality\" domain names, like sought-after real estate, tend to carry significant value, usually due to their online brand-building potential, use in advertising, search engine optimization, and many other criteria.\nA few companies have offered low-cost, below-cost, or even free domain registration with a variety of models adopted to recoup the costs to the provider. These usually require that domains be hosted on their website within a framework or portal that includes advertising wrapped around the domain holder's content, revenue from which allows the provider to recoup the costs. Domain registrations were free of charge when the DNS was new. A domain holder may provide an infinite number of subdomains in their domain. For example, the owner of example.org could provide subdomains such as foo.example.org and foo.bar.example.org to interested parties.\nMany desirable domain names are already assigned and users must search for other acceptable names, using Web-based search features, or WHOIS, RDAP, and dig operating system tools. Many registrars have implemented domain name suggestion tools which search domain name databases and suggest available alternative domain names related to keywords provided by the user.\nResale of domain names.\nThe business of resale of registered domain names is known as the domain aftermarket. Various factors influence the perceived value or market value of a domain name. Most of the high-prize domain sales are carried out privately. Also, it is called confidential domain acquiring or anonymous domain acquiring.\nDomain name confusion.\nIntercapping is often used to emphasize the meaning of a domain name, because DNS names are not case-sensitive. Some names may be misinterpreted in certain uses of capitalization. For example: \"Who Represents\", a database of artists and agents, chose \"whorepresents.com\", which can be misread. In such situations, the proper meaning may be clarified by placement of hyphens when registering a domain name. For instance, Experts Exchange, a programmers' discussion site, used \"expertsexchange.com\", but changed its domain name to \"experts-exchange.com\".\nUses in website hosting.\nThe domain name is a component of a uniform resource locator (URL) used to access websites, for example:\nA domain name may point to multiple IP addresses to provide server redundancy for the services offered, a feature that is used to manage the traffic of large, popular websites.\nWeb hosting services, on the other hand, run servers that are typically assigned only one or a few addresses while serving websites for many domains, a technique referred to as virtual web hosting. Such IP address overloading requires that each request identifies the domain name being referenced, for instance by using the HTTP request header field \"Host:\", or Server Name Indication.\nAbuse and regulation.\nCritics often claim abuse of administrative power over domain names. Particularly noteworthy was the VeriSign Site Finder system which redirected all unregistered .com and .net domains to a VeriSign webpage. For example, at a public meeting with VeriSign to air technical concerns about Site Finder, numerous people, active in the IETF and other technical bodies, explained how they were surprised by VeriSign's changing the fundamental behavior of a major component of Internet infrastructure, not having obtained the customary consensus. Site Finder, at first, assumed every Internet query was for a website, and it monetized queries for incorrect domain names, taking the user to VeriSign's search site. Other applications, such as many implementations of email, treat a lack of response to a domain name query as an indication that the domain does not exist, and that the message can be treated as undeliverable. The original VeriSign implementation broke this assumption for mail, because it would always resolve an erroneous domain name to that of Site Finder. While VeriSign later changed Site Finder's behaviour with regard to email, there was still widespread protest about VeriSign's action being more in its financial interest than in the interest of the Internet infrastructure component for which VeriSign was the steward.\nDespite widespread criticism, VeriSign only reluctantly removed it after the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) threatened to revoke its contract to administer the root name servers. ICANN published the extensive set of letters exchanged, committee reports, and ICANN decisions.\nThere is also significant disquiet regarding the United States Government's political influence over ICANN. This was a significant issue in the attempt to create a .xxx top-level domain and sparked greater interest in alternative DNS roots that would be beyond the control of any single country.\nAdditionally, there are numerous accusations of domain name front running, whereby registrars, when given WHOIS or RDAP queries, automatically register the domain name for themselves. Network Solutions has been accused of this.\nTruth in Domain Names Act.\nIn the United States, the Truth in Domain Names Act of 2003, in combination with the PROTECT Act of 2003, forbids the use of a misleading domain name with the intention of attracting Internet users into visiting Internet pornography sites.\nThe Truth in Domain Names Act follows the more general Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act passed in 1999 aimed at preventing typosquatting and deceptive use of names and trademarks in domain names.\nSeizures.\nIn the early 21st century, the US Department of Justice (DOJ) pursued the seizure of domain names, based on the legal theory that domain names constitute property used to engage in criminal activity, and thus are subject to forfeiture. For example, in the seizure of the domain name of a gambling website, the DOJ referenced \u00a0https:// and \u00a0https://.https:// In 2013 the US government seized Liberty Reserve, citing \u00a0https://.\nThe U.S. Congress passed the Combating Online Infringement and Counterfeits Act in 2010. Consumer Electronics Association vice president Michael Petricone was worried that seizure was a \"blunt instrument\" that could harm legitimate businesses. After a joint operation on February 15, 2011, the DOJ and the Department of Homeland Security claimed to have seized ten domains of websites involved in advertising and distributing child pornography, but also mistakenly seized the domain name of a large DNS provider, temporarily replacing 84,000 websites with seizure notices.\nIn the United Kingdom, the Police Intellectual Property Crime Unit (PIPCU) has been attempting to seize domain names from registrars without court orders.\nSuspensions.\nPIPCU and other UK law enforcement organisations make domain suspension requests to Nominet which they process on the basis of breach of terms and conditions. Around 16,000 domains are suspended annually, and about 80% of the requests originate from PIPCU.\nProperty rights.\nBecause of the economic value it represents, the European Court of Human Rights has ruled that the exclusive right to a domain name is protected as property under article 1 of Protocol 1 to the European Convention on Human Rights.\nIDN variants.\nICANN Business Constituency (BC) has spent decades trying to make IDN variants work at the second level, and in the last several years at the top level. Domain name variants are domain names recognized in different character encodings, like a single domain presented in traditional Chinese and simplified Chinese. It is an Internationalization and localization problem. Under Domain Name Variants, the different encodings of the domain name (in simplified and traditional Chinese) would resolve to the same host.\nAccording to John Levine, an expert on Internet related topics, \"Unfortunately, variants don't work. The problem isn't putting them in the DNS, it's that once they're in the DNS, they don't work anywhere else.\"\nFictitious domain name.\nA \"fictitious domain name\" is a domain name used in a work of fiction or popular culture to refer to a domain that does not actually exist, often with invalid or unofficial top-level domains such as \".web\", a usage exactly analogous to the dummy 555 telephone number prefix used in film and other media. The canonical fictitious domain name is \"example.com\", specifically set aside by IANA for such use, along with the \".example\" TLD.\nDomain names used in works of fiction have often been registered in the DNS, either by their creators or by cybersquatters attempting to profit from it. This phenomenon prompted NBC to purchase the domain name Hornymanatee.com after talk-show host Conan O'Brien spoke the name while ad-libbing on his show. O'Brien subsequently created a website based on the concept and used it as a running gag on the show. Companies whose works have used fictitious domain names have also employed firms such as MarkMonitor to park fictional domain names in order to prevent misuse by third parties.\nMisspelled domain names.\nMisspelled domain names, also known as typosquatting or URL hijacking, are domain names that are intentionally or unintentionally misspelled versions of popular or well-known domain names. The goal of misspelled domain names is to capitalize on internet users who accidentally type in a misspelled domain name, and are then redirected to a different website.\nMisspelled domain names are often used for malicious purposes, such as phishing scams or distributing malware. In some cases, the owners of misspelled domain names may also attempt to sell the domain names to the owners of the legitimate domain names, or to individuals or organizations who are interested in capitalizing on the traffic generated by internet users who accidentally type in the misspelled domain names.\nTo avoid being caught by a misspelled domain name, internet users should be careful to type in domain names correctly, and should avoid clicking on links that appear suspicious or unfamiliar. Additionally, individuals and organizations who own popular or well-known domain names should consider registering common misspellings of their domain names in order to prevent others from using them for malicious purposes.\nDomain name spoofing.\nThe term Domain name spoofing (or simply though less accurately, Domain spoofing) is used generically to describe one or more of a class of phishing attacks that depend on falsifying or misrepresenting an internet domain name. These are designed to persuade unsuspecting users into visiting a web site other than that intended, or opening an email that is not in reality from the address shown (or apparently shown). Although website and email spoofing attacks are more widely known, any service that relies on domain name resolution may be compromised.\nTypes.\nThere are a number of better-known types of domain spoofing:\nThe typosquatter's URL will usually be one of five kinds, all \"similar to\" the victim site address:\n*A common misspelling, or foreign language spelling, of the intended site\n*A misspelling based on a typographical error\n*A plural of a singular domain name\n*A different top-level domain: (i.e. .com instead of .org)\n*An abuse of the Country Code Top-Level Domain (ccTLD) (.cm, .co, or .om instead of .com)\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39879", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39879", "title": "Alan Rickman", "text": "English actor (1946\u20132016)\nAlan Sidney Patrick Rickman (21 February 1946\u00a0\u2013 14 January 2016) was an English actor and director. Known for his distinctive deep, languid voice, he trained at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London and became a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company, performing in modern and classical theatre productions. He played the Vicomte de Valmont in the RSC stage production of \"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\" in 1985, and after the production transferred to the West End in 1986 and Broadway in 1987, he was nominated for a Tony Award.\nRickman made his film debut as the German criminal mastermind Hans Gruber in \"Die Hard\" (1988). He won the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role for his role as the Sheriff of Nottingham in ' (1991). He earned critical acclaim for \"Truly, Madly, Deeply\" (1991), \"An Awfully Big Adventure\", \"Sense and Sensibility\" (both 1995), and \"Michael Collins\" (1996). He went on to play Severus Snape in all eight films of the \"Harry Potter\" series, beginning with \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\" (2001) and concluding with \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows \u2013 Part 2\" (2011). His other notable film roles include those in \"Quigley Down Under\" (1990), \"Dogma\", \"Galaxy Quest\" (both 1999), \"Love Actually\" (2003), \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (2005), ' (2007), \"Alice in Wonderland\" (2010), its 2016 sequel, and \"Eye in the Sky\" (2015). He directed the films \"The Winter Guest\" (1997) and \"A Little Chaos\" (2014).\nRickman made his television debut playing Tybalt in \"Romeo and Juliet\" (1978) as part of the BBC's Shakespeare series. His breakthrough role was Obadiah Slope in the BBC adaptation of \"The Barchester Chronicles\" (1982). He later starred in television films, portraying Grigori Rasputin in the HBO film \"\" (1996), which won him a Primetime Emmy Award, Golden Globe Award, and Screen Actors Guild Award and played Alfred Blalock in the HBO film \"Something the Lord Made\" (2004). In 2009, \"The Guardian\" named him one of the best actors never to have received an Academy Award nomination. Rickman died of pancreatic cancer on 14 January 2016, at the age of 69.\nEarly life and education.\nAlan Rickman was born on 21 February 1946 in Brentford, London, and grew up in Acton, London. His parents were housewife Margaret Doreen Rose (n\u00e9e Bartlett) and factory worker, house painter and decorator, and former Second World War aircraft fitter Bernard William Rickman. His mother was Welsh, and his paternal grandmother was Irish. Rickman would later say in April 2015, \"I was talking to Sharleen Spiteri about being a Celt, how you smell each other out, because my mother's family is Welsh. There's not a lot of English blood in me.\" His father was Catholic and his mother was a Methodist. He had two brothers named David and Michael and a sister named Sheila.\nRickman was born with a tight jaw, contributing to the deep tone of voice and languid delivery for which he would become famous. He said that a vocal coach told him he had a \"spastic soft palate\". When Rickman was eight years old his father died of cancer, leaving his mother to raise him and his three siblings mostly alone. According to biographer Maureen Paton, the family was \"rehoused by the council and moved to an Acton estate to the west of Wormwood Scrubs Prison, where his mother struggled to bring up four children on her own by working for the Post Office\". Margaret Rickman married again in 1960, but divorced Rickman's stepfather after three years.\nRickman met his longtime partner Rima Horton at the age of 19; he stated that his first crush was at 10 years old on a girl named Amanda at his school's sports day. As a child, he excelled at calligraphy and watercolour painting. Rickman was educated at West Acton First School followed by Derwentwater Primary School in Acton, and then Latymer Upper School in London through the Direct Grant system, where he became involved in drama. Rickman went on to attend Chelsea College of Art and Design from 1965 to 1968. He then attended the Royal College of Art from 1968 to 1970. His training allowed him to work as a graphic designer for the Royal College of Art's in-house magazine, \"ARK\", and the \"Notting Hill Herald\", which he considered a more stable occupation than acting; he later said that drama school \"wasn't considered the sensible thing to do at 18\".\nFollowing graduation, Rickman and several friends opened a graphic design studio called Graphiti, but after three years of successful business, he decided that he was going to pursue acting professionally. He wrote to request an audition with RADA (the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art), which he attended from 1972 until 1974. While there, he supported himself by working as a dresser for Nigel Hawthorne and Ralph Richardson.\nCareer.\n1980\u20131988: Theatre roles and film debut.\nAfter graduating from RADA, Rickman worked extensively with British repertory and experimental theatre groups in productions including Chekhov's \"The Seagull\" and Snoo Wilson's \"The Grass Widow\" at the Royal Court Theatre, and appeared three times at the Edinburgh International Festival. He performed with the Court Drama Group in 1978, gaining roles in \"Romeo and Juliet\" and \"A View from the Bridge\", among other plays. While working with the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC), he was cast as Jaques in \"As You Like It\", contributing an essay about his process to the RSC's book \"Players of Shakespeare 2\". He appeared in the 1981 BBC adaptation of \u00c9mile Zola's novel \"Th\u00e9r\u00e8se Raquin\", opposite Kate Nelligan and Brian Cox. He made a brief appearance in one episode of the BBC adaptation of John le Carr\u00e9's \"Smiley's People\" (1982). His breakthrough role was in \"The Barchester Chronicles\" (1982), the BBC's adaptation of Trollope's first two Barchester novels, as the Reverend Obadiah Slope.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt shouldn't be a surprise that Alan Rickman is the only actor to make it onto this Greatest Villains list twice\u2014he does bad deeds with such gusto. Legend has it he kept refusing the role of the Sheriff of Nottingham until it was agreed he could do whatever he liked with it\u2014which, to Kevin Costner's rumoured chagrin, included stealing the whole damn show. Every sneer, every eye-roll, every flourish of splenetic exasperation is a joy to behold. Whether he's cancelling Christmas or cutting your heart out with a spoon, Rickman's crowd-pleasing pantomime villainy is downright heroic.\n \u2014\"Empire\" on Rickman, ranking his portrayals of the Sheriff of Nottingham (number 14) and Hans Gruber (number 4) on their list of the greatest villains.\nRickman was given the male lead, the Vicomte de Valmont, in the 1985 Royal Shakespeare Company production of Christopher Hampton's adaptation of \"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\", directed by Howard Davies. After the RSC production transferred to the West End in 1986 and Broadway in 1987, Rickman received both a Tony Award nomination and a Drama Desk Award nomination for his performance. In 1988, Rickman played the antagonist Hans Gruber in the action thriller \"Die Hard\" in what was his first feature film. His portrayal, starring opposite Bruce Willis, earned him critical acclaim and a spot on the AFI's 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp; Villains list as the 46th-best villain in film history. Rickman later revealed that he almost did not take the role, for he did not think \"Die Hard\" was the kind of film he wanted to make.\n1990\u20132000: Career breakthrough.\nIn 1990, he played the Australian Elliott Marston opposite Tom Selleck in \"Quigley Down Under\" (1990). The following year, Rickman was cast as the Sheriff of Nottingham in Kevin Reynolds's film adaptation of \"\" (1991). In the film, Rickman acted opposite Kevin Costner and Morgan Freeman. \"Entertainment Weekly\" proclaimed that while \"Robin Hood\" \"left critics and movie goers underwhelmed, Rickman's gleefully wicked villain became the summer's most talked-about performance\". For his performance he received the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role. Upon winning the award Rickman stated, \"This will be a healthy reminder to me that subtlety isn't everything\". Despite gaining acclaim within the media for his ability to portray villainous roles in films Rickman took issue with being typecast as a villain. During this decade he would portray a range of characters that would defy media perceptions.\nRickman soon started to play leading roles such as Man, in the enigmatic film \"Closet Land\" (1991) alongside Madeleine Stowe; and he also was the romantic role of Jamie in the independent romance film \"Truly, Madly, Deeply\" (1991) which earned him another BAFTA Award nomination. The film, directed by Anthony Minghella and starring Rickman and Juliet Stevenson, proved to be a critical success. Rickman was able to break out of the mould of the movie villain, with critic Roger Ebert noting, \"The man is Rickman, who you will look at on the screen, and know you have seen somewhere, and rattle your memory all during the movie without making the connection that he was the villain in \"Die Hard\".\" Rickman also starred in Stephen Poliakoff's \"Close My Eyes\" (1991) with Clive Owen and Saskia Reeves. Jonathan Rosenbaum of \"The Chicago Reader\" praised the film and all three lead performances, calling them \"edgy, powerful, and wholly convincing, with Rickman a particular standout.\" All three of Rickman's performances in \"Close My Eyes\", \"Truly Madly Deeply\" and \"Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves\" would win him the Evening Standard British Film Award for Best Actor, and the same performances along with his work in \"Quigley Down Under\" would also win him the London Film Critics' Circle Award for Actor of the Year.\nIn 1995, he was cast as Colonel Brandon in \"Sense and Sensibility\", Ang Lee's film adaptation of Jane Austen's novel. The film also starred Emma Thompson, Hugh Grant, and Kate Winslet. Thompson noted that Rickman could express the \"extraordinary sweetness [of] his nature,\" as he had played \"Machiavellian types so effectively\" in other films. For his performance, Rickman earned his third BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role nomination and his first Screen Actors Guild Award nomination. The following year he portrayed \u00c9amon de Valera in the Neil Jordan period drama, \"Michael Collins\" starring Liam Neeson, Julia Roberts, and Stephen Rea. Rickman earned his fourth BAFTA Award nomination. In 1996, Rickman starred as the \"mad monk\" Rasputin in the HBO television biopic \",\" a role for which he won a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie, a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie, and a Golden Globe Award for Best Actor \u2013 Miniseries or Television Film.\nRickman directed \"The Winter Guest\" at London's Almeida Theatre in 1995 and the film version of the same play, released in 1997, starring Emma Thompson and her real-life mother Phyllida Law. Rickman's stage performances in the 1990s include \"Antony and Cleopatra\" in 1998 as Mark Antony, with Helen Mirren as Cleopatra, in the Royal National Theatre's production at the Olivier Theatre in London, which ran from October to December 1998. Rickman appeared in \"Victoria Wood with All the Trimmings\" (2000), a BBC One Christmas special with Victoria Wood, playing an aged colonel in the battle of Waterloo who is forced to break off his engagement to Honeysuckle Weeks' character.\nDuring his career, Rickman played comedic roles, including as Sir Alexander Dane/Dr. Lazarus in the cult classic sci-fi parody \"Galaxy Quest\" (1999) with Tim Allen, Sigourney Weaver, Sam Rockwell, and Tony Shalhoub. Rockwell said that Rickman \"was very instrumental in making sure the script hit the dramatic notes, and everything had a strong logic and reason behind it\". He also played the angel Metatron, the voice of God, in Kevin Smith's \"Dogma\" (also 1999).\n2001\u20132011: \"Harry Potter\" and acclaim.\nIn 2001, he first appeared as Severus Snape, the potions master, in \"Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone\". His portrayal of the role throughout the \"Harry Potter\" series (2001\u20132011) was dark, but the character's motivations were not clear early on. In 2002, Rickman performed onstage in No\u00ebl Coward's romantic comedy \"Private Lives\". After its successful run at the Albery Theatre in the West End, it transferred to Broadway and ended in September 2002; he reunited with his \"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\" co-star Lindsay Duncan and director Howard Davies in the Olivier and Tony Award-winning production. Rickman also voiced the character of \"King Philip\" in the 2002 \"King of the Hill\" episode, \"Joust Like a Woman\".\nIn 2003, Rickman starred in the ensemble Christmas-themed romantic comedy \"Love Actually\" (2003) as Harry, the foolish husband of Emma Thompson's character. The film, written and directed by Richard Curtis, has been called \"a modern classic\" by \"The Independent\". Rickman was nominated for an Primetime Emmy Award for his work as Dr. Alfred Blalock in HBO's \"Something the Lord Made\" (2004). In 2005, he lent his voice to Marvin the Paranoid Android in science fiction comedy \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (2005) starring Martin Freeman, Mos Def, Sam Rockwell, and Zooey Deschanel.\nIn early 2005, \"My Name is Rachel Corrie\", a play composed from Rachel Corrie's journals and emails from Gaza and compiled by Rickman and journalist Katharine Viner, in a production directed by Rickman, premiered at the Royal Court Theatre in London and was later revived in October 2005. The West End production saw Rickman win the Theatregoers' Choice Awards for Best Director. The play was to be transferred to the New York Theatre Workshop the following year, but when it was postponed indefinitely over the possibility of boycotts and protests from those who saw it as \"anti-Israeli agit-prop\", the British producers denounced the decision as censorship, and withdrew the show. Rickman called it \"censorship born out of fear\". Harold Pinter, Vanessa Redgrave and Tony Kushner among others, criticised the decision to indefinitely delay the show. The one-woman play finally opened off-Broadway on 15 October 2006 for an initial run of 48 performances. Despite the adverse reaction from pro-Israel groups, overall, the play was very popular, especially in London. \"I never imagined that the play would create such acute controversy,\" Rickman said. He added, \"Many Jews supported it. The New York producer was Jewish and we held a discussion after every performance. Both Israelis and Palestinians participated in the discussions and there was no shouting in the theatre. People simply listened to each other.\"\nHe starred in the independent film \"Snow Cake\" (2006) with Sigourney Weaver and Carrie-Anne Moss, and ' (also 2006), directed by Tom Tykwer. He appeared as Judge Turpin in the critically acclaimed Tim Burton film ' (2007) alongside Johnny Depp, and his \"Harry Potter\" co-stars Helena Bonham Carter and Timothy Spall. The same year he also played the egotistical, Nobel Prize-winning father in the black comedy \"Nobel Son\" (2007). Rickman starred in the 2008 movie \"Bottle Shock\" as a Paris-based wine expert named Steven Spurrier, who heads to Napa Valley California in search of worthy wines to bring back to France for the competition that year (based on a true story). In 2009, Rickman was awarded the James Joyce Award by University College Dublin's Literary and Historical Society. In October and November 2010, Rickman starred in the eponymous role in Henrik Ibsen's \"John Gabriel Borkman\" at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin alongside Lindsay Duncan and Fiona Shaw. The \"Irish Independent\" called Rickman's performance breathtaking. He reprised the role in a production at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.\nIn 2010, he starred in the BBC television production \"The Song of Lunch\" alongside Emma Thompson. That same year he provided the voice of Absolem the Caterpillar in Tim Burton's film \"Alice in Wonderland\" (2010). Rickman again appeared as Severus Snape in the final installment in the \"Harry Potter\" series, \"Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows \u2013 Part 2\" (2011). Throughout the series, his portrayal of Snape garnered widespread critical acclaim. Kenneth Turan of the \"Los Angeles Times\" said Rickman \"as always, makes the most lasting impression\", while Peter Travers of \"Rolling Stone\" magazine called Rickman \"sublime at giving us a glimpse at last into the secret nurturing heart that... Snape masks with a sneer.\" Media coverage characterised Rickman's performance as worthy of nomination for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor. His last appearance as Snape saw him receive award nominations in 2011, including at the Saturn Awards and the Scream Awards. In November 2011, Rickman opened in \"Seminar\", a new play by Theresa Rebeck, at the John Golden Theatre on Broadway. Rickman, who left the production in April, won the Broadway.com Audience Choice Award for Favorite Actor in a Play and was nominated for a Drama League Award for Outstanding Distinguished Performance.\n2012\u20132016: Final roles.\nRickman starred with Colin Firth and Cameron Diaz in \"Gambit\" (2012) by Michael Hoffman, a remake of the 1966 film. In 2013, he played Hilly Kristal, the founder of the East Village punk-rock club CBGB, in the \"CBGB\" film with Rupert Grint. In 2014, he directed and starred as King Louis XIV in the costume drama film \"A Little Chaos\" starring Kate Winslet, Matthias Schoenaerts, Jennifer Ehle, and Stanley Tucci. The film premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival. The film received mixed reviews with its critics' consensus reading, \"Stylish and well-acted without ever living up to its dramatic potential, \"A Little Chaos\" is shouldered by the impressive efforts of a talented cast.\"\nThe following year he starred in Gavin Hood's \"Eye in the Sky\" (2015) starring Helen Mirren, Aaron Paul, and Barkhad Abdi. This would be Rickman's final onscreen performance. The film debuted at the 2015 Toronto International Film Festival to great acclaim, receiving a Rotten Tomatoes score of 95%, based on 175 critics, with the consensus being, \"As taut as it is timely, \"Eye in the Sky\" offers a powerfully acted \u2013 and unusually cerebral \u2013 spin on the modern wartime political thriller.\" Critic Stephen Holden of \"The New York Times\" in particular praised his role, writing: \"General Benson is Mr. Rickman's final screen performance, and it is a great one, suffused with a dyspeptic world-weary understanding of war and human nature\".\nReception and public image.\nPublic image.\nRickman was chosen by \"Empire\" as one of the 100 Sexiest Stars in film history (No. 34) in 1995, and ranked No. 59 in \"Empire\"'s \"The Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time\" list in October 1997. In 2009 and 2010, he was ranked once again as one of the 100 Sexiest Stars by \"Empire\", both times placing No. 8 out of the 50 actors chosen. He was elected to the council of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) in 1993; he was subsequently RADA's vice-chairman and a member of its artistic advisory and training committees and development board.\nRickman was voted No. 19 in \"Empire\" magazine's Greatest Living Movie Stars over the age of 50 and was twice nominated for Broadway's Tony Award as Best Actor (Play); in 1987 for \"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\" and in 2002 for a revival of No\u00ebl Coward's \"Private Lives\". \"The Guardian\" named Rickman as an \"honourable mention\" in a list of the best actors never to have received an Academy Award nomination.\nOn acting.\nIn 2010, he was interviewed by BBC Hardtalk and explained you only speak as a human being in life and therefore ...you only speak because you wish to respond to something you've heard. He believed the idea of merely recalling a speech to memory alone in a bedroom was nonsense in terms of learning to act.\nTalking to ABC Radio National in 2012, Rickman revealed that the film which influenced and informed him was Robert Altman's 1975 film Nashville.\nIn an interview with Charlie Rose in 2012, Rose commented to Rickman that when playing anyone nasty, you have to find a vulnerability to which Rickman responded that he felt you couldn't judge a character you play or how could you play it? He went on to say that the characters have different wants and look at different means to gain them.\nIn an interview with NPR in 2013, he affirmed his earlier advice saying: \"...it would be that acting is about accurate listening.\"\nAcademia.\nTwo researchers, a linguist and a sound engineer, found \"the perfect [male] voice\" to be a combination of Rickman's and Jeremy Irons' voices based on a sample of 50 voices. The BBC states that Rickman's \"sonorous, languid voice was his calling card\u2014making even throwaway lines of dialogue sound thought-out and authoritative.\" In their vocal range exercises in studying for a GCSE in drama, he was singled out by the BBC for his \"excellent diction and articulation\".\nPop culture.\nRickman is featured in several musical works, including a song composed by Adam Leonard entitled \"Not Alan Rickman\". Credited as 'A Strolling Player' in the sleeve notes, the actor played a \"Master of Ceremonies\" part, announcing the various instruments at the end of the first part of Mike Oldfield's \"Tubular Bells II\" (1992) on the track \"The Bell\". Rickman was one of the many artists who recited Shakespearian sonnets on the album \"When Love Speaks\" (2002), and also featured prominently in a music video by Scottish rock band Texas entitled \"In Demand\", which premiered on MTV Europe in August 2000.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1965, when he was 19, Rickman met 18-year-old Rima Horton, who became his partner in the early 1970s and would later be a Labour Party councillor on Kensington and Chelsea London Borough Council (1986\u20132006) and an economics lecturer at Kingston University in London. In 2015, Rickman confirmed that they had married in a private ceremony in New York City in 2012.\nRickman was the godfather of fellow actor Tom Burke. Rickman's brother Michael is a Conservative Party district councillor in Leicestershire.\nRickman was an active patron of the research foundation Saving Faces and honorary president of the International Performers' Aid Trust, a charity that works to fight poverty amongst performing artists all over the world.\nWhen discussing politics, Rickman said he \"was born a card-carrying member of the Labour Party\". His last recorded work prior to his death was for a short video to help Oxford University students raise funds and awareness of the refugee crisis for Save the Children and Refugee Council. According to his diaries, Rickman declined a CBE in 2008.\nRickman was political until his last days. His last onscreen performance was with Helen Mirren in the drama \"Eye in the Sky\", which he had described as \"a film about the moral responsibilities governments face regarding the use of drones.\"\nIn 2003, after reading published emails by Rachel Corrie, a US activist who advocated for Palestinian rights and was crushed to death by an Israeli bulldozer in Gaza, he was motivated to produce \"My Name Is Rachel Corrie\"; the play was well-received and popular in London.\nIllness and death.\nThroughout 2005, Rickman received treatment for an aggressive form of prostate cancer, culminating in a prostatectomy in January 2006. The operation coincided with the casting for \"Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix\", and he deliberated over whether to return to the series, but decided in favour, stating: \"The argument that wins is the one that says: 'See it through. It's your story.'\"\nIn August 2015, Rickman had a minor stroke, which led to the diagnosis of pancreatic cancer. He revealed that he had terminal cancer to only his closest confidants. On 14 January 2016, he died at his and Rima\u2019s home in London on Westbourne Terrace at the age of 69. His remains were cremated on 3 February 2016 in the West London Crematorium in Kensal Green. His ashes were given to his wife, Rima Horton. His final two films, \"Eye in the Sky\" and \"Alice Through the Looking Glass\", were dedicated to his memory, as was \"The Limehouse Golem\", which would have been his next project.\nActing credits and accolades.\nRickman gained acclaim for his portrayal of Severus Snape in the \"Harry Potter\" series (2001\u20132011). He also appeared in numerous films including \"Die Hard\" (1988), ', \"Truly, Madly, Deeply\" (both 1991), \"An Awfully Big Adventure\", \"Sense and Sensibility\" (both 1995), \" Michael Collins\" (1996), \"Dogma\", \"Galaxy Quest\" (both 1999), \"Love Actually\" (2003), \"The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy\" (2005), ' (2007), \"Alice in Wonderland\" (2010), and \"Eye in the Sky\" (2015).\nHe received numerous accolades including a BAFTA Award, a Primetime Emmy Award, a Golden Globe Award, and a Screen Actors Guild Award in addition to nominations for two Drama Desk Awards, a Drama League Award, a Laurence Olivier Award, and two Tony Awards.\nLegacy.\nSoon after his death, his fans created a memorial underneath the \"Platform 9\u00be\" sign at London King's Cross railway station. His death has been compared to that of David Bowie, a fellow British cultural figure who died at the same age as Rickman four days earlier; like Rickman, Bowie died of cancer and kept his cancer diagnosis from the public.\nTributes from Rickman's co-stars and contemporaries appeared on social media following the announcement. Since his cancer was not publicly known, some\u2014like Ralph Fiennes, who \"cannot believe he is gone\", and Jason Isaacs, who was \"sidestepped by the awful news\"\u2014expressed their surprise. Sir Michael Gambon told BBC Radio 4 he was a \"great friend\" and \"a real man of the theatre and the stage\". At a West End performance of the play that made him a star (\"Les Liaisons Dangereuses\"), he was remembered as \"a great man of the British theatre\".\n\"Harry Potter\" creator J. K. Rowling called Rickman \"a magnificent actor and a wonderful man.\" Emma Watson wrote, \"I feel so lucky to have worked and spent time with such a special man and actor. I'll really miss our conversations.\" Daniel Radcliffe appreciated his loyalty and support: \"I'm pretty sure he came and saw everything I ever did on stage both in Britain and America. He didn't have to do that.\" Evanna Lynch said it was scary to bump into Rickman in character as Snape, but \"he was so kind and generous in the moments he wasn't Snaping about.\" Rupert Grint said, \"even though he has gone I will always hear his voice.\" Johnny Depp, who co-starred with Rickman in two Tim Burton films, commented, \"That voice, that persona. There's hardly anyone unique anymore. He was unique.\"\nKate Winslet, who gave a tearful tribute at the London Film Critics' Circle Awards, remembered Rickman as warm and generous, adding, \"And that voice! Oh, that voice.\" Dame Helen Mirren said his voice \"could suggest honey or a hidden stiletto blade\". Emma Thompson remembered \"the intransigence which made him the great artist he was\u2014his ineffable and cynical wit, the clarity with which he saw most things, including me... I learned a lot from him.\" Colin Firth told \"The Hollywood Reporter\" that, as an actor, Rickman had been a mentor. John McTiernan, director of \"Die Hard\", said Rickman was the antithesis of the villainous roles for which he was most famous on screen. Sir Ian McKellen wrote, \"behind [Rickman's] mournful face, which was just as beautiful when wracked with mirth, there was a super-active spirit, questing and achieving, a super-hero, unassuming but deadly effective.\" Writer/director Kevin Smith told a tearful 10-minute story about Rickman on his \"Hollywood Babble On\" podcast. Rickman's family offered their thanks \"for the messages of condolence\".\nAn edited collection of Rickman's diaries from 1993 to 2015 was published on 4 October 2022 under the title \"Madly, Deeply: The Alan Rickman Diaries\".\nOn 30 April 2023, search engine Google commemorated Rickman with a Doodle.\nOn 13 November 2025, Rickman's personal scripts and mementoes went up for auction. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39880", "revid": "27062869", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39880", "title": "Battle of the Teutoburg Forest", "text": "Roman defeat by Germanic tribes in 9 AD\nThe Battle of the Teutoburg Forest, also called the Varus Disaster or Varian Disaster () by Roman historians, was a major battle fought between an alliance of Germanic peoples and the Roman Empire between 8 and 11 September 9\u00a0AD, possibly near modern Kalkriese. Fighting began with an ambush by the Germanic alliance on three Roman legions being led by Publius Quinctilius Varus and their auxiliaries; the alliance was led by Arminius, a Germanic chieftain and officer of Varus's auxilia. Arminius had received Roman citizenship and a Roman military education, thus allowing him to deceive the Romans methodically and anticipate their tactical responses.\nTeutoburg Forest is considered one of the most important defeats in Roman history, bringing the triumphant period of expansion under Augustus to an abrupt end. It dissuaded the Romans from pursuing the conquest of Germania, and so can be considered one of the most important events in European history.\nThe provinces of Germania Superior and Germania Inferior, sometimes collectively referred to as \"Roman Germania\", were established in northeast Roman Gaul, while territories beyond the Rhine remained independent. Retaliatory campaigns were commanded by Tiberius and Germanicus and enjoyed success, but the Rhine became the border between the Roman Empire and the rest of Germania. Rome then made no major incursion into Germania until Marcus Aurelius (r. 161\u2013180) during the Marcomannic Wars.\nSome of the descendants of the vassal kingdoms, like the Suebi (by suzerainty), that Augustus tried to create in Germania to expand the and the Empire, were the ones that invaded Rome in the fourth and fifth centuries.\nBackground.\nGeopolitical situation.\nThe Roman Republic expanded rapidly in the first century BC, most notably under Julius Caesar, who conquered most of western Europe and parts of the British Isles in the Gallic Wars (58\u201350 BC). These mostly were against the Gauls, but also included battles with various Germanic tribes. Caesar twice crossed the Rhine river, but the engagements were inconclusive. His conquests ended as Caesar's civil war (49\u201345 BC) drew near.\nContinental Europe was mostly neglected by Rome for the next two decades, as power struggles wracked the Republic. Troops previously garrisoned in Gaul were pulled out in 31 BC for the showdown between Octavian and Mark Antony at the Battle of Actium. The Gauls promptly rebelled, and Roman control was not regained until 28 BC.\n27 BC saw drastic change for both Gaul and Rome as a whole. The Roman Republic reorganised into the Roman Empire, with Octavian the first emperor. Octavian, now styled Augustus, aimed to solidify control of Gaul by dividing the region into three smaller provinces that emphasised the strategic importance of the Rhine valley. Troops were kept near the Rhine, though policy towards the Germanic lands remains unclear. Two main theories exist. The first is that Augustus simply sought to cement the Rhine as the Northern border of the Empire; the second that the border was far more fluid, and that the troops were focused on maintaining order in the Empire more than on preventing Germanic intrusion. The Germanics operated with apparent impunity anyway, as exemplified by the crushing defeat in the Lollian disaster in 16 BC.\nThe Lollian disaster prompted a reorganisation of the legions in Gaul, which was completed by 12 BC, when Augustus sought finally to tame the Germanic tribes. He began by making his stepson Drusus I governor of Gaul. Drusus campaigned against the Germanics from 11\u20139 BC, earning a series of victories, despite considerable obstacles, before his untimely death in a riding accident in 9 BC. His elder brother and future emperor Tiberius was given command of Germany in 8 BC. Tiberius continued his brother's campaign against the Sugambri, extending \"de facto\", if not \"de jure\" Roman rule, but he fell out of political favour and chose exile in 6 BC. He was, in turn, succeeded by Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, who had been consul in 16 BC. Ahenobarbus suppressed a number of local uprisings and then crossed the Elbe river, the first and last Roman general to do so. As the turn of the century approached, the Romans felt secure about Germany, reassured by thriving cross-border trade and relative peace.\nIn early AD 6, Legatus Gaius Sentius Saturninus and Consul Legatus Marcus Aemilius Lepidus led a massive army of 13 legions and their entourage, totaling around 100,000 men (65,000 heavy infantry legionaries, 10,000\u201320,000 cavalrymen, archers, and 10,000\u201320,000 civilians) against Maroboduus, the king of the Marcomanni, who were a tribe of the Suebi.\nHowever, Tiberius was then forced to turn his attention to the \"Bellum Batonianum\", also known as the Great Illyrian Revolt, which broke out in the Balkan province of Illyricum. Led by Bato the Daesitiate, Bato the Breucian, Pinnes of Pannonia, and elements of the Marcomanni, it lasted nearly four years. Tiberius had to stop his campaign against Maroboduus and recognise him as king so that he could then send eight legions (VIII \"Augusta\", XV \"Apollinaris\", XX \"Valeria Victrix\", XXI \"Rapax\", XIII \"Gemina\", XIV \"Gemina\", XVI \"Gallica\" and an unknown unit) to crush the rebellion in the Balkans.\nAfter his return from Rome to Gaul, Arminius became a trusted advisor to Varus, the governor of the newly created Roman province of Germania, even as he secretly constructed an alliance of Germanic peoples that had traditionally been enemies. These probably included the Cherusci, Marsi, Chatti, and Bructeri. These were some of the fifty Germanic tribes at the time. Using the collective outrage over Varus' tyranny, insolence and cruelty to the conquered, Arminius was able to unite the disorganised groups who had submitted to Rome, and maintain the alliance until the most opportune moment to strike. Following Rome's transfer of forces to the Balkans, only three legions faced the Germanic tribesmen. This was the opportunity for Arminius to defeat Varus. While Varus was on his way from his summer camp west of the River Weser to winter quarters near the Rhine, he heard reports of a local rebellion; these had been fabricated by Arminius. Edward Shepherd Creasy writes that \"This was represented to Varus as an occasion which required his prompt attendance on the spot; but he was kept in studied ignorance of its being part of a concerted national rising; and he still looked on Arminius as his submissive vassal\".\nCommanders and their armies.\nPublius Quinctilius Varus.\nThe Varian disaster takes its name from Publius Quinctilius Varus, the Roman commander. Varus was a promising leader; Emperor Augustus appointed him \"quaestor\" in 22 BC as a young man, even though the office usually required the holder to be at least 30. He went on to command the XIX legion in 15 BC, and was elected junior consul. He was appointed governor of Africa in 8 BC and of Syria in 7 BC. The Syrian posting was prestigious, and a very difficult job due to political struggles in the Eastern Empire and its border nations. Varus acted to resolve the succession crisis at the death of Herod the Great in 4 BC, but his performance as governor is disputed by contemporary sources. Josephus (writing some decades after the fact) has a positive view of Varus, whereas Velleius Paterculus implicitly accuses him of corruption. Regardless, Varus married the Emperor's great-niece after his term as governor ended, which ensured him a place in the Emperor's inner circle. Varus likely remained with the Emperor in Rome until his appointment to the command in Germania in 7 AD. Michael McNally assesses that Varus was not assigned to Germania for his military abilities, but for his political acumen; this was likely sought by the Emperor to deal with the factionalism among Germanic tribes.\nVarus's name and deeds were known beyond the empire because of his ruthlessness, including crucifixion of insurgents. While he was feared by the people, he was highly respected by the Roman Senate. On the Rhine, he was in command of the XVII, XVIII, and XIX legions. These had previously been led by General Gaius Sentius Saturninus, who had been sent back to Rome after being awarded the . The other two legions in the winter-quarters of the army at were led by Varus' nephew, Lucius Nonius Asprenas, and perhaps Lucius Arruntius.\nVarus initially commanded five legions plus auxiliaries in Germania. In the early imperial period each legion at full strength had 4,800 men supported by 120 light escort/scouting cavalry. Combined usually with a group of engineers and officers, a legion was roughly 5,000 fighting men. This did not include the 1,200 non-combatant servants who were integrated into the legion. Varus's initial command of about 25,000 (not counting auxiliaries) represented some 20% of the Roman frontline army. But it is unclear how many men were truly under his command at the battle of the Teutoburg Forest; estimates generally range from 20,000 to 30,000. Of his five starting legions, only three were under his command at the battle (~15,000 men), supported by nine small auxiliary units (~4,500 men). Winter attrition due to casualties, illness, and other causes would have sapped the legions' strength. The Roman historian Cassius Dio assumed that a large number of civilians were part of the camp following. But McNally finds this unlikely. Recent reforms had required that legionaries be unmarried, which meant that families were no longer part of the camp following. McNally puts the likely number of civilians at a few hundred, mostly merchants who followed the army. Assuming 10% winter attrition, and an auxiliary force of about 4,000 after attrition, McNally comes up with 17,000 combatants, supported by roughly 3,800 servant non-combatants. Combined with the civilians, the army would have numbered about 21,000 at the start of campaigning, but was probably smaller by the time of the battle, as further attrition combined with the need to detach garrisons along the way would have sapped the army's strength.\nThe main Roman army was highly professional and outfitted by the state. They were given standardised weapons and armour, consisting of a \"gladius\" (shortsword), a large shield, a \"pilum\" (javelin), a helmet, a mail shirt, and some segmented armour. The auxiliary units were not outfitted by the Romans, and instead would have represented the equipment and fighting styles of their homelands, which put them much on par with the Germanic troops.\nArminius.\nThe Germanic coalition was led by Arminius, of the Cherusci tribe. Arminius was in a strong position to understand Roman tactics and strategy: though he was born in Germania, he was taken hostage by the Romans after Drusus defeated the tribe in combat in 8 BC, when Arminius would have been about 10 years old. He received an aristocratic education in Rome, as he was the son of a nobleman\u2014even if he was still a hostage. When he came of age, he joined the \"ordo equester\" (the Roman cavalry), which would later lead to his appointment as a commander of Roman auxiliaries. By 4 AD he was serving in Pannonia (in the northwestern Balkan states). Soon after, he returned to his homeland in Germania, still nominally loyal to Rome.\nMcNally suggests that two important events shaped Arminius's view of the Romans: an ambush in 11 BC led by the Cherusci against Drusus, and Drusus' victory over the Cherusci in 8 BC. In the ambush in 11 BC, the Cherusci had trapped Drusus' army in unfavourable terrain, and the Romans escaped only with great difficulty. Drusus' victory in 8 BC would have been unforgettable to Arminius, who had been made a hostage because of it. From these events, McNally argues that Arminius surmised a key lesson: \"the Romans could be defeated, but only in a situation where their tactical flexibility and discipline could not be brought to bear.\"\nThe size of Arminius's forces is a guessing game at best since no written records of the Germanic peoples survive. Estimates thus vary widely based on the starting assumptions. Historian Adrian Murdoch suggests a force of 25,000. Historian Peter Wells suggests that the army may have pulled from a large area, and gives a range of estimates between 17,000 and 100,000, but suggests that 18,000 were probably involved at the final stage of the battle when the Romans were routed. McNally finds fault with Wells's demographic calculation style, finding his upper estimate of 100,000 to be very unlikely. Historian Hans Delbr\u00fcck suggested that each tribe involved probably had 6,000 to 8,000 fighting men, for a total in the 20,000 to 30,000 range.\nDelbr\u00fcck notes that these troops were not just mere farmers; they were experienced soldiers in their own right, even if not outfitted by the state as the Romans were. But the Germanic army was generally worse outfitted than the Romans. Most had no armour and would have been limited to a simple shield and a hunting spear or axe. There was a gradation in equipment quality according to the wealth and status of the fighter. Those fighters who would have held command roles or been part of a chief's guard would have carried a heavy spear and a number of javelins, along with various other secondary weapons, as well as high-quality shields. Still, armour was very rare and would have been acquired as spoils of war from defeated Romans, or perhaps from time serving as a Roman auxiliary.\nLead-up to battle.\nA simple campaign.\nAncient battles were constrained by the seasons and weather. Typically, the campaigning season began in March, and ended by October, at which point armies would return to winter camps. Over the winter of 8 to 9 AD, Varus planned a simple campaign for the coming year. The disparate elements of the army would meet at Vetera (modern day Xanten, Germany), cross the Rhine, march to Cherusci territory while resupplying garrisons on the way, and then set up a summer camp in nominally pacified Cherusci lands from which to base summer operations.\nBut unbeknownst to Varus, he had already been betrayed. The idea of setting up a summer camp in Cherusci lands was a ploy by Arminius, who was still Varus's trusted confidant. By being in the homeland of Arminius, the Cherusci could carefully observe the Romans during the summer, and the Romans would have to make a longer trek back to their winter headquarters. Then, while on the long march back, the Romans could be ambushed in terrain favourable to Arminius. It is unknown as to when Arminius decided to plan an attack against Rome and its forces; it could have occurred during his time as a youth during his \u201cRomanisation\u201d as a hostage, or even as late as his service in Germania under Varus. Regardless, his mind was made up by early 9 AD when he began deceiving Varus and recruiting Germanic leaders and warriors to his cause. It is doubtful that Arminius imagined he would strike a total victory against the Romans, and thus he had to build a coalition of tribes together in order to wage what could have been a protracted war.\nSummer operations.\nThe Roman army moved out of winter camps sometime in March, and followed Varus's plan. Logistical challenges beset the army and security was lax. The location of the summer camp is unknown, but probably near or at what is now Minden, Germany. Historical sources suggest that Varus waged little to no military action that summer, and instead focused on holding court and dealing with the Germanic tribes in a political and legal sense. McNally finds the accounts to be unreliable on some points, noting that the only contemporary chronicler who describes the summer was Paterculus, and that Paterculus had reason to dislike Varus. Other accounts in turn relied on Paterculus's account, and thus had Paterculus's bias. At any rate, the summer was probably typical for the troops, whose time would have been spent drilling or engaging in civil engineering projects such as strengthening local roads and fortifications.\nThe summer proved to be crucial for Arminius, who along with his auxiliaries, was attached to the main Roman army. He bided his time during the early part of the summer, but the clock was running out, and he still needed to orchestrate an ambush. Thus in July, he ordered some of his allies to start raiding the Romans. Then, he counselled Varus to split off a detachment of troops to go put down unrest. Varus acceded, thereby splitting his own forces. Arminius further arranged for his own Cherusci auxiliaries to find Roman work parties, approach them as if nothing was unusual, and then betray the Romans while in their midst. McNally chastises Varus for not improving security or otherwise realising that a larger plan was afoot.\nArminius's carefully laid plans nearly unravelled when his father-in-law, Segestes, informed Varus of Arminius's treachery. But Varus disbelieved this report, perhaps because Segestes had not approved of the marriage of his daughter and thus bore a grudge against Arminius.\nVarus's choice.\nAs late summer arrived, escalating unrest became the chief concern. Other counsellors to Varus advised that there was not enough time left in the season to put down unrest and also make it back to winter camp. An early Roman retreat back to camp would have foiled Arminius's plans, as the Romans would not only leave before the Germanic troops could be marshalled, but the Romans would also retreat along the same well-guarded path they had come in on. In a desperate gamble, Arminius suggested that instead of retracing the army's path, they could achieve both goals if they went on campaign against the Angrivarii. By going through Angrivarii territory, the route back would be shorter, and the Romans would also be able to put down the revolt. The otherwise boring summer may have increased Varus's willingness to engage in action, and he chose to follow Arminius's plan.\nOn the morning of September 7, 9 AD, the Roman army mustered to move out. The muster was combined with the third payday of the year, which resulted in large numbers of coins being distributed to the army. The high density of coins would, some two thousand years later, serve as an archaeological marker of the battle site. The morale of the troops was boosted by word that high command authorised looting on the Angrivarii campaign, given that the army would be operating beyond supply lines.\nThat evening, Arminius told Varus that he was breaking off to finish the muster of the Cheruscii auxiliaries, but would return with the main army in two or three days. It was the men's final meeting. Arminius left behind a small number of Cheruscii, nominally to act as guides, but their true purpose was to act as spies. The loss of Arminius cut the size of the Roman army by a quarter and deeply curtailed its scouting abilities. Arminius himself hurriedly rode northward to gather the troops of the Angrivarii and Bructeri.\nBattles.\nOn the morning of 8 September, the Roman army decamped and continued snaking its way through the area's thick forest, which slowed movement and strung the army out at an increasing distance. Arminius now only had to ensure that the Romans worked their way towards Kalkriese, where the Angrivarii lay in ambush. To that end, his Bructerii allies attacked the Roman army along its length in the late morning.\nThe line of march was now stretched out perilously long\u2014between . It was in this state when it came under attack by Germanic warriors armed with swords, large lances and narrow-bladed short spears called \"fremae\". The attackers surrounded the entire Roman army and rained down javelins on the intruders. It was a brief skirmish, aimed at tiring out the Roman troops and causing maximum damage to their supplies. The Bructerii withdrew quickly, likely taking the Cheruscii spies embedded in the Roman army with them.\nThe Romans' luck went from bad to worse as a torrential downpour began. Unable to advance, Varus ordered the army to make camp. A sturdy camp was erected, and Varus called a war council. Casualty reports indicated only light losses, but the baggage trains and scout cavalry were shown to be particularly vulnerable.\nThe Romans undertook a night march to escape, but marched into another trap that Arminius had set at the foot of Kalkriese Hill. There, a sandy, open strip on which the Romans could march was constricted by the hill, so that there was a gap of only about between the woods and the swampland at the edge of the Great Bog. The road was further blocked by a trench and, towards the forest, an earthen wall had been built along the roadside, permitting the Germanic alliance to attack the Romans from cover. The Romans made a desperate attempt to storm the wall, but failed, and the highest-ranking officer next to Varus, \"Legatus\" Numonius Vala, abandoned the troops by riding off with the cavalry. His retreat was in vain, however, as he was overtaken by the Germanic cavalry and killed shortly thereafter, according to Velleius Paterculus. The Germanic warriors then stormed the field and slaughtered the disintegrating Roman forces. Varus committed suicide, and Velleius reports that one commander, \"Praefectus\" Ceionius, surrendered, then later took his own life, while his colleague \"Praefectus\" Eggius died leading his doomed troops.\nRoman casualties have been estimated at 15,000\u201320,000 dead, and many of the officers were said to have taken their own lives by falling on their swords in the approved manner. Tacitus wrote that many officers were sacrificed by the Germanic forces as part of their indigenous religious ceremonies, cooked in pots and their bones used for rituals. Others were ransomed and some common soldiers appear to have been enslaved.\nAll Roman accounts stress the completeness of the Roman defeat, and the finds at Kalkriese of 6,000 pieces of Roman equipment, but only a single item that is clearly Germanic (part of a spur), suggest few Germanic losses. However, the victors would most likely have removed the bodies of their fallen and their practice of burying their warriors' battle gear with them would have contributed to the lack of Germanic relics. Additionally, as many as several thousand Germanic soldiers were deserting militiamen and wore Roman armour, and thus would appear to be \"Roman\" in the archaeological digs. It is known, too, that the Germanic peoples wore perishable organic material, such as leather, and less metal than the Roman legionaries.\nThe victory was followed by a clean sweep of all Roman forts, garrisons and cities (of which there were at least two) east of the Rhine; the two Roman legions remaining in Germania, commanded by Varus' nephew Lucius Nonius Asprenas, simply tried to hold the Rhine. One fort, Aliso, most likely located in today's Haltern am See, fended off the Germanic alliance for many weeks, perhaps even a few months. After the situation became untenable, the garrison under Lucius Caedicius, accompanied by survivors of Teutoburg Forest, broke through the siege and reached the Rhine. They had resisted long enough for Nonius Asprenas to have organised the Roman defence on the Rhine with two legions and Tiberius to have arrived with a new army, together preventing Arminius from crossing the Rhine and invading Gaul.\nAftermath.\nUpon hearing of the defeat, the Emperor Augustus, according to the Roman historian Suetonius in \"The Twelve Caesars\", was so shaken that he stood butting his head against the walls of his palace, repeatedly shouting:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;(\"Quintilius Varus, give me back my legions!\")\nThe legion numbers XVII, XVIII and XIX were not used again by the Romans. This was in contrast to other legions that were reestablished after suffering defeat.\nThe battle abruptly ended the period of triumphant Roman expansion that followed the end of the Civil Wars forty years earlier. Augustus' stepson Tiberius took effective control, and prepared for the continuation of the war. Legio \"II Augusta\", \"XX Valeria Victrix\" and \"XIII Gemina\" were sent to the Rhine to replace the lost legions.\nArminius sent Varus's severed head to Maroboduus, king of the Marcomanni, the other most powerful Germanic ruler, with the offer of an anti-Roman alliance. Maroboduus declined, sending the head to Rome for burial, and remained neutral throughout the ensuing war. Only thereafter did a brief, inconclusive war break out between the two Germanic leaders.\nRoman retaliation.\nGermanicus' campaign against the Germanic coalition.\nThough the shock at the slaughter was enormous, the Romans immediately began a slow, systematic process of preparing for the reconquest of the country. In 14 AD, just after Augustus' death and the accession of his heir and stepson Tiberius, a massive raid was conducted by the new emperor's nephew Germanicus. He attacked the Marsi with the element of surprise. The Bructeri, Tubanti and Usipeti were roused by the attack and ambushed Germanicus on the way to his winter quarters, but were defeated with heavy losses.\nThe next year was marked by two major campaigns and several smaller battles with a large army estimated at 55,000\u201370,000 men, backed by naval forces. In spring 15 AD, \"Legatus\" Caecina Severus invaded the Marsi a second time with about 25,000\u201330,000 men, causing great havoc. Meanwhile, Germanicus' troops had built a fort on Mount Taunus from where he marched with about 30,000\u201335,000 men against the Chatti. Many of the men fled across a river and dispersed themselves in the forests. Germanicus next marched on Mattium (\"caput gentis\", capital city) and burned it to the ground. After initial successful skirmishes in summer 15 AD, including the capture of Arminius' wife Thusnelda, the army visited the site of the first battle. According to Tacitus, they found heaps of bleached bones and severed skulls nailed to trees, which they buried, \"...looking on all as kinsfolk and of their own blood...\". At a location Tacitus calls the \"pontes longi\" (\"long causeways\"), in boggy lowlands somewhere near the Ems, Arminius' troops attacked the Romans. Arminius initially caught Germanicus' cavalry in a trap, inflicting heavy casualties, but the Roman infantry reinforced the rout and checked them. The fighting lasted for two days, with neither side achieving a decisive victory. Germanicus' forces withdrew and returned to the Rhine.\nUnder Germanicus, the Romans marched another army, along with allied Germanic auxiliaries, into Germania in 16 AD. He forced a crossing of the Weser near modern Minden, suffering losses to a Germanic skirmishing force, and forced Arminius' army to stand in open battle at Idistaviso in the Battle of the Weser River. Germanicus' legions inflicted huge casualties on the Germanic armies. A final battle was fought at the Angrivarian Wall west of modern Hanover, repeating the pattern of high Germanic fatalities, which forced them to flee beyond the Elbe. Germanicus, having defeated the forces between the Rhine and the Elbe, then ordered Caius Silius to march against the Chatti with a mixed force of three thousand cavalry and thirty thousand infantry and lay waste to their territory, while Germanicus, with a larger army, invaded the Marsi for the third time and devastated their land, encountering no resistance.\nWith his main objectives reached and winter approaching, Germanicus ordered his army back to their winter camps, with the fleet incurring some damage from a storm in the North Sea. Afterwards, a few more raids across the Rhine resulted in the recovery of two of the three legions' eagles lost in 9 AD: one Legion Eagle was recovered from the Marsi in 14 AD; the Legion XIX Eagle was recovered from the Bructeri in 15 AD by troops under Lucius Stertinius. Tiberius ordered the Roman forces to halt and withdraw across the Rhine. Germanicus was recalled to Rome and informed by Tiberius that he would be given a triumph and reassigned to a new command.\nGermanicus' campaign had been taken to avenge the Teutoburg slaughter and also partially in reaction to indications of mutinous intent amongst his troops. Arminius, who had been considered a very real threat to stability by Rome, was now defeated. Once his Germanic coalition had been broken and honour avenged, the huge cost and risk of keeping the Roman army operating beyond the Rhine was not worth any likely benefit to be gained. Tacitus, with some bitterness, claims that Tiberius' decision to recall Germanicus was driven by his jealousy of the glory Germanicus had acquired, and that an additional campaign the next summer would have concluded the war and facilitated a Roman occupation of territories between the Rhine and the Elbe.\nLater campaigns.\nThe third legionary standard was recovered in 41 AD by Publius Gabinius from the Chauci during the reign of Claudius, brother of Germanicus. Possibly the recovered \"aquilae\" were placed within the Temple of Mars Ultor (\"Mars the Avenger\"), the ruins of which stand today in the Forum of Augustus by the Via dei Fori Imperiali in Rome.\nThe last chapter was recounted by the historian Tacitus. Around 50 AD, bands of Chatti invaded Roman territory in Germania Superior, possibly an area in Hesse east of the Rhine that the Romans appear to have still held, and began to plunder. The Roman commander, Publius Pomponius Secundus, and a legionary force supported by Roman cavalry recruited auxiliaries from the Vangiones and Nemetes. They attacked the Chatti from both sides and defeated them, and joyfully found and liberated Roman prisoners, including some from Varus' legions who had been held for 40 years.\nArminius continued to fight against the Romans, but the conflict remained a stalemate. He was poisoned by his fellow Germanics in 21 AD, possibly by his own family, who feared his increasing autocracy.\nImpact on Roman expansion.\nFrom the time of the rediscovery of Roman sources in the 15th century, the Battles of the Teutoburg Forest have been seen as a pivotal event resulting in the end of Roman expansion into northern Europe, ending at the Rhine. This theory became prevalent in the 19th century, and formed an integral part of the mythology of German nationalism.\nMore recently some scholars tempered this interpretation with a number of reasons why the Roman Empire chose to stop its expansion at the Rhine, instead of other rivers in Germania.\nLogistically, armies on the Rhine could be supplied from the Mediterranean via the Rh\u00f4ne, Sa\u00f4ne and Mosel, with a brief stretch of portage. Armies on the Elbe, on the other hand, would have to be supplied either by extensive overland routes or ships travelling the hazardous Atlantic seas.\nEconomically, the Rhine was already supporting towns and sizeable villages at the time of the Gallic conquest. Northern Germania was far less developed, possessed fewer villages, and had little food surplus and thus a far lesser capacity for tribute. Thus the Rhine was both significantly more accessible from Rome and better suited to supply sizeable garrisons than the regions beyond.\nPractically, the Romans were mostly interested in conquering areas that had a high degree of self-sufficiency which could provide a tax base for them to extract from. Most of Germania Magna did not have the higher level of urbanism at this time as in comparison with some Celtic Gallic settlements, which were in many ways already integrated into the Roman trade network in the case of southern Gaul.\nIn a cost/benefit analysis, the prestige to be gained by conquering more territory was outweighed by the lack of financial benefits accorded to conquest.\nRoman-controlled territory was limited to the modern states of Austria, Baden-W\u00fcrttemberg, southern Bavaria, southern Hesse, Saarland and the Rhineland as Roman provinces of Noricum, Raetia and Germania. The Roman provinces in western Germany, Germania Inferior (with the capital situated at Colonia Claudia Ara Agrippinensium, modern Cologne) and Germania Superior (with its capital at Mogontiacum, modern Mainz), were formally established in 85 AD, after a long period of military occupation beginning in the reign of the emperor Augustus. Nonetheless, the Severan-era historian Cassius Dio is emphatic that Varus had been conducting the latter stages of full colonisation of a greater German province, which has been partially confirmed by recent archaeological discoveries such as the Varian-era Roman provincial settlement at Waldgirmes Forum.\nWhile the battle set an outer boundary on the \"March of the Roman Empire\", and the territory was not officially claimed, Roman punitive campaigns into Germania continued and they were intended less for conquest or expansion than they were to force the Germanic alliance into some kind of political structure that would comply with Roman diplomatic efforts. The most famous of those incursions, led by the Roman emperor Maximinus Thrax, resulted in a Roman victory in 235 AD at the Battle at the Harzhorn, which is located in the modern German state of Lower Saxony, east of the Weser river, between the towns of Kalefeld and Bad Gandersheim.\nAfter Arminius was defeated and subsequently murdered in 21 AD by opponents within his own tribe, Rome tried to control Germania beyond the Limes indirectly, by appointing client kings. Italicus, a nephew of Arminius, was appointed king of the Cherusci, Vangio and Sido became vassal princes of the powerful Suebi, and the Quadian client king Vannius was imposed as a ruler of the Marcomanni.\nAfter the Marcomannic Wars, the Romans managed to occupy the provinces of Marcomannia and Sarmatia, corresponding to modern Czech Republic, Slovakia and Bavaria/Austria/Hungary north of the Danube. Final plans to annex those territories were discarded by Commodus deeming the occupation of the region too expensive for the imperial treasury.\nBetween 91 and 92 AD during the reign of Emperor Domitian, the Romans sent a military detachment to assist their client Lugii against the Suebi in what is now Poland.\nSite of the battle.\nThe theories about the location of the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest have emerged in large numbers especially since the beginning of the 16th century, when Tacitus' works \"Germania\" and \"Annales\" were rediscovered. The assumptions about the possible place of the battle are based essentially on place names and river names, as well as on the description of the topography by the ancient writers, on investigations of the prehistoric road network, and on archaeological finds. Only a few assumptions are scientifically based theories.\nThe prehistorian and provincial archaeologist Harald Petrikovits combined the several hundred theories in 1966 into four units:\nFor almost 2,000 years, the site of the battle was unidentified. The main clue to its location was an allusion to the \"saltus Teutoburgiensis\" in section i.60\u201362 of Tacitus' \"Annals\", an area \"not far\" from the land between the upper reaches of the Lippe and Ems rivers in central Westphalia. During the 19th century, theories as to the site abounded, and the followers of one theory successfully argued for a long wooded ridge called the Osning, near Bielefeld. This was then renamed the Teutoburg Forest.\nLate 20th-century research and excavations were sparked by finds in 1987 by a British amateur archaeologist, Major Tony Clunn, who was casually prospecting at Kalkriese Hill () with a metal detector in the hope of finding \"the odd Roman coin\". He discovered coins from the reign of Augustus (and none later), and some ovoid leaden Roman sling bolts. Kalkriese is a village administratively part of the city of Bramsche, on the north slope fringes of the Wiehen, a ridge-like range of hills in Lower Saxony north of Osnabr\u00fcck. This site, some north west of Osning, was first suggested by the 19th-century historian Theodor Mommsen, renowned for his fundamental work on Roman history.\nInitial systematic excavations were carried out by the archaeological team of the \"Kulturhistorisches Museum Osnabr\u00fcck\" under the direction of Professor Wolfgang Schl\u00fcter from 1987. Once the dimensions of the project had become apparent, a foundation was created to organise future excavations and to build and operate a museum on the site, and to centralise publicity and documentation. Since 1990 the excavations have been directed by Susanne Wilbers-Rost.\nExcavations have revealed battle debris along a corridor almost from east to west and little more than wide. A long zig-zagging wall of peat turves and packed sand had apparently been constructed beforehand: concentrations of battle debris in front of it and a dearth behind it testify to the Romans' inability to breach the Germanic tribes' strong defence. Human remains appear to corroborate Tacitus' account of the Roman legionaries' later burial. Coins minted with the countermark , distributed by Varus, also support the identification of the site. As a result, Kalkriese is now perceived to be an event of the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest.\nThe Museum und Park Kalkriese includes a large outdoor area with trails leading to a re-creation of part of the earthen wall from the battle and other outdoor exhibits. An observation tower, which holds most of the indoor exhibits, allows visitors to get an overview of the battle site. A second building includes the ticket centre, museum store and a restaurant. The museum houses a large number of artefacts found at the site, including fragments of studded sandals legionaries lost, spearheads, and a Roman officer's ceremonial face-mask, which was originally silver-plated.\nGerman nationalism.\nThe legacy of the Germanic victory was resurrected with the recovery of the histories of Tacitus in the 15th century, when the figure of Arminius, now known as \"Hermann\" (a mistranslation of the name \"Armin\" which has often been incorrectly attributed to Martin Luther), became a nationalistic symbol of \"Pan-Germanism\". From then on, Teutoburg Forest has been seen as a pivotal clash that ended Roman expansion into northern Europe. This notion became especially prevalent in the 19th century, when it formed an integral part of the mythology of German nationalism.\nThe location of the site of the Battle bore unique political meaning to the German states during the 19th century. Michael McNally notes that the French had found a hero of the Roman age in Vercingetorix, the commander of the Gallic grand coalition during the Gallic Wars. In 1865, they had erected a monument to Vercing\u00e9torix at the site of his last stand. Because Julius Caesar had written extensively about the Gallic Wars, the locations of the battles of the Gallic Wars were easily found. But Germany, in seeking a similar national hero, found that the site of the Varian Disaster was not so easily placed. A monument to the battle was begun in 1841, outside the town of Detmold, on the nearby summit of Grotenburg (also known as Teutberg). Finished in 1875, the statue atop it looked west, to France, a reflection of the rivalry between the two nations.\nAs a symbol of unified Romantic nationalism, the \"Hermannsdenkmal\", a monument to Hermann surmounted by a statue, was erected in a forested area near Detmold, believed at that time to be the site of the battle. Paid for largely out of private funds, the monument remained unfinished for decades and was not completed until 1875, after the Franco-Prussian War of 1870\u201371 unified the country. The completed monument was then a symbol of conservative German nationalism.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\nAncient sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\n20th century.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39882", "revid": "2842084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39882", "title": "Howard K. Smith", "text": "American news anchor\nHoward Kingsbury Smith (May 12, 1914 \u2013 February 15, 2002) was an American journalist, radio reporter, television anchorman, political commentator, and film actor. He was one of the original members of the team of war correspondents known as the Murrow Boys.\nEarly life.\nSmith was born in Ferriday in Concordia Parish in eastern Louisiana near Natchez, Mississippi.\nEarly career and CBS years.\nWorld War II.\nUpon graduating, Smith worked for the \"New Orleans Item\", with United Press in London, and with \"The New York Times\". In January 1940, Smith was sent to Berlin, where he joined the Columbia Broadcasting System under Edward R. Murrow. He visited Hitler's mountain retreat at Berchtesgaden and interviewed many leading Nazis, including Hitler himself, Schutzstaffel or \"SS\" leader Heinrich Himmler and Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels.\nHe was one of the last American reporters to leave Berlin before Germany and the United States went to war. His 1942 book, \"Last Train from Berlin: An Eye-Witness Account of Germany at War\" describes his observations from Berlin in the year after the departure of \"Berlin Diary\" author William L. Shirer. \"Last Train from Berlin\" became an American best-seller and was reprinted in 2001, shortly before Smith's death.\nSmith became a significant member of the \"Murrow Boys\" that made CBS the dominant broadcast news organization of the era. In May 1945, he returned to Berlin to recap the German surrender.\nPost-war.\nIn 1946, Smith went to London for CBS with the title of chief European correspondent. In 1947, he made a long broadcasting tour of most of the nations of Europe, including behind the Iron Curtain. In 1949, Knopf published his \"The State of Europe\", a 408-page country-by-country survey of Europe that drew on these experiences and that argued \"both the American and the Russian policies are mistaken\"; he advocated more \"social reform\" for Western Europe and more \"political liberty\" for Eastern Europe.\nDespite these criticisms of Soviet policies, Smith was one of 151 alleged Communist sympathizers named in the \"Red Channels\" report issued in June 1950 at the beginning of the Red Scare, effectively placing him on the Hollywood blacklist.\nBeginning on January 11, 1959, Smith moderated \"Behind the News with Howard K. Smith\", a CBS-TV program \"analying news events and the significance of issues in the news\". The sustaining program was broadcast on Sundays from 6 to 6:30 p.m. Eastern Time.\nCivil Rights reporting: Who Speaks for Birmingham?\nReporting on civil-rights riots in Birmingham in the early 1960s, Smith revealed the conspiracy that existed between police commissioner Bull Connor and the KKK to beat up black people and Freedom Riders. He planned to end his report \"Who Speaks for Birmingham?\" (broadcast date: May 18, 1961 with a quote from Edmund Burke, \"The only thing necessary for the triumph of evil is for good men to do nothing,\" but the CBS lawyers intervened. Nonetheless, the documentary caused a stir (leading CBS to be sued and its Birmingham TV station to disaffiliate), and because his contract with CBS forbade editorializing, Smith was suspended and subsequently fired by CBS President William S. Paley.\nABC, 1962\u20131979.\nOn June 5, 1968, Smith and fellow newsman Bill Lawrence were anchoring coverage of the California presidential primary that had stretched to 3\u00a0am. New York time. As the closing credits for the special were airing, word came that United States Senator Robert F. Kennedy of New York had been shot at the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles. ABC simply showed a wide shot of the chaotic newsroom for several minutes until Smith was able to confirm the initial story and go back on the air with a special report. He and Lawrence remained at their anchor desks for several more hours for reports of Kennedy's condition.\nIn the summer of 1968, Smith moderated a series of debates on ABC between conservative journalist William F. Buckley Jr. and liberal author Gore Vidal.\nIn 1969, the veteran reporter became the co-anchor of the \"ABC Evening News,\" first with Frank Reynolds, then the following year with another CBS alumnus, Harry Reasoner. He began making increasingly conservative commentaries, in particular a hard-line stance in support of the Vietnam War. He contrasted United States President Lyndon B. Johnson's decisive stance in Vietnam with the international failure to take preemptive action against Hitler. During this period, his son, future ABC newsman, Jack Smith (April 25, 1945 \u2013 April 7, 2004), was serving with the U.S. Army 7th Cavalry Regiment in South Vietnam and fought at the Battle of Ia Drang. These commentaries endeared him to President Nixon, who rewarded him with a rare, hour-long, one-on-one interview in 1971, at the height of the administration's animus against major newspapers, CBS, and NBC, despite Smith's having broadcast his \"political obituary\" only nine years earlier.\nDuring the 1972 presidential campaign, a letter was published that Smith had written to Democratic United States Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine, indicating Smith's full support for Muskie. The endorsement was written on stationery with ABC's letterhead. Nothing ever came of this controversy, however, and Smith kept his job. Notwithstanding his past temporary friendly relations with Nixon (who defeated U.S. Senator George S. McGovern of South Dakota for re-election), Smith became the first national television commentator to call for Nixon's resignation over Watergate.\nSmith remained as co-anchor at ABC until 1975, after which Reasoner anchored solo until Barbara Walters joined the broadcast a year later. Smith continued as an analyst until 1979; he left the network nearing full retirement, and as the Roone Arledge era was beginning at ABC News. Sources say that Smith was embittered over the reduction in time allowed for his commentaries and hence resigned after he criticized the revamped \"World News Tonight\" format as a \"Punch and Judy show.\"\nAwards and film roles.\nAmong honors which Smith received over the years were DuPont Awards in 1955 and 1963, a Sigma Delta Chi Award for radio journalism in 1957, and an award from the American Jewish Congress in 1960. In 1962 he received the Paul White Award from the Radio Television Digital News Association.\nSmith also appeared in a number of films, often as himself; \"The Best Man\" (1964), \"The Candidate\" (1972), \"The President's Plane Is Missing\" (1973, a made-for-television production of the Robert J. Serling novel of the same name), \"Nashville\" (1975), \"Network\" (1976), \"The Pink Panther Strikes Again\" (scenes cut) (1976), \"Close Encounters of the Third Kind\" (1977), \"The Pursuit of D. B. Cooper\" (1981), \"The Best Little Whorehouse in Texas\" (1982), \"The Odd Candidate\" (1974) episode of the television series \"The Odd Couple\" (playing himself), the \"Kill Oscar\" episode (1976) of \"The Bionic Woman\" (playing himself anchoring an ABC newscast), and both \"V\" (1983) and the subsequent 1984 television series. He appeared as the Narrator in the 1987 film \"Escape from Sobibor\".\nAlong with \"Last Train from Berlin\", he wrote three other books, \"The Population Explosion\" (1960), the children's book \"Washington, D.C.: The Story of our Nation's Capital\" (1967), and a memoir \"Events Leading Up to My Death: The Life of a Twentieth-Century Reporter\" (1996).\nPersonal life.\nSmith met his future wife, Danish news reporter Benedicte Traberg, while working in Nazi Germany in 1941. Because she was only 20 at the time, she had to return to Denmark for parental approval, but the couple re-united three months later in Berne, Switzerland. The couple were married until Smith's death in 2002. Benedicte died in 2008. Their son Jack was an ABC correspondent who received Peabody and Emmy awards for his coverage of technology. Having left journalism for a job in Silicon Valley, Jack died at age 58 in 2004 of pancreatic cancer in Marin County, California.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39884", "revid": "1071745", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39884", "title": "Cockney", "text": "Dialect of English spoken in London\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nCockney is a dialect of the English language, mainly spoken in London and its environs, particularly by Londoners from working-class and lower-middle-class families. The term \"Cockney\" is also used as a demonym for a person from the East End, or, traditionally, born within earshot of Bow Bells.\nEstuary English is an intermediate accent between Cockney and Received Pronunciation, also widely spoken in and around London, as well as in wider South Eastern England. In multicultural areas of London, the Cockney dialect is, to an extent, being replaced by Multicultural London English\u2014a new form of speech with significant Cockney influence.\nNomenclature.\nEtymology of \"Cockney\".\nThe earliest recorded use of the term is 1362 in passus VI of William Langland's \"Piers Plowman\", where it is used to mean \"a small, misshapen egg\", from Middle English \"coken\" + \"ey\" (\"a cock's egg\"). Concurrently, the mythical land of luxury Cockaigne (attested from 1305) appeared under a variety of spellings, including \"Cockayne\", \"Cocknay\", and \"Cockney\", and became humorously associated with the English capital London.\nThe meaning of \"Cockney\" comes from its use among rural Englishmen (attested in 1520) as a pejorative term for effeminate town-dwellers, from an earlier general sense (encountered in \"The Reeve's Tale\" of Geoffrey Chaucer's \"The Canterbury Tales\" c.\u20091386) of a \"cokenay\" as \"a child tenderly brought up\" and, by extension, \"an effeminate fellow\" or \"a milksop\". This may have developed from those sources or separately, alongside such terms as \"cock\" and \"cocker\" which both have the sense of \"to make a nestle-cock\u00a0... or the darling of\", \"to indulge or pamper\". By 1600, this meaning of \"Cockney\" was being particularly associated with the Bow Bells area. In 1617, the travel writer Fynes Moryson stated in his \"Itinerary\" that \"Londoners, and all within the sound of Bow Bells, are in reproach called Cockneys.\" The same year, John Minsheu included the term in this newly restricted sense in his dictionary \"Ductor in Linguas\".\nRegion.\nInitially, when London consisted of little more than the walled City, the term applied to all Londoners, and this lingered into the 19th century. As the city grew, the definitions shifted to alternatives based on dialect or more specific areas; the East End and the area within earshot of Bow Bells.\nThe East End of London and the vicinity of Bow Bells are often used interchangeably, representing the identity of the East End. The region within the audible range of the bells varies depending on the direction of the wind, but there is a correlation between the two geographic definitions under the typical prevailing wind conditions. The term can apply to East Londoners who do not speak the dialect and those who do.\nLondon's East End.\nThe traditional core districts of the East End include the Middlesex towns of Bethnal Green, Whitechapel, Spitalfields, Stepney, Wapping, Limehouse, Poplar, Haggerston, Shoreditch, Hackney, Hoxton, Bow and Mile End. Nearly all of these areas had originally been part of the Manor and Parish of Stepney. In the 1600s and 1700s a Cockney's Feast, also later known as the Stepney Feast was held in Stepney each May. The purpose of the event was to raise money so that Stepney boys could be apprenticed in the maritime trades.\nThe informal definition of the East End has gradually expanded to areas including as Poplar, Stratford, West Ham and Canning Town, as these have formed part of London's growing conurbation.\nBow Bells' audible range.\nThe church of St Mary-le-Bow is one of the oldest, largest, and historically most important churches in the City of London. The definition based on being born within earshot of the bells, cast at the Whitechapel Bell Foundry, reflects the early definition of the term as relating to all of London.\nThe audible range of the Bells is dependent on geography and wind conditions. The east is mostly low lying, a factor which combines with the strength and regularity of the prevailing wind, blowing from west-south-west for nearly three-quarters of the year, to carry the sound further to the east, and more often. A 2012 study showed that in the 19th century, and under typical conditions, the sound of the bells would carry as far as Clapton, Bow and Stratford in the east but only as far as Southwark to the south and Holborn in the west. An earlier study suggested the sound would have carried even further. The 2012 study showed that in the modern era, noise pollution means that the bells can only be heard as far as Shoreditch. According to legend, Dick Whittington heard the bells 4.5 miles away at Highgate Hill, in what is now north London. The studies mean that it is credible that Whittington might have heard them on one of the infrequent days that the wind blows from the south.\nThe church of St Mary-le-Bow was destroyed in 1666 by the Great Fire of London and rebuilt by Sir Christopher Wren. Although the bells were destroyed again in 1941 in the Blitz, they had fallen silent on 13 June 1940 as part of the British anti-invasion preparations of World War II. Before they were replaced in 1961, there was a period when, by the \"within earshot\" definition, no \"Bow Bell\" Cockneys could be born. The use of such a literal definition produces other problems since the area around the church is no longer residential, and the noise pollution in that area combined with the absence of maternity wards there means that few are born within earshot.\nBlurred definitions.\nRegional definitions are sometimes blurred. Ahead of the 2024\u201325 season, West Ham United released an away shirt which it called the \"Cockney Kit\". The promotional material celebrated a Cockney identity for East London based on a territory rather than dialect.\nThe kit featured the Bow Bells on the reverse as a symbol of the area, and the promotional video included the church of St Mary-le-Bow and parts of East London within earshot of the bells\u00a0\u2013 such as Brick Lane, Upper Clapton and Stratford\u00a0\u2013 as well as a scene in Romford, in suburban East London.\nDialect.\nCockney speakers have distinctive accents and dialects and occasionally use rhyming slang. The Survey of English Dialects took a recording from a long-time resident of Hackney in the 1950s, and the BBC made another recording in 1999 which showed how the accent had changed. One of the characteristic pronunciations of Cockney is \"th\"-fronting.\nThe early development of Cockney vocabulary is obscure, but appears to have been heavily influenced by Essex and related eastern dialects, while borrowings from Yiddish, including \"kosher\" (originally Hebrew, via Yiddish, meaning \"legitimate\") and \"shtum\" ( originally German, via Yiddish, meaning \"mute\"), as well as Romani, for example \"wonga\" (meaning \"money\", from the Romani \"wanga\" meaning coal), and \"cushty\" (Kushty) (from the Romani \"kushtipen\", meaning good) reflect the influence of those groups on the development of the speech.\nJohn Camden Hotten, in his \"Slang Dictionary\" of 1859, refers to \"their use of a peculiar slang language\" when describing the costermongers of London's East End.\nMigration and evolution.\nA dialectological study of Leytonstone in 1964 found that the area's dialect was very similar to that recorded in Bethnal Green by Eva Sivertsen, but there were still some features that distinguished Leytonstone speech from Cockney.\nLinguistic research conducted in the early 2010s suggests that today, some aspects of the Cockney accent are declining in usage within multicultural areas, where some traditional features of Cockney have been displaced by Multicultural London English, a multiethnolect particularly common amongst young people from diverse backgrounds. Nevertheless, the glottal stop, double negatives, and the vocalisation of the dark L (and other features of Cockney speech) are among the Cockney influences on Multicultural London English, and some rhyming slang terms are still in common usage.\nAn influential July 2010 report by Paul Kerswill, professor of sociolinguistics at Lancaster University, \"Multicultural London English: the emergence, acquisition, and diffusion of a new variety\", predicted that the Cockney accent would disappear from London's streets within 30 years. The study, funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, said that the accent, which has been around for more than 500 years, is being replaced in London by a new hybrid language. \"Cockney in the East End is now transforming itself into Multicultural London English, a new, melting-pot mixture of all those people living here who learned English as a second language\", Kerswill said.\nA series of new and expanded towns have often had a strong influence on local speech. Many areas beyond the capital have become Cockney-speaking to a greater or lesser degree, including the new towns of Hemel Hempstead, Basildon, and Harlow, and expanded towns such as Grays, Chelmsford and Southend. However, this is, except where least mixed, difficult to discern because of common features: linguistic historian and researcher of early dialects Alexander John Ellis in 1890 stated that Cockney developed owing to the influence of Essex dialect on London speech.\nWriting in 1981, the dialectologist Peter Wright identified the building of the Becontree estate in Dagenham as influential in the spread of the Cockney dialect. This vast estate was built by the Corporation of London to house poor East Enders in a previously rural area of Essex. The residents typically kept their Cockney dialect rather than adopt an Essex dialect. Wright also reports that the Cockney dialect spread along the main railway routes to towns in the surrounding counties as early as 1923, spreading further after World War II when many refugees left London owing to the bombing, and continuing to speak Cockney in their new homes.\nA more distant example where the accent stands out is Thetford in Norfolk, which tripled in size from 1957 in a deliberate attempt to attract Londoners by providing social housing funded by the London County Council.\nTypical features.\nAs with many accents of the United Kingdom, Cockney is non-rhotic. A final \"-er\" is pronounced or lowered in broad Cockney. As with all or nearly all non-rhotic accents, the paired lexical sets and , and , and , are merged. Thus, the last syllable of words such as \"cheetah\" can be pronounced as well in broad Cockney.\nA broad is used in words such as \"bath\", \"grass\" and \"demand\". This originated in London in the 16th\u201317th centuries and is also part of Received Pronunciation (RP).\nThe accent features T-glottalisation, with use of the glottal stop as an allophone of in various positions, including after a stressed syllable. Glottal stops also occur, albeit less frequently, for and , and occasionally for mid-word consonants. For example, Richard Whiteing spelled \"Hyde Park\" as \"Hy' Par\"'. \"Like\" and \"light\" can be homophones. \"Clapham\" can be said as \"Cla'am\" (i.e., ). This feature results in Cockney being often mentioned in textbooks about Semitic languages while explaining how to pronounce the glottal stop. may also be flapped intervocalically, e.g. \"utter\" . London are often aspirated in intervocalic and final environments, e.g., \"upper\" , \"utter\" , \"rocker\" , \"up\" , \"out\" , \"rock\" , where RP is traditionally described as having the unaspirated variants. Also, in broad Cockney at least, the degree of aspiration is typically greater than in RP, and may often also involve some degree of affrication . Affricatives may be encountered in initial, intervocalic, and final position.\nCockney also demonstrates:\nPhonetic realisation.\nThe diphthong offsets are only fully close in and : . In all other cases, they are more similar to or . According to Beaken, and typically glide towards : , towards : , and the wide allophone of towards : , whereas and both towards : . According to Mott, do not occur at all as glides: (he does not show on his charts). Furthermore, Wells remarks on the laxness of the unrounded offset of , which is a kind of a centralised : .\nIn the rest of the article, this is treated as a simple allophonic rule and only \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 are used for the diphthong offsets. In narrow phonetic transcription, their rounded and unrounded counterparts are written with \u27e8\u27e9 and \u27e8\u27e9 (phonetically and in fully narrow transcription). Only the central offglides and are transcribed as non-syllabic vowels due to the lack of appropriate glide symbols.\nDiphthong alterations in Cockney are:\nOther vowel differences include\nThe dialect uses the vocalisation of dark L, hence for Millwall. The actual realisation of a vocalised is influenced by surrounding vowels, and it may be realised as , , or . It is also transcribed as a semivowel by some linguists, e.g., Coggle and Rosewarne. However, according to , the vocalised dark l is sometimes an unoccluded lateral approximant, which differs from the RP only by the lack of the alveolar contact. Relatedly, there are many possible vowel neutralisations and absorptions in the context of a following dark L () or its vocalised version; these include:\nCockney has been occasionally described as replacing with , for example, \"thwee\" (or \"fwee\") instead of \"three\", \"fwasty\" instead of \"frosty\". Peter Wright, a Survey of English Dialects fieldworker, concluded that this was not a universal feature of Cockneys but that it was more common to hear this in the London area than elsewhere in Britain. This description may also be a result of mishearing the labiodental R as , when it is still a distinct phoneme in Cockney.\nAn unstressed final \"-ow\" may be pronounced . In broad Cockney, this can be lowered to . This is common to most traditional, Southern English dialects except for those in the West Country.\nRegarding grammar, Cockney uses \"me\" instead of \"my\", for example, \"'At's me book you got 'ere\" . (where ''ere' means 'there'). It cannot be used when \"my\" is emphasised; e.g., \"'At's \"my\" book you got 'ere\" . It also uses the term \"ain't\", as well as double negatives, for example, \"I didn't see nuffink\".\nBy the 1980s and 1990s, most of the features mentioned above had partly spread into more general south-eastern speech, giving the accent called Estuary English; an Estuary speaker will use some but not all of the Cockney sounds.\nPerception.\nThe Cockney accent has long been regarded as an indicator of low status. For example, in 1909 the Conference on the Teaching of English in London Elementary Schools issued by the London County Council, stating that \"the Cockney mode of speech, with its unpleasant twang, is a modern corruption without legitimate credentials, and is unworthy of being the speech of any person in the capital city of the Empire\". Others defended the language variety: \"The London dialect is really, especially on the South side of the Thames, a perfectly legitimate and responsible child of the old Kentish tongue [...] the dialect of London North of the Thames has been shown to be one of the many varieties of the Midland or Mercian dialect, flavoured by the East Anglian variety of the same speech\". Since then, the Cockney accent has been more accepted as an alternative form of the English language rather than a lesser one, though the low status mark remains.\nIn the 1950s, the only accent to be heard on the BBC (except in entertainment programs such as \"The Sooty Show\") was the RP of Standard English, whereas nowadays many different accents, including Cockney or accents heavily influenced by it, can be heard on the BBC. The Cockney accent often featured in films produced by Ealing Studios and was frequently portrayed as the typical British accent of the lower classes in movies by Walt Disney, though this was only so in London.\nSpread.\nStudies have indicated that the heavy use of South East England accents on television and radio may have caused the spread of Cockney English since the 1960s. Cockney is becoming increasingly influential, and some claim that in the future, many features of the accent may become standard.\nScotland.\nStudies have indicated that working-class adolescents in areas such as Glasgow have begun to use certain aspects of Cockney and other Anglicisms in their speech. infiltrating the traditional Glasgow patter. For example, \"TH\"-fronting is commonly found, and typical Scottish features such as the postvocalic are reduced. Research suggests the use of English speech characteristics is likely to be a result of the influence of London and South East England accents featuring heavily on television, such as the popular BBC One soap opera \"EastEnders\". However, such claims have been criticised.\nEngland.\nCertain features of Cockney \u2013 \"Th\"-fronting, \"L\"-vocalisation, \"T\"-glottalisation, and the fronting of the and vowels \u2013 have spread across the south-east of England and, to a lesser extent, to other areas of Britain. However, Clive Upton has noted that these features have occurred independently in some other dialects, such as TH-fronting in Yorkshire and L-vocalisation in parts of Scotland.\nThe term Estuary English has been used to describe London pronunciations slightly closer to RP than Cockney. The variety first came to public prominence in an article by David Rosewarne in the \"Times Educational Supplement\" in October 1984. Rosewarne argued that it may eventually replace Received Pronunciation in the south-east. The phonetician John C. Wells collected media references to Estuary English on http://. Writing in April 2013, Wells argued that research by Joanna Przedlacka \"demolished the claim that EE was a single entity sweeping the southeast. Rather, we have various sound changes emanating from working-class London speech, each spreading independently\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39885", "revid": "37259459", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39885", "title": "Convention on the Future of Europe", "text": "Body established to draft a constitution for the EU\nThe Convention on the Future of the European Union, also known as the European Convention, was a body established by the European Council in December 2001 as a result of the Laeken Declaration. Inspired by the Philadelphia Convention that led to the adoption of the United States federal Constitution, its purpose was to produce a draft constitution for the European Union for the Council to finalise and adopt. The Convention finished its work in July 2003 with their Draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe. See History of the European Constitution for developments after this point.\nOrigins at Nice.\nThe Convention has its origins in the Nice European Council held in December 2000. This summit sought agreement on a process of revising the existing treaties on which the European Union was founded, as a prelude to enlargement. A consensus emerged about the need to begin a \"broader and deeper debate\" on the future of the EU, and consequently the Council adopted a declaration on the future of the union annexed to the Treaty of Nice. The process was intended to commence with a phase of open debate before the European Council met in Laeken the following year, when a better idea of what was required would have emerged.\nThe declaration adopted at Nice set out four main themes to be addressed:\nLaeken Declaration.\nIn December 2001, when the European Council met in Laeken, a fresh declaration was adopted committing the EU to greater democracy, transparency and efficiency, and setting out the process by which a constitution could be arrived at. This was to be achieved by a convention, which was intended to comprise the main 'stakeholders', in order to examine questions about the future direction of the EU. It was to produce a \"final document\", which soon became the draft constitution, to be handed over to the Intergovernmental Conference, scheduled for 2004, which would finalise a new treaty.\nWork.\nThe European Convention was established with 102 members. Former French President Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing was appointed Chairman, former Italian Prime Minister Giuliano Amato and former Belgian Prime Minister Jean-Luc Dehaene were appointed Vice-Chairmen. Its members were drawn from the national parliaments of member states and candidate countries, the European Parliament, the European Commission, and representatives of heads of state and government. The Convention met for the first time in February 2002, and met thereafter in plenary session once or twice per month. It deliberated in public in the European Parliament building in Brussels.\nThe 13 member pr\u00e6sidium of the convention consisted of the chairman and vice-chairmen along with:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39886", "revid": "6289403", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39886", "title": "Cockney Rhyming slang", "text": ""}
{"id": "39888", "revid": "196446", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39888", "title": "Secretariat of the Convention on the Future of Europe", "text": ""}
{"id": "39892", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39892", "title": "History of the Bahamas", "text": "The earliest arrival of people in the islands now known as The Bahamas was in the first millennium AD. The first inhabitants of the islands were the Lucayans, an Arawakan language-speaking Taino people, who arrived between about 500 and 800 AD from other islands of the Caribbean.\nRecorded history began on 12 October 1492, when Christopher Columbus landed on the island of Guanahani, which he renamed San Salvador Island, on his first voyage to the New World. The earliest permanent European settlement was in 1648 on Eleuthera, settled by the British. During the 18th century slave trade, many purchased African slaves were brought to The Bahamas to work unpaid. Their descendants now constitute 85% of the Bahamian population. The Bahamas gained independence from the United Kingdom on July 10, 1973.\nEarly history.\nSometime between 500 and 800 AD, Ta\u00ednos began crossing in dugout canoes from Hispaniola and/or Cuba to the Bahamas. Suggested routes for the earliest migrations have been from Hispaniola to the Caicos Islands, from Hispaniola or eastern Cuba to Great Inagua Island, and from central Cuba to Long Island (in the central Bahamas). William Keegan argues that the most likely route was from Hispaniola or Cuba to Great Inagua. Granberry and Vescelius argue for two migrations, from Hispaniola to the Turks and Caicos Islands, and from Cuba to Great Inagua.\nFrom the initial colonisation(s), the Lucayan expanded throughout the Bahamas in some 800 years (c. 700 \u2013 c. 1500), growing to a population of about 40,000. Population density at the time of first European contact was highest in the south-central area of The Bahamas, declining towards the north, reflecting the migration pattern and progressively shorter time of occupation of the northern islands. Known Lucayan settlement sites are confined to the nineteen largest islands in the archipelago, or to smaller cays located less than one km. from those islands. Population density in the southernmost Bahamas remained lower, probably due to the drier climate there (less than 800\u00a0mm of rain a year on Great Inagua Island and the Turks and Caicos Islands and only slightly higher on Acklins and Crooked Islands and Mayaguana).\nEuropean exploration.\nIn 1492, Christopher Columbus sailed from Spain on his first voyage with three ships, the \"Ni\u00f1a,\" the \"Pinta,\" and the flagship, \"Santa Maria,\" seeking a direct route to Asia. On 12 October, Columbus reached an island in the Bahamas and claimed it for Spain, an event long regarded by Europeans as the \"discovery\" of America. This island was called \"Guanahani\" by the Lucayan, and San Salvador by the Spanish. The identity of the first American landfall by Columbus remains controversial, but many authors accept Samuel E. Morison's identification of Columbus' San Salvador as what was later called Watling (or Watling's) Island. Its name has been officially changed to San Salvador. Columbus visited several other islands in the Bahamas before sailing to present-day Cuba and afterwards to Hispaniola.\nThe Bahamas held little interest to the Spanish except as a source of slave labor. Nearly the entire population of Lucayan (almost 40,000 people total) were transported to other islands as laborers over the next 30 years. When the Spanish decided to remove the remaining Lucayans to Hispaniola in 1520, they could find only eleven. The islands remained abandoned and depopulated for 130 years afterwards. With no gold to be found, and the population removed, the Spanish effectively abandoned the Bahamas. They retained titular claims to them until the Peace of Paris in 1783, when they ceded them to Britain in exchange for East Florida.\nWhen Europeans first landed on the islands, they reported the Bahamas were lushly forested. Cleared to develop the land for sugarcane plantations, the forests have not regrown and have not been replanted.\nFor many years, historians believed that the Bahamas was not colonised until the 17th century. However, recent studies show that there may have been attempts of colonisation by groups from Spain, France, Britain, and the Netherlands. In 1565 a group of French Huguenots settled on Abaco and were never heard of again.\nEarly English settlement.\nIn 1648, a group from Bermuda called \"The Company of Adventurers for the Plantation of the Islands of Eleutheria\", which was led by William Sayle, sailed to the Bahamas to found a colony. These early settlers were Puritans and republicans. Bermuda was becoming overcrowded, and the Bahamas offered both religious and political freedom and economic opportunity. The larger of the company's two ships, the \"William\", wrecked on the reef at the north end of what is now called Eleuthera Island, with the loss of all provisions. \nDespite the arrival of additional settlers, including Europeans, slaves and former African slaves from Bermuda and the receipt of relief supplies from Virginia and New England, the Eleuthera colony struggled for many years, hampered by poor soil, fighting between settlers, and conflict with the Spanish. In the mid-1650s, many of the settlers returned to Bermuda. The remaining settlers founded communities on Harbour Island and Saint George's Cay (Spanish Wells) at the north end of Eleuthera. In 1670 about 20 families lived in the Eleuthera communities.\nIn 1666 other colonists from Bermuda settled on New Providence, which soon became the centre of population and commerce in the Bahamas, with almost 500 people living on the island by 1670. Unlike the Eleutherians, who were primarily farmers, the first settlers on New Providence made their living from the sea, salvaging (mainly Spanish) wrecks, making salt, and taking fish, turtles, conchs and ambergris. Farmers from Bermuda soon followed the seamen to New Providence, where they found good, plentiful land. Neither the Eleutherian colony nor the settlement on New Providence had any legal standing under English law. In 1670, the Proprietors of Carolina were issued a patent for the Bahamas, but the governors sent by the Proprietors had difficulty imposing their authority on the independent-minded residents of New Providence.\nThe early settlers continued to live much as they had in Bermuda, fishing, hunting turtles, whales, and seals, finding ambergris, making salt on the drier islands, cutting the abundant hardwoods of the islands for lumber, dyewood and medicinal bark; and wrecking, or salvaging wrecks. The Bahamas were close to the sailing routes between Europe and the Caribbean, so shipwrecks in the islands were common, and wrecking was the most lucrative occupation available to the Bahamians.\nRepublic of Pirates.\nThe Bahamians soon came into conflict with the Spanish over the salvaging of wrecks. The Bahamian wreckers drove the Spanish away from their wrecked ships, and attacked Spanish salvagers, seizing goods the Spanish had already recovered from the wrecks. When the Spanish raided the Bahamas, the Bahamians in turn commissioned privateers against Spain, even though England and Spain were at peace. In 1684, the Spanish burned the settlements on New Providence and Eleuthera, after which they were largely abandoned. New Providence was settled a second time in 1686 by colonists from Jamaica.\nIn the 1690s, English privateers (England was then at war with France) made a base in the Bahamas. In 1696 Henry Every (or Avery), using the assumed name Henry Bridgeman, brought his ship \"Fancy\", loaded with pirates' loot, into Nassau harbor. Avery bribed the governor, Nicholas Trott (uncle of the Nicholas Trott who presided at the trial of Stede Bonnet), with gold and silver, and by leaving him the \"Fancy\", still loaded with 50 tons of elephant tusks and 100 barrels of gunpowder. Following peace with France in 1697, many of the privateers became pirates. From this time the pirates increasingly made Nassau, the Bahamian capital founded in 1694, their base. The governors appointed by the Proprietors usually made a show of suppressing the pirates, but most were accused of dealing with them. By 1701 England was at war with France and Spain. In 1703, and again in 1706, combined French-Spanish fleets attacked and sacked Nassau, after which some settlers left, and the Proprietors gave up on trying to govern the islands.\nWith no functioning government in the Bahamas, English privateers operated from Nassau as their base, in what has been called a \"privateers' republic\", which lasted for eleven years. The raiders attacked French and Spanish ships, while French and Spanish forces burned Nassau several times. The War of the Spanish Succession ended in 1714, but some privateers were slow to get the news, or reluctant to accept it, and slipped into piracy. One estimate puts at least 1,000 pirates in the Bahamas in 1713, outnumbering the 200 families of more permanent settlers.\nThe \"privateers' republic\" in Nassau became a \"pirates' republic\". At least 20 pirate captains used Nassau or other places in the Bahamas as a home port during this period, including Henry Jennings, Edward Teach (Blackbeard), Benjamin Hornigold and Stede Bonnet. Many settler families moved from New Providence to Eleuthera or Abaco to escape harassment from the pirates. On the other hand, residents of Harbor Island were happy to serve as middlemen for the pirates, as merchants from New England and Virginia came there to exchange needed supplies for pirate plunder. Piracy provoked frequent and brutal but ineffective retaliatory attacks by the French and Spanish.\nReasserting British control.\nStarting in 1713, Woodes Rogers had conceived the idea of leading an expedition to Madagascar to suppress the pirates there and establish it as a British colony. Rogers' friends Richard Steele and Joseph Addison eventually convinced him to tackle the pirates' nest in the Bahamas, instead. Rogers and others formed a company to fund the venture. They persuaded the Proprietors of Carolina to surrender the government of the Bahamas to the king, while retaining title to the land. In 1717 King George appointed Rogers governor of the Bahamas and issued a proclamation granting a pardon to any pirate who surrendered to a British governor within one year.\nWord of the appointment of a new governor and of the offer of pardons reached Nassau ahead of Rogers and his forces. Some of the pirates were willing to accept a pardon and retire from piracy. Henry Jennings and Christopher Winter, sailed off to find British authorities to confirm their acceptance of the amnesty.\nOthers were not ready to give up. Many of those were Jacobites, supporters of the House of Stuart, who identified as enemies of the Hanoverian King George. Still others simply identified as rebels, or thought they were better off as pirates than trying to earn an honest living. When a Royal Navy ship brought official word to Nassau of the pardon offer, many pirates planned to accept. Soon, however, the recalcitrant parties gained the upper hand, eventually forcing the Navy ship to leave.\nBlackbeard, Stede Bonnet, Nicholas Brown and Edmond Condent left the Bahamas for other territories. Charles Vane, with John Rackham and Edward England in his crew, came to prominence at this time. Vane worked to organise resistance to the anticipated arrival of Royal authority, even appealing to James Francis Edward Stuart, the Stuart pretender, for aid in holding the Bahamas and capturing Bermuda for the Stuarts. As aid from the Stuarts failed to materialise and the date for Rogers' arrival approached, Vane and his crew prepared to leave Nassau.\nWoodes Rogers arrived in Nassau in late July 1718, with his own 460-ton warship, three ships belonging to his company, and an escort of three ships of the Royal Navy. Vane's ship was trapped in Nassau harbor. His crew set that ship on fire, sending it towards Rogers' ships, and escaped in the ensuing confusion in a smaller ship they had seized from another pirate. The remaining population welcomed Rogers; they comprised about 200 settlers and 500 to 700 pirates who wanted to receive pardons, most prominently Benjamin Hornigold. After the pirates' surrender, the Proprietors leased their land in the Bahamas to Rogers' company for 21 years.\nRogers controlled Nassau, but Charles Vane was loose and threatening to drive the governor and his forces out. Learning that the King of Spain wanted to expel English from the islands, Rogers worked to improve the defenses of Nassau. He lost nearly 100 men of the new forces due to an unidentified disease, and the Navy ships left for other assignments. Rogers sent four of his ships to Havana to assure the Spanish governor that he was suppressing piracy and to trade for supplies. The crews of ex-pirates and men who had come with Rogers all turned to piracy. The ex-pirate Benjamin Hornigold later caught ten men at Green Turtle Cay as part of Rogers' suppression effort. Eight were found guilty and hanged in front of the fort.\nVane attacked several small settlements in the Bahamas but, after he refused to attack a stronger French frigate, he was deposed for cowardice and replaced as captain by John Rackham. Vane never returned to the Bahamas; he was eventually caught, convicted and executed in Jamaica. After nearly being captured by Jamaican privateers, and hearing that the king had extended the deadline for pardons for piracy, Rackham and his crew returned to Nassau to surrender to Woodes Rogers.\nIn August of 1720, Rackham stole the sloop William out of Nassau harbor. Alongside him was a small crew that included female pirates Anne Bonny and Mary Read. 61 days later in October, Rackham, Bonny and Read were captured and taken to Jamaica. They were convicted of piracy, and Rackham was executed. Bonny and Read were sent to prison, after claiming to be pregnant and therefore excluded from execution. Read died in prison, while Bonny was likely quietly released, and died in obscurity in late 1733.\nWhen Britain and Spain went to war again in 1719, many of the ex-pirates were commissioned by the British government as privateers. A Spanish invasion fleet set out for the Bahamas, but was diverted to Pensacola, Florida when it was seized by the French. Rogers continued to improve the defenses of Nassau, spending his personal fortune and going heavily into debt to do so. In 1720, the Spaniards finally attacked Nassau. Rogers returned to Britain in 1722 to plead for repayment of the money he had borrowed to build up Nassau, only to find he had been replaced as governor. He was sent to debtors' prison, although his creditors later absolved his debts, gaining him release.\nAfter the publication in 1724 of \"A General History of the Robberies and Murders of the Most Notorious Pirates,\" which praised Rogers' efforts to suppress piracy in the Bahamas, his fortunes began to improve. The king awarded him a pension, retroactive to 1721. In 1728 Rogers was appointed Governor of the Bahamas for a second term. He dissolved the colony's assembly when it would not approve taxes to repair Nassau's defenses. He died in Nassau in 1732.\nLatter 18th century.\nIn 1741, Governor John Tinker and Peter Henry Bruce constructed Fort Montague. Additionally, the Governor also reported a privateering boom in the Thirteen Colonies in North America. He also reported that over 2300 sumptuous houses were built. In 1768 Governor William Shirley filled in mosquito-breeding swamps and extended Nassau.\nDuring the American War of Independence the Bahamas was attacked by American and allied forces on several occasions. In 1776, American forces launched an amphibious assault against Nassau, resulting in its two-week occupation. In 1782, Spanish forces under General Galvez captured the Bahamas in 1782. A British-American Loyalist expedition led by Colonel Andrew Deveaux, recaptured the islands in 1783. \nAfter the American Revolution, the British issued land grants to American Loyalists who had gone into exile from the newly established United States. The sparse population of the Bahamas tripled within a few years. The Loyalists developed cotton as a commodity crop, but it dwindled from insect damage and soil exhaustion. In addition to slaves they brought with them, the planters' descendants imported more African slaves for labour.\nMost of the current inhabitants in the islands are descended from the slaves brought to work on the Loyalist plantations. In addition, thousands of captive Africans, who were liberated from foreign slave ships by the British navy after the abolition of the British slave trade in 1807, were resettled as free persons in the Bahamas.\n19th century.\nIn the early 1820s, following the Adams\u2013On\u00eds Treaty ceding Florida from Spain to the United States, hundreds of African slaves and Black Seminoles escaped from Florida, most settling on Andros Island in the Bahamas. Three hundred escaped in a mass flight in 1823. While the flow was reduced by federal construction of a lighthouse at Cape Florida in 1825, slaves continued to find freedom in the Bahamas. In August 1834, the traditional plantation life ended with the British emancipation of slaves throughout most of its colonies. Freedmen chose to work on their own small plots of land when possible.\nIn the 1830s and 1840s, tensions rose between Britain and the United States after American merchant ships, part of the coastwise slave trade, put into Nassau or were wrecked on its reefs. These included the \"Hermosa\" (1840) and the \"Creole\" (1841), the latter brought in after a slave revolt on board. Britain had notified nations that slaves brought into Bahama and Bermuda waters would be forfeited and freed the slaves, refusing US efforts to recover them. In 1853 Britain and the US signed a claims treaty and submitted to arbitration for claims dating to 1814; they paid each other in 1855.\nWith emancipation, Caribbean societies inherited a rigid racial stratification that was reinforced by the unequal distribution of wealth and power. The three-tier race structure, of whites, mixed-race, and primarily blacks, who comprised the large majority, existed well into the 1940s and in some societies beyond. Like African Americans, many also have European and Native American ancestry. Caribbean societies continue to struggle with racial issues.\nThe Bahamas during the American Civil War prospered as a base for Confederate blockade-running, bringing in cotton to be shipped to the mills of England and running out arms and munitions. None of these provided any lasting prosperity to the islands, nor did attempts to grow different kinds of crops for export.\nColonial 20th century.\nIn 1911, there was a short-lived movement to make the Bahamas part of Canada. Although the movement enjoyed the support of many in Nassau and from the head of Sun Life, a Canadian insurance company, the movement failed. The failure of the movement was, in part, due to the British government's opposition to uniting a predominantly black colony with a predominantly white country.\nIn World War I organisations such as the Imperial Order of the Daughters of Empire and the Bahamas Red Cross Guild began collecting money, food and clothing for soldiers and civilians in Europe. \"The Gallant Thirty\" Bahamians set out to join the British West Indies Regiment as early as 1915 and as many as 1,800 served in the armed forces of Canada, Britain and the United States.\nWorld War II.\nOakes Field, the Bahamas first airport, was opened in Nassau in January 1940. It was named after Harry Oakes, a millionaire who made a large contribution. Prior to that, aviation in the Bahamas was largely carried out by seaplanes.\nThe Duke of Windsor was installed as governor of the Bahamas, arriving at that post in August 1940 with his new wife. They were appalled at the condition of Government House, but they \"tried to make the best of a bad situation.\" He did not enjoy the position, and referred to the islands as \"a third-class British colony\". He opened the small local parliament on October 29, 1940, and they visited the 'Out Islands' that November, which caused some controversy because of on whose yacht they were cruising. The British Foreign Office strenuously objected when the Duke and Duchess planned to tour aboard a yacht belonging to a Swedish magnate, Axel Wenner-Gren, whom American intelligence wrongly believed to be a close friend of Luftwaffe commander Hermann G\u00f6ring. The Duke was praised, however, for his efforts to combat poverty on the islands, although he was as contemptuous of the Bahamians as he was of most non-white peoples of the Empire. He was also praised for his resolution of civil unrest over low wages in Nassau in June 1942, when there was a \"full-scale riot,\" even though he blamed the trouble on \"mischief makers \u2013 communists\" and \"men of Central European Jewish descent, who had secured jobs as a pretext for obtaining a deferment of draft\". The Duke resigned the post on 16 March 1945.\nCanadian garrison.\nIn April 1942 the United Kingdom asked Canada to provide military support in Nassau, in part to provide protection services to H.R.H. the Duke of Windsor. The No. 33 company of the Veterans Guard of Canada was raised and arrived in June. No. 33 company were relieved in 1943 by a company of The Pictou Highlanders. The Canadian garrison left Nassau in 1946.\nPost-World War II.\nThe wartime airfield became Nassau's international airport in 1957 and helped spur the growth of mass tourism, which accelerated after Havana was closed to American tourists in 1961. Freeport, on the island of Grand Bahama, was established as a free trade zone in the 1950s. Bank secrecy combined with the lack of corporate and income taxes led to a rapid growth in the offshore financial sector during the postwar years.\nModern political development began after World War II. The first political parties were formed in the 1950s. The Progressive Liberal Party was formed in 1953, and the United Bahamian Party was formed in 1956.\nBahamians achieved self-government in 1964, with Sir Roland Symonette, of the United Bahamian Party, as the first Premier. Sir Lynden O. Pindling, leader of the Progressive Liberal Party, became the first black Premier of the colony in 1967, and in 1968 the title was changed to Prime Minister.\nIndependent Bahamas.\nThe Bahamas achieved full independence as a Commonwealth realm within the Commonwealth of Nations on 10 July 1973. Sir Milo Butler was appointed the first Governor-General of the Bahamas (the official representative of Queen Elizabeth II) shortly after independence. Pindling was prime minister until 1992. He was succeeded by Hubert Ingraham, leader of the Free National Movement, who was prime minister until 2002.\nThe College of the Bahamas was founded in 1974 and provided the nation's higher or tertiary education. The college was chartered in 2016 as the University of the Bahamas, offering baccalaureate, masters and associate degrees, on three campuses and teaching and research centres throughout the Bahamas.\nBased on the twin pillars of tourism and offshore finance, the Bahamian economy has prospered since the 1950s. However, there remain significant challenges in areas such as education, health care, housing, international narcotics trafficking and illegal immigration from Haiti.\nIn the 2002 Bahamian general election, the PLP returned to power under Perry Christie. Ingraham returned to power from 2007 to 2012, followed by Christie again from 2012 to 2017. With economic growth faltering, Bahamians re-elected the FNM in 2017, with Hubert Minnis becoming the fourth prime minister.\nIn September 2019, Hurricane Dorian struck the Abaco Islands and Grand Bahama at Category 5 intensity, devastating the northwestern Bahamas. The storm inflicted at least US$7 billion in damages and killed more than 50 people, with 1,300 people still missing.\nIn September 2021, Prime Minister Hubert Minnis lost in a snap election as the economy struggles to recover from its deepest crash since at least 1971. Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) won 32 of the 39 seats in the House of Assembly. Free National Movement (FNM), led by Minnis, took the remaining seats. On 17 September 2021, the leader of the Progressive Liberal Party (PLP) Phillip \u201cBrave\u201d Davis was sworn in as the new Prime Minister of the Bahamas.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "39893", "revid": "10199389", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=39893", "title": "Sanity check", "text": "Test to check if a hypothesis is rational\nA sanity check or sanity test is a basic test to quickly evaluate whether a claim or the result of a calculation can possibly be true. It is a simple check to see if the produced material is rational (that the material's creator was thinking rationally, applying sanity). The point of a sanity test is to rule out certain classes of obviously false results, not to catch every possible error. A rule-of-thumb or back-of-the-envelope calculation may be checked to perform the test. The advantage of performing an initial sanity test is that of speedily evaluating basic function.\nIn arithmetic, for example, when multiplying by 9, using the divisibility rule for 9 to verify that the sum of digits of the result is divisible by 9 is a sanity test\u2014it will not catch \"every\" multiplication error, but is a quick and simple method to discover \"many\" possible errors.\nIn computer science, a \"sanity test\" is a very brief run-through of the functionality of a computer program, system, calculation, or other analysis, to assure that part of the system or methodology works roughly as expected. This is often prior to a more exhaustive round of testing.\nUse in different fields.\nMathematical.\nA sanity test can refer to various orders of magnitude and other simple rule-of-thumb devices applied to cross-check mathematical calculations. For example:\nSoftware development.\nIn software development, a sanity test (a form of software testing which offers \"quick, broad, and shallow testing\") evaluates the result of a subset of application functionality to determine whether it is possible and reasonable to proceed with further testing of the entire application. Sanity tests may sometimes be used interchangeably with smoke tests insofar as both terms denote tests which determine whether it is \"possible\" and \"reasonable\" to continue testing further. On the other hand, a distinction is sometimes made that a smoke test is a non-exhaustive test that ascertains whether the most crucial functions of a programme work before proceeding with further testing whereas a sanity test refers to whether specific functionality such as a particular bug fix works as expected without testing the wider functionality of the software. In other words, a sanity test determines whether the intended result of a code change works correctly while a smoke test ensures that nothing else important was broken in the process. Sanity testing and smoke testing avoid wasting time and effort by quickly determining whether an application is too flawed to merit more rigorous QA testing, but needs more developer debugging.\nGroups of sanity tests are often bundled together for automated unit testing of functions, libraries, or applications prior to merging development code into a testing or trunk version control branch, for automated building, or for continuous integration and continuous deployment.\nAnother common usage of \"sanity test\" is to denote checks which are performed within programme code, usually on arguments to functions or returns therefrom, to see if the answers can be assumed to be correct. The more complicated the routine, the more important that its response be checked. The trivial case is checking to see whether the return value of a function indicated success or failure, and to therefore cease further processing upon failure. This return value is actually often itself the result of a sanity check. For example, if the function attempted to open, write to, and close a file, a sanity check may be used to ensure that it did not fail on any of these actions\u2014which is a sanity check often ignored by programmers.\nThese kinds of sanity checks may be used during development for debugging purposes and also to aid in troubleshooting software runtime errors.\nSanity checks are also performed upon installation of stable, production software code into a new computing environment to ensure that all dependencies are met, such as a compatible operating system and link libraries. When a computing environment has passed all the sanity checks, it is considered a sane environment for the installation programme to proceed with reasonable expectation of success.\nA \"Hello, World!\" program is often used as a sanity test for a development environment similarly. Rather than a complicated script running a set of unit tests, if this simple programme fails to compile or execute, it proves that the supporting environment likely has a configuration problem that will prevent \"any\" code from compiling or executing. But if \"Hello world\" executes, then any problems experienced with other programmes likely can be attributed to errors in that application's code rather than the environment.\nThe Association for Computing Machinery, and software projects such as Android, MediaWiki and Twitter, discourage use of the phrase \"sanity check\" in favour of other terms such as \"confidence test\", \"coherence check\", or simply \"test\", as part of a wider attempt to avoid ableist language and increase inclusivity.\nVibe coding.\nSanity checking is often used in vibe coding, especially between different AI models (although two separate instances of the same model can work in some cases), in order to have a different AI model cover any blind spots or check for any potential errors or faulty logic using a third-party source. This can also be done by human debuggers as with human-written code.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
