{"id": "37998", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37998", "title": "Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand", "text": "President of France from 1981 to 1995\nFran\u00e7ois Maurice Adrien Marie Mitterrand (26 October 1916\u00a0\u2013 8 January 1996) was a French politician and statesman who served as President of France from 1981 to 1995, the longest holder of that position in the history of France. As a former Socialist Party First Secretary, he was the first left-wing politician to assume the presidency under the Fifth Republic.\nDue to family influences, Mitterrand started his political life on the Catholic nationalist right. He served under the Vichy regime during its earlier years. Subsequently, he joined the Resistance, moved to the left, and held ministerial office several times under the Fourth Republic. Mitterrand opposed Charles de Gaulle's establishment of the Fifth Republic. Although at times a politically isolated figure, he outmanoeuvred rivals to become the left's standard bearer in the 1965 and 1974 presidential elections, before being elected president in the 1981 presidential election. He was re-elected in 1988 and remained in office until 1995.\nMitterrand invited the Communist Party into his first government, which was a controversial decision at the time. However, the Communists were boxed in as junior partners and, rather than taking advantage, saw their support eroded, eventually leaving the cabinet in 1984. \nEarly in his first term, Mitterrand followed a radical left-wing economic agenda, including nationalisation of key firms and the introduction of the 39-hour work week. He likewise pushed a progressive agenda with reforms such as the abolition of the death penalty, and the end of a government monopoly in radio and television broadcasting. He was also a strong promoter of French culture and implemented a range of \"Grands Projets\". However, faced with economic tensions, he soon abandoned his nationalization programme, in favour of austerity and market liberalization policies. In 1985, he was faced with a major controversy after ordering the bombing of the \"Rainbow Warrior\", a Greenpeace vessel docked in Auckland. Later in 1991, he became the first French President to appoint a female prime minister, \u00c9dith Cresson. During his presidency, Mitterrand was twice forced by the loss of a parliamentary majority into \"cohabitation governments\" with conservative cabinets led, respectively, by Jacques Chirac (1986\u20131988), and \u00c9douard Balladur (1993\u20131995).\nMitterrand\u2019s foreign and defence policies built on those of his Gaullist predecessors, except in regard to their reluctance to support European integration, which he reversed. His partnership with German chancellor Helmut Kohl advanced European integration via the Maastricht Treaty, and he accepted German reunification. \nLess than eight months after leaving office, he died from the prostate cancer he had successfully concealed for most of his presidency. Beyond making the French Left electable, Mitterrand presided over the rise of the Socialist Party to dominance of the left, and the decline of the once-dominant Communist Party.\nFamily.\nFran\u00e7ois Marie Adrien Maurice Mitterrand was born on 26 October 1916 in Jarnac, Charente, the son of Joseph Mitterrand and Yvonne Lorrain. His family was devoutly Catholic and conservative. His father worked as a stationmaster for the Compagnie Paris Orl\u00e9ans railway. He had three brothers, Robert, Jacques (retired General and head of the French state aircraft company Aerospatiale), and Philippe, and four sisters, Antoinette, Marie-Jos\u00e8phe, Colette, and Genevi\u00e8ve.\nMitterrand's wife, Danielle Mitterrand (\"n\u00e9e\" Gouze, 1924\u20132011), came from a socialist background and worked for various left-wing causes. They married on 24 October 1944 and had three sons: Pascal (10 June \u2013 17 September 1945), Jean-Christophe, born in 1946, and Gilbert, born on 4 February 1949. He also had two children as results of extra-marital affairs: an acknowledged daughter, Mazarine (born 1974), with his mistress Anne Pingeot, and an unacknowledged son, Hravn Forsne (born 1988), with Swedish journalist Chris Forsne.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's nephew Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Mitterrand was a journalist, Minister of Culture and Communications under Nicolas Sarkozy (and a supporter of Jacques Chirac, former French President), and his wife's brother-in-law Roger Hanin was a well-known French actor.\nEarly life.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand studied from 1925 to 1934 at the Coll\u00e8ge Saint-Paul in Angoul\u00eame, where he became a member of the Jeunesse \u00c9tudiante Chr\u00e9tienne, the student organisation of \"Action catholique\". Arriving in Paris in the autumn of 1934, he then went to the \u00c9cole Libre des Sciences Politiques until 1937, where he obtained his diploma in July of that year. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand took membership for about a year in the \"Volontaires nationaux\" (National Volunteers), an organisation related to Fran\u00e7ois de la Rocque's far-right league, the \"Croix de Feu\"; the league had just participated in the 6 February 1934 riots which led to the fall of the second \"Cartel des Gauches\" (Left-Wing Coalition).\nContrary to some reports, Mitterrand never became a formal member of the French Social Party, which was the successor to the Croix de Feu and may be considered the first French right-wing mass party. However, he did write news articles in the \"L'\u00c9cho de Paris\" newspaper, which was close to the Social Party. He participated in the demonstrations against the \"invasion m\u00e9t\u00e8que\" in February 1935 and then in those against law teacher Gaston J\u00e8ze, who had been nominated as juridical counsellor of Ethiopia's Negus, in January 1936.\nWhen Mitterrand's involvement in these conservative nationalist movements was revealed in the 1990s, he attributed his actions to the milieu of his youth. He furthermore had some personal and family relations with members of the \"Cagoule\", a far-right terrorist group in the 1930s.\nMitterrand then served his conscription from 1937 to 1939 in the 23rd r\u00e9giment d'infanterie coloniale. In 1938, he became the best friend of Georges Dayan, a Jewish socialist, whom he saved from anti-Semitic aggressions by the national-royalist movement \"Action fran\u00e7aise\". His friendship with Dayan caused Mitterrand to begin to question some of his nationalist ideas. Finishing his law studies, he was sent in September 1939 to the Maginot line near Montm\u00e9dy, with the rank of Sergeant-chief (infantry sergeant). He became engaged to Marie-Louise Terrasse (future actress and television presenter Catherine Langeais) in May 1940, when she was 16, but she broke it off in January 1942. Following an observation of Nazi concentration camps at the end of World War II, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand became an agnostic.\nSecond World War.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's actions during World War II were the cause of much controversy in France during the 1980s and 1990s.\nPrisoner of War: 1940\u20131941.\nMitterrand was near the end of his national service when the war broke out. He fought as an infantry sergeant and was injured and captured by the Germans on 14 June 1940. He was held prisoner at Stalag IXA near Ziegenhain (today part of Schwalmstadt, a town near Kassel in Hesse). Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand became involved in the social organisation for the POWs in the camp. He claims this, and the influence of the people he met there, began to change his political ideas, moving him towards the left. He had two failed escape attempts in March and then November 1941 before he finally escaped on 16 December 1941, returning to France on foot. In December 1941 he arrived home in the unoccupied zone controlled by the French. With help from a friend of his mother, he got a job as a mid-level functionary of the Vichy government, looking after the interests of POWs. This was very unusual for an escaped prisoner, and he later claimed to have served as a spy for the Free French Forces.\nWork in France under the Vichy administration: 1941\u20131943.\nMitterrand worked from January to April 1942 for the \"L\u00e9gion fran\u00e7aise des combattants et des volontaires de la r\u00e9volution nationale\" (Legion of French combatants and volunteers of the national revolution) as a civil servant on a temporary contract. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand worked under Jean-Paul Favre de Thierrens who was a spy for the British secret service. He then moved to the \"Commissariat au reclassement des prisonniers de guerre\" (Service for the Reorientation of POWs). During this period, Mitterrand was aware of Thierrens's activities and may have helped in his disinformation campaign. At the same time, he published an article detailing his time as a POW in the magazine \"France, revue de l'\u00c9tat nouveau\" (the magazine was published as propaganda by the Vichy Regime).\nMitterrand has been called a \"\" (an expression used by the historian Jean-Pierre Az\u00e9ma to describe people who supported Marshal Philippe P\u00e9tain, the head of the Vichy Regime, before 1943, but subsequently rejected the Vichy Regime).\nFrom spring 1942, he met other escaped POWs Jean Roussel, Max Varenne, and Dr. Guy Fric, under whose influence he became involved with the resistance. In April, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand and Fric caused a major disturbance in a public meeting held by the collaborator Georges Claude. From mid-1942, he sent false papers to POWs in Germany and on 12 June and 15 August 1942, he joined meetings at the Ch\u00e2teau de Montmaur which formed the base of his future network for the resistance. From September, he made contact with Free French Forces, but clashed with Michel Cailliau, General Charles de Gaulle's nephew (and de Gaulle's candidate to head-up all POW-related resistance organizations). On 15 October 1942, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand and Marcel Barrois (a member of the resistance deported in 1944) met Marshal Philippe P\u00e9tain along with other members of the \"Comit\u00e9 d'entraide aux prisonniers rapatri\u00e9s de l'Allier\" (Mutual Assistance Committee for Repatriated POWs of the Allier Department). By the end of 1942, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand met Pierre Guillain de B\u00e9nouville, an old friend from his days with \"La Cagoule\". B\u00e9nouville was a member of the resistance groups \"Combat\" and \"Noyautage des administrations publiques\" (NAP).\nIn late 1942, the non-occupied zone was invaded by the Germans. Mitterrand left the Commissariat in January 1943, when his boss Maurice Pinot, another , was replaced by the collaborator Andr\u00e9 Masson, but he remained in charge of the \"centres d'entraides\". In the spring of 1943, along with Gabriel Jeantet, a member of Marshal P\u00e9tain's cabinet, and Simon Arbellot (both former members of La Cagoule), Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand received the Order of the Francisque (the honorific distinction of the Vichy Regime).\nDebate rages in France as to the significance of this. When Mitterrand's Vichy past was exposed in the 1950s, he at first denied having received the Francisque (some sources say he was designated for the award, but never received the medal because he went into hiding before the ceremony took place). Socialist Resistance leader Jean Pierre-Bloch says that Mitterrand was ordered to accept the medal as cover for his work in the resistance. Pierre Moscovici and Jacques Attali remain skeptical of Mitterrand's beliefs at this time, accusing him of having at best a \"foot in each camp\" until he was sure who the winner would be. They noted his friendship with Ren\u00e9 Bousquet and the wreaths he was said to have placed on P\u00e9tain's tomb in later years (see below) as examples of his ambivalent attitude.\nIn 1994, while President of France, Mitterrand maintained that the roundup of Jews who were then deported to death camps during the war was solely the work of \"Vichy France\", an entity distinct from France: \"The Republic had nothing to do with this. I do not believe France is responsible.\" This position was rejected by President Jacques Chirac in 1995 who stated that it was time that France faced up to its past. He acknowledged the role of the state \u2013 \"4,500 policemen and gendarmes, French, under the authority of their leaders [who] obeyed the demands of the Nazis\" \u2013 in the Holocaust. Chirac added that the \"criminal madness of the occupiers was seconded by the French, by the French State\".\nPresident Emmanuel Macron was even more specific as to the State's responsibility for the 1942 Vel' d'Hiv Roundup of 13,000 Jews for deportation to concentration camps. It was indeed \"France that organized the roundup, the deportation, and thus, for almost all, death.\" It was done by \"French police collaborating with the Nazis\", he said on 16 July 2017. \"It is convenient to see the Vichy regime as born of nothingness, returned to nothingness. Yes, it\u2019s convenient, but it is false. We cannot build pride upon a lie.\"\nFull engagement in resistance: 1943\u20131945.\nMitterrand built up a resistance network, composed mainly of former POWs. The POWs National Rally (\"Rassemblement national des prisonniers de guerre\", RNPG) was affiliated with General Henri Giraud, a former POW who had escaped from a German prison and made his way across Germany back to the Allied forces. In 1943 Giraud was contesting with de Gaulle for the leadership of the French Resistance.\nFrom the beginning of 1943, Mitterrand had contacts with a powerful resistance group called the \"Organisation de r\u00e9sistance de l'arm\u00e9e\" (ORA), organised by former French military personnel. From this time on, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand could act as a member of the ORA, moreover he set up his own RNPG network with Pinot in February and he obtained funding for his own network. In March, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand met Henri Frenay, who encouraged the resistance in France to support Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand over Michel Cailliau. 28 May 1943, when Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand met with Gaullist Philippe Dechartre, is generally taken as the date Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand split with Vichy. According to Dechartre, the meeting on 28 May 1943 was set up because \"there were three movements [of \"R\u00e9sistance\":] [\u2026] the Gaullist, the communist, and one from support centers [\u2026] hence I was assigned the mission to prepare what would be called afterwards the merger [of the three movements].\"\nDuring 1943, the RNPG gradually changed from providing false papers to information-gathering for France libre. Pierre de B\u00e9nouville said, \"Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand created a true spy network in the POW camps which gave us information, often decisive, about what was going on behind the German borders.\" On 10 July Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand and Piatzook (a militant communist) interrupted a public meeting in the Salle Wagram in Paris. The meeting was about allowing French POWs to go home if they were replaced by young French men forced to go and work in Germany (in French this was called \"\"la rel\u00e8ve\"). When Andr\u00e9 Masson began to talk about \"la trahison des gaullistes\" (the Gaullist treason), Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand stood up in the audience and shouted him down, saying Masson had no right to talk on behalf of POWs and calling \"la rel\u00e8ve\" a \"con\"\" (i.e., something stupid). Mitterrand avoided arrest as Piatzook covered his escape.\nIn November 1943, the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" raided a flat in Vichy, where they hoped to arrest Fran\u00e7ois Morland, a member of the resistance. \"Morland\" was Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's cover name. He also used Purgon, Monnier, Laroche, Captain Fran\u00e7ois, Arnaud et Albre as cover names. The man they arrested was Pol Pilven, a member of the resistance who was to survive the war in a concentration camp. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand was in Paris at the time.\nWarned by his friends, Mitterrand escaped to London aboard a Lysander plane on 15 November 1943 (piloted by then-Squadron Leader Lewis Hodges). He promoted his movement to the British and American Authorities, but he was sent to Algiers, where he met de Gaulle, by then the uncontested leader of the Free French. The two men clashed, de Gaulle refused to jeopardize the Resistance by including a movement that gathered information from POWs. Later Mitterrand refused to merge his group with other POW movements if de Gaulle's nephew Cailliau was to be the leader. Under the influence of Henri Frenay, de Gaulle finally agreed to merge his nephew's network and the RNPG with Mitterrand in charge. Thus the RNPG was listed in the French Force organization from spring 1944.\nMitterrand returned to France by boat via England. In Paris, the three Resistance groups made up of POWs (Communists, Gaullists, RNPG) finally merged as the POWs and Deportees National Movement (\"Mouvement national des prisonniers de guerre et d\u00e9port\u00e9s\", MNPGD) and Mitterrand took the lead. In his memoirs, he says that he had started this organisation while he was still officially working for the Vichy Regime. From 27 November 1943, Mitterrand worked for the Bureau central de renseignements et d'action. In December 1943 Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand ordered the execution of Henri Marlin (who was about to order attacks on the \"Maquis\") by Jacques Paris and Jean Munier, who later hid out with Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's father.\nAfter a second visit to London in February 1944, Mitterrand took part in the liberation of Paris in August; he took over the headquarters of Commissariat g\u00e9n\u00e9ral aux prisonniers de guerre (general office for POW, the ministry he was working for), immediately he took up the vacant post of secretary general of POWs. When de Gaulle entered Paris following the Liberation, he was introduced to various men who were to be part of the provisional government. Among them was Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand, when they came face to face, de Gaulle is said to have muttered: \"You again!\" He dismissed Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand 2 weeks later.\nIn October 1944, Mitterrand and Jacques Foccart developed a plan to liberate the POW and concentration camps. This was called operation \"Vicarage\". On the orders of de Gaulle, in April 1945 Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand accompanied General Lewis as the French representative at the liberation of the camps at Kaufering and Dachau. By chance Mitterrand discovered his friend and member of his network, Robert Antelme, suffering from typhus. Antelme was restricted to the camp to prevent the spread of disease, but Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand arranged for his \"escape\" and sent him back to France for treatment.\nFourth Republic.\nRise in politics: 1946\u20131954.\nAfter the war, Mitterrand quickly moved back into politics. At the June 1946 legislative election, he led the list of the Rally of the Republican Lefts (\"Rassemblement des gauches r\u00e9publicaines\", RGR) in the Western suburb of Paris, but he was not elected. The RGR was an electoral entity composed of the Radical Party, the centrist Democratic and Socialist Union of the Resistance (\"Union d\u00e9mocratique et socialiste de la R\u00e9sistance\", UDSR) and several conservative groupings. It opposed the policy of the \"Three-parties alliance\" (Communists, Socialists and Christian Democrats).\nIn the November 1946 legislative election, he succeeded in winning a seat as deputy from the Ni\u00e8vre \"d\u00e9partement\". To be elected, he had to win a seat at the expense of the French Communist Party (PCF). As leader of the RGR list, he led a very anti-communist campaign. He became a member of the UDSR party. In January 1947, he joined the cabinet as War Veterans Minister. He held various offices in the Fourth Republic as a Deputy and as a Minister (holding eleven different portfolios in total), including as a mayor of Ch\u00e2teau-Chinon from 1959 to 1981.\nIn May 1948, Mitterrand participated in the Congress of The Hague, together with Konrad Adenauer, Winston Churchill, Harold Macmillan, Paul-Henri Spaak, Albert Copp\u00e9 and Altiero Spinelli. It originated the European Movement.\nAs Overseas Minister (1950\u20131951), Mitterrand opposed the colonial lobby to propose a reform program. He connected with the left when he resigned from the cabinet after the arrest of Morocco's sultan (1953). As leader of the progressive wing of the UDSR, he took the head of the party in 1953, replacing the conservative Ren\u00e9 Pleven.\nIn June 1953, Mitterrand attended the coronation of Queen Elizabeth II. Seated next to the elderly Princess Marie Bonaparte, he reported having spent much of the ceremony being psychoanalyzed by her.\nSenior minister during the Algerian War: 1954\u20131958.\nAs Interior Minister in Pierre Mend\u00e8s-France's cabinet (1954\u20131955), Mitterrand had to direct the response to the Algerian War of Independence. He claimed: \"Algeria is France.\" He was suspected of being the informer of the Communist Party in the cabinet. This rumour was spread by the former Paris police prefect, who had been dismissed by him. The suspicions were dismissed by subsequent investigations.\nThe UDSR joined the Republican Front, a centre-left coalition, which won the 1956 legislative election. As Justice Minister (1956\u20131957), Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand allowed the expansion of martial law in the Algerian conflict. Unlike other ministers (including Mend\u00e8s-France), who criticised the repressive policy in Algeria, he remained in Guy Mollet's cabinet until its end. As Minister of Justice, he had a role in 45 executions of the Algerian natives, recommending President Ren\u00e9 Coty to reject clemency in 80% of the cases, an action he later came to regret. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's role in confirming the death sentences of FLN rebels convicted by French courts of terrorism and later in abolishing the death penalty in 1981 led the British writer Anthony Daniels (writing under his pseudonym of Theodore Dalrymple) to accuse Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand of being an unprincipled opportunist, a cynical politician who proudly confirmed death sentences of FLN rebels in the 1950s when it was popular and who only came to champion abolishing the death penalty when this was popular with the French people.\nAs Minister of Justice, he was an official representative of France during the wedding of Rainier III, Prince of Monaco, and actress Grace Kelly. Under the Fourth Republic, he was representative of a generation of young ambitious politicians. He appeared as a possible future prime minister.\nOpposition during the Fifth Republic.\nCrossing the desert: 1958\u20131964.\nIn 1958, Mitterrand was one of the few to object to the nomination of Charles de Gaulle as head of government and to de Gaulle's plan for a Fifth Republic. He justified his opposition by the circumstances of de Gaulle's comeback: the 13 May 1958 quasi-putsch and military pressure. In September 1958, determinedly opposed to Charles de Gaulle, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand made an appeal to vote \"no\" in the referendum over the Constitution, which was nevertheless adopted on 4 October 1958. This defeated coalition of the \"No\" was composed of the PCF and some left-wing republican politicians (such as Pierre Mend\u00e8s-France and Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand).\nThis attitude may have been a factor in Mitterrand's losing his seat in the 1958 elections, beginning a long \"crossing of the desert\" (this term is usually applied to de Gaulle's decline in influence for a similar period). Indeed, in the second round of the legislative election, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand was supported by the Communists but the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO) refused to withdraw its candidate. This division caused the election of the Gaullist candidate. One year later, he was elected to represent Ni\u00e8vre in the Senate, where he was part of the Group of the Democratic Left. At the same time, he was not admitted to the ranks of the Unified Socialist Party (\"Parti socialiste unifi\u00e9\", PSU) which was created by Mend\u00e8s-France, former internal opponents of Mollet and reform-minded former members of the Communist Party. The PSU leaders justified their decision by referring to his non-resignation from Mollet's cabinet and by his past in Vichy.\nAlso in that same year, on the Avenue de l'Observatoire in Paris, Mitterrand claimed to have escaped an assassin's bullet by diving behind a hedge, in what became known as the \"Observatory Affair\". The incident brought him a great deal of publicity, initially boosting his political ambitions. Some of Mitterrand's critics claimed, however, that he had staged the incident himself, resulting in a backlash against him. He later said he had earlier been warned by right-wing deputy Robert Pesquet that he was the target of an \"Alg\u00e9rie fran\u00e7aise\" death squad and accused Prime Minister Michel Debr\u00e9 of being its instigator. Before his death, Pesquet claimed that Mitterrand had set up a fake attempt on his life. Prosecution was initiated against Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand but was later dropped. Nonetheless, the Observatory Affair cast a lasting shadow over Mitterrand's reputation. Years later in 1965, when Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand emerged as the challenger to de Gaulle in the second round of the presidential elections, de Gaulle was urged by an aide to use the Observatory Affair to discredit his opponent. \"No, and don't insist\" was the General's response, \"It would be wrong to demean the office of the Presidency, since one day he [Mitterrand] may have the job.\"\nMitterrand visited China in 1961, during the worst of the Great Chinese Famine, but denied the existence of starvation.\nOpposition to De Gaulle: 1964\u20131971.\nIn the 1962 election, Mitterrand regained his seat in the National Assembly with the support of the PCF and the SFIO. Practising left unity in Ni\u00e8vre, he advocated the rallying of left-wing forces at the national level, including the PCF, in order to challenge Gaullist domination. Two years later, he became the president (chairman) of the General Council of Ni\u00e8vre. While the opposition to De Gaulle organized in clubs, he founded his own group, the Convention of Republican Institutions (\"Convention des institutions r\u00e9publicaines\", CIR). He reinforced his position as a left-wing opponent to Charles de Gaulle in publishing \"Le Coup d'\u00c9tat permanent\" (The permanent coup, 1964), which criticized de Gaulle's personal power, the weaknesses of Parliament and of the government, the President's exclusive control of foreign affairs, and defence, etc.\nIn 1965, Mitterrand was the first left-wing politician who saw the presidential election by universal suffrage as a way to defeat the opposition leadership. Not a member of any specific political party, his candidacy for presidency was accepted by all left-wing parties (the French Section of the Workers' International (SFIO), French Communist Party (PCF), Radical-Socialist Party (PR) and Unified Socialist Party (PSU)). He ended the \"cordon sanitaire\" of the PCF which the party had been subject to since 1947. For the SFIO leader Guy Mollet, Mitterrand's candidacy prevented Gaston Defferre, his rival in the SFIO, from running for the presidency. Furthermore, Mitterrand was a lone figure, so he did not appear as a danger to the left-wing parties' staff members.\nDe Gaulle was expected to win in the first round, but Mitterrand received 31.7% of the vote, denying De Gaulle a first-round victory. Mitterrand was supported in the second round by the left and other anti-Gaullists: centrist Jean Monnet, moderate conservative Paul Reynaud and Jean-Louis Tixier-Vignancour, an extreme right-winger and the lawyer who had defended Raoul Salan, one of the four generals who had organized the 1961 Algiers putsch during the Algerian War.\nMitterrand received 44.8% of votes in the second round and de Gaulle, with the majority, was thus elected for another term, but this defeat was regarded as honourable, for no one was really expected to defeat de Gaulle. Mitterrand took the lead of a centre-left alliance: the Federation of the Democratic and Socialist Left (\"F\u00e9d\u00e9ration de la gauche d\u00e9mocrate et socialiste\", FGDS). It was composed of the SFIO, the Radicals and several left-wing republican clubs (such the CIR of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand).\nIn the legislative election of March 1967, the system where all candidates who failed to pass a 10% threshold in the first round were eliminated from the second round favoured the pro-Gaullist majority, which faced a split opposition (PCF, FGDS and centrists of Jacques Duhamel). Nevertheless, the parties of the left managed to gain 63 seats more than previously for a total of 194. The Communists remained the largest left-wing group with 22.5% of votes. The governing coalition won with its majority reduced by only one seat (247 seats out of 487).\nIn Paris, the Left (FGDS, PSU, PCF) managed to win more votes in the first round than the two governing parties (46% against 42.6%) while the Democratic Centre of Duhamel got 7% of votes. But with 38% of votes, de Gaulle's Union for the Fifth Republic remained the leading French party.\nDuring the May 1968 governmental crisis, Mitterrand held a press conference to announce his candidacy if a new presidential election was held. But after the Gaullist demonstration on the Champs-\u00c9lys\u00e9es, de Gaulle dissolved the Assembly and called for a legislative election instead. In this election, the right-wing won its largest majority since the \"Bloc National\" in 1919.\nMitterrand was accused of being responsible for this huge legislative defeat and the FGDS split. In 1969, Mitterrand could not run for the Presidency: Guy Mollet refused to give him the support of the SFIO. The left-wing was eliminated in the first round, with the Socialist candidate Gaston Defferre winning a humiliating 5.1 per cent of the total vote. Georges Pompidou faced the centrist Alain Poher in the second round.\nSocialist Party leader: 1971\u20131981.\nAfter the FGDS's implosion Mitterrand turned to the Socialist Party (\"Parti socialiste\" or PS). In June 1971, at the time of the Epinay Congress, the CIR joined the PS, which had succeeded the SFIO in 1969. The executive of the PS was then dominated by Guy Mollet's supporters. They proposed an \"ideological dialogue\" with the Communists. For Mitterrand, an electoral alliance with the Communists was necessary to rise to power. With this in mind, Mitterrand obtained the support of all the internal opponents to Mollet's faction and was elected as the first secretary of the PS. At the 1971 congress, he declared: \"Whoever does not accept the break with the established order, with capitalist society, cannot be an adherent of the Socialist Party.\"\nIn June 1972, Mitterrand signed the Common Programme of Government with the Communist Georges Marchais and the Left Radical Robert Fabre. With this programme, he led the 1973 legislative campaign of the \"Union of the Left\".\nAt the 1974 presidential election, Mitterrand received 43.2% of the vote in the first round, as the common candidate of the left. He faced Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing in the second round. During the national TV debate, Giscard d'Estaing criticised him as being \"a man of the past\", due to his long political career. Mitterrand was narrowly defeated by Giscard d'Estaing, Mitterrand receiving 49.19% and Giscard 50.81%.\nIn 1977, the Communist and Socialist parties failed to update the \"Common Programme\", and then lost the 1978 legislative election. While the Socialists took the leading position on the left, by obtaining more votes than the Communists for the first time since 1936, the leadership of Mitterrand was challenged by an internal opposition led by Michel Rocard who criticized the programme of the PS as being \"archaic\" and \"unrealistic\". The polls indicated Rocard was more popular than Mitterrand. Nevertheless, Mitterrand won the vote at the Party's Metz Congress (1979) and Rocard renounced his candidacy for the 1981 presidential election.\nFor his third candidacy for the presidency, Mitterrand was not supported by the PCF but only by the PS. Mitterrand projected a reassuring image with the slogan \"the quiet force\". He campaigned for \"another politics\", based on the Socialist programme \"110 Propositions for France\", and denounced the performance of the incumbent president. Furthermore, he benefited from divisions in the right-wing majority. He obtained 25.85% of votes in the first round (against 15% for the PCF candidate Georges Marchais), then defeated President Giscard d'Estaing in the second round, with 51.76%. He became the first left-wing politician elected President of France by universal suffrage.\nPresidency.\nFirst term: 1981\u20131988.\nIn the presidential election of 10 May 1981, Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand became the first socialist President of the Fifth Republic, and his government became the first left-wing government in 23 years. He named Pierre Mauroy as prime minister and organised a new legislative election. The Socialists obtained an absolute parliamentary majority, and four Communists joined the cabinet.\nEconomic policy.\nThe beginning of his first term was marked by a left-wing economic policy based on the 110 Propositions for France and the 1972 Common Programme between the Socialist Party, the Communist Party and the Left Radical Party. This included several nationalizations, a 10% increase in the \"SMIC\" (minimum wage), a 39-hour work week, 5 weeks holiday per year, the creation of the solidarity tax on wealth, an increase in social benefits, and the extension of workers' rights to consultation and information about their employers (through the Auroux Act). The objective was to boost economic demand and thus economic activity (Keynesianism), but the stimulative fiscal policy implemented by the Mauroy government was in contradiction with the constrained monetary policy implemented by the Bank of France. However, unemployment continued to grow, and the franc was devalued three times.\nOld age pensions were raised by 300 francs per month to 1,700 francs for a single person and to 3,700 francs for a couple, while health insurance benefits were made more widely available to unemployed persons and part-time employees. Housing allocations for the low-paid were raised by 25% in 1981, and in the two years following May 1981 family allowances were increased by 44% for families with 3 children and by 81% for families with 2 children. In 1981, the purchasing power of social transfers went up by 4.5% and by 7.6% in 1982. In addition, the minimum wage (which affected 1.7\u00a0million employees) was increased by 15% in real terms between May 1981 and December 1982. Also, between 1981 and 1983, the basic pension benefit for elderly poor persons was raised by 62.% \nMajor efforts were made to improve access to housing and health care, while the government also attempted to tackle working-class under-achievement in schools by reinforcing the comprehensive system, modernising the curriculum and reducing streaming. As a means of increasing political participation, the government increased the financial allowances of local politicians, who also became entitled to paid leave from their jobs to attend courses in public administration. Allowances for the handicapped were improved, while improvements were also made in the pay and conditions for those serving in the army. A decree of January 1982 provided for \"solidarity contracts\" whereby firms would be subsidised for introducing part-time work or early retirement if they also allowed the creation of new jobs, while a decree of March 1982 provided employees with the right to retire at the age of 60 on 50% of average earnings during their 10 best years of employment. In 1983, legislation was passed to encourage greater equality in the private sector. Firms now had to make an annual report on the training opportunities and employment conditions for women and present a statistical analysis of their position in the firm, whilst the works committee had to ensure that equality-promoting measures were taken. In addition, a new benefit was introduced for unemployed workers who had exhausted their eligibility for unemployment insurance. In December 1982, a law was passed that restored to workers the right to elect administrators to social security funds, which had been eliminated by Charles De Gaulle in 1967.\nMitterrand continued to promote the new technologies initiated by his predecessor Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing: the TGV high-speed train and the Minitel, a pre-World Wide Web interactive network similar to the web. The Minitel and the Paris-Lyon TGV line were inaugurated only a few weeks after the election. In addition, Government grants and loans for capital investment for modernisation were significantly increased. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand passed the first decentralization laws, the Defferre Act.\nAfter two years in office, Mitterrand made a substantial u-turn in economic policies, with the March 1983 adoption of the so-called \"tournant de la rigueur\" (austerity turn). Priority was given to the struggle against inflation in order to remain competitive in the European Monetary System. Although there were two periods of mild economic reflation (first from 1984 to 1986 and again from 1988 to 1990), monetary and fiscal restraint was the essential policy orientation of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's presidency from 1983 onwards. Nevertheless, compared to the OECD average, fiscal policy in France remained relatively expansionary during the course of the two Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand presidencies.\nSocial policy.\nIn 1983, all members of the general pension scheme obtained the right to a full pension at the age of 60 payable at a rate of half the reference wage in return for 37.5 years contribution. The government agreed at the same time to improve the pension position of some public sector employees and to increase the real value of the minimum pension. In addition, later negotiations brought retirement at 60 years into the occupational schemes although the financial terms for doing so could only be agreed for a 7-year period. A comparison between 1981 and 1986 showed that the minimum state pension had increased by 64% for a couple and by 81% for one person. During that same period, family allowances had increased by 71% for three children and by 112% for two children. In addition, the single-parent allowance for mothers or fathers with one child had been increased by 103% and for two or more children by 52% for each child.\nIn order to mark the importance of the problems of the elderly, the government appointed a Secretary of State (attached to the Ministry of Social Affairs and National Solidarity) to carry special responsibility for them, and in an effort to try to relate policy to the felt needs of the elderly, it set up a central advisory committee to examine social policy from their point of view and carry out special studies and enquiries. This body became especially concerned with monitoring the attempts at coordination and encouraging policies which were aimed at helping the elderly stay at home instead of entering residential care.\nIn the field of health care, some prescription charges were abolished, hospital administration was decentralised, workers' rights in the health service were reaffirmed, and equipment was provided for researchers. From 1983 onwards, wage-earners who had contributed to a pension fund for 37.5 years became eligible to retire on a full pension. This right was extended to the self-employed in 1984 and to farmers in 1986. People who had retired at the age of 60 were, however, not initially eligible for reductions on public transport until they reached the age of 65. The qualifying age for these reductions was, however, reduced to 62 in 1985. A number of illegal immigrants had their position regularized under the Socialists and the conditions pertaining to residence and work permits were eased. Educational programmes were implemented to help immigrant communities, while immigrants were allowed the right to free association. The Socialist government also opened up talks with the authorities in some of the main countries of origin, easing nationality rules in the public sector, associating representatives of migrant groups with public authority work, and establishing an Immigrants Council in 1984.\nAlthough the income limit for allowances varied according to the position of the child in the family and the number of dependent children, these ceilings were made more favourable in cases where both parents were working or where a single parent was in charge and were linked to changes in wage levels. Those taking parental leave to care for three or more children (provided that they fulfilled the rules for eligibility) also received certain benefits in kind, such as a non-taxable, non-means-tested benefit and priority on vocational training courses. A new boost was also given to research into family problems including an interest in the effects of changing family structures, of women\u2019s employment and the impact of local social policies on family life. In addition, a law on equal opportunities in employment was passed in July 1983 which prohibited all forms of unequal treatment regardless of the circumstances, together with providing for positive action plans to be established in major companies. In January 1984, a decree was made granting state aid to companies which implemented equality plans for staff. That same year, a law was passed that gave the regional Caissess des Allocations Familiales the task of collecting unpaid alimony, initially for lone parents and subsequently for remarried or cohabiting mothers.\nIn the field of education, more resources were devoted to the educational system, with the education budgets of 1982, 1983, and 1984 increasing by approximately 4% to 6% per year above the rate of inflation. From 1981 to 1983, the corps of teachers was increased by 30,000. Authorization was restored for a number of advanced undergraduate and graduate programmes which the previous centre-right minister Alice Saunier-Seit\u00e9 had rejected on grounds of economy and \"rationalization\" of resources. Numerous initiatives were carried out such as the teaching of civics, the reintroduction of the teaching of French history and geography at the primary level, the introduction of new professional degrees, a partnership between schools and enterprises, and the introduction of computers in classrooms. Priority areas were set up in 1981 as part of a systematic effort to combat underachievement in schools, while technical education was encouraged. In addition, nursery education was expanded, while efforts by the Socialists to promote joint research between industry and the research agencies increased the number of such contracts by half each year between 1982 and 1985, with a 29% increase in joint patents. The baccalaur\u00e9at professionnel, introduced in 1985, enabled holders of a Brevet d'\u00e9tudes professionnelles (or in some cases of a Certificat d\u2019aptitude professionnelle) to continue for another two years and study for the baccalaur\u00e9at.\nSeveral measures were taken to put an end to the discrimination of homosexuals and repeal legal practices that repressed them. The Minister of the Interior, Gaston Defferre, put an end to the registration of homosexuals, and the Communist Jack Ralite, Minister of Health, removed homosexuality from the list of mental disorders. The government also introduced the passage of the sexual majority to 15 years for all, abolishing the distinction, introduced in 1942, in the age of consent between homosexual and heterosexual relations. Homosexual lifestyle ceased to be a clause for cancellation of a residential lease.\nMitterrand abolished the death penalty as soon as he took office (via the Badinter Act), as well as the \"anti-casseurs Act\" which instituted collective responsibility for acts of violence during demonstrations. He also dissolved the \"Cour de s\u00fbret\u00e9\", a special high court, and enacted a massive regularization of illegal immigrants. Tighter regulations on the powers of police to stop, search and arrest were introduced, and the \"loi s\u00e9curit\u00e9 et libert\u00e9\" (a controversial public order act) was repealed. In addition, the legal aid system was improved.\nIn 1984, a law was passed to ensure that divorced women who were not in receipt of maintenance would be provided with assistance in recovering the shortfall in their income from their former husband. By 1986, particular attention was being focused on assisting women in single-parent families to get back into employment, in recognition of the growing problems associated with extra-marital births and marital breakdown. Parental leave was extended to firms with 100 employees in 1981 (previously, parental leave provision had been made in 1977 for firms employing at least 200 employees) and subsequently to all employees in 1984. From 1984 onwards, married women were obliged to sign tax returns, men and women were provided with equal rights in managing their common property and that of their children, and in 1985 they became responsible for each other\u2019s debts.\nChildcare facilities were also expanded, with the number of places in cr\u00e8ches rising steadily between 1981 and 1986. In addition, the minimum wage was significantly increased. From 1981 to 1984, the \"SMIC\" rose by 125%, while prices went up by only 75% during that same period. Various measures were also introduced to mitigate the effects of rising unemployment. Between 1981 and 1986, there had been just over 800,000 young people placed on special work schemes, 800,000 early retirements, 200,000 enterprise allowance successes, and 30,000 retrained workers from declining industrial sectors.\nCultural policy.\nWith respect to cultural policies, grants were allocated to non-profit associations and community cultural initiatives, Mitterrand liberalized the media, created the CSA media regulation agency, and authorized pirate radio and the first private TV (Canal+), giving rise to the private broadcasting sector.\nIn terms of the theatre, some transfer of resources was made from the subsidy of the national theatres to the support for theatre companies which did not necessarily have an institutional home. A significant investment was made in music education with the creation of 5 new music schools in the departments and the revamping of the Conservatoire National de la Musique at Lyon, while the range and capacity of performance facilities in Paris were considerably increased, with the Cite Musicale de la Villette and the Opera de la Bastille allowing for specialist performance in a way that was lacking in Paris previously, and a 2,000 seat concert hall called le Zenith, which was designed primarily for rock music concerts but adapted for all uses.\nThe Socialists continued the policies of their predecessors with the Grand Louvre project and the opening of the Picasso Museum at the Hotel Sale, while the museum budget was quadrupled and particular sums were set aside for the first time for large regional projects including the establishment of a number of new museums in the provinces such as the Ecomuseum at Chartres and the Museum of Prehistory at Carnac. A Fonds Regional des Acquisitions was established to assist provincial museums in the purchase of works of art, while the state actively continued an existing policy of encouraging bequests in lieu of death duties.\nLibraries and publishing benefited from new thinking and an injection of funds, while aid to authors and publishers was restructured and book prices were fixed once again, with the objective being to assist smaller publishing houses and specialist bookshops. The network of regional lending libraries was significantly reinforced, while financial assistance was provided for the export of French books. In addition, archaeology, ethnography and historical buildings and monuments all benefited from the general increase in resources.\nDomestic difficulties.\nThe Left lost the 1983 municipal elections and the 1984 European Parliament election. At the same time, the Savary Bill, to limit the financing of private schools by local communities, caused a political crisis. It was abandoned and Mauroy resigned in July 1984. Laurent Fabius succeeded him, and the Communists left the cabinet.\nIn terms of foreign policy, Mitterrand did not significantly deviate from his predecessors and he continued nuclear weapons testing in the South Pacific in spite of protests from various peace and environmentalist organizations. In July 1985, French agents sank the Greenpeace-owned ex-trawler \"Rainbow Warrior\" while it was docked in Auckland, New Zealand which the group had used in demonstrations against nuclear tests, whaling, and seal hunting. One Greenpeace member was killed, and when news broke of the event, a major scandal erupted that led to the resignation of Defence Minister Charles Hernu. France apologized with a subsequent payment of $8.16m reparations to Greenpeace in damages, NZ$13m to the New Zealand Government and a significant amount to the relatives of the deceased.\nFirst Cohabitation.\nBefore the 1986 legislative campaign, proportional representation was instituted in accordance with the 110 Propositions. It did not prevent, however, the victory of the Rally for the Republic/Union for French Democracy (RPR/UDF) coalition. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand thus named the RPR leader Jacques Chirac as Prime Minister. This period of government, with a President and a Prime Minister who came from two opposite coalitions, was the first time that such a combination had occurred under the Fifth Republic, and came to be known as \"Cohabitation\".\nChirac mostly handled domestic policy while Mitterrand concentrated on his \"reserved domain\" of foreign affairs and defence. However, several conflicts erupted between the two. In one example, Mitterrand refused to sign executive decrees of liberalisation, obliging Chirac to pass the measures through parliament instead. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand also reportedly gave covert support to some social movements, notably the student revolt against the university reform (Devaquet Bill). Benefiting from the difficulties of Chirac's cabinet, the President's popularity increased.\nWith the polls running in his favour, Mitterrand announced his candidacy in the 1988 presidential election. He proposed a moderate programme (promising \"neither nationalisation nor privatization\"), advocated a \"united France,\" and laid out his policy priorities in his \"Letter to the French People.\" He obtained 34% of the votes in the first round, then faced Chirac in the second, and was re-elected with 54% of the votes. Mitterrand thus became the first President to be elected twice by universal suffrage.\nSecond term: 1988\u20131995.\nDomestic policy.\nFollowing his re-election, he named Michel Rocard as prime minister, despite their poor relations. Rocard led the moderate wing of the PS and he was the most popular of the Socialist politicians. Mitterrand decided to organize a new legislative election. The PS obtained a relative parliamentary majority. Four centre-right politicians joined the cabinet.\nThe second term was marked by the creation of the Insertion Minimum Revenue (RMI), which ensured a minimum level of income to those deprived of any other form of income; the restoring of the solidarity tax on wealth, which had been abolished by Chirac's cabinet; the institution of the Generalized social tax; the extension of parental leave up to the child's third birthday; the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy; the 1990 Gayssot Act on hate speech and Holocaust denial; the Besson law of 1990; the Mermaz Law of 1989; the introduction of a private childcare allowance; the Urban Orientation Law of 1991; the Arpaillange Act on the financing of political parties; the reform of the penal code; the Matignon Agreements concerning New Caledonia; the Evin Act on smoking in public places; the extension of the age limit for family allowances to 18 years in 1990; and the 1989 Education Act which, amongst other measures, obliged local authorities to educate all children with disabilities. Several large architectural works were pursued, in what would become known as the Grands Projets of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand with the building of the Louvre Pyramid, the Channel Tunnel, the Grande Arche at La D\u00e9fense, the Bastille Opera, the Finance Ministry in Bercy, and the National Library of France. On 16 February 1993, President Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand inaugurated in Fr\u00e9jus a memorial to the wars in Indochina.\nBut the second term was also marked by rivalries within the PS and the split of the \"Mitterrandist\" group (at the Rennes Congress, where supporters of Laurent Fabius and Lionel Jospin clashed bitterly for control of the party), the scandals about the financing of the party, the contaminated blood scandal which implicated Laurent Fabius and former ministers Georgina Dufoix and Emond Herv\u00e9, and the Elys\u00e9e wiretaps affairs.\nSecond Cohabitation.\nDisappointed with Rocard's apparent failure to enact the Socialists' programme, Mitterrand dismissed Michel Rocard in 1991 and appointed \u00c9dith Cresson to replace him. She was the first woman to become prime minister in France but proved a costly mistake due to her tendency to make acerbic and racist public remarks. After the Socialists experienced heavy losses in the 1992 regional elections, Cresson resigned from office. Her successor Pierre B\u00e9r\u00e9govoy promised to fight unemployment and corruption but he could not prevent the catastrophic defeat of the left in the 1993 legislative election. The Socialist Party suffered a crushing defeat with the right-wing parties winning 485 seats to the left's 95. He killed himself on 1 May 1993.\nMitterrand named the former RPR Finance Minister Edouard Balladur as Prime Minister. The second \"cohabitation\" was less contentious than the first, because the two men knew they were not rivals for the next presidential election. By this point, Mitterrand was nearly 80 years old and suffering from cancer in addition to the shock of his friend Fran\u00e7ois de Grossouvre's suicide. His second and last term ended after the 1995 presidential election in May 1995 with the election of Jacques Chirac. Socialist candidate Lionel Jospin lost the presidential election.\nOverall, as President, Mitterrand maintained the \"basic characteristic of a strong welfare base underpinned by a strong state.\" A United Nations Human Development report concluded that, from 1979 to 1989, France was the only country in the OECD (apart from Portugal) in which income inequalities did not get worse. During his second term as president, however, the gap between rich and poor widened in France, with both unemployment and poverty rising in the wake of the economic recession of 1991\u20131993. According to other studies, though, the percentage of the French population living in poverty (based on various criteria) fell between the mid-Eighties and the mid-Nineties.\nForeign policy.\nAccording to Wayne Northcutt, certain domestic circumstances helped shape Mitterrand's foreign policy in four ways: he needed to maintain a political consensus; he kept an eye on economic conditions; he believed in the nationalistic imperative for French policy; and he tried to exploit Gaullism and its heritage for political advantage.\nEast/West relations.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand supported closer European collaboration and the preservation of France's unique relationship with its former colonies, which he feared were falling under \"Anglo-Saxon influence.\" His drive to preserve French power in Africa led to controversies concerning Paris' role during the Rwandan genocide.\nDespite Mitterrand's left-wing affiliations, the 1980s saw France becoming more distant from the USSR, especially following events such as the expulsion of 47 Soviet diplomats and their families from the country in 1982 after they were accused of large-scale industrial and military espionage. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand also sharply criticized the Soviet intervention in Afghanistan as well as the country's nuclear weapons buildup. When Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand visited the USSR in November 1988, the Soviet media claimed to be 'leaving aside the virtually wasted decade and losing the Soviet-French 'special relationship' of the Gaullist era'.\nNevertheless, Mitterrand was worried by the rapidity of the Eastern bloc's collapse. He was opposed to German reunification but came to see it as unavoidable. He was opposed to the swift recognition of Croatia and Slovenia, which he thought would lead to the violent implosion of Yugoslavia.\nFrance participated in the Gulf War (1990\u20131991) with the U.N. coalition.\nEuropean policy.\nHe initially opposed further membership, fearing the Community was not ready and it would water it down to a free trade area. Mitterrand supported the enlargement of the Community to include Spain and Portugal (which both joined in January 1986). In February 1986 he helped the \"Single European Act\" come into effect. He worked well with his friend Helmut Kohl and improved Franco-German relations significantly. Together they fathered the Maastricht Treaty, which was signed on 7 February 1992. It was ratified by referendum, and approved by just over 51% of the voters. British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher was against a German reunification and also against the then discussed Maastricht Treaty. When Kohl, then West German Chancellor, asked Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand to agree to reunification (France was one of the four Allies who had to agree to the Two Plus Four-treaty), Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand told Kohl he accepted it only in the event Germany would abandon the Deutsche Mark and adopt the Euro. Kohl accepted this package deal (including without talking to Karl Otto P\u00f6hl, then President of the Bundesbank). That year, he also established the Mitterrand doctrine, a policy of not extraditing convicted far-left terrorists of the years of lead such as Cesare Battisti to Italy, due to the alleged non-conformity of Italian legislation to European standards of rule of law, in particular the anti-terrorism laws passed by Italy in the 1970s and 1980s. When the European Court of Human Rights finally ruled against the Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand doctrine, the policy had already led to most of the criminals never being punished for their crimes.\n1990 speech at La Baule.\nResponding to a democratic movement in Africa after the 1989 fall of the Berlin Wall, he made his La Baule speech in June 1990 which tied development aid to democratic efforts from former French colonies, and during which he opposed the devaluation of the CFA Franc. Seeing an \"East wind\" blowing in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, he stated that a \"Southern wind\" was also blowing in Africa, and that state leaders had to respond to the populations' wishes and aspirations by a \"democratic opening\", which included a representative system, free elections, multipartyism, freedom of the press, an independent judiciary, and abolition of censorship. Claiming that France was the country making the most important effort concerning development aid, he announced that the least developed countries (LDCs) would henceforth receive only grants from France, as opposed to loans (in order to combat the massive increase of Third World debt during the 1980s). He likewise limited the interest rate to 5% on French loans to intermediate-income countries (that is, Ivory Coast, Congo, Cameroon and Gabon).\nHe also criticized interventionism in sovereign matters, which was according to him only another form of \"colonialism\". However, according to Mitterrand, this did not imply lessened concern on the part of Paris for its former colonies. Mitterrand thus continued with the African policy of de Gaulle inaugurated in 1960, which followed the relative failure of the 1958 creation of the French Community. All in all, Mitterrand's La Baule speech, which marked a relative turning point in France's policy concerning its former colonies, has been compared with the 1956 \"loi-cadre Defferre\" which was responding to anti-colonialist feelings.\nAfrican heads of state reacted to Mitterrand's speech at most with indifference. Omar Bongo, President of Gabon, declared that he would rather have \"events counsel him;\" Abdou Diouf, President of Senegal, said that, according to him, the best solution was a \"strong government\" and a \"good faith opposition;\" the President of Chad, Hiss\u00e8ne Habr\u00e9 (nicknamed the \"African Pinochet\") claimed that it was contradictory to demand that African states should simultaneously carry on a \"democratic policy\" and \"social and economic policies which limited their sovereignty\", in a clear allusion to the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank's \"structural adjustment programs\". Hassan II, the king of Morocco, said for his part that \"Africa was too open to the world to remain indifferent to what was happening around it\", but that Western countries should \"help young democracies open out, without putting a knife under their throat, without a brutal transition to multipartyism.\"\nAll in all, the La Baule speech has been said to be on one hand \"one of the foundations of political renewal in Africa French speaking area\", and on the other hand \"cooperation with France\", this despite \"incoherence and inconsistency, like any public policy\".\nDiscovery of HIV.\nThe controversy surrounding the discovery of the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) was intense after American researcher Robert Gallo and French scientist Luc Montagnier both claimed to have discovered it. The two scientists had given the new virus different names. The controversy was eventually settled by an agreement (helped along by the mediation of Dr Jonas Salk) between President Ronald Reagan and Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand which gave equal credit to both men and their teams.\nApology to the Huguenots.\nIn October 1985, to commemorate the tricentenary of the Revocation of the Edict of Nantes, Mitterrand gave a formal apology to the descendants of Huguenots around the world. At the same time, a special postage stamp was released in their honour. The stamp states that France \"is\" the home of the Huguenots (\"Accueil des Huguenots\"). Hence their rights were finally recognised.\nCo-Prince of Andorra.\nOn 2 February 1993, in his capacity as co-prince of Andorra, Mitterrand and Joan Mart\u00ed Alanis, who was Bishop of Urgell and therefore Andorra's other co-prince, signed Andorra's new constitution, which was later approved by referendum in the principality.\nDeath.\nMitterrand died in Paris on 8 January 1996 at the age of 79 from prostate cancer, a condition he and his doctors had concealed for most of his presidency (see section on \"Medical secrecy\" below). A few days before his death, he was joined by family members and close friends for a \"last meal\" that attracted controversy because, in addition to other gourmet dishes, it included the serving of roast ortolan bunting, a small wild songbird that is a protected species whose sale was and remains illegal in France.\nFuneral.\nThe day of the funeral was declared a national day of mourning. A requiem mass was held at Notre-Dame cathedral, celebrated by Cardinal Lustiger in the presence of UN Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, EU President Jacques Santer and representatives from 171 countries. Daniel Tarschys, Secretary General of the Council of Europe, former president of the European Commission Jacques Delors and Simone Veil were present. Jacques Chirac, President of France, Alain Jupp\u00e9, Prime Minister of France, former president Val\u00e9ry Giscard d'Estaing and former prime ministers \u00c9douard Balladur, Jacques Chaban-Delmas, Laurent Fabius, Maurice Couve de Murville, Michel Rocard, Pierre Mauroy, \u00c9dith Cresson were present. Sixty-one heads of state were presented.\nFran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's grave is in Jarnac.\nFormer leaders and foreign delegations who attended Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's funeral included:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt; \nPrime ministers during presidency.\nAs of 2025[ [update]], Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand has had the most prime ministers during the history of the 5th Republic, along with Emmanuel Macron, both at 7.\nControversies.\nMedical secrecy.\nFollowing his death, a controversy erupted when his former physician, Claude Gubler, wrote a book called \"Le Grand Secret\" (\"The Grand Secret\") explaining that Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand had false health reports published since November 1981, hiding his cancer. Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's family then prosecuted Gubler and his publisher for violating medical confidentiality.\nUrba.\nThe Urba consultancy was established in 1971 by the Socialist Party to advise Socialist-led communes on infrastructure projects and public works. The Urba affair became public in 1989 when two police officers investigating the Marseille regional office of Urba discovered detailed minutes of the organisation's contracts, which showed a division of proceeds between the party and elected officials. Although the minutes proved a direct link between Urba and corrupt payments to politicians, an edict from the office of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand (even though he himself was listed as a recipient) prevented further investigation. The Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand election campaign of 1988 was directed by Henri Nallet, who then became Justice Minister and therefore in charge of the investigation at the national level. In 1990 Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand declared an amnesty for those under investigation, thus ending the affair. Socialist Party treasurer Henri Emmanuelli was tried in 1997 for corruption offences, for which he received a two-year suspended sentence.\nWiretaps.\nFrom 1982 to 1986, Mitterrand established an \"anti-terror cell\" installed as a service of the President of the Republic. This was an unusual set-up since such law enforcement missions against terrorism are normally left to the National Police and \"Gendarmerie\", run under the cabinet and the Prime Minister, and under the supervision of the judiciary. The cell was largely staffed by members of these services, but it bypassed the normal line of command and safeguards. Three thousand conversations concerning 150 people (7 for reasons judged to be contestable by the ensuing court process) were recorded between January 1983 and March 1986 by this anti-terrorist cell at the Elys\u00e9e Palace. In one of its first actions, the cell was involved in the \"Irish of Vincennes\" affair, in which it appeared that members of the cell had planted weapons and explosives in the Vincennes apartment of three Irish nationals who were arrested on terrorism charges. Most markedly, it appears that the cell, under illegal presidential orders, obtained wiretaps on journalists, politicians and other personalities who may have been an impediment to Mitterrand's personal life. The illegal wiretapping was revealed in 1993 by \"Lib\u00e9ration\"; the case against members of the cell went to trial in November 2004.\nIt took 20 years for the \"affaire\" to come before the courts because the instructing judge Jean-Paul Vallat was at first thwarted by the \"affaire\" being classed a defence secret, but in December 1999 the \"Commission consultative du secret de la d\u00e9fense nationale\" declassified part of the files concerned. The judge finished his investigation in 2000, but it still took another four years before coming on 15 November 2004 before the 16th chamber of the \"Tribunal correctionnel de Paris\". Twelve people were charged with \"atteinte \u00e0 la vie priv\u00e9e\" (breach of privacy) and one with selling computer files. Seven were given suspended sentences and fines and 4 were found not guilty.\nThe affair finally ended before the \"Tribunal correctionnel de Paris\" with the court's judgement on 9 November 2005. Seven members of the President's anti-terrorist unit were convicted and Mitterrand was designated as the \"inspirator and essentially the controller of the operation.\"\nThe court's judgement revealed that Mitterrand was motivated by keeping elements of his private life secret from the general public, such as the existence of his illegitimate daughter Mazarine Pingeot (which the writer Jean-Edern Hallier, was threatening to reveal), his cancer which had been diagnosed in 1981, and the elements of his past in the Vichy R\u00e9gime which were not already public knowledge. The court judged that certain people were tapped for \"obscure\" reasons, such as Carole Bouquet's companion, a lawyer with family in the Middle East, Edwy Plenel, a journalist for \"Le Monde\" who covered the \"Rainbow Warrior\" story and the Vincennes Three affair, and the lawyer Antoine Comte. The court declared \"Les faits avaient \u00e9t\u00e9 commis sur ordre soit du pr\u00e9sident de la R\u00e9publique, soit des ministres de la D\u00e9fense successifs qui ont mis \u00e0 la disposition de (Christian Prouteau) tous les moyens de l'\u00c9tat afin de les ex\u00e9cuter\" (translation: these actions were committed following orders from the French President or his various Defence Ministers who gave Christian Prouteau full access to the state machinery so he could execute the orders) The court stated that Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand was the principal instigator of the wire taps (l'inspirateur et le d\u00e9cideur de l'essentiel) and that he had ordered some of the taps and turned a blind eye to others and that none of the 3000 wiretaps carried out by the cell were legally obtained.\nOn 13 March 2007 the Court of Appeal in Paris awarded a symbolic \u20ac1 in damages to the actress Carole Bouquet and \u20ac5000 to Lieutenant-Colonel Jean-Michel Beau for breach of privacy.\nThe case was taken to the European Court of Human Rights, which gave judgement on 7 June 2007 that the rights of free expression of the journalists involved in the case were not respected.\nIn 2008 the French state was ordered by the courts to give Jean-Edern Hallier's family compensation.\nRwanda.\nParis assisted Rwanda's president Juv\u00e9nal Habyarimana, who was assassinated on 6 April 1994 while travelling in a Dassault Falcon 50 given to him as a personal gift of Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand. Through the offices of the 'Cellule Africaine', a Presidential office headed by Fran\u00e7ois Mitterrand's son, Jean-Christophe Mitterrand, he provided the Hutu regime with financial and military support in the early 1990s. With French assistance, the Rwandan army grew from a force of 9,000 men in October 1990 to 28,000 in 1991. France also provided training staff, experts and massive quantities of weaponry and facilitated arms contracts with Egypt and South Africa. It also financed, armed and trained Habyrimana's Presidential Guard. French troops were deployed under Op\u00e9ration Turquoise, a military operation carried out under a United Nations (UN) mandate. The operation is currently the object of political and historical debate.\nBombing of the \"Rainbow Warrior\".\nOn 10 July 1985, the \"Rainbow Warrior\", a Greenpeace vessel, was in New Zealand preparing to protest against French nuclear testing in the South Pacific when two explosions sank the ship, resulting in the death of freelance photographer Fernando Pereira. The New Zealand government called the bombing the first terrorist attack in the country. In mid-1985, French Defence Minister Charles Hernu was forced to resign after New Zealand authorities arrested DGSE (French intelligence services) agents who confessed to planting the explosives and later pleaded guilty.\nOn the twentieth anniversary of the sinking, it was revealed that Mitterrand had personally authorised the mission. Admiral Pierre Lacoste, the former head of the DGSE, made a statement saying Pereira's death weighed heavily on his conscience. Television New Zealand (TVNZ) also sought access to the court video recording hearing where two French agents pleaded guilty, which they .\nPolitical career.\nPresident of the French Republic: 1981\u20131995. Reelected in 1988.\nGovernmental functions\nElected positions\nNational Assembly of France\nMember of the National Assembly of France for Ni\u00e8vre: 1946\u20131958 / 1962\u20131981 (resignation, became President of the French Republic in 1981). Elected in 1946, reelected in 1951, 1956, 1962, 1967, 1968, 1973, 1978.\nSenate of France\nSenator of Ni\u00e8vre: 1959\u20131962 (resignation, reelected member of the National Assembly of France in 1962). Elected in 1959.\nGeneral Council\nPresident of the General Council of Ni\u00e8vre: 1964\u20131981 (resignation, became President of the French Republic in 1981). Reelected in 1967, 1970, 1973, 1976, 1979.\nGeneral councillor of Ni\u00e8vre: 1949\u20131981 (resignation). Reelected in 1955, 1961, 1967, 1973, 1979.\nMunicipal Council\nMayor of Ch\u00e2teau-Chinon (Ville): 1959\u20131981 (resignation, became President of the French Republic in 1981). Reelected in 1965, 1971, 1977.\nMunicipal councillor of Ch\u00e2teau-Chinon (Ville): 1959\u20131981 (resignation). Reelected in 1965, 1971, 1977.\nPolitical function\nFirst Secretary (leader) of the Socialist Party: 1971\u20131981 (resignation, became President of the French Republic in 1981). Reelected in 1973, 1975, 1977, 1979.\nFrom 1962 to 1964 and, again, from 1969 to 1971, he was the Grand Master of the Grand Orient de France. In May 1987, Mitterrand was also the first French president to receive a representative of that organization at the \u00c9lys\u00e9e Palace.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "37999", "revid": "158371", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=37999", "title": "Science and Environmental Policy Project", "text": ""}
{"id": "38001", "revid": "49979117", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38001", "title": "Phenylalanine", "text": "Type of \u03b1-amino acid\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Chembox/styles.css\"/&gt;\nChemical compound\nPhenylalanine (symbol Phe or F) is an essential \u03b1-amino acid with the formula C9H11NO2. It can be viewed as a benzyl group substituted for the methyl group of alanine, or a phenyl group in place of a terminal hydrogen of alanine. This essential amino acid is classified as neutral, and nonpolar because of the inert and hydrophobic nature of the benzyl side chain. The -isomer is used to biochemically form proteins coded for by DNA. Phenylalanine is a precursor for tyrosine, the monoamine neurotransmitters dopamine, norepinephrine (noradrenaline), and epinephrine (adrenaline), and the biological pigment melanin. It is encoded by the messenger RNA codons UUU and UUC.\nPhenylalanine is found naturally in the milk of mammals. It is used in the manufacture of food and drink products and sold as a nutritional supplement as it is a direct precursor to the neuromodulator phenethylamine. As an essential amino acid, phenylalanine is not synthesized \"de novo\" in humans and other animals, who must ingest phenylalanine or phenylalanine-containing proteins.\nThe one-letter symbol F was assigned to phenylalanine for its phonetic similarity.\nHistory.\nThe first description of phenylalanine was made in 1879, when Schulze and Barbieri identified a compound with the empirical formula, C9H11NO2, in yellow lupine (\"Lupinus luteus\") seedlings. In 1882, Erlenmeyer and Lipp first synthesized phenylalanine from phenylacetaldehyde, hydrogen cyanide, and ammonia.\nThe genetic codon for phenylalanine was first discovered by J. Heinrich Matthaei and Marshall W. Nirenberg in 1961. They showed that by using mRNA to insert multiple uracil repeats into the genome of the bacterium \"E. coli\", they could cause the bacterium to produce a polypeptide consisting solely of repeated phenylalanine amino acids. This discovery helped to establish the nature of the coding relationship that links information stored in genomic nucleic acid with protein expression in the living cell.\nDietary sources.\nGood sources of phenylalanine are eggs, chicken, liver, beef, milk, and soybeans. Another common source of phenylalanine is anything sweetened with the artificial sweetener aspartame, such as diet drinks, diet foods and medication; the metabolism of aspartame produces phenylalanine as one of the compound's metabolites.\nDietary recommendations.\nThe Food and Nutrition Board (FNB) of the U.S. Institute of Medicine set Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs) for essential amino acids in 2002. For phenylalanine plus tyrosine, for adults 19 years and older, 33\u00a0mg/kg body weight/day. In 2005, the DRI was set to 27\u00a0mg/kg per day (with no tyrosine), the FAO/WHO/UNU recommendation of 2007 is 25\u00a0mg/kg per day (with no tyrosine).\nOther biological roles.\n-Phenylalanine is biologically converted into -tyrosine, another one of the DNA-encoded amino acids. -tyrosine in turn is converted into -DOPA, which is further converted into dopamine, norepinephrine (noradrenaline), and epinephrine (adrenaline). The latter three are known as the catecholamines.\nPhenylalanine uses the same active transport channel as tryptophan to cross the blood\u2013brain barrier. In excessive quantities, supplementation can interfere with the production of serotonin and other aromatic amino acids as well as nitric oxide due to the overuse (eventually, limited availability) of the associated cofactors, iron or tetrahydrobiopterin. The corresponding enzymes for those compounds are the aromatic amino acid hydroxylase family and nitric oxide synthase.\nIn plants.\nPhenylalanine is the starting compound used in the synthesis of flavonoids. Lignan is derived from phenylalanine and from tyrosine. Phenylalanine is converted to cinnamic acid by the enzyme phenylalanine ammonia-lyase.\nBiosynthesis.\nPhenylalanine is biosynthesized via the shikimate pathway.\nPhenylketonuria.\nThe genetic disorder phenylketonuria (PKU) is the inability to metabolize phenylalanine because of a lack of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase. Individuals with this disorder are known as \"phenylketonurics\" and must regulate their intake of phenylalanine. Phenylketonurics often use blood tests to monitor the amount of phenylalanine in their blood. Lab results may report phenylalanine levels using either mg/dL and \u03bcmol/L. One mg/dL of phenylalanine is approximately equivalent to 60 \u03bcmol/L.\nA (rare) \"variant form\" of phenylketonuria called hyperphenylalaninemia is caused by the inability to synthesize a cofactor called tetrahydrobiopterin, which can be supplemented. Pregnant women with hyperphenylalaninemia may show similar symptoms of the disorder (high levels of phenylalanine in blood), but these indicators will usually disappear at the end of gestation. Pregnant women with PKU must control their blood phenylalanine levels even if the fetus is heterozygous for the defective gene because the fetus could be adversely affected due to hepatic immaturity.\nA non-food source of phenylalanine is the artificial sweetener aspartame. This compound is metabolized by the body into several chemical byproducts including phenylalanine. The breakdown problems phenylketonurics have with the buildup of phenylalanine in the body also occurs with the ingestion of aspartame, although to a lesser degree. Accordingly, all products in Australia, the U.S. and Canada that contain aspartame must be labeled: \"Phenylketonurics: Contains phenylalanine.\" In the UK, foods containing aspartame must carry ingredient panels that refer to the presence of \"aspartame or E951\" and they must be labeled with a warning \"Contains a source of phenylalanine.\" In Brazil, the label \"Cont\u00e9m Fenilalanina\" (Portuguese for \"Contains Phenylalanine\") is also mandatory in products which contain it. These warnings are placed to help individuals avoid such foods.\n-, - and -phenylalanine.\nThe stereoisomer -phenylalanine (DPA) can be produced by conventional organic synthesis, either as a single enantiomer or as a component of the racemic mixture. It does not participate in protein biosynthesis although it is found in proteins in small amounts - particularly aged proteins and food proteins that have been processed. The biological functions of -amino acids remain unclear, although -phenylalanine has pharmacological activity at niacin receptor 2.&lt;ref name=\"IUPHAR/BPS-bio\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\n-Phenylalanine (DLPA) is marketed as a nutritional supplement for its purported analgesic and antidepressant activities, which have been supported by clinical trials. -Phenylalanine is a mixture of -phenylalanine and -phenylalanine. The reputed analgesic activity of -phenylalanine may be explained by the possible blockage by -phenylalanine of enkephalin degradation by the enzyme carboxypeptidase A.&lt;ref name=\"IUPHAR/BPS-clinical\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Enkephalins act as agonists of the mu and delta opioid receptors, and agonists of these receptors are known to produce antidepressant effects. The mechanism of -phenylalanine's supposed antidepressant activity may also be accounted for in part by the precursor role of -phenylalanine in the synthesis of the neurotransmitters norepinephrine and dopamine, though clinical trials have not found an antidepressant effect from -phenylalanine alone. Elevated brain levels of norepinephrine and dopamine are thought to have an antidepressant effect. -Phenylalanine is absorbed from the small intestine and transported to the liver via the portal circulation. A small amount of -phenylalanine appears to be converted to -phenylalanine. -Phenylalanine is distributed to the various tissues of the body via the systemic circulation. It appears to cross the blood\u2013brain barrier less efficiently than -phenylalanine, and so a small amount of an ingested dose of -phenylalanine is excreted in the urine without penetrating the central nervous system.\n-Phenylalanine is an antagonist at \u03b12\u03b4 Ca2+ calcium channels with a Ki of 980 nM.\nIn the brain, -phenylalanine is a competitive antagonist at the glycine binding site of NMDA receptor and at the glutamate binding site of AMPA receptor. At the glycine binding site of NMDA receptor -phenylalanine has an apparent equilibrium dissociation constant (KB) of 573 \u03bcM estimated by Schild regression which is considerably lower than brain -phenylalanine concentration observed in untreated human phenylketonuria.\n-Phenylalanine also inhibits neurotransmitter release at glutamatergic synapses in hippocampus and cortex with IC50 of 980 \u03bcM, a brain concentration seen in classical phenylketonuria, whereas -phenylalanine has a significantly smaller effect.\nCommercial synthesis.\n-Phenylalanine is produced for medical, feed, and nutritional applications, such as aspartame, in large quantities by utilizing the bacterium \"Escherichia coli\", which naturally produces aromatic amino acids like phenylalanine. The quantity of -phenylalanine produced commercially has been increased by genetically engineering \"E. coli\", such as by altering the regulatory promoters or amplifying the number of genes controlling enzymes responsible for the synthesis of the amino acid.\nDerivatives.\nBoronophenylalanine (BPA) is a dihydroxyboryl derivative of phenylalanine, used in neutron capture therapy.\n4-Azido--phenylalanine is a protein-incorporated unnatural amino acid used as a tool for bioconjugation in the field of chemical biology.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "38003", "revid": "15", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38003", "title": "Colin L. Powell", "text": ""}
{"id": "38004", "revid": "205121", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38004", "title": "Vladimir V. Putin", "text": ""}
{"id": "38005", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38005", "title": "Boeing CH-47 Chinook", "text": "American tandem-rotor helicopter introduced in 1962 during the Cold War\nThe Boeing CH-47 Chinook is a tandem-rotor helicopter originally developed by American rotorcraft company Vertol and now manufactured by Boeing Defense, Space &amp; Security. The Chinook is a heavy-lift helicopter that is the second-heaviest lifting Western helicopter to the Sikorsky CH-53. Its name, Chinook, is from the Native American Chinook people of Oregon and Washington.\nThe Chinook was originally designed by Vertol, which had begun work in 1957 on a new tandem-rotor helicopter, designated as the Vertol Model 107 or V-107. Around the same time, the United States Department of the Army announced its intention to replace the piston-engine\u2013powered Sikorsky CH-37 Mojave with a new, gas turbine\u2013powered helicopter. During June 1958, the U.S. Army ordered a small number of V-107s from Vertol under the \"YHC-1A\" designation; following testing, some Army officials considered it to be too heavy for the assault missions and too light for transport purposes. While the YHC-1A would be improved and adopted by the U.S. Marine Corps as the CH-46 Sea Knight, the Army sought a heavier transport helicopter and ordered an enlarged derivative of the V-107 with the Vertol designation Model 114. Initially designated as the \"YCH-1B\", on 21 September 1961, the preproduction rotorcraft performed its maiden flight. In 1962, the HC-1B was redesignated \"CH-47A\" under the 1962 United States Tri-Service aircraft designation system.\nThe Chinook possesses several means of loading various cargoes, including multiple doors across the fuselage, a wide loading ramp located at the rear of the fuselage, and three external ventral cargo hooks to carry underslung loads. Capable of a top speed of , upon its introduction to service in 1962, the helicopter was considerably faster than contemporary 1960s utility helicopters and attack helicopters, and is still one of the fastest helicopters in the US inventory. Improved and more powerful versions of the Chinook have also been developed since its introduction; one of the most substantial variants to be produced was the CH-47D, which first entered service in 1982; improvements from the CH-47C standard included upgraded engines, composite rotor blades, a redesigned cockpit to reduce workload, improved and redundant electrical systems and avionics, and the adoption of an advanced flight control system. It remains one of the few aircraft to be developed during the early 1960s \u2013 along with the fixed-wing Lockheed C-130 Hercules cargo aircraft \u2013 that has remained in both production and frontline service for over 60 years.\nThe military version of the helicopter has been exported to nations; the U.S. Army and the Royal Air Force (see Boeing Chinook (UK variants)) have been its two largest users. The civilian version of the Chinook is the Boeing Vertol 234. It has been used by civil operators not only for passenger and cargo transport, but also for aerial firefighting and to support logging, construction, and oil-extraction industries.\nDesign and development.\nInitial development.\nDuring late 1956, the U.S. Department of the Army announced its intention to replace the Sikorsky CH-37 Mojave, which was powered by piston engines, with a new, gas turbine-powered helicopter. Turbine engines were also a key design feature of the smaller UH-1 \"Huey\" utility helicopter. Following a design competition, in September 1958, a joint Army\u2013Air Force source selection board recommended that the Army procure the Vertol-built medium-transport helicopter. Funding for full-scale development was not then available, though, and the Army vacillated on its design requirements. Some officials in Army Aviation thought that the new helicopter should be operated as a light tactical transport aimed at taking over the missions of the old piston-engined Piasecki H-21 and Sikorsky H-34 helicopters, and be consequently capable of carrying about 15 troops (one squad). Another faction in Army Aviation thought that the new helicopter should be much larger, enabling it to airlift large artillery pieces and possess enough internal space to carry the new MGM-31 \"Pershing\" missile system.\nDuring 1957, Vertol commenced work upon a new tandem-rotor helicopter, designated as the Vertol Model 107 or V-107. During June 1958, the U.S. Army awarded a contract to Vertol for the acquisition of a small number of the rotorcraft, giving it the \"YHC-1A\" designation. As ordered, the YHC-1A possessed the capacity to carry a maximum of 20 troops. Three underwent testing by the Army for deriving engineering and operational data. However, the YHC-1A was considered by many figures within the Army users to be too heavy for the assault role, while too light for the more general transport role. Accordingly, a decision was made to procure a heavier transport helicopter, and at the same time, upgrade the UH-1 \"Huey\" to serve as the needed tactical troop transport. The YHC-1A would be improved and adopted by the Marines as the CH-46 Sea Knight in 1962. As a result, the Army issued a new order to Vertol for an enlarged derivative of the V-107, known by internal company designation as the Model 114, which it gave the designation of HC-1B. On 21 September 1961, the preproduction Boeing Vertol YCH-1B made its initial hovering flight. During 1962, the HC-1B was redesignated the CH-47A under the 1962 United States Tri-Service aircraft designation system; it was also named \"Chinook\" after the Chinook people of the Pacific Northwest.\nThe CH-47 is powered by two turboshaft engines, mounted on each side of the helicopter's rear pylon and connected to the rotors by drive shafts. Initial models were fitted with Lycoming T55 engines rated at each. The counter-rotating rotors eliminate the need for an antitorque vertical rotor, allowing all power to be used for lift and thrust. The ability to adjust lift in either rotor makes it less sensitive to changes in the center of gravity, important for the cargo lifting and dropping. While hovering over a specific location, a twin-rotor helicopter has increased stability over a single rotor when weight is added or removed, for example, when troops drop from or begin climbing up ropes to the aircraft, or when other cargo is dropped. If one engine fails, the other can drive both rotors. The \"sizing\" of the Chinook was directly related to the growth of the Huey and the Army's tacticians' insistence that initial air assaults be built around the squad. The Army pushed for both the Huey and the Chinook, and this focus was responsible for the acceleration of its air mobility effort.\nImproved and later versions.\nImproved and more powerful versions of the CH-47 have been developed since the helicopter entered service. Often, the same airframe was upgraded to later standards, or sometimes the airframes were built to the newer upgrade. The U.S. Army's first major design leap was the now-common CH-47D, which entered service in 1982. Improvements from the CH-47C included upgraded engines, composite rotor blades, a redesigned cockpit to reduce pilot workload, improved and redundant electrical systems, an advanced flight control system, and improved avionics. The latest (2009) mainstream generation is the CH-47F, which features several major upgrades to reduce maintenance, digitized flight controls, and is powered by two Honeywell engines.\nAn example of a British upgraded version is the HC.4, which first flew on 9 December 2010. \nA commercial model of the Chinook, the Boeing-Vertol Model 234, is used worldwide for logging, construction, forest fire suppresion, and petroleum-extraction operations. In December 2006, Columbia Helicopters Inc purchased the type certificate of the Model 234 from Boeing. The Chinook has also been licensed to be built by companies outside the United States, such as Agusta (later AgustaWestland, now Leonardo) in Italy and Kawasaki in Japan.\nCH-47F orders.\nIn February 2007, the Royal Netherlands Air Force became the first international customer of the CH-47F model, expanding their Chinook fleet to 17. On 10 August 2009, Canada signed a contract for 15 extensively modified and upgraded CH-47Fs for the Canadian Forces, later delivered in 2013\u20132014 with the Canadian designation CH-147F. On 15 December 2009, Britain announced its Future Helicopter Strategy, including the purchase of 24 new CH-47Fs to be delivered from 2012. Australia ordered seven CH-47Fs in March 2010 to replace its six CH-47Ds between 2014 and 2017. In September 2015, India approved purchase of 15 CH-47F Chinooks. On 7 November 2016, Singapore announced that the CH-47F would replace its older Chinooks, which had been in service since 1994, enabling the Republic of Singapore Air Force to meet its requirements for various operations, including search-and-rescue, aeromedical evacuation, and humanitarian assistance and disaster relief operations. The German government announced in June 2022 that the CH-47F Block 2 was selected as the winner of its heavy helicopter program to replace its Sikorsky CH-53G Sea Stallion fleet. Germany is planning to buy sixty airframes to boost heavy lift capability.\nSpain had 17 CH-47s, which it is planning to upgrade to CH-47F standards. By 2023, 13 CH-47Ds were upgraded to CH-47Fs, and additionally, four newly built CH-47Fs were acquired.\nOperational history.\nVietnam War.\nThe Army finally settled on the larger Chinook as its standard medium-transport helicopter, and by February 1966, 161 aircraft had been delivered to the Army. The 1st Cavalry Division had brought its organic Chinook battalion (three Chinook companies) when it arrived in 1965 and a separate aviation medium helicopter company, the 147th, had arrived in Vietnam on 29 November 1965. This latter company was initially placed in direct support of the 1st Infantry Division. CH-47 crews quickly learned to mount an M60 machine gun in each of the forward doors. Sometimes, they also installed an M2 machine gun to fire from the rear cargo door.\nThe most spectacular mission in Vietnam for the Chinook was the placing of artillery batteries in perilous mountain positions inaccessible by any other means, and then keeping them resupplied with large quantities of ammunition. The 1st Cavalry Division found that its CH-47s were limited to a payload when operating in the mountains, but could carry an additional when operating near the coast.\nAs with any new piece of equipment, the Chinook presented a major problem of \"customer education\". Commanders and crew chiefs had to be constantly alert that eager soldiers did not overload the temptingly large cargo compartment. Quite some time was needed before troops would be experts at using sling loads. The Chinook soon proved to be such an invaluable aircraft for artillery movement and heavy logistics that it was seldom used as an assault troop carrier. Some of the Chinook fleet was used for casualty evacuation, and due to the very heavy demand for the helicopters, they were usually overburdened with wounded. Perhaps the most cost effective use of the Chinook was the recovery of other downed aircraft.\nAt the war's peak, the US Army had 21 Chinook companies in Vietnam. Pilots discovered the CH-47A's transmission system could not handle the two gas turbines running at full power, and high humidity and heat reduced the maximum lift by more than 20% in the lowlands and 30% in mountain areas. More powerful, improved transmissions and strengthened fuselages arrived in 1968 with the CH-47B, followed a few months later by the CH-47C. The CH-47s in Vietnam were generally armed with a single 0.308\u00a0in (7.62 mm) M60 machine gun on a pintle mount on either side of the aircraft for self-defense, with stops fitted to keep the gunners from firing into the rotor blades. Dust filters were also added to improve engine reliability. Of the nearly 750 Chinook helicopters in the U.S. and South Vietnam fleets, about 200 were lost in combat or wartime operational accidents. The U.S. Army CH-47s supported the 1st Australian Task Force as required.\nFour CH-47s were converted into ACH-47As by adding armor and improved engines. Its armament included two fixed, forward-firing M24A1 20\u00a0mm cannons, one turret with 40\u00a0mm automatic grenade launcher on the nose, five .50 in machine guns, and two weapon pods on the sides that could carry either XM159B/XM159C 70\u00a0mm rocket launchers or 7.62\u00a0mm miniguns. They arrived in Vietnam in 1966, and they engaged in six months of operational testing at An Kh\u00ea Army Airfield. They performed well in combat, but their high maintenance costs and demand for use in troop and cargo transport was stronger. Three ACH-47s were lost. One collided with a CH-47 while taxiing. Another had a retention pin shake loose on a 20\u00a0mm cannon and was brought down when its own gun fired through the forward rotor blades. The third was grounded by enemy fire and destroyed by enemy mortar rounds after the crew escaped.\nIran.\nDuring the 1970s, the U.S. and Iran had a strong relationship, in which the Iranian armed forces began to use many American military aircraft, most notably the F-14 Tomcat, as part of a modernization program. After an agreement signed between Boeing and Agusta, the Imperial Iranian Air Force purchased 20 Agusta-built CH-47Cs in 1971. The Imperial Iranian Army Aviation purchased 70 CH-47Cs from Agusta between 1972 and 1976. In late 1978, Iran placed an order for an additional 50 helicopters with Elicotteri Meridionali, but that order was canceled immediately after the revolution; 11 of them were delivered after multiple requests by Iran.\nIn the 1978 Iranian Chinook shootdown, four Iranian CH-47Cs penetrated into Soviet airspace in the Turkmenistan Military District. They were intercepted by a MiG-23M, which shot down one CH-47, killing eight crew members, and forced a second helicopter to land. Chinook helicopters were used in efforts by the Iranian against Kurdish rebels in 1979.\nDuring the Iran\u2013Iraq War, Iran made heavy use of its US-bought equipment, and lost at least eight CH-47s during the 1980\u20131988 period, most notably during a clash on 15 July 1983, when an Iraqi Mirage F1 destroyed three Iranian Chinooks transporting troops to the front line, and on 25\u201326 February 1984, when Iraqi MiG-21 fighters shot down two examples. On 22 March 1982, in Operation Fath ol-Mobin, a key operation of the war, Iranian Chinooks were landed behind Iraqi lines, deployed troops that silenced their artillery, and captured an Iraqi headquarters; the attack took the Iraqi forces by surprise.\nDespite the arms embargo in place upon Iran, it has managed to keep its Chinook fleet operational. Some of the Chinooks have been rebuilt by Panha. As of 2015, 20 to 45 Chinooks were operational in Iran.\nLibyan wars.\nIn 1976, the Libyan Air Force purchased 24 Italian-built CH-47C helicopters, 14 of which were transferred to the Libyan Army during the 1990s. The Libyan Air Force recruited Western pilots and technicians to operate the CH-47 fleet. The Libyan Chinooks flew transport and support missions into Chad to supply Libyan ground forces operating there in the 1980s. Chinooks were occasionally used to transport Libyan special forces in assault missions in northern Chad.\nIn 2002, Libya sold 16 helicopters to the United Arab Emirates, as maintaining them was difficult due to the Western embargo and lack of funds. The sale to UAE was a $939 million package that included equipment, parts, and training. The number of CH-47s still in existence or operational during the ongoing Libyan civil wars that started in 2011 is not known.\nFalklands War.\nThe Chinook was used both by Argentina and the United Kingdom during the Falklands War in 1982.\nThe Argentine Air Force and the Argentine Army each deployed two CH-47C helicopters, which were widely used in general transport duties. Of the Army's aircraft, one was destroyed on the ground by 30\u00a0mm cannon fire from an RAF GR3 Harrier, while the other was captured by the British and reused after the war. Both Argentine Air Force helicopters returned to Argentina and remained in service until 2002.\nThree British Chinooks were destroyed on 25 May 1982 when \"Atlantic Conveyor\" was struck by an Exocet sea-skimming missile fired by an Argentine Super \u00c9tendard. The sole surviving British Chinook, Bravo November, did outstanding service in the Falklands, lifting 81 troops on one occasion. Since April 2022, it has been on display at Royal Air Force Museum Cosford.\nAfghanistan and Iraq wars.\nAbout 163 CH-47Ds of various operators were deployed to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Iraq during Operation Desert Shield and the subsequent Operation Desert Storm in 1990\u201391.\nThe CH-47D saw wide use in Operation Enduring Freedom in Afghanistan and Operation Iraqi Freedom in Iraq. The Chinook was used in air assault missions, inserting troops into fire bases, and later bringing food, water, and ammunition. It was also the casualty evacuation aircraft of choice in the British Armed Forces. In combat theaters, it is typically escorted by attack helicopters such as the AH-64 Apache for protection. Its lift capacity had been found of particular value in the mountainous terrain of Afghanistan, where high altitudes and temperatures limit the use of helicopters such as the UH-60 Black Hawk; reportedly, one Chinook could replace up to five UH-60s in the air assault transport role.\nThe Chinook helicopters of several nations have participated in the Afghanistan War, including aircraft from Britain, Italy, the Netherlands, Spain, Canada, and Australia. Despite the age of the Chinook, it was still in heavy demand, in part due its proven versatility and ability to operate in demanding environments such as Afghanistan.\nIn May 2011, an Australian Army CH-47D crashed during a resupply mission in Zabul Province, resulting in one fatality and five survivors. The helicopter was unable to be recovered and was destroyed in place. To compensate for the loss, the ADF added two ex-U.S. Army CH-47Ds to the fleet which are expected to be in service until the introduction of the CH-47Fs in 2016.\nOn 6 August 2011, a Chinook crashed near Kabul, killing all of the 38 aboard. The Chinook was reportedly shot down with a rocket-propelled grenade by the Taliban while attempting to assist a group of U.S. Navy SEALs. The 38 were members of NATO and allied forces, including 22 Naval Special Warfare operators, five U.S. Army Aviation soldiers, three U.S. Air Force special operations personnel, and seven Afghan National Army commandos. A civilian translator and a U.S. military working dog were also killed in the crash, which was the single deadliest during the entire Operation Enduring Freedom campaign. The previous biggest single-day loss for American forces in Afghanistan involved a Chinook that was shot down near Kabul in Kunar Province in June 2005 with all aboard killed, including a 16-member U.S. Special Operations team.\nChinook helicopters participated in the 2021 Kabul airlift at the close of military operations in Afghanistan.\nDisaster relief.\nThe Chinook's ability to carry large, underslung loads has been of significant value in relief operations in the aftermath of natural disasters. Numerous operators have chosen to deploy their Chinook fleets to support humanitarian efforts in stricken nations overseas. Following the 2004 Asian tsunami, the Republic of Singapore Air Force assisted in the relief operations in neighboring Indonesia using its Chinooks; similarly, after the 2005 Kashmir earthquake, the Royal Air Force dispatched several Chinooks to northern Pakistan to assist in recovery efforts.\nIn August 1992, six CH-47Ds were deployed from Fort Bragg in North Carolina to provide relief in the wake of Hurricane Andrew in what was one of the first major helicopter disaster relief operations on US soil. Then President George H. W. Bush ordered the military to assist. The Chinooks arrived at Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport, just outside of the disaster zone, one day after the President's order; early on, they performed a wide loop over Homestead and Florida City to publicly display their presence, helping to curtail lawlessness and looting. The Chinooks initially flew 12 sorties per day out of Opa Locka, which expanded over time, often supporting distribution operations at Homestead AFB and Opa Locka, as well as delivering relief payloads via internal storage, not using sling loads, supplementing the 24 distribution centers and trucks, proving essential as trucks could not reach the worst-hit areas due to downed trees and power lines. They flew every day for about three weeks, moving supplies and personnel around the disaster zone and carrying media and government officials, including then-Congressman Bill Nelson. Ultimately, the Chinooks supplied 64 distribution sites throughout the zone and transported 1.2 million pounds of supplies before the urgent relief phase ended.\nThree of Japan's CH-47s were used to cool Reactors 3 and 4 of the Fukushima nuclear power plant following the 9.0 earthquake in 2011; they were used to collect sea water from the nearby ocean and drop it over the affected areas. In order to protect the crew from the heightened radiation levels present, a number of lead plates were attached to the floor of each Chinook; even with such measures, pilots had to keep their distance from the reactors while also limiting flight times in the vicinity to a maximum of 45 minutes to avoid excessive radiation exposure.\nIn August 2025, the Indian Air Force, from its Northern Sector, deployed five of its Mi-17 helicopters along with a Chinook and C-130J transport aircraft each for the flood relief operations following the Uttarakhand and Kishtwar district flash floods. The C-130J aircraft boarded by an NDRF team reached Jammu to supply rescue materials, supplies and trained personnel. So far, 50 Army personnel, 21 BSF personnel and over 40 civilians have been rescued by the fleet from regions including Akhnoor, Pathankot and Dera Baba Nanak. Additionally, over 750\u00a0kg of relief materials were also air dropped into Pathankot as part of the operation. Additional helicopters and transport aircraft also remained on standby to join the operations if deemed necessary.\nOther operations and roles.\nIn April 2023, multiple Chinooks conducted the evacuation of the US Embassy in Khartoum, Sudan, with Special Forces. (see also Sudanese civil war (2023\u2013present)) Chinooks have been deployed to Mali for MINUSMA.\nSince the type's inception, the Chinook has carried out various secondary missions, including medical evacuation, disaster relief, search and rescue, aircraft recovery, firefighting, and heavy construction assistance.\nIn February 2020, the Indian Air Force started using Chinooks at theatres such as Ladakh and Siachen Glacier to assist Indian forces deployed at the Indian borders with China and Pakistan. The Indian Space Research Organisation has also enlisted Indian Air Force Chinooks during the development of its Reusable Launch Vehicle Technology Demonstration Program, with Chinook helicopters air-dropping two test vehicles during the \"RLV-LEX-01\" and \"RLV-LEX-02\" conducted on April 2, 2023, and March 22, 2024, respectively.\nVariants.\nMany versions of the Chinook have been produced over the decades, including variants that involve major upgrades such as engines and avionics, ones for certain tasks, such as Special Operation missions, and finally for certain countries, such as the J model built by and for Japan.\nHC-1B.\nThe pre-1962 designation for Model 114 development aircraft that would be redesignated CH-47 Chinook\nCH-47A.\nThe all-weather, medium-lift CH-47A Chinook was powered initially by Lycoming T55-L-5 engines rated at , which were replaced by the T55-L-7 rated at engines or T55-L-7C engines rated at . The CH-47A had a maximum gross weight of , with a maximum payload about Delivery of the CH-47A Chinook to the U.S. Army began in August 1962. A total of 354 were built.\nACH-47A.\nThe ACH-47A was known as the Armed/Armored CH-47A (or A/ACH-47A) before being designated ACH-47A as a U.S. Army Attack Cargo Helicopter, and unofficially referred to as \"Guns A Go-Go\". Four CH-47A helicopters were converted to gunships by Boeing Vertol in late 1965. Three were assigned to the 53rd Aviation Detachment in South Vietnam for testing, with the remaining one retained in the U.S. for weapons testing. By 1966, the 53rd was redesignated the 1st Aviation Detachment (Provisional) and attached to the 228th Assault Support Helicopter Battalion of the 1st Cavalry Division (Airmobile). One was lost to an accident while grounded, one to self-inflicted damage during a poor landing and one to enemy action, leaving only one by 1968. Since transport demands prevented more conversions, the survivor was returned to the United States, and the program stopped.\nThe ACH-47A carried five 7.62 \u00d7 51\u00a0mm M60D machine guns or .50-caliber (12.7\u00a0mm) M2HB heavy machine guns, provided by the XM32 and XM33 armament subsystems, two 20\u00a0mm M24A1 cannons, two 19-tube Folding Fin Aerial Rocket launchers (XM159B/XM159) or sometimes two M18/M18A1 7.62 \u00d7 51\u00a0mm gun pods, and a single 40\u00a0mm M75 grenade launcher in the XM5/M5 armament subsystem (more commonly seen on the UH-1 series of helicopters). Rare newsreel footage shows one of the aircraft in action supporting the 8th Cavalry Regiment during an ambush at B\u00f4ng Son, South Vietnam. The surviving aircraft, \"Easy Money\", has been restored and is on display at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama.\nCH-47B.\nThe CH-47B was an interim upgrade while Boeing worked on a more substantially improved CH-47C. The CH-47B was powered by two Lycoming T55-L-7C engines. It had a blunted rear rotor pylon, redesigned asymmetrical rotor blades, and strakes along the rear ramp and fuselage to improve flying characteristics. It could be equipped with two door-mounted M60D 7.62 mm NATO machine guns on the M24 armament subsystem and a ramp-mounted M60D using the M41 armament subsystem. Some CH-47 \"bombers\" were equipped to drop tear gas or napalm from the rear cargo ramp onto Viet Cong bunkers. The CH-47B could be equipped with a hoist and cargo hook. The Chinook proved especially valuable in \"Pipe Smoke\" aircraft recovery missions. The \"Hook\" recovered about 12,000 aircraft valued at over $3.6\u00a0billion during the war; 108 were built.\nCH-47C.\nThe CH-47C featured more powerful engines and transmissions. Three sub-versions were built, the first with Lycoming T55-L-7C engines delivering . The \"Super C\" had Lycoming T55-L-11 engines delivering , an upgraded maximum gross weight of , and pitch stability augmentation. The T55-L-11 engines were less reliable, as they had been hurriedly introduced to increase payload; thus, they were temporarily replaced by the more reliable Lycoming T55-L-7C. The Super C was distinguishable from the standard \"C\" by the uprated maximum gross weight.\nThe type was not approved by the FAA for civil aviation due to the nonredundant hydraulic flight boost system drive. The hydraulic system was redesigned for the succeeding CH-47D, allowing it to achieve certification as the Boeing Model 234. A total of 233 CH-47Cs were built. Canada bought eight CH-47Cs; deliveries of the type began in 1974. Receiving the Canadian designation \"CH-147\", these were fitted with a power hoist above the crew door; other changes included a flight engineer station in the rear cabin: operators referred to the configuration as the \"Super C\". The CH-47C was used widely during the Vietnam War, eventually replacing the older Piasecki H-21 Shawnee in the combat assault support role.\nCH-47D.\nThe CH-47D shares the same airframe as earlier models, with more powerful engines. Early CH-47Ds were powered by two T55-L-712 engines. The most common engine is the later T55-GA-714A. With its triple-hook cargo system, the CH-47D can carry heavy payloads internally and up to (such as containers) externally. It was introduced into service in 1979. In air assault operations, it often serves as the principal mover of the 155\u00a0mm M198 howitzer, plus 30 rounds of ammunition, and an 11-man crew. The CH-47D has advanced avionics, including Global Positioning System. Nearly all US Army CH-47Ds were converted from previous A, B, and C models, a total of 472 being converted. The last U.S. Army CH-47D built was delivered to the U.S. Army Reserve, located at Fort Hood, Texas, in 2002.\nIn 1993, the Netherlands signed an agreement with Canada to acquire seven CH-147Cs that were no longer in use with the RCAF. These airframes where upgraded by Boeing to CH-47D standard and delivery took place between August 1995 and February 1996. Six more new CH-47Ds were delivered by Boeing in 1998 for a total of 13, of which two where lost in 2005 while on duty in Afghanistan. The Dutch CH-47Ds are improved over U.S. Army CH-47Ds, including a long nose for a Bendix weather radar, a \"glass cockpit\", and improved T55-L-714 engines. Between 2015 and 2023, the Netherlands replaced all 11 remaining CH-47Ds with 14 newly built CH-47Fs. The six CH-47Fs that where already in service have been upgraded to the same \"MYII CAAS\" standard as the newly built helicopters.\nAs of 2011, Singapore has 18 CH-47D/SDs, which includes twelve \"Super D\" Chinooks, in service.\nIn 2008, Canada purchased 6 CH-47Ds from the U.S. for the Canadian Helicopter Force Afghanistan for $252\u00a0million. With 1 CH-47D lost to an accident, the remaining five were sold in 2011 after the end of Canada's Afghanistan mission and replaced with seven CH-147Fs.\nThe U.S. Army is surplusing many of its CH-47Ds for use in FAA restricted category.\nMH-47D.\nThe MH-47D was developed for special forces operations and has inflight refueling capability, a fast rope-rappelling system, and other upgrades. The MH-47D was used by U.S. Army 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment. Twelve MH-47D helicopters were produced. Six were converted from CH-47As and six were converted from CH-47C models.\nMH-47E.\nThe MH-47E has been used by U.S. Army Special Operations. Beginning with the E-model prototype manufactured in 1991, a total of 26 Special Operations Aircraft were produced. All aircraft were assigned to 2\u2013160th SOAR(A) \"Nightstalkers\", home based at Fort Campbell, Kentucky. E models were converted from CH-47C airframes. The MH-47E has similar capabilities as the MH-47D, but with increased fuel capacity similar to the CH-47SD and terrain following/terrain avoidance radar.\nIn 1995, the Royal Air Force ordered eight Chinook HC3s, effectively a lower cost MH-47E for special operations. They were delivered in 2001, but never became operational due to technical issues with their avionics fit, unique to the HC3. In 2008, work started to revert the HC3s to HC2 standard, to enable them to enter service. As of 2017[ [update]] they were upgraded to HC5 standard with a digital automated flight control system.\nCH-47F.\nIn 2001, the CH-47F, an upgraded CH-47D, made its maiden flight. The first production model rolled out at Boeing's facility in Ridley Park, Pennsylvania, and first flew on 23 October 2006. Upgrades included Honeywell engines and airframe with better integrated construction for lower maintenance requirements. The milled construction reduces vibration, as well as inspection and repair needs, and eliminates flexing points to increase service life. The CH-47F can fly at speeds of over with a payload of more than . New avionics include a Rockwell Collins Common Avionics Architecture System (CAAS) cockpit, and BAE Systems' Digital Advanced Flight Control System (DAFCS). AgustaWestland assembles the CH-47F under license, known as the Chinook ICH-47F, for several customers. Boeing delivered 48 CH-47Fs to the U.S. Army through August 2008; at that time Boeing announced a $4.8\u00a0billion (~$ in 2024) contract with the Army for 191 Chinooks.\nA CH-47F Block 2 is being implemented as of 2020[ [update]]. The Block 2 aims for a payload of with and high and hot hover performance, eventually increased up to , to carry the Joint Light Tactical Vehicle; maximum takeoff weight would be raised to . It has 20% more powerful Honeywell T55-715 engines along with an active parallel actuator system (APAS) to enhance the digital advanced flight-control system, providing an exact torque split between the rotors for greater efficiency. A new fuel system combines the three fuel cells in each sponson into one larger fuel cell and eliminates intracell fuel transfer hardware, reducing weight by and increasing fuel capacity. Electrical capacity is increased by three 60\u00a0kVA generators. The Advanced Chinook Rotor Blades (ACRB), derived from the cancelled RAH-66 Comanche, were intended to improve lift performance in hot/high altitude conditions by 900\u00a0kg (2,000\u00a0lb); however, the US Army ultimately decided against implementing the ACRB due to persistent vibration during testing, Boeing denied the assertion that the vibration was a safety risk and believed it could be solved with dampeners. In addition, the aft rotor blade was stalling when in a swept back position.\nThe U.S. Army plans for a Block 3 upgrade after 2025, which could include a new class engine with boosted power capacity of the transmission and drive train developed under the future affordable turbine engine (FATE) program and a lengthened fuselage. The Future Vertical Lift program is planned to begin replacing the Army's rotorcraft fleet in the mid-2030s, initially focusing on medium-lift helicopters, thus the CH-47 is planned to be in service beyond 2060, over 100 years after the first entered service.\nMH-47G.\nThe MH-47G Special Operations Aviation (SOA) version is similar to the MH-47E, but features more sophisticated avionics including a digital Common Avionics Architecture System (CAAS). The CAAS is a common glass cockpit used by helicopters such as MH-60K/Ls and CH-53E/Ks. The MH-47G also incorporates all of the new sections of the CH-47F.\nThe modernization program improves MH-47D and MH-47E Special Operations Chinooks to the MH-47G design specs. A total of 25 MH-47E and 11 MH-47D aircraft were upgraded by the end of 2003. The final MH-47G was delivered to the U.S. Army Special Operations Command (USASOC) on 10 February 2011. Modernization of MH-47D/Es to the MH-47G standard is due by 2015. On 1 September 2020, Boeing announced the delivery of the first MH-47G Block II to USASOC of an initial order of 24, with a stated ultimate requirement for 69. The MH-47G Block II includes all of the improvements from the CH-47F Block II, as well as inflight refueling capability, a comprehensive defensive aids suite and low-level/adverse weather piloting aids, such as forward-looking infrared and multi-mode/terrain-following radar. It is armed with two 7.62\u00a0mm M134 Miniguns and two M240 7.62\u00a0mm machine guns.\nThe British MOD confirmed that while the U.S. does not export the model, the two countries were in discussion regarding the MH-47G as of 2017[ [update]]. On 19 October 2018, the Defense Security Cooperation Agency notified Congress of a possible sale of 16 H-47 Chinooks (Extended Range) to the UK.\nCH-47J.\nThe CH-47J is a medium-transport helicopter for the Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (JGSDF), and the Japan Air Self-Defense Force (JASDF). The differences between the CH-47J and the CH-47D are the engine, rotor brake and avionics, for use for general transportation, SAR and disaster activity like U.S. forces. The CH-47JA, introduced in 1993, is a long-range version of the CH-47J, fitted with an enlarged fuel tank, an AAQ-16 FLIR in a turret under the nose, and a partial glass cockpit. Both versions are built under license in Japan by Kawasaki Heavy Industries, who produced 61 aircraft by April 2001.\nThe Japan Defense Agency ordered 54 aircraft of which 39 were for the JGSDF and 15 were for the JASDF. Boeing supplied flyable aircraft, to which Kawasaki added full avionics, interior, and final paint. The CH-47J model Chinook (N7425H) made its first flight in January 1986, and it was sent to Kawasaki in April. Boeing began delivering five CH-47J kits in September 1985 for assembly at Kawasaki.\nOver 110 had been produced by the early 21st century, including the CH-47JA model with improved fuel tanks and other upgrades.\nHH-47.\nOn 9 November 2006, the HH-47, a new variant of the Chinook based on the MH-47G, was selected by the U.S. Air Force as the winner of the Combat Search and Rescue (CSAR-X) competition. Four development HH-47s were to be built, with the first of 141 production aircraft planned to enter service in 2012. However, in February 2007 the contract award was protested and the GAO ordered the CSAR-X project to be re-bid. The CSAR-X program was again terminated in 2009. In February 2010, the USAF announced plans to replace aging HH-60G helicopters, and deferred secondary combat search and rescue requirements calling for a larger helicopter. In a long process the Air Force did not choose the larger Chinook, and the HH-60W entered service by 2020 to replace the older helicopters.\nSea Chinook.\nFor years the U.S. Navy has been operating different versions of the single-rotor CH-53 helicopter as its heavy-lift helicopter. CH-47s regularly conduct ship-based operations for U.S. Special Forces and other international operators. Due to budget issues, technical problems and delays with CH-53K, the director of the Pentagon's cost assessment office directed US Navy to consider maritime versions of CH-47. Naval versions must be protected against the corrosive seaborne environment and be able to operate from aircraft carriers and amphibious ships.\nDerivatives.\nIn 1969, work on the experimental BV-347 was begun. It was a CH-47A with a lengthened fuselage, four-blade rotors, detachable wings mounted on top of the fuselage and other changes. It first flew on 27 May 1970 and was evaluated for a few years.\nIn 1973, the Army contracted with Boeing to design a \"Heavy Lift Helicopter\" (HLH), designated XCH-62A. It appeared to be a scaled-up CH-47 without a conventional body, in a configuration similar to the S-64 Skycrane (CH-54 Tarhe), but the project was canceled in 1975. The program was restarted for test flights in the 1980s and was again not funded by Congress. The scaled-up model of the HLH was scrapped in late 2005 at Fort Rucker, Alabama.\nSpecifications (CH-47F).\n\"Data from\" Boeing CH-47, Army Chinook file, CH-47F, International Directory, CH-47DGeneral characteristics* Crew: 3 (pilot, copilot, flight engineer or loadmaster)* Capacity: &lt;br&gt;\nPerformance* Endurance: \nArmament\n * Up to 3 pintle-mounted medium machine guns (1 on loading ramp and 2 at shoulder windows), generally M240/FN MAG machine guns, and can be armed with the 7.62\u00a0mm M134 Minigun rotary machine gun.\nAvionics\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38006", "revid": "15", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38006", "title": "Antiballistic Missile Treaty of 1972", "text": ""}
{"id": "38007", "revid": "9182658", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38007", "title": "Julian day", "text": "Days since the beginning of the Julian Period\nThe Julian day is a continuous count of days from the beginning of the Julian period; it is used primarily by astronomers, and in software for easily calculating elapsed days between two events (e.g., food production date and sell by date).\nThe Julian period is a chronological interval of 7980\u00a0years, derived from three multi-year cycles: the Indiction, Solar, and Lunar cycles. The last year that was simultaneously the beginning of all three cycles was 4713 BC (\u22124712), so that is year 1 of the current Julian period, making AD\u00a02025 year\u00a06738 of that Period. The next Julian Period begins in the year AD\u00a03268. Historians used the period to identify Julian calendar years within which an event occurred when no such year was given in the historical record, or when the year given by previous historians was incorrect.\nThe Julian day number (JDN) has the same epoch as the Julian period, but counts the number of days since the epoch rather than the number of years since then. Specifically, Julian day number 0 is assigned to the day starting at noon Universal Time on Monday, January 1, 4713\u00a0BC, proleptic Julian calendar (November 24, 4714\u00a0BC, in the proleptic Gregorian calendar). For example, the Julian day number for the day starting at 12:00\u00a0UT (noon) on January 1, 2000, was .\nThe Julian date (JD) of any instant is the Julian day number plus the fraction of a day since the preceding noon in Universal Time. Julian dates are expressed as a Julian day number with a decimal fraction added. For example, the Julian Date for 00:30:00.0\u00a0UT January 1, 2013, is . This article was loaded at (UTC) \u2013 expressed as a Julian date this is .\nTerminology.\nThe term \"Julian date\" may also refer, outside of astronomy, to the day-of-year number (more properly, the ordinal date) in the Gregorian calendar, especially in computer programming, the military and the food industry, or it may refer to dates in the Julian calendar. For example, if a given \"Julian date\" is \"October 5, 1582\", this means that date in the Julian calendar (which was October 15, 1582, in the Gregorian calendar\u00a0\u2013 the date it was first established). Without an astronomical or historical context, a \"Julian date\" given as \"36\" most likely means the 36th\u00a0day of a given Gregorian year, namely February 5. Other possible meanings of a \"Julian date\" of \"36\" include an astronomical Julian Day Number, or the year AD\u00a036 in the Julian calendar, or a duration of 36\u00a0astronomical Julian years. This is why the terms \"ordinal date\" or \"day-of-year\" are preferred. In contexts where a \"Julian date\" means simply an ordinal date, calendars of a Gregorian year with formatting for ordinal dates are often called \"Julian calendars\", but this could also mean that the calendars are of years in the Julian calendar system.\nHistorically, Julian dates were recorded relative to Greenwich Mean Time (GMT) (later, Ephemeris Time), but since 1997 the International Astronomical Union has recommended that Julian dates be specified in Terrestrial Time. Seidelmann indicates that Julian dates may be used with International Atomic Time (TAI), Terrestrial Time (TT), Barycentric Coordinate Time (TCB), or Coordinated Universal Time (UTC) and that the scale should be indicated when the difference is significant. The fraction of the day is found by converting the number of hours, minutes, and seconds after noon into the equivalent decimal fraction. Time intervals calculated from differences of Julian Dates specified in non-uniform time scales, such as UTC, may need to be corrected for changes in time scales (e.g. leap seconds).\nVariants.\nBecause the starting point or reference epoch is so long ago, numbers in the Julian day can be quite large and cumbersome. A more recent starting point is sometimes used, for instance by dropping the leading digits, in order to fit into limited computer memory with an adequate amount of precision. In the following table, times are given in 24-hour notation.\nIn the table below, \"Epoch\" refers to the point in time used to set the origin (usually zero, but (1) where explicitly indicated) of the alternative convention being discussed in that row. The date given is a Gregorian calendar date unless otherwise specified. JD stands for Julian Date. 0h is 00:00 midnight, 12h is 12:00 noon, UT unless otherwise specified. \"Current value is at 16:02:17, , 18, 2025 (UTC) and may be cached. \"\nHistory.\nJulian Period.\nThe \"Julian day number\" is based on the \"Julian Period\" proposed by Joseph Scaliger, a classical scholar, in 1583 (one year after the Gregorian calendar reform) as it is the product of three calendar cycles used with the Julian calendar:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;28 (solar cycle) \u00d7 19 (lunar cycle) \u00d7 15 (indiction cycle) = 7980 years\nIts epoch occurs when all three cycles (if they are continued backward far enough) were in their first year together. Years of the Julian Period are counted from this year, 4713 BC, as year 1, which was chosen to be before any historical record.\nScaliger corrected chronology by assigning each year a tricyclic \"character\", three numbers indicating that year's position in the 28-year solar cycle, the 19-year lunar cycle, and the 15-year indiction cycle. One or more of these numbers often appeared in the historical record alongside other pertinent facts without any mention of the Julian calendar year. The character of every year in the historical record was unique \u2013 it could only belong to one year in the 7980-year Julian Period. Scaliger determined that 1\u00a0BC or year\u00a00 was Julian Period (JP) 4713. He knew that 1\u00a0BC or year\u00a00 had the character 9 of the solar cycle, 1 of the lunar cycle, and 3 of the indiction cycle. By inspecting a 532-year Paschal cycle with 19 solar cycles (each of 28\u00a0years, each year numbered 1\u201328) and 28 lunar cycles (each of 19\u00a0years, each year numbered 1\u201319), he determined that the first two numbers, 9 and 1, occurred at its year\u00a0457. He then calculated via remainder division that he needed to add eight 532-year Paschal cycles totaling 4256\u00a0years before the cycle containing 1\u00a0BC or year\u00a00 in order for its year\u00a0457 to be indiction 3. The sum 4256 + 457 was thus JP\u00a04713.\nA formula for determining the year of the Julian Period given its character involving three four-digit numbers was published by Jacques de Billy in 1665 in the \"Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society\" (its first year). John F. W. Herschel gave the same formula using slightly different wording in his 1849 \"Outlines of Astronomy\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Multiply the \"Solar\" Cycle by 4845, and the \"Lunar\", by 4200, and that of the \"Indiction\", by 6916. Then divide the Sum of the products by 7980, which is the \"Julian Period\": The \"Remainder\" of the Division, without regard to the \"Quotient\", shall be the year enquired after.\u2014\u200a\nCarl Friedrich Gauss introduced the modulo operation in 1801, restating de Billy's formula as: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Julian Period year = (6916\"a\" + 4200\"b\" + 4845\"c\") MOD 15\u00d719\u00d728\nwhere \"a\" is the year of the indiction cycle, \"b\" of the lunar cycle, and \"c\" of the solar cycle.\nJohn Collins described the details of how these three numbers were calculated in 1666, using many trials. A summary of Collin's description is in a footnote.\nReese, Everett and Craun reduced the dividends in the \"Try\" column from 285, 420, 532 to 5, 2, 7 and changed remainder to modulo, but apparently still required many trials.\nThe specific cycles used by Scaliger to form his tricyclic Julian Period were, first, the indiction cycle with a first year of 313. Then he chose the dominant 19-year Alexandrian lunar cycle with a first year of 285, the Era of Martyrs and the Diocletian Era epoch, or a first year of 532 according to Dionysius Exiguus.&lt;ref name=\"Dionysius Exiguus 2003/525\"&gt;Dionysius Exiguus 2003/525&lt;/ref&gt; Finally, Scaliger chose the post-Bedan solar cycle with a first year of 776, when its first quadrennium of concurrents, 1 2 3 4, began in sequence. Although not their intended use, the equations of de Billy or Gauss can be used to determined the first year of any 15-, 19-, and 28-year tricyclic period given any first years of their cycles. For those of the Julian Period, the result is AD\u00a03268, because both remainder and modulo usually return the lowest positive result. Thus 7980\u00a0years must be subtracted from it to yield the first year of the present Julian Period, \u22124712 or 4713\u00a0BC, when all three of its sub-cycles are in their first years.\nScaliger got the idea of using a tricyclic period from \"the Greeks of Constantinople\" as Herschel stated in his quotation below in Julian day numbers. Specifically, the monk and priest Georgios wrote in 638/39 that the Byzantine year 6149\u00a0AM (640/41) had indiction 14, lunar cycle 12, and solar cycle 17, which places the first year of the Byzantine Era in 5509/08\u00a0BC, the Byzantine Creation. Dionysius Exiguus called the Byzantine lunar cycle his \"lunar cycle\" in argumentum 6, in contrast with the Alexandrian lunar cycle which he called his \"nineteen-year cycle\" in argumentum 5.\nAlthough many references say that the \"Julian\" in \"Julian Period\" refers to Scaliger's father, Julius Scaliger, at the beginning of Book V of his \"\" (\"Work on the Emendation of Time\") he states, \"\", which Reese, Everett and Craun translate as \"We have termed it Julian because it fits the Julian year\". Thus \"Julian\" refers to the Julian calendar.\nJulian day numbers.\nJulian days were first used by Ludwig Ideler for the first days of the Nabonassar and Christian eras in his 1825 \"Handbuch der mathematischen und technischen Chronologie\". John F. W. Herschel then developed them for astronomical use in his 1849 \"Outlines of Astronomy\", after acknowledging that Ideler was his guide.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The period thus arising of 7980 Julian years, is called the Julian period, and it has been found so useful, that the most competent authorities have not hesitated to declare that, through its employment, light and order were first introduced into chronology. We owe its invention or revival to Joseph Scaliger, who is said to have received it from the Greeks of Constantinople. The first year of the current Julian period, or that of which the number in each of the three subordinate cycles is 1, was the year 4713 BC, and the noon of January 1 of that year, for the meridian of Alexandria, is the chronological epoch, to which all historical eras are most readily and intelligibly referred, by computing the number of integer days intervening between that epoch and the noon (for Alexandria) of the day, which is reckoned to be the first of the particular era in question. The meridian of Alexandria is chosen as that to which Ptolemy refers the commencement of the era of Nabonassar, the basis of all his calculations.\nAt least one mathematical astronomer adopted Herschel's \"days of the Julian period\" immediately. Benjamin Peirce of Harvard University used over 2,800 Julian days in his \"Tables of the Moon\", begun in 1849 but not published until 1853, to calculate the lunar ephemerides in the new \"American Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac\" from 1855 to 1888. The days are specified for \"Washington mean noon\", with Greenwich defined as 18h 51m 48s west of Washington (282\u00b057\u2032W, or Washington 77\u00b03\u2032W of Greenwich). A table with 197 Julian days (\"Date in Mean Solar Days\", one per century mostly) was included for the years \u20134713 to 2000 with no year\u00a00, thus \"\u2013\" means BC, including decimal fractions for hours, minutes, and seconds. The same table appears in \"Tables of Mercury\" by Joseph Winlock, without any other Julian days.\nThe national ephemerides started to include a multi-year table of Julian days, under various names, for either every year or every leap year beginning with the French \"Connaissance des Temps\" in 1870 for 2,620\u00a0years, increasing in 1899 to 3,000\u00a0years. The British \"Nautical Almanac\" began in 1879 with 2,000\u00a0years. The \"Berliner Astronomisches Jahrbuch\" began in 1899 with 2,000\u00a0years. The \"American Ephemeris\" was the last to add a multi-year table, in 1925 with 2,000\u00a0years. However, it was the first to include any mention of Julian days with one for the year of issue beginning in 1855, as well as later scattered sections with many days in the year of issue. It was also the first to use the name \"Julian day number\" in 1918. The \"Nautical Almanac\" began in 1866 to include a Julian day for every day in the year of issue. The \"Connaissance des Temps\" began in 1871 to include a Julian day for every day in the year of issue.\nThe French mathematician and astronomer Pierre-Simon Laplace first expressed the time of day as a decimal fraction added to calendar dates in his book, , in 1823. Other astronomers added fractions of the day to the Julian day number to create Julian Dates, which are typically used by astronomers to date astronomical observations, thus eliminating the complications resulting from using standard calendar periods like eras, years, or months. They were first introduced into variable star work in 1860 by the English astronomer Norman Pogson, which he stated was at the suggestion of John Herschel. They were popularized for variable stars by Edward Charles Pickering, of the Harvard College Observatory, in 1890.\nJulian days begin at noon because when Herschel recommended them, the astronomical day began at noon. The astronomical day had begun at noon ever since Ptolemy chose to begin the days for his astronomical observations at noon. He chose noon because the transit of the Sun across the observer's meridian occurs at the same apparent time every day of the year, unlike sunrise or sunset, which vary by several hours. Midnight was not even considered because it could not be accurately determined using water clocks. Nevertheless, he double-dated most nighttime observations with both Egyptian days beginning at sunrise and Babylonian days beginning at sunset. Medieval Muslim astronomers used days beginning at sunset, so astronomical days beginning at noon did produce a single date for an entire night. Later medieval European astronomers used Roman days beginning at midnight so astronomical days beginning at noon also allow observations during an entire night to use a single date. When all astronomers decided to start their astronomical days at midnight to conform to the beginning of the civil day, on January 1, 1925, it was decided to keep Julian days continuous with previous practice, beginning at noon.\nDuring this period, usage of Julian day numbers as a neutral intermediary when converting a date in one calendar into a date in another calendar also occurred. An isolated use was by Ebenezer Burgess in his 1860 translation of the \"Surya Siddhanta\" wherein he stated that the beginning of the Kali Yuga era occurred at midnight at the meridian of Ujjain at the end of the 588,465th\u00a0day and the beginning of the 588,466th\u00a0day (civil reckoning) of the Julian Period, or between February 17 and 18 JP\u00a01612 or 3102\u00a0BC. Robert Schram was notable beginning with his 1882 \"Hilfstafeln f\u00fcr Chronologie\". Here he used about 5,370 \"days of the Julian Period\". He greatly expanded his usage of Julian days in his 1908 \"Kalendariographische und Chronologische Tafeln\" containing over 530,000 Julian days, one for the zeroth day of every month over thousands of years in many calendars. He included over 25,000 negative Julian days, given in a positive form by adding 10,000,000 to each. He called them \"day of the Julian Period\", \"Julian day\", or simply \"day\" in his discussion, but no name was used in the tables. Continuing this tradition, in his book \"Mapping Time: The Calendar and Its History\" British physics educator and programmer Edward Graham Richards uses Julian day numbers to convert dates from one calendar into another using algorithms rather than tables.\nJulian day number calculation.\nThe Julian day number can be calculated using the following formulas (integer division rounding towards zero is used exclusively, that is, positive values are rounded down and negative values are rounded up):\nThe months January to December are numbered 1 to 12. For the year, astronomical year numbering is used, thus 1\u00a0BC is 0, 2\u00a0BC is \u22121, and 4713\u00a0BC is \u22124712. \"JDN\" is the Julian Day Number. Use the previous day of the month if trying to find the JDN of an instant before midday UT.\nConverting Gregorian calendar date to Julian day number.\nThe algorithm is valid for all (possibly proleptic) Gregorian calendar dates after November 23, \u22124713. Divisions are integer divisions towards zero; fractional parts are ignored.\nformula_1\nConverting Julian calendar date to Julian day number.\nThe algorithm is valid for all (possibly proleptic) Julian calendar years \u2265\u00a0\u22124712, that is, for all JDN\u00a0\u2265\u00a00. Divisions are integer divisions, fractional parts are ignored.\nFinding Julian date given Julian day number and time of day.\nFor the full Julian Date of a moment after 12:00\u00a0UT one can use the following. Divisions are real numbers.\nSo, for example, January 1, 2000, at 18:00:00\u00a0UT corresponds to \"JD\"\u00a0=\u00a02451545.25 and January 1, 2000, at 6:00:00\u00a0UT corresponds to \"JD\"\u00a0=\u00a02451544.75.\nFinding day of week given Julian day number.\nBecause a Julian day starts at noon while a civil day starts at midnight, the Julian day number needs to be adjusted to find the day of week: for a point in time in a given Julian day after midnight UT and before 12:00\u00a0UT, add 1 or use the JDN of the next afternoon.\nThe US day of the week W1 (for an afternoon or evening UT) can be determined from the Julian Day Number J with the expression:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;W1 = mod(\"J\" + 1, 7)\nIf the moment in time is after midnight UT (and before 12:00\u00a0UT), then one is already in the next day of the week.\nThe ISO day of the week W0 can be determined from the Julian Day Number J with the expression:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;W0 = mod (\"J\", 7) + 1\nJulian or Gregorian calendar from Julian day number.\nThis is an algorithm by Edward Graham Richards to convert a Julian Day Number, J, to a date in the Gregorian calendar (proleptic, when applicable). Richards states the algorithm is valid for Julian day numbers greater than or equal to 0. All variables are integer values, and the notation \"\"a\"\u00a0div\u00a0\"b\"\" indicates integer division, and \"mod(\"a\",\"b\")\" denotes the modulus operator.\nFor Julian calendar:\nFor Gregorian calendar:\nFor Julian or Gregorian, continue:\nD, M, and Y are the numbers of the day, month, and year respectively for the afternoon at the beginning of the given Julian day.\nJulian Period from indiction, Metonic and solar cycles.\nLet Y be the year BC or AD and i, m, and s respectively its positions in the indiction, Metonic and solar cycles. Divide 6916i\u00a0+\u00a04200m\u00a0+\u00a04845s by 7980 and call the remainder r.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;If r&gt;4713, Y = (r \u2212 4713) and is a year AD.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;If r&lt;4714, Y = (4714 \u2212 r) and is a year BC.\nExample\ni\u00a0=\u00a08, m\u00a0=\u00a02, s\u00a0=\u00a08. What is the year?\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;(6916 \u00d7 8) = 55328; (4200 \u00d7 2) = 8400: (4845 \u00d7 8) = 38760. 55328 + 8400 + 38760 = 102488.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;102488/7980 = 12 remainder 6728.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;Y = (6728 \u2212 4713) = AD 2015.\nJulian date calculation.\nAs stated above, the Julian date (JD) of any instant is the Julian day number for the preceding noon in Universal Time plus the fraction of the day since that instant. Ordinarily calculating the fractional portion of the JD is straightforward; the number of seconds that have elapsed in the day divided by the number of seconds in a day, 86,400. But if the UTC timescale is being used, a day containing a positive leap second contains 86,401\u00a0seconds (or in the unlikely event of a negative leap second, 86,399\u00a0seconds). One authoritative source, the Standards of Fundamental Astronomy (SOFA), deals with this issue by treating days containing a leap second as having a different length (86,401 or 86,399\u00a0seconds, as required). SOFA refers to the result of such a calculation as \"quasi-JD\".\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38008", "revid": "46992329", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38008", "title": "Bell UH-1 Iroquois", "text": "Family of American military utility helicopters\nThe Bell UH-1 Iroquois (nicknamed \"Huey\") is a utility military helicopter designed and produced by the American aerospace company Bell Helicopter. It is the first member of the prolific Huey family, as well as the first turbine-powered helicopter in service with the United States military.\nDevelopment of the Iroquois started in the early 1950s, a major impetus being a requirement issued by the United States Army for a new medical evacuation and utility helicopter. The Bell 204, first flown on 20 October 1956, was warmly received, particularly for the performance of its single turboshaft engine over piston engine-powered counterparts. An initial production contract for 100 \"HU-1A\"s was issued in March 1960. In response to criticisms over the rotorcraft's power, Bell quickly developed multiple models furnished with more powerful engines; in comparison to the prototype's Lycoming YT53-L-1 (LTC1B-1) engine, producing , by 1966, the Lycoming T53-L-13, capable of , was being installed on some models. A stretched version of the Iroquois, first flown during August 1961, was also produced in response to Army demands for a version that could accommodate more troops. Further modifications would include the use of all-aluminium construction, the adoption of a rotor brake, and alternative powerplants.\nThe Iroquois was first used in combat operations during the Vietnam War, the first examples being deployed in March 1962. It was used for various purposes, including conducting general support, air assault, cargo transport, aeromedical evacuation, search and rescue, electronic warfare, and ground attack missions. Armed Iroquois gunships carried a variety of weapons, including rockets, grenade launchers, and machine guns, and were often modified in the field to suit specific operations. The United States Air Force deployed its Iroquois to Vietnam, using them to conduct reconnaissance operations, psychological warfare, and other support roles. Other nations' armed air services, such as the Royal Australian Air Force, also dispatched their own Iroquois to Vietnam. In total, around 7,000 Iroquois were deployed in the Vietnam theater, over 3,300 of which were believed to be destroyed. Various other conflicts have seen combat deployments of the Iroquois, such as the Rhodesian Bush War, Falklands War, War in Afghanistan, and the 2007 Lebanon conflict.\nThe Iroquois was originally designated HU-1, hence the \"Huey\" nickname, which has remained in common use, despite the official redesignation to UH-1 in 1962. Various derivatives and developments of the Iroquois were produced. A dedicated attack helicopter, the Bell AH-1 Cobra, was derived from the UH-1, and retained a high degree of commonality. The Bell 204 and 205 are Iroquois versions developed for the civilian market. In response to demands from some customers, a twin-engined model, the UH-1N Twin Huey, was also developed during the late 1960s; a further updated four blades model, the Bell 412, entered service in Canada but not the US. A further updated UH-1 with twin engines and four-bladed derivative, the Bell UH-1Y Venom, was also developed during the early twenty-first century for the USMC. In US Army service, the Iroquois was gradually phased out following the introduction of the Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk and the Eurocopter UH-72 Lakota in the early 21st century. However, hundreds were still in use more than 50 years following the type's introduction. In excess of 16,000 Iroquois have been built since 1960. With new orders from Japan and the Czech Republic, the UH-1 remains in production. Several export customers, such as Canada, Germany, Taiwan, Japan, and Italy, opted to produce the type under license. Operators have been located across the world, including the Americas, Europe, Asia, Africa, the Middle East, and the Pacific region.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1952, the U.S. Army identified a requirement for a new helicopter to serve as medical evacuation (MEDEVAC), instrument trainer, and general utility aircraft. The Army determined that current helicopters were too large, underpowered, or too complex to maintain easily. During November 1953, revised military requirements were submitted to the Department of the Army. Twenty companies submitted designs in their bid for the contract, including Bell Helicopter with the \"Model 204\" and Kaman Aircraft with a turbine-powered version of the H-43. On 23 February 1955, the Army announced its decision, selecting Bell to build three copies of the Model 204 for evaluation with the designation \"XH-40\".\nModel 204.\nPowered by a prototype Lycoming YT53-L-1 (LTC1B-1) engine producing 700 shp (520\u00a0kW), the XH-40 first flew on 20 October 1956, at Fort Worth, Texas, with Bell's chief test pilot, Floyd Carlson, at the controls. Even prior to the first flight, the Army had placed an order for six \"YH-40\" service test helicopters. During 1957, a further two prototypes were completed. In 1959, the Army awarded Bell a production contract for 182 aircraft, which was designated \"HU-1A\" and officially named \"Iroquois\" after the Native American nations.\nThe helicopter quickly developed a nickname derived from its HU-1 designation, which came to be pronounced as \"Huey\". The reference became so popular that Bell began casting the name on the helicopter's anti-torque pedals. The official U.S. Army name was almost never used in practice. Even after September 1962, at which point the designation for all models was changed to UH-1 under a unified Department of Defense (DOD) designation system, yet the nickname persisted.\nWhile glowing in praise for the helicopter's advances over piston-engined helicopters, the Army reports from the service tests of the YH-40 found it to be underpowered with the production T53-L-1A powerplant producing a maximum continuous 770 shaft horsepower (570 kilowatts). The Army indicated the need for improved follow-on models even as the first UH-1As were being delivered. In response, Bell proposed the UH-1B, equipped with the Lycoming T53-L-5 engine producing 960\u00a0shp (720\u00a0kW) and a longer cabin that could accommodate either seven passengers or four stretchers and a medical attendant. Army testing of the UH-1B started in November 1960, with the first production aircraft delivered in March 1961.\nBell commenced development of the UH-1C in 1960 to correct aerodynamic deficiencies of the armed UH-1B. Bell fitted the UH-1C with a 1,100\u00a0shp (820\u00a0kW) T53-L-11 engine to provide the power needed to lift all weapons systems in use or under development. The Army eventually refitted all UH-1B aircraft with the same engine. A new rotor system was developed for the UH-1C to allow higher air speeds and reduce the incidence of retreating blade stall during diving engagements. The improved rotor resulted in better maneuverability and a slight speed increase. The increased power and a larger diameter rotor required Bell's engineers to design a new tail boom for the UH-1C. The longer tail boom incorporated a wider chord vertical fin on the tail rotor pylon and larger synchronized elevators.\nBell also introduced a dual hydraulic control system for redundancy as well as an improved inlet filter system for the dusty conditions found in southeast Asia. The UH-1C fuel capacity was increased to 242 US gallons (920 liters), and gross weight was raised to , giving a nominal useful load of . UH-1C production started in June 1966 with a total of 766 aircraft produced, including five for the Royal Australian Navy and five for Norway.\nModel 205.\nWhile earlier short-body Hueys were a success, the Army wanted a version that could carry more troops. Bell's solution was to stretch the HU-1B fuselage by and use the extra space to fit four seats next to the transmission, facing out. Seating capacity increased to 15, including crew. The enlarged cabin could also accommodate six stretchers and a medic, two more than the earlier models. In place of the earlier model's sliding side doors with a single window, larger doors were fitted which had two windows, plus a small hinged panel with an optional window, providing enhanced access to the cabin. The doors and hinged panels were quickly removable, allowing the Huey to be flown in a doors off configuration.\nThe Model 205 prototype flew on 16 August 1961. Seven pre-production/prototype aircraft had been delivered for testing at Edwards AFB starting in March 1961. The 205 was initially equipped with a main rotor and a Lycoming T53-L-9 engine with 1,100 shp (820\u00a0kW). The rotor was lengthened to with a chord of . The tailboom was also lengthened, to accommodate the longer rotor blades. Altogether, the modifications resulted in a gross weight capacity of . The Army ordered production of the 205 in 1963, produced with a T53-L-11 engine for its multi-fuel capability. The prototypes were designated as YUH-1D and the production aircraft was designated as the \"UH-1D\".\nDuring 1966, Bell installed the Lycoming T53-L-13 engine to provide more power for the helicopter. The pitot tube was relocated from the nose to the roof of the cockpit to prevent damage during landing. Production models in this configuration were designated as the \"UH-1H\".\nMarine Corps.\nIn 1962, the United States Marine Corps held a competition to choose an assault support helicopter to replace the Cessna O-1 fixed-wing aircraft and the Kaman OH-43D helicopter. The winner was the UH-1B, which was already in service with the Army. The helicopter was designated the \"UH-1E\" and modified to meet Marine requirements. The major changes included the use of all-aluminium construction for corrosion resistance, radios compatible with Marine Corps ground frequencies, a rotor brake for shipboard use to stop the rotor quickly on shutdown and a roof-mounted rescue hoist.\nThe UH-1E was first flown on 7 October 1963, and deliveries commenced on 21 February 1964; a total of 192 Iroquois of this model were completed. Due to production line realities at Bell, the UH-1E was produced in two versions, both with the same UH-1E designation. The first 34 built were essentially UH-1B airframes with the Lycoming T53-L-11 engine producing 1,100 shp (820\u00a0kW). When Bell switched production to the UH-1C, the UH-1E production benefited from the same changes. The Marine Corps later upgraded UH-1E engines to the Lycoming T53-L-13, which produced 1,400 shp (1,000\u00a0kW), after the Army introduced the UH-1M and upgraded their UH-1C helicopters to the same engine.\nAir Force.\nThe United States Air Force (USAF) held a competition for a helicopter to be used for support on missile bases included a specific requirement to mandate the use of the General Electric T58 turboshaft as a powerplant. The Air Force had a large inventory of these engines on hand for its fleet of HH-3 Jolly Green Giant rescue helicopters and using the same engine for both helicopters would save costs. In response, Bell proposed an upgraded version of the 204B with the T58 engine. Because the T58 output shaft is at the rear, and was thus mounted in front of the transmission on the HH-3, it had to have a separate offset gearbox (SDG or speed decreaser gearbox) at the rear, and shafting to couple to the UH-1 transmission.\nTwin-engine variants.\nThe single-engine UH-1 variants were followed by the twin-engine UH-1N Twin Huey (Bell 212) and years later the UH-1Y Venom. Bell began development of the UH-1N for Canada in 1968. It changed to the more powerful Pratt &amp; Whitney Canada PT6T twin-engine set. The US also ordered the helicopter with the USAF receiving it in 1970. Canada's military, the U.S. Marine Corps, and the U.S. Navy first received the model in 1971.\nIn 1996, the USMC launched the H-1 upgrade program via the award of a contract to Bell Helicopter for development of the improved UH-1Y and AH-1Zs variants. The UH-1Y includes a lengthened cabin, four-blade rotor, and two more powerful GE T700 engines. The UH-1Y entered service with the USMC in 2008.\nThe Bell 412 is an improved four-blade main rotor version of the twin-engined Bell 212, and while not adopted by the US, was chosen by Canada (CH-146 Griffon), license produced in Italy as the Augusta-Bell AB412, and is going to be made for the Japan Self Defense Force in Japan by Subaru. It is a popular commercial and military helicopter, and it competed in the early 2000s Army Light Utility Helicopter program, but lost to what would be the UH-72 Lakota. That program replaced aging UH-1 and OH-58A/C models being used by the National Guard.\nDesign.\nThe Bell UH-1 Iroquois is a utility helicopter designed for military use. It has a metal fuselage of semi-monocoque construction with tubular landing skids and two rotor blades on the main rotor. Early UH-1 models featured a single Lycoming T53 turboshaft engine in versions with power ratings from . Later UH-1 and related models often featured twin engines and four-blade rotors. All members of the UH-1 family have similar construction. The UH-1H is the most-produced version, and is representative of all types. The main structure consists of two longitudinal main beams that run under the passenger cabin to the nose and back to the tail boom attachment point. The main beams are separated by transverse bulkheads and provide the supporting structure for the cabin, landing gear, under-floor fuel tanks, transmission, engine and tail boom. The main beams are joined at the lift beam, a short aluminum girder structure that is attached to the transmission via a lift link on the top and the cargo hook on the bottom and is located at the aircraft's center of gravity. The lift beams were changed to steel later in the UH-1H's life, due to cracking on high-time airframes. The semi-monocoque tail boom attaches to the fuselage with four bolts.\nThe UH-1H's dynamic components include the engine, transmission, rotor mast, main rotor blades, tail rotor driveshaft, and the 42-degree and 90-degree gearboxes of the tail rotor. The main rotor transmission consists of a 90-degree bevel gear assembly with a reduction ratio of 2.14:1, followed by a 2-stage planetary gearset with a ratio of 9.53:1 (two stages of 3.087:1 each). This is in addition to the output gearbox of the T53 engine with a reduction ratio of 3.19:1. This combined reduction results in 324 rpm at the main rotor. The two-bladed, semi-rigid rotor design, with pre-coned and underslung blades, is a development of early Bell model designs, such as the Bell 47 with which it shares common design features, including a damped stabilizer bar. The two-bladed system reduces storage space required for the aircraft, but at a cost of higher vibration levels. The two-bladed design is also responsible for the characteristic 'Huey thump' sound when the aircraft is in flight, which is particularly evident during descent and in turning flight. The tail rotor is driven from the main transmission, via the two directional gearboxes which provide a tail rotor speed approximately six times that of the main rotor to increase tail rotor effectiveness.\nThe UH-1H also features a synchronized elevator on the tail boom, which is linked to the cyclic control and allows a wider center of gravity range. The standard fuel system consists of five interconnected fuel tanks, three of which are mounted behind the transmission and two of which are under the cabin floor. The landing gear consists of two arched cross tubes joining the skid tubes. The skids have replaceable sacrificial skid shoes to prevent wear of the skid tubes themselves. Skis and inflatable floats may be fitted. While the five main fuel tanks are self-sealing, the UH-1H was not equipped with factory armor, although armored pilot seats were available.\nInternal seating is made up of two pilot seats and additional seating for up to 13 passengers or crew in the cabin. The maximum seating arrangement consists of a four-man bench seat facing rearwards behind the pilot seats, facing a five-man bench seat in front of the transmission structure, with two, two-man bench seats facing outwards from the transmission structure on either side of the aircraft. All passenger seats are constructed of aluminum tube frames with canvas material seats, and are quickly removable and reconfigurable. The cabin may also be configured with up to six stretchers, an internal rescue hoist, auxiliary fuel tanks, spotlights, or many other mission kits. Access to the cabin is via two aft-sliding doors and two small, forward-hinged panels. The doors and hinged panels may be removed for flight or the doors may be pinned open. Pilot access is via individual hinged doors.\nThe UH-1H's dual controls are conventional for a helicopter and consist of a single hydraulic system boosting the cyclic stick, collective lever and anti-torque pedals. The collective levers have integral throttles, although these are not used to control rotor rpm, which is automatically governed, but are used for starting and shutting down the engine. The cyclic and collective control the main rotor pitch through push-pull tube linkages to the swashplate, while the anti-torque pedals change the pitch of the tail rotor via a tensioned cable arrangement. Some UH-1Hs have been modified to replace the tail rotor control cables with push-pull tubes similar to the UH-1N Twin Huey.\nOperational history.\nU.S. Army.\nThe HU-1A (later redesignated UH-1A) first entered service with the 101st Airborne Division at Fort Campbell, Kentucky, the 82nd Airborne Division, and the 57th Medical Detachment. Although intended for evaluation only, the Army quickly pressed the new helicopter into operational service, and Hueys with the 57th Medical Detachment arrived in South Vietnam in March 1962. The UH-1 has long been a symbol of US involvement in Southeast Asia in general and Vietnam in particular, and as a result of that conflict, has become one of the world's most recognized helicopters. In Vietnam primary missions included general support, air assault, cargo transport, aeromedical evacuation, search and rescue, electronic warfare, and later, ground attack. During the conflict, the craft was upgraded, notably to a larger version based on the Model 205. This version was initially designated the UH-1D and flew operationally from 1963.\nDuring its Vietnam War service, the UH-1 was used for various purposes and various terms for each task abounded. UH-1s tasked with ground attack or armed escort were outfitted with rocket launchers, grenade launchers, and machine guns. As early as 1962, UH-1s were modified locally by the companies themselves, who fabricated their own mounting systems. These gunship UH-1s were commonly referred to as \"Frogs\" or \"Hogs\" if they carried rockets, and \"Cobras\" or simply \"Guns\" if they had guns. UH-1s tasked and configured for troop transport were often called \"Slicks\" due to an absence of weapons pods. Slicks did have door gunners, but were generally employed in the troop transport and medevac roles.\nUH-1s also flew hunter-killer teams with observation helicopters, namely the Bell OH-58A Kiowa and the Hughes OH-6 Cayuse (\"Loach\"). Towards the end of the conflict, the UH-1 was tested with TOW missiles, and two UH-1B helicopters equipped with the XM26 Armament Subsystem were deployed to help counter the 1972 Easter Invasion. USAF Lieutenant James P. Fleming piloted a UH-1F on a 26 November 1968 mission that earned him the Medal of Honor.\nDuring the course of the conflict, the UH-1 went through several upgrades. The UH-1A, B, and C models (short fuselage, Bell 204) and the UH-1D and H models (stretched-fuselage, Bell 205) each had improved performance and load-carrying capabilities. The UH-1B and C performed the gunship, and some of the transport, duties in the early years of the Vietnam War. The first batch of 77 UH-1Ds arrived in South Vietnam in April 1965. UH-1B/C gunships were replaced by the new AH-1 Cobra attack helicopter from 1967 to late 1968. The increasing intensity and sophistication of North Vietnamese anti-aircraft defenses made continued use of UH-1 gunships impractical, and after Vietnam the Cobra was adopted as the Army's main attack helicopter. Devotees of the UH-1 in the gunship role cite its ability to act as an impromptu Dustoff if the need arose, as well as the superior observational capabilities of the larger Huey cockpit, which allowed return fire from door gunners to the rear and sides of the aircraft. In air cavalry troops (i.e., companies) UH-1s were combined with infantry scouts, OH-6 and OH-58 aero-scout helicopters, and AH-1 attack helicopters to form several color-coded teams (viz., blue, white, red, purple, and pink) to perform various reconnaissance, security, and economy of force missions in fulfilling the traditional cavalry battlefield role.\nThe Army tested a great variety of experimental weapons on the UH-1; nearly anything that could be carried. The Army desired weapons with large calibers and high rates of fire, which led to the testing of a 20\u00a0mm cannon on a large mount bolted to the cabin floor. The size of the weapon allowed very little room for movement. The Army further tested a full-size Vulcan cannon firing out the door of a UH-1. It was capable of firing 2400 rounds per minute, or about 40 rounds per second. Despite this being a significant reduction from the nearly 100 rounds per second fired by a standard Vulcan cannon, the installation proved too kinetic for the UH-1. Podded versions of the M24 20\u00a0mm cannon were tested in combat over Vietnam. There was a wide variety of 7.62\u00a0mm automatic weapons tested, including different installations of the M60 machine gun. AS-10 and SS-11 missiles were tested in several different configurations. High-capacity rocket launchers were also tested, such as the XM3 launcher, which had 24 launching tubes. Press photos were taken with the XM5 and XM3 installed on the same aircraft, but this arrangement could not be used because it was more than the gross take-off weight of the aircraft.\nDuring the Easter Offensive of 1972 by North Vietnam, experimental models of the TOW-firing XM26 were taken out of storage and sent to South Vietnam in response to the onslaught. The pilots had never fired a TOW missile before, and were given brief crash courses. Despite having little training with the units, the pilots managed to hit targets with 151 of the 162 missiles fired in combat, including a pair of tanks. The airborne TOW launchers were known as \"Hawks Claws\" and were based at Camp Holloway. During the conflict, 7,013 UH-1s served in Vietnam and of these 3,305 were destroyed. In total, 1,151 pilots were killed, along with 1,231 other crew members (these figures are not including Army of the Republic of Vietnam losses).\nPost Vietnam, the US Army continued to operate large numbers of Iroquois; they would see further combat during the US invasion of Grenada in 1983, the US invasion of Panama in 1989, and the Gulf War in 1991. In the latter conflict, in excess of 400 Iroquois performed a variety of missions in the region; over a nine-month period, the fleet cumulatively reached 31,000 flight hours and achieved a stable fully mission capable rate of 70%. The type comprised more than 20% of all rotorcraft across the coalition and recorded 21% of the overall flying hours. Even after the Gulf War, the US Army had more than 2,800 Iroquois in its inventory; in particular, 389 UH-1Vs comprised 76% of the Army's medevac aircraft. Nevertheless, plans were mooted as early as 1992 to undertake a slow withdrawal of the aging type in favor of larger and more technologically advanced rotorcraft.\nThe US Army began phasing out the UH-1 with the introduction of the Sikorsky UH-60 Black Hawk starting in the 1980s, although the Army UH-1 Residual Fleet had around 700 UH-1s that were to be retained until 2015, primarily in support of Army Aviation training at Fort Rucker and in selected Army National Guard units. Army support for the craft was intended to end in 2004; The UH-1 was retired from active Army service in early 2005. During 2009, Army National Guard retirements of the UH-1 accelerated with the introduction of the Eurocopter UH-72 Lakota. In 2009 the Army National Guard marked 50 years of service of the Huey in the Army, and 40 with the National Guard and had a ceremonial end to its service at that time; in the coming years many final flights of the Huey in State National Guard took place. The Washington, D.C. Army National Guard had its last flight in 2011, and Pennsylvania in 2010. The final U.S. Army UH-1 was retired in late 2016, and transferred to a State police department. In context, the Huey is still in service with Armed Forces overall, and the Air Force UH-1N were still in service as of 2024, but scheduled for replacement.\nU.S. Air Force.\nIn October 1965, the United States Air Force (USAF) 20th Helicopter Squadron was formed at Tan Son Nhut Air Base in South Vietnam, equipped initially with CH-3C helicopters. By June 1967, the UH-1F and UH-1P were also added to the unit's inventory and, by the end of the year, the entire unit had shifted from Tan Son Nhut to Nakhon Phanom Royal Thai Air Force Base, with the CH-3s transferring to the 21st Helicopter Squadron. On 1 August 1968, the unit was redesignated the 20th Special Operations Squadron. The 20th SOS's UH-1s were known as the \"Green Hornets\", stemming from their color, a primarily green two-tone camouflage (green and tan) was carried, and radio call-sign \"Hornet\". The main role of these helicopters were to insert and extract reconnaissance teams, provide cover for such operations, conduct psychological warfare, and other support roles for covert operations especially in Laos and Cambodia during the so-called Secret War.\nUSAF UH-1s were often equipped with automatic grenade launchers in place of the door guns. The XM-94 grenade launcher had been tested on Army rotorcraft prior to its use by the USAF. The unit was capable of firing 400 grenades per minute, up to 1,500 yards effective range.\nInto the twenty-first century, the USAF operates the UH-1N for support of intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM) sites, including transport of security personnel and distinguished visitors. On 24 September 2018, the USAF announced that the Boeing/Leonardo MH-139 (an AW-139 variant) had won a competition to replace the UH-1N fleet. The UH-1N fleet is in service as of 2024, as production of the new type is ramped up.\nU.S. Navy.\nThe US Navy acquired a number of surplus UH-1B helicopters from the U.S. Army, these rotorcraft were modified into gunships, outfitted with special gun mounts and radar altimeters. They were known as \"Seawolves\" in service with Navy Helicopter Attack (Light) (HA(L)-3). UH-1C helicopters were also acquired during the 1970s. The Seawolves worked as a team with Navy river patrol operations.\nFour years after the disestablishment of HA(L)-3, the Navy determined that it still had a need for gunships, establishing two new Naval Reserve Helicopter Attack (Light) Squadrons as part of the newly formed Commander, Helicopter Wing Reserve (COMHELWINGRES) in 1976. Helicopter Attack Squadron (Light) Five (HA(L)-5), nicknamed the \"Blue Hawks\", was established at Naval Air Station Point Mugu, California on 11 June 1977 and its sister squadron, Helicopter Attack Squadron (Light) Four (HA(L)-4), known as the Red Wolves, was formed at Naval Air Station Norfolk, Virginia on 1 July 1976.\nThe last regular Navy Huey's, HH-1's for search and rescue were retired in 2009 and replaced by H-60 Seahawks, and the last Marine Corps UH-1N were retired in 2014.\nDrug Enforcement Administration.\nThe UH-1H has been used on multiple occasions by the American Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA); initially, these were usually borrowed from the U.S. Army to support planned missions, such for Operation Snowcap, a large multi-year counter-narcotics action covering nine countries across Latin America.\nDuring the War in Afghanistan, the DEA made use of a number of UH-1s stationed in the country for the purpose of conducting counter-narcotics raids. Operated by contractors, these Hueys provide transportation, surveillance, and air support for DEA FAST teams. During July 2009, four UH-1Hs and two Mi-17s were used in a raid that led to the arrest of an Afghan Border Police commander on corruption charges.\nArgentina.\nNine Argentine Army Aviation UH-1Hs and two Argentine Air Force Bell 212 were included with the aircraft deployed during the Falklands War. They performed general transport and SAR missions and were based at Port Stanley (BAM Puerto Argentino). Two of the Hueys were destroyed and, after the hostilities had ended, the remainder were captured by the British military. Three captured aircraft survive as museum pieces in England and Falklands.\nAustralia.\nThe Royal Australian Air Force employed the UH-1H until 1989. Iroquois helicopters of No. 9 Squadron RAAF were deployed to South Vietnam in mid 1966 in support of the 1st Australian Task Force. In this role they were armed with single M60 doorguns. In 1969 four of No. 9 Squadron's helicopters were converted to gunships (known as 'Bushrangers'), armed with two fixed forward firing M134 7.62\u00a0mm minigun (one each side) and a 7-round rocket pod on each side. Aircrew were armed with twin M60 flexible mounts in each door. UH-1 helicopters were used in many roles including troop transport, medevac and Bushranger gunships for armed support. No. 35 Squadron and No. 5 Squadron also operated the Iroquois in various roles through the 1970s and 1980s. Between 1982 and 1986, the squadron contributed aircraft and aircrew to the Australian helicopter detachment which formed part of the Multinational Force and Observers peacekeeping force in the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt. During 1988, the RAAF began to re-equip with S-70A Blackhawks.\nIn 1989 and 1990, the RAAF's UH-1H Iroquois were subsequently transferred to the 171st Aviation Squadron in Darwin, Northern Territory and the 5th Aviation Regiment based in Townsville, Queensland following the decision that all battlefield helicopters would be operated by the Australian Army. On 21 September 2007, the Australian Army retired the last of their Bell UH-1s. The last flight occurred in Brisbane on that day with the aircraft replaced by MRH-90 medium helicopters and Tiger armed reconnaissance helicopters.\nThe Royal Australian Navy's 723 Squadron also operated seven UH-1B from 1964 to 1989, with three of these aircraft lost in accidents during that time. 723 Squadron deployed Iroquois aircraft and personnel as part of the Experimental Military Unit during the Vietnam War.\nEl Salvador.\nNumerous UH-1s were operated by the Salvadoran Air Force; during the 1980s, it became the biggest and most experienced combat helicopter force in Central and South America, fighting for over a decade during the Salvadoran Civil War and having been trained by US Army in tactics developed during the Vietnam War. By the start of 1985, El Salvador had 33 UH-1s in its inventory, some configured as gunships and others as transports; furthermore, in the following years, the country expanded its UH-1 fleet further with assistance from the US government. Several Salvadoran UH-1M and UH-1H helicopters used were modified to carry bombs instead of rocket pods. The UH-1s enabled the military to avoid ground routes vulnerable to guerrilla ambushes; the gunships were typically used to suppress hostile forces ahead of troops being inserted by UH-1 transports.\nGermany.\nThe German aerospace company Dornier constructed 352 UH-1Ds under license between 1967 and 1981 for the West German Bundeswehr. These saw service with both the German Army and German Air Force as utility helicopters, they were also commonly used for search and rescue (SAR) missions. After being replaced by newer twin-engine Eurocopter EC145s, the last UH-1Ds in German service were withdrawn on 12 April 2021.\nIsrael.\nIsrael withdrew its UH-1s from service in 2002, after 33 years of operation. They were replaced by Sikorsky UH-60 Blackhawk helicopters with an initial batch of 10 delivered during 1994. While some were passed on to pro-Israeli militias in Lebanon, eleven other UH-1Ds were reportedly sold to a Singapore-based logging company but were, instead, delivered in October 1978 to the Rhodesian Air Force to skirt a United Nations-endorsed embargo imposed on the country during the Rhodesian Bush War.\nJapan.\nIn 1960, Subaru made an agreement to produce the HU-1B for Japan, which was renamed the UH-1B in 1962, along with the HU-1H, renamed UH-1H. Bell and Subaru developed the UH-1J.\nEntering service starting in 1993, 130 UH-1J were produced by Fuji for the Japanese Self-Defense Force.\nIn 2005, a pair of Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (JGSDF) UH-1 helicopters were deployed to Pakistan for earthquake disaster relief. During 2010, after floods in Pakistan, UH-1s were again deployed to the country to aid in disaster relief. Japanese UH-1s have also been periodically used to conduct water bombing against fires.\nIn the aftermath of the 2011 T\u014dhoku earthquake and tsunami, Japan's UH-1 fleet was extensively deployed across the country for disaster relief purposes; they also conducted reconnaissance flights over the stricken Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant while carrying radiation detection equipment to help inform planners of the plant's condition.\nBy the early 2020s, Japan's Acquisition, Technology &amp; Logistics Agency was in the process of recapitalizing much of the JGSDF's rotarywing capability; it is planned for a locally-built model of the twin-engined multirole Bell 412 helicopter to replace the remaining older UH-1s in Japanese service; the new helicopter will be called the H-2 in JSDF service. The first flight of the Subaru UH-2 took place in 2022.\nLebanon.\nDuring the early 1990s, the Lebanese Air Force (LAF) inducted their first UH-1 helicopters. During the 2007 Lebanon conflict, at the Battle of Nahr el-Bared in North Lebanon, the Lebanese Army, lacking fixed-wing aircraft, modified several UH-1Hs to carry Mark 82 bombs, enabling it to perform helicopter bombing, and used it to strike militant-held positions. Specifically, special mounting points were installed along the sides of each Huey for the carriage of these high explosive bombs. In the aftermath of the 2020 Beirut explosion, UH-1s participated in the disaster response, and were used to extinguish fires.\nTypically, the fleet is tasked with performing search and rescue, troop transport, aerial firefighting and utility missions. In the late 2010s, specially modified UH-1Ds participated in the first LIDAR mapping exercise in the country. During February 2021, an additional three Bell UH-1H-IIs were delivered to the LAF by Bell to augment their existing fleet.\nNew Zealand.\nThe Royal New Zealand Air Force had an active fleet of 13 Iroquois serving with No. 3 Squadron RNZAF. The first delivery was five UH-1D in 1966 followed in 1970 by nine UH-1H and one more UH-1H in 1976. All of the UH-1D aircraft were upgraded to 1H specification during the 1970s. Two ex-U.S. Army UH-1H attrition airframes were purchased in 1996. Three aircraft have been lost in accidents.\nThe RNZAF has retired the Iroquois, with the NHIndustries NH90 as its replacement. Eight active NH90 helicopters plus one spare have been procured. This process was initially expected to be completed by the end of 2013, but was delayed until 2016. Individual aircraft were retired as they reach their next major group servicing intervals; the UH-1H was retired as the NH90 fleet stood up. On 21 May 2015, the remaining UH-1H fleet of six helicopters conducted a final tour of the country ahead of its planned retirement on 1 July. During 49 years of service the type had seen service in areas including the UK, Southeast Asia, Timor, the Solomon Islands, various South Pacific nations, and the Antarctic.\nOne was preserved in the New Zealand National museum after its retirement from service in 2013, delivered to the museum in 2015; it had had been in service many decades entering RNZAF service in 1966.\nPakistan.\nDuring the 1973 floods in Pakistan, the U.S. was the first to send a relief team with six UH-1H helicopters, which operated mainly in the south of Pakistan. After completing their mission, the helicopters were left at Dhamial. Initially idle for a few months, they were later gifted to Pakistan by the U.S. government, following a proposal made to Prime Minister Bhutto before his state visit to the U.S. in 1974.\nPhilippines.\nThe Philippine Air Force (PAF) has a long history of acquiring United States Air Force assets, including the Bell UH-1.On 29 March 1969 the PAF received the first UH-1 Hueys and a unit was reorganized into the 205th Tactical Helicopter Wing. The Huey platforms were brand-new equipped with the latest avionics and pilots were provided ballistics helmets. The first four helicopters with tail numbers 290, 291, 292 and 293 came straight out of the factory, the US Army having started commissioning initials productions only two years before.\nIn PAF service, the type was regularly used to combat local insurgents as well as to conduct disaster relief operations after several earthquakes and typhoons hit the nation. Learning from this experience, the PAF decided to arm the Hueys with machineguns. In February 1971, aircrew members of the unit underwent gunnery training at Fort Magsaysay. The sparkling new M-60 machineguns now enhanced the Hueys' capability to provide fire support from the air. The new-found fire power was ably demonstrated in punitive operations at Barrio Talbac, San Ildefonso, Bulacan, on 7\u20138 April 1971. In the ensuing encounter, Huk Commander Beto and his aide named Yoyong were killed. Francis Ford Coppola filmed \"Apocalypse Now\" in the Philippines primarily because President Ferdinand Marcos agreed to let Coppola use Philippine Hueys to film the iconic scene with Robert Duvall as Lt. Colonel Kilgore.In 2004, the Philippine Air Force (PAF) procured 20 refurbished UH-1H 'Huey' helicopters from Singapore Technologies Aerospace (ST Aero) in a deal worth US$12\u00a0million. \nIn 2013, due to urgent operational requirements the PAF Procured Brand New Bell 412 delivered in 2015. Procured another batch of 21 units refurbished Bell UH-1D now with Nigh Vision Compatible Cockpit with a budget of PHP1.26bn ($28m) contract with Rice Aircraft Services and Eagle Copters joint venture (JV) delivered in 2015. \nFurthermore, during October 2019, the Philippines made a deal with Japan to acquire some of its spare parts inventory; this reportedly was to facilitate the restoration of 7 units stored UH-1s to flightworthy condition. By January 2021, the PAF had 13 UH-1H and 10 UH-1D helicopters in an operational condition.On 2021, a plan to retire all of the PAF's remaining UH-1 helicopters was raised, following a series of crashes involving the type. On 14 October 2021, the PAF officially decommissioned the remainder of its UH-1D fleet, the retired rotorcraft were stored at Clark Air Base. However airworthy airframes were returned to service due to lack of aircraft. The role of the UH-1 is to be performed by recently delivered Poland Built PZL Mielec (Sikorsky S-70i) helicopters which were acquired through Multi-Year Contractual Authority (MYCA); in January 2022\nIn 2022, the Philippines said that some of the retired Huey's will be reactivated with the help of Turkish company ASFAT. Also, in 2022, Japan planned to donate UH-1s leaving its service to the Philippine Army. Japan is introducing new Huey's as replacement. As of December 2024, twenty-three units are in active service.\nRhodesia.\nVery late in the Rhodesian Bush War, the Rhodesian Air Force obtained 11 former Israeli Agusta-Bell 205As in violation of sanctions on the nation, allegedly having used a series of intermediaries to evade them. Locally known as \"Cheetahs\", these helicopters were returned to a flightworthy condition and then assigned to No. 8 Squadron, after which they usually functioned as armed gunships as well as troop transports. During September 1979, one Cheetah was lost in combat after being hit by an RPG while flying over Mozambique. At least another three other UH-1s were also lost. The surviving helicopters were put up for sale in 1990.\nYemen.\nIn July 2009, Yemen received four UH-1Hs. These remained grounded for almost all the time they were in Yemen; at least one helicopter was heavily damaged during Saudi-led airstrikes on Al Daylami and Al Anad Air Bases.\nVariant overview.\nU.S. military variants.\nNote: In U.S. service, the G, J, Q, R, S, T, W and Z model designations are used by the AH-1. The UH-1 and AH-1 are considered members of the same H-1 series. The military does not use I (India) or O (Oscar) for aircraft designations to avoid confusion with \"one\" and \"zero\" respectively.\nSpecifications (UH-1H).\n\"Data from\" \"Jane's All the World's Aircraft 1987-88\"General characteristics* Crew: 1\u20134* Capacity: including 11\u201314 troops, 6 stretchers and attendant, or equivalent cargo\nPerformance* Endurance: * g limits: * Roll rate: * Power/mass: \nArmament\nvarious including:\nNotable appearances in media.\nThe image of American troops disembarking from a Huey has become an iconic image of the Vietnam War, and can be seen in many films, video games and television shows on the subject, as well as more modern settings. The UH-1 is seen in many films about the Vietnam War, including \"The Green Berets\", \"The Deer Hunter\", \"Platoon\", \"Hamburger Hill\", \"Apocalypse Now\", \"Casualties of War\", and \"Born on the Fourth of July\". It is prominently featured in \"We Were Soldiers\" as the main helicopter used by the Air Cavalry in the Battle of Ia Drang. Author Robert Mason recounts his career as a UH-1 \"Slick\" pilot in his memoir, \"Chickenhawk\".\nThe 2002 journey of \"Huey 091\", displayed in the Smithsonian National Museum of American History, is outlined in the 2004 documentary \"In the Shadow of the Blade\".\nSee also.\nRelated development\nAircraft of comparable role, configuration, and era\nRelated lists\nReferences.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38010", "revid": "11487766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38010", "title": "Heliox", "text": "Breathing gas mixed from helium and oxygen\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Infobox drug/styles.css\"/&gt;\nHeliox is a breathing gas mixture of helium (He) and oxygen (O2). It is used as a medical treatment for patients with difficulty breathing because this mixture generates less resistance than atmospheric air when passing through the airways of the lungs, and thus requires less effort by a patient to breathe in and out of the lungs. It is also used as a breathing gas for deep ambient pressure diving as it is not narcotic at high pressure, and for its low work of breathing.\nHeliox has been used medically since the 1930s, and although the medical community adopted it initially to alleviate symptoms of upper airway obstruction, its range of medical uses has since expanded greatly, mostly because of the low density of the gas. Heliox is also used in saturation diving and sometimes during the deep phase of technical dives.\nMedical uses.\nThere is also some use of heliox in conditions of the medium airways (croup, asthma and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease). A recent trial has suggested that lower fractions of helium (below 40%)\u00a0\u2013 thus allowing a higher fraction of oxygen\u00a0\u2013 might also have the same beneficial effect on upper airway obstruction.\nPatients with these conditions may develop a range of symptoms including dyspnea (breathlessness), hypoxemia (below-normal oxygen content in the arterial blood) and eventually a weakening of the respiratory muscles due to exhaustion, which can lead to respiratory failure and require intubation and mechanical ventilation. Heliox may reduce all these effects, making it easier for the patient to breathe. Heliox has also found utility in the weaning of patients off mechanical ventilation, and in the nebulization of inhalable drugs, particularly for the elderly. Research has also indicated advantages in using helium\u2013oxygen mixtures in delivery of anaesthesia.\nAvailable forms.\nIn medicine, heliox may refer to a mixture of 21% O2 (the same as air) and 79% He, although other combinations are available (70/30 and 60/40).\nMechanism of action.\nHeliox generates less airway resistance than air and thereby requires less mechanical energy to ventilate the lungs. \"Work of breathing\" (WOB) is reduced by two mechanisms:\nHeliox 20/80 diffuses 1.8 times faster than oxygen, and the flow of heliox 20/80 from an oxygen flowmeter is 1.8 times the normal flow for oxygen.\nHeliox has a similar viscosity to air but a significantly lower density (0.5\u00a0g/L versus 1.25\u00a0g/L at STP). Flow of gas through the airway comprises laminar flow, transitional flow and turbulent flow. The tendency for each type of flow is described by the Reynolds number. Heliox's low density produces a lower Reynolds number and hence higher probability of laminar flow for any given airway. Laminar flow tends to generate less resistance than turbulent flow.\nIn the small airways where flow is laminar, resistance is proportional to gas viscosity and is not related to density and so heliox has little effect. The Hagen\u2013Poiseuille equation describes laminar resistance. In the large airways where flow is turbulent, resistance is proportional to density, so heliox has a significant effect.\nHistory.\nHeliox has been used medically since the early 1930s. It was the mainstay of treatment in acute asthma before the advent of bronchodilators. Currently, heliox is mainly used in conditions of large airway narrowing (upper airway obstruction from tumors or foreign bodies and vocal cord dysfunction).\nUsage in diving.\nHelium diluted breathing gases are used to eliminate or reduce the effects of inert gas narcosis, and to reduce work of breathing due to increased gas density at depth. From the 1960s saturation diving physiology studies were conducted with helium from over several decades by a Hyperbaric Experimental Centre operated by the French company COMEX specializing in engineering and deep diving operations. Owing to the expense of helium, heliox is most likely to be used in deep saturation diving. It is also sometimes used by technical divers, particularly those using rebreathers, which conserve the breathing gas at depth much better than open circuit scuba. Use of heliox mixtures is known as heliox diving, a subs-category of mixed gas diving, also known simply as gas diving.\nThe proportion of oxygen in a diving mix depends on the maximum depth of the dive plan, but it is often hypoxic and may be less than 10%. Each mix is custom made using gas blending techniques, which often involve the use of booster pumps to achieve typical diving cylinder pressures of from lower pressure banks of oxygen and helium cylinders.\nBecause sound travels faster in heliox than in air, voice formants are raised, making divers' speech very high-pitched and hard to understand to people not used to it. Surface personnel often employ a piece of communications equipment called a \"helium de-scrambler\", which electronically lowers the pitch of the diver's voice as it is relayed through the communications gear, making it easier to understand.\nTrimix is a less expensive alternative to heliox for deep diving, which uses only enough helium to limit narcosis and gas density to tolerable levels for the planned depth. Trimix is often used in technical diving, and is also sometimes used in professional diving.\nIn 2015, the United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit showed that decompression from bounce dives using trimix is not more efficient than dives on heliox.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38011", "revid": "3138265", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38011", "title": "Squid", "text": "Superorder of cephalopod molluscs\nA squid (pl.\u2009squid) is a mollusc with an elongated soft body, large eyes, eight arms, and two tentacles in the orders Myopsida, Oegopsida, and Bathyteuthida (though many other molluscs within the broader Neocoleoidea are also called \"squid\" despite not strictly fitting these criteria). Like all other cephalopods, squid have a distinct head, bilateral symmetry, and a mantle. They are mainly soft-bodied, like octopuses, but have a small internal skeleton in the form of a rod-like gladius or pen, made of chitin.\nSquid diverged from other cephalopods during the Jurassic and radiated at the beginning of the Late Cretaceous, and occupy a similar role to teleost fish as open-water predators of similar size and behaviour. They play an important role in the open-water food web. The two long tentacles are used to grab prey and the eight arms to hold and control it. The beak then cuts the food into suitable size chunks for swallowing. Squid are rapid swimmers, moving by jet propulsion, and largely locate their prey by sight. They are among the most intelligent of invertebrates, with groups of Humboldt squid having been observed hunting cooperatively. They are preyed on by sharks, other fish, sea birds, seals and cetaceans, particularly sperm whales.\nSquid can change colour for camouflage and signalling. Some species are bioluminescent, using their light for counter-illumination camouflage, while many species can eject a cloud of ink to distract predators.\nSquid are used for human consumption with commercial fisheries in Japan, the Mediterranean, the southwestern Atlantic, the eastern Pacific and elsewhere. They are used in cuisines around the world, often known as \"calamari\". Squid have featured in literature since classical times, especially in tales of giant squid and sea monsters.\nTaxonomy and phylogeny.\nSquid are members of the class Cephalopoda, subclass Coleoidea. The squid orders Myopsida and Oegopsida are in the superorder Decapodiformes (from the Greek for \"ten-legged\"). Two other orders of decapodiform cephalopods are also called squid, although they are taxonomically distinct from squids and differ recognizably in their gross anatomical features. They are the bobtail squid of order Sepiolida and the ram's horn squid of the monotypic order Spirulida. The vampire squid (\"Vampyroteuthis infernalis\"), however, is more closely related to the octopus than to any squid.\nThe cladogram, not fully resolved, is based on Sanchez et al., 2018. Their molecular phylogeny used mitochondrial and nuclear DNA marker sequences; they comment that a robust phylogeny \"has proven very challenging to obtain\". If it is accepted that Sepiidae cuttlefish are a kind of squid, then the squids, excluding the vampire squid, form a clade as illustrated. Orders are shown in boldface; all the families not included in those orders are in the paraphyletic order \"Oegopsida\", except Sepiadariidae and Sepiidae that are in the polyphyletic order \"Sepiida\", \nEvolution.\nCrown coleoids (the common ancestor of octopuses and squid) diverged in the late Paleozoic (Mississippian), according to fossils of \"Syllipsimopodi\", an early relative of vampire squids and octopuses. True squid diverged from other cephalopods during the Jurassic, but only emerged to prominence at the boundary between the Early and Late Cretaceous, around 100 million years ago. Both the coleoids and the teleost fish were involved in much adaptive radiation at this time, and the two modern groups resemble each other in size, ecology, habitat, morphology and behaviour, however some fish moved into fresh water while the coleoids remained in marine environments.\nThe ancestral coleoid was probably nautiloid-like with a straight septate shell that became immersed in the mantle and was used for buoyancy control. Four lines diverged from this, Spirulida (with one living member), the cuttlefishes, the squids and the octopuses. Squid have differentiated from the ancestral mollusc such that the body plan has been condensed antero-posteriorly and extended dorso-ventrally. What may have been the foot of the ancestor is modified into a complex set of appendages around the mouth. The sense organs are highly developed and include advanced eyes similar to those of vertebrates.\nThe ancestral shell has been lost, with only an internal gladius, or pen, remaining. The pen, made of a chitin-like material, is a feather-shaped internal structure that supports the squid's mantle and serves as a site for muscle attachment. The cuttlebone or sepion of the Sepiidae is calcareous and appears to have evolved afresh in the Tertiary. \nDue to their soft bodies and tendency to easily decay, fossil remains of true squid are very rare in the Mesozoic fossil record, in contrast to those of the superficially similar belemnites. Even their beaks, the only hard part of them that can sometimes fossilize, tend to be extremely fragile and can be easily destroyed during preparation of the surrounding rock. The lack of squid remains in the Mesozoic fossil record has skewed calibrations over the phylogenetic divergence times of squid, with some studies suggesting that they may have only evolved during the Cenozoic, although more recent discoveries have clarified and refuted this. In 2006 and 2015, the fossil squid genera \"Yezoteuthis\" and \"Haboroteuthis\" were identified from the Late Cretaceous-aged Yezo Group of Japan based on fossil beaks. \nIn 2025, multiple fossil squid taxa belonging to both the Oegopsida and Myopsida were described based on fossil beaks from the Yezo Group, with records of both found dating back to the earliest Cenomanian. The authors resolved the fragility of the fossil beaks by scanning them and the surrounding matrix with grinding tomography. The abundance of squid beaks in carbonite concretions, which would have only formed within a few weeks, suggests that squid had likely already formed large populations by the mid-Cretaceous despite their paucity in the fossil record. Their total biomass would have likely already exceeded that of marine fishes and even ammonoids by that point.\nDescription.\nSquid are soft-bodied molluscs whose forms evolved to adopt an active predatory lifestyle. The head and foot of the squid are at one end of a long body, and this end is functionally anterior, leading the animal as it moves through the water. A set of eight arms and two distinctive tentacles surround the mouth; each appendage takes the form of a muscular hydrostat and is flexible and prehensile, usually bearing disc-like suckers.\nThe suckers may lie directly on the arm or be stalked. Their rims are stiffened with chitin and may contain minute toothlike denticles. These features, as well as strong musculature, and a small ganglion beneath each sucker to allow individual control, provide a very powerful adhesion to grip prey. Hooks are present on the arms and tentacles in some species, but their function is unclear. The two tentacles are much longer than the arms and are retractile. Suckers are limited to the spatulate tip of the tentacle, known as the manus.\nIn the mature male, the outer half of one of the left arms is hectocotylised\"\u00a0\"\u2013 and ends in a copulatory pad rather than suckers. This is used for depositing a spermatophore inside the mantle cavity of a female. A ventral part of the foot has been converted into a funnel through which water exits the mantle cavity.\nThe main body mass is enclosed in the mantle, which has a swimming fin along each side. These fins are not the main source of locomotion in most species. The mantle wall is heavily muscled and internal. The visceral mass, which is covered by a thin, membranous epidermis, forms a cone-shaped posterior region known as the \"visceral hump\". The mollusc shell is reduced to an internal, longitudinal chitinous \"pen\" in the functionally dorsal part of the animal; the pen acts to stiffen the squid and provides attachments for muscles.\nOn the functionally ventral part of the body is an opening to the mantle cavity, which contains the gills (ctenidia) and openings from the excretory, digestive and reproductive systems. An inhalant siphon behind the funnel draws water into the mantle cavity via a valve. The squid uses the funnel for locomotion via precise jet propulsion. In this form of locomotion, water is sucked into the mantle cavity and expelled out of the funnel in a fast, strong jet. The direction of travel is varied by the orientation of the funnel. Squid are strong swimmers and certain species can \"fly\" for short distances out of the water.\nCamouflage.\nSquid make use of different kinds of camouflage, namely active camouflage for background matching (in shallow water) and counter-illumination. This helps to protect them from their predators and allows them to approach their prey.\nThe skin is covered in controllable chromatophores of different colours, enabling the squid to match its coloration to its surroundings. The play of colours may in addition distract prey from the squid's approaching tentacles. The skin also contains light reflectors called iridophores and leucophores that, when activated, in milliseconds create changeable skin patterns of polarized light. Such skin camouflage may serve various functions, such as communication with nearby squid, prey detection, navigation, and orientation during hunting or seeking shelter. Neural control of the iridophores enabling rapid changes in skin iridescence appears to be regulated by a cholinergic process affecting reflectin proteins.\nSome mesopelagic squid such as the firefly squid (\"Watasenia scintillans\") and the midwater squid (\"Abralia veranyi\") use counter-illumination camouflage, generating light to match the downwelling light from the ocean surface. This creates the effect of countershading, making the underside lighter than the upperside.\nCounter-illumination is also used by the Hawaiian bobtail squid (\"Euprymna scolopes\"), which has symbiotic bacteria (\"Aliivibrio fischeri\") that produce light to help the squid avoid nocturnal predators. This light shines through the squid's skin on its underside and is generated by a large and complex two-lobed light organ inside the squid's mantle cavity. From there, it escapes downwards, some of it travelling directly, some coming off a reflector at the top of the organ (dorsal side). Below there is a kind of iris, which has branches (diverticula) of its ink sac, with a lens below that; both the reflector and lens are derived from mesoderm. The squid controls light production by changing the shape of its iris or adjusting the strength of yellow filters on its underside, which presumably change the balance of wavelengths emitted. Light production shows a correlation with intensity of down-welling light, but it is about one third as bright; the squid can track repeated changes in brightness. Because the Hawaiian bobtail squid hides in sand during the day to avoid predators, it does not use counter-illumination during daylight hours.\nPredator distraction with ink.\nSquid distract attacking predators by ejecting a cloud of ink, giving themselves an opportunity to escape. The ink gland and its associated ink sac empties into the rectum close to the anus, allowing the squid to rapidly discharge black ink into the mantle cavity and surrounding water. The ink is a suspension of melanin particles and quickly disperses to form a dark cloud that obscures the escape manoeuvres of the squid. Predatory fish may also be deterred by the alkaloid nature of the discharge which may interfere with their chemoreceptors.\nNervous system and sense organs.\nCephalopods have the most highly developed nervous systems among invertebrates. Squids have a complex brain in the form of a nerve ring encircling the oesophagus, enclosed in a cartilaginous cranium. Paired cerebral ganglia above the oesophagus receive sensory information from the eyes and statocysts, and further ganglia below control the muscles of the mouth, foot, mantle and viscera. Giant axons up to in diameter convey nerve messages with great rapidity to the circular muscles of the mantle wall, allowing a synchronous, powerful contraction and maximum speed in the jet propulsion system.\nThe paired eyes, on either side of the head, are housed in capsules fused to the cranium. Their structure is very similar to that of a fish eye, with a globular lens that has a depth of focus from to infinity. The image is focused by changing the position of the lens, as in a camera or telescope, rather than changing the shape of the lens, as in the human eye. Squid adjust to changes in light intensity by expanding and contracting the slit-shaped pupil. Deep sea squids in the family Histioteuthidae have eyes of two different types and orientation. The large left eye is tubular in shape and looks upwards, presumably searching for the silhouettes of animals higher in the water column. The normally-shaped right eye points forwards and downwards to detect prey.\nThe statocysts are involved in maintaining balance and are analogous to the inner ear of fish. They are housed in cartilaginous capsules on either side of the cranium. They provide the squid with information on its body position in relation to gravity, its orientation, acceleration and rotation, and are able to perceive incoming vibrations. Without the statocysts, the squid cannot maintain equilibrium. Squid appear to have limited hearing, but the head and arms bear lines of hair-cells that are weakly sensitive to water movements and changes in pressure, and are analogous in function to the lateral line system of fish.\nReproductive system.\nThe sexes are separate in squid, with a single gonad in the posterior part of the body. Fertilisation is external and usually takes place in the mantle cavity of the female. The male has a testis from which sperm pass into a single gonoduct where they are rolled together into a long bundle, or spermatophore. The gonoduct is elongated into a \"penis\" that extends into the mantle cavity and through which spermatophores are ejected. In shallow water species, the penis is short, and the spermatophore is removed from the mantle cavity by a tentacle of the male, which is specially adapted for the purpose and known as a hectocotylus, and placed inside the mantle cavity of the female during mating.\nThe female has a large translucent ovary, situated towards the posterior of the visceral mass. From here, eggs travel along the gonocoel, where there are a pair of white nidamental glands, which lie anterior to the gills. Also present are red-spotted accessory nidamental glands containing symbiotic bacteria; both organs are associated with nutrient manufacture and forming shells for the eggs. The gonocoel enters the mantle cavity at the gonopore, and in some species, receptacles for storing spermatophores are located nearby, in the mantle wall.\nIn shallow-water species of the continental shelf and epipelagic or mesopelagic zones, it is frequently one or both of arm pair IV of males that are modified into hectocotyli. However, most deep-sea squid lack hectocotyl arms and have longer penises; Ancistrocheiridae and Cranchiinae are exceptions. Giant squid of the genus \"Architeuthis\" are unusual in that they possess both a large penis and modified arm tips, although whether the latter are used for spermatophore transfer is uncertain. Penis elongation has been observed in the deep-water species \"Onykia ingens\"; when erect, the penis may be as long as the mantle, head, and arms combined. As such, deep-water squid have the greatest known penis length relative to body size of all mobile animals, second in the entire animal kingdom only to certain sessile barnacles.\nDigestive system.\nLike all cephalopods, squids are predators and have complex digestive systems. The mouth is equipped with a sharp, horny beak mainly made of chitin and cross-linked proteins, which is used to kill and tear prey into manageable pieces. The beak is very robust, but does not contain minerals, unlike the teeth and jaws of many other organisms; the cross-linked proteins are histidine- and glycine-rich and give the beak a stiffness and hardness greater than most equivalent synthetic organic materials. The stomachs of captured whales often have indigestible squid beaks inside. The mouth contains the radula, the rough tongue common to all molluscs except bivalvia, which is equipped with multiple rows of teeth. In some species, toxic saliva helps to control large prey; when subdued, the food can be torn in pieces by the beak, moved to the oesophagus by the radula, and swallowed.\nThe food bolus is moved along the gut by waves of muscular contractions (peristalsis). The long oesophagus leads to a muscular stomach roughly in the middle of the visceral mass. The digestive gland, which is equivalent to a vertebrate liver, diverticulates here, as does the pancreas, and both of these empty into the caecum, a pouch-shaped sac where most of the absorption of nutrients takes place. Indigestible food can be passed directly from the stomach to the rectum where it joins the flow from the caecum and is voided through the anus into the mantle cavity. Cephalopods are short-lived, and in mature squid, priority is given to reproduction; the female \"Onychoteuthis banksii\" for example, sheds its feeding tentacles on reaching maturity, and becomes flaccid and weak after spawning.\nCardiovascular and excretory systems.\nThe squid mantle cavity is a seawater-filled sac containing three hearts and other organs supporting circulation, respiration, and excretion. Squid have a main systemic heart that pumps blood around the body as part of the general circulatory system, and two branchial hearts. The systemic heart consists of three chambers, a lower ventricle and two upper atria, all of which can contract to propel the blood. The branchial hearts pump blood specifically to the gills for oxygenation, before returning it to the systemic heart. The blood contains the copper-rich protein hemocyanin, which is used for oxygen transport at low ocean temperatures and low oxygen concentrations, and makes the oxygenated blood a deep, blue color. As systemic blood returns via two venae cavae to the branchial hearts, excretion of urine, carbon dioxide, and waste solutes occurs through outpockets (called nephridial appendages) in the venae cavae walls that enable gas exchange and excretion via the mantle cavity seawater.\nBuoyancy.\nUnlike nautiloids and cuttlefish which have gas-filled chambers inside their shells which provide buoyancy, and octopuses which live near and rest on the seabed and do not require to be buoyant, many squid have a fluid-filled receptacle, equivalent to the swim bladder of a fish, in the coelom or connective tissue. This reservoir acts as a chemical buoyancy chamber, with the heavy metallic cations typical of seawater replaced by low molecular-weight ammonium ions, a product of excretion. The small difference in density provides a small contribution to buoyancy per unit volume, so the mechanism requires a large buoyancy chamber to be effective. Since the chamber is filled with liquid, it has the advantage over a swim bladder of not changing significantly in volume with pressure. Glass squids in the family Cranchiidae for example, have an enormous transparent coelom containing ammonium ions and occupying about two-thirds the volume of the animal, allowing it to float at the required depth. About half of the 28 families of squid use this mechanism to solve their buoyancy issues. The family Bathyteuthidae get their buoyancy from an oily substance found in their liver and around their mantle and head.\nLargest and smallest.\nThe majority of squid are no more than long, although the giant squid may reach . The smallest species are probably the benthic pygmy squids \"Idiosepius\", which grow to a mantle length of , and have short bodies and stubby arms.\nIn 1978, sharp, curved claws on the suction cups of squid tentacles cut up the rubber coating on the hull of the USS \"Stein\". The size suggested the largest squid known at the time.\nIn 2003, a large specimen of an abundant but poorly understood species, \"Mesonychoteuthis hamiltoni\" (the colossal squid), was discovered. This species may grow to in length, making it the largest invertebrate. In February\u00a02007, a New Zealand fishing vessel caught the largest squid ever documented, weighing and measuring around off the coast of Antarctica. Dissection showed that the eyes, used to detect prey in the deep Southern Ocean, exceeded the size of footballs; these may be among the largest eyes ever to exist in the animal kingdom.\nDevelopment.\nThe eggs of squid are large for a mollusc, containing a large amount of yolk to nourish the embryo as it develops directly, without an intervening veliger larval stage. The embryo grows as a disc of cells on top of the yolk. During the gastrulation stage, the margins of the disc grow to surround the yolk, forming a yolk sac, which eventually forms part of the animal's gut. The dorsal side of the disc grows upwards and forms the embryo, with a shell gland on its dorsal surface, gills, mantle and eyes. The arms and funnel develop as part of the foot on the ventral side of the disc. The arms later migrate upwards, coming to form a ring around the funnel and mouth. The yolk is gradually absorbed as the embryo grows. Some juvenile squid live higher in the water column than do adults. Squids tend to be short-lived; \"Loligo\" for example lives from one to three years according to species, typically dying soon after spawning.\nIn a well-studied bioluminescent species, the Hawaiian bobtail squid, a special light organ in the squid's mantle is rapidly colonized with \"Aliivibrio fischeri\" bacteria within hours of hatching. This light-organ colonization requires this particular bacterial species for a symbiotic relationship; no colonization occurs in the absence of \"A.\u00a0fischeri\". Colonization occurs in a horizontal manner, such that the hosts acquires its bacterial partners from the environment. The symbiosis is obligate for the squid, but facultative for the bacteria. Once the bacteria enter the squid, they colonize interior epithelial cells in the light organ, living in crypts with complex microvilli protrusions. The bacteria also interact with hemocytes, macrophage-like blood cells that migrate between epithelial cells, but the mechanism and function of this process is not well understood. Bioluminescence reaches its highest levels during the early evening hours and bottoms out before dawn; this occurs because at the end of each day, the contents of the squid's crypts are expelled into the surrounding environment. Approximately 95% of the bacteria are voided each morning before the bacterial population builds up again by nightfall.\nBehaviour.\nLocomotion.\nSquid can move about in several different ways. Slow movement is achieved by a gentle undulation of the muscular lateral fins on either side of the trunk which drives the animal forward. A more common means of locomotion providing sustained movement is achieved using jetting, during which contraction of the muscular wall of the mantle cavity provides jet propulsion.\nSlow jetting is used for ordinary locomotion, and ventilation of the gills is achieved at the same time. The circular muscles in the mantle wall contract; this causes the inhalant valve to close, the exhalant valve to open and the mantle edge to lock tightly around the head. Water is forced out through the funnel which is pointed in the opposite direction to the required direction of travel. The inhalant phase is initiated by the relaxation of the circular muscles causes them to stretch, the connective tissue in the mantle wall recoils elastically, the mantle cavity expands causing the inhalant valve to open, the exhalant valve to close and water to flow into the cavity. This cycle of exhalation and inhalation is repeated to provide continuous locomotion.\nFast jetting is an escape response. In this form of locomotion, radial muscles in the mantle wall are involved as well as circular ones, making it possible to hyper-inflate the mantle cavity with a larger volume of water than during slow jetting. On contraction, water flows out with great force, the funnel always being pointed anteriorly, and travel is backwards. During this means of locomotion, some squid exit the water in a similar way to flying fish, gliding through the air for up to , and occasionally ending up on the decks of ships.\nFeeding.\nSquid are carnivores, and, with their strong arms and suckers, can overwhelm relatively large animals efficiently. Prey is identified by sight or by touch, grabbed by the tentacles which can be shot out with great rapidity, brought back to within reach of the arms, and held by the hooks and suckers on their surface. In some species, the squid's saliva contains toxins which act to subdue the prey. These are injected into its bloodstream when the prey is bitten, along with vasodilators and chemicals to stimulate the heart, and quickly circulate to all parts of its body. The deep sea squid \"Taningia danae\" has been filmed releasing blinding flashes of light from large photophores on its arms to illuminate and disorientate potential prey.\nAlthough squid can catch large prey, the mouth is relatively small, and the food must be cut into pieces by the chitinous beak with its powerful muscles before being swallowed. The radula is located in the buccal cavity and has multiple rows of tiny teeth that draw the food backwards and grind it in pieces. The deep sea squid \"Mastigoteuthis\" has the whole length of its whip-like tentacles covered with tiny suckers; it probably catches small organisms in the same way that flypaper traps flies. The tentacles of some bathypelagic squids bear photophores which may bring food within its reach by attracting prey.\nSquid are among the most intelligent invertebrates. For example, groups of Humboldt squid hunt cooperatively, spiralling up through the water at night and coordinating their vertical and horizontal movements while foraging.\nReproduction.\nCourtship in squid takes place in the open water and involves the male selecting a female, the female responding, and the transfer by the male of spermatophores to the female. In many instances, the male may display to identify himself to the female and drive off any potential competitors. Elaborate changes in body patterning take place in some species in both agonistic and courtship behaviour. The Caribbean reef squid (\"Sepioteuthis sepioidea\"), for example, employs a complex array of colour changes during courtship and social interactions and has a range of about 16 body patterns in its repertoire.\nThe pair adopt a head-to-head position, and \"jaw locking\" may take place, in a similar manner to that adopted by some cichlid fish. The hectocotylus of the male is used to transfer the spermatophore and deposit it in the female's mantle cavity in the position appropriate for the species; this may be adjacent to the gonopore or in a seminal receptacle.\nThe sperm may be used immediately or may be stored. As the eggs pass down the oviduct, they are wrapped in a gelatinous coating, before continuing to the mantle cavity, where they are fertilised. In \"Loligo\", further coatings are added by the nidimental glands in the walls of the cavity and the eggs leave through a funnel formed by the arms. The female attaches them to the substrate in strings or groups, the coating layers swelling and hardening after contact with sea water. \"Loligo\" sometimes forms breeding aggregations which may create a \"community pile\" of egg strings. Some pelagic and deep sea squid do not attach their egg masses, which float freely.\nEcology.\nSquid mostly have an annual life cycle, growing fast and dying soon after spawning. The diet changes as they grow but mostly consists of large zooplankton and small nekton. In Antarctica for example, krill is the main constituent of the diet, with other food items being amphipods, other small crustaceans, and large arrow worms. Fish are also eaten, and some squid are cannibalistic.\nDifferent species of squid vary wildly in size, and even giant squid young are rice-grain-sized at hatching. Throughout their life cycle, they can serve as a food source for many sizes of predator. Juvenile squid provide part of the diet for worms and small fish. Larger squid are food for larger predators, including sharks, sea birds, seals and whales.\nWhen researchers studied the contents of the stomachs of elephant seals in South Georgia, they found 96% squid by weight. In a single day, a sperm whale can eat 700 to 800 squid, and a Risso's dolphin entangled in a net in the Mediterranean was found to have eaten angel clubhook squid, umbrella squid, reverse jewel squid and European flying squid, all identifiable from their indigestible beaks. \n\"Ornithoteuthis volatilis\", a common squid from the tropical Indo-Pacific, is predated by yellowfin tuna, longnose lancetfish, common dolphinfish and swordfish, the tiger shark, the scalloped hammerhead shark and the smooth hammerhead shark. Sperm whales also hunt this species extensively as does the brown fur seal. In the Southern Ocean, penguins and wandering albatrosses are major predators of \"Gonatus antarcticus\".\nParasites.\nSquid can be hosts to a variety of different parasites that make them unsafe for human consumption. The most harmful is a zoonotic Anisakis nematode also known as herring worm disease. The larvae of this parasite use the squid as an intermediate host and typically do not harm the squid, but still propose a large risk if consumed by humans.\nThe risk comes from eating raw or undercooked seafood that can cause severe symptoms such as abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, fever, and diarrhea. The best way to prevent infection is to avoid eating raw or undercooked squid seafood; cook squid to at least 60 degrees Celsius (140 degrees Fahrenheit) or freeze squid at -20 degrees Celsius (-4 degrees Fahrenheit) for a minimum of 24 hours.\nHuman uses.\nIn literature and art.\nGiant squid have featured as monsters of the deep since classical times. Giant squid were described by Aristotle (4th century BC) in his \"History of Animals\" and Pliny the Elder (1st century AD) in his \"Natural History\". The Gorgon of Greek mythology may have been inspired by squid or octopus, the animal itself representing the severed head of Medusa, the beak as the protruding tongue and fangs, and its tentacles as the snakes. The six-headed sea monster of the \"Odyssey\", Scylla, may have had a similar origin. The Nordic legend of the kraken may also have derived from sightings of large cephalopods.\nIn literature, H. G. Wells' short story \"The Sea Raiders\" featured a man-eating squid species \"Haploteuthis ferox\". The science fiction writer Jules Verne told a tale of a kraken-like monster in his 1870 novel \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas\".\nAs food.\nSquid form a major food resource and are used in cuisines around the world, notably in Japan where it is eaten as ika s\u014dmen, sliced into vermicelli-like strips; as sashimi; and as tempura. Three species of \"Loligo\" are used in large quantities: \"L.\u00a0vulgaris\" in the Mediterranean (known as in Spanish, in Italian); \"L.\u00a0forbesii\" in the Northeast Atlantic; and \"L.\u00a0pealei\" on the American East Coast. Among the Ommastrephidae, \"Todarodes pacificus\" is the main commercial species, harvested in large quantities across the North Pacific in Canada, Japan and China.\nIn English-speaking countries, squid as food is often called \"calamari\", adopted from Italian into English in the 17th century. Squid are found abundantly in certain areas, and provide large catches for fisheries. The body can be stuffed whole, cut into flat pieces, or sliced into rings. The arms, tentacles, and ink are also edible; the only parts not eaten are the beak and gladius (pen). Squid is a good food source for zinc and manganese, and high in copper, selenium, vitamin B12, and riboflavin.\nCommercial fishing.\nAccording to the FAO, the cephalopod catch for 2002 was . Of this, 2,189,206 tonnes, or 75.8 percent, was squid. The following table lists squid species fishery catches that exceeded in 2002.\nIn biomimicry.\nPrototype chromatophores that mimic the squid's adaptive camouflage have been made by Bristol University researchers using an electroactive dielectric elastomer, a flexible \"smart\" material that changes its colour and texture in response to electrical signals. The researchers state that their goal is to create an artificial skin that provides rapid active camouflage.\nThe squid giant axon inspired Otto Schmitt to develop a comparator circuit with hysteresis now called the Schmitt trigger, replicating the axon's propagation of nerve impulses.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38012", "revid": "49416358", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38012", "title": "Roman triumph", "text": "Ancient Roman ceremony of military success\nThe Roman triumph (\"\") was a civil ceremony and religious rite of ancient Rome, held to publicly celebrate and sanctify the success of a military commander who had led Roman forces to victory in the service of the state or, in some historical traditions, one who had successfully completed a foreign war.\nOn the day of his triumph, the general wore a crown of laurel and an all-purple, gold-embroidered triumphal \"toga picta\" (\"painted\" toga), regalia that identified him as near-divine or near-kingly. In some accounts, his face was painted red, perhaps in imitation of Rome's highest and most powerful god, Jupiter. The general rode in a four-horse chariot through the streets of Rome in unarmed procession with his army, captives, and the spoils of his war. At Jupiter's temple on the Capitoline Hill, he offered sacrifice and the tokens of his victory to Jupiter. \nIn Republican tradition, only the Senate could grant a triumph. The origins and development of this honour are obscure: Roman historians themselves placed the first triumph in the mythic past. Republican morality required that the general conduct himself with dignified humility, as a mortal citizen who triumphed on behalf of Rome's Senate, people, and gods. Inevitably, the triumph offered the general extraordinary opportunities for self-publicity, besides its religious and military dimensions. Most triumphal celebrations included a range of popular games and entertainments for the Roman masses.\nMost Roman festivals were calendar fixtures, tied to the worship of particular deities. While the triumphal procession culminated at Jupiter's temple on the far end of the Via Sacra (sacred road) in the Roman Forum, the procession itself, attendant feasting, and public games promoted the general's status and achievement. By the Late Republican era, triumphs were drawn out and extravagant, motivated by increasing competition among the military-political adventurers who ran Rome's nascent empire. Some triumphs were prolonged by several days of public games and entertainments. From the Principate onwards, the triumph reflected the Imperial order and the pre-eminence of the Imperial family. The triumph was consciously imitated by medieval and later states in the royal entry and other ceremonial events.\nBackground and ceremonies.\nThe \"vir triumphalis\".\nIn Republican Rome, truly exceptional military achievement merited the highest possible honours, which connected the \"vir triumphalis\" (\"man of triumph\", later known as a \"triumphator\") to Rome's mythical and semi-mythical past. In effect, the general was close to being \"king for a day\", and possibly close to divinity. He wore the regalia traditionally associated both with the ancient Roman monarchy and with the statue of \"Jupiter Capitolinus\": the purple and gold \"toga picta\", laurel crown, red boots and, again possibly, the red-painted face of Rome's supreme deity. He was drawn in procession through the city in a four-horse chariot, under the gaze of his peers and an applauding crowd, to the temple of Capitoline Jupiter. His spoils and captives led the way; his armies followed behind. Once at the Capitoline temple, he sacrificed two white oxen to Jupiter, and laid tokens of victory at the feet of Jupiter's statue, thus dedicating the triumph to the Roman Senate, people, and gods.\nTriumphs were tied to no particular day, season, or religious festival of the Roman calendar. Most seem to have been celebrated at the earliest practicable opportunity, probably on days that were deemed auspicious for the occasion. Tradition required that, for the duration of a triumph, every temple was open. The ceremony was thus, in some sense, shared by the whole community of Roman gods, but overlaps were inevitable with specific festivals and anniversaries. Some may have been coincidental; others were designed. For example, March 1, the festival and \"dies natalis\" of the war god Mars, was the traditional anniversary of the first triumph by Publicola (504 BCE), of six other Republican triumphs, and of the very first Roman triumph by Romulus. Pompey postponed his third and most magnificent triumph for several months to make it coincide with his own \"dies natalis\" (birthday).\nReligious dimensions aside, the focus of the triumph was the general himself. The ceremony promoted him \u2013 however temporarily \u2013 above every mortal Roman. This was an opportunity granted to very few. From the time of Scipio Africanus, the triumphal general was linked (at least for historians during the Principate) to Alexander and the demi-god Hercules, who had laboured selflessly for the benefit of all mankind. His sumptuous triumphal chariot was bedecked with charms against the possible envy (\"invidia\") and malice of onlookers. In some accounts, a companion or public slave would remind him from time to time of his own mortality (a \"memento mori\").\nThe procession.\nRome's earliest \"triumphs\" were probably simple victory parades, celebrating the return of a victorious general and his army to the city, along with the fruits of his victory, and ending with some form of dedication to the gods. This is probably so for the earliest legendary and later semi-legendary triumphs of Rome's regal era, when the king functioned as Rome's highest magistrate and war-leader. As Rome's population, power, influence, and territory increased, so did the scale, length, variety, and extravagance of its triumphal processions.\nThe procession (\"pompa\") mustered in the open space of the Campus Martius (Field of Mars) probably well before first light. From there, all unforeseen delays and accidents aside, it would have managed a slow walking pace at best, punctuated by various planned stops en route to its final destination of the Capitoline temple, a distance of just under 4\u00a0km (2.48\u00a0mi). Triumphal processions were notoriously long and slow; the longest could last for two or three days, and possibly more, and some may have been of greater length than the route itself.\nSome ancient and modern sources suggest a fairly standard processional order. First came the captive leaders, allies, and soldiers (and sometimes their families) usually walking in chains; some were destined for execution or further display. Their captured weapons, armour, gold, silver, statuary, and curious or exotic treasures were carted behind them, along with paintings, tableaux, and models depicting significant places and episodes of the war. Next in line, all on foot, came Rome's senators and magistrates, followed by the general's lictors in their red war-robes, their fasces wreathed in laurel, then the general in his four-horse chariot. A companion, or a public slave, might share the chariot with him or, in some cases, his youngest children. His officers and elder sons rode horseback nearby. His unarmed soldiers followed in togas and laurel crowns, chanting \"io triumphe!\" and singing ribald songs at their general's expense. Somewhere in the procession, two flawless white oxen were led for the sacrifice to Jupiter, garland-decked and with gilded horns. All this was done to the accompaniment of music, clouds of incense, and the strewing of flowers.\nAlmost nothing is known of the procession's infrastructure and management. Its doubtless enormous cost was defrayed in part by the state but mostly by the general's loot, which most ancient sources dwell on in great detail and unlikely superlatives. Once disposed, this portable wealth injected huge sums into the Roman economy; the amount brought in by Octavian's triumph over Egypt triggered a fall in interest rates and a sharp rise in land prices. No ancient source addresses the logistics of the procession: where the soldiers and captives, in a procession of several days, could have slept and eaten, or where these several thousands plus the spectators could have been stationed for the final ceremony at the Capitoline temple.\nThe route.\nThe following schematic is for the route taken by \"some, or many\" triumphs, and is based on standard modern reconstructions. Any original or traditional route would have been diverted to some extent by the city's many redevelopments and re-building, or sometimes by choice. The starting place (the Campus Martius) lay outside the city's sacred boundary (\"pomerium\"), bordering the eastern bank of the Tiber. The procession entered the city through a \"Porta Triumphalis\" (Triumphal Gate), and crossed the \"pomerium\", where the general surrendered his command to the senate and magistrates. It continued through the site of the Circus Flaminius, skirting the southern base of the Capitoline Hill and the \"Velabrum\", along a \"Via Triumphalis\" (Triumphal Way) towards the \"Circus Maximus\", perhaps dropping off any prisoners destined for execution at the Tullianum. It entered the \"Via Sacra\" then the Forum. Finally, it ascended the Capitoline Hill to the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus. Once the sacrifice and dedications were completed, the procession and spectators dispersed to banquets, games, and other entertainments sponsored by the triumphing general.\nBanquets, games, and entertainments.\nIn most triumphs, the general funded any post-procession banquets from his share of the loot. There were feasts for the people and separate, much richer feasts for the elite; some went on for most of the night. Dionysius offers a contrast to the lavish triumphal banquets of his time by giving Romulus's triumph the most primitive possible \"banquet\" \u2013 ordinary Romans setting up food-tables as a \"welcome home\", and the returning troops taking swigs and bites as they marched by. He recreates the first Republican triumphal banquet along the same lines. Varro claims that his aunt earned 20,000 sesterces by supplying 5,000 thrushes for Caecilius Metellus's triumph of 71 BCE.\nSome triumphs included ludi as fulfillment of the general's vow to a god or goddess, made before battle or during its heat, in return for their help in securing victory. In the Republic, they were paid for by the triumphing general. Marcus Fulvius Nobilior vowed \"ludi\" in return for victory over the Aetolian League and paid for ten days of games at his triumph.\nCommemoration.\nMost Romans would never have seen a triumph, but its symbolism permeated Roman imagination and material culture. Triumphal generals minted and circulated characteristically detailed, high value coins to propagate their triumphal fame and generosity empire-wide. Pompey's issues for his three triumphs are typical. One is an aureus (a gold coin) that has a laurel-wreathed border enclosing a head which personifies Africa; beside it, Pompey's title \"Magnus\" (\"The Great\"), with wand and jug as symbols of his augury. The reverse identifies him as proconsul in a triumphal chariot attended by Victory. A triumphal denarius (a silver coin) shows his three trophies of captured arms, with his augur's wand and jug. Another shows a globe surrounded by triumphal wreaths, symbolising his \"world conquest\", and an ear of grain to show that his victory protected Rome's grain supply. A notable coin, minted by Lucius Manlius Torquatus, a supporter of Sulla, references Sulla's victory over Mithridates VI of Pontus. This coin depicts a quadriga with Sulla's legend and the general partially visible in his chariot. This established a precedent for the Imperial period, where coins often depicted triumphal arches erected by emperors to commemorate their victories. Germanicus' achievements in Germany in 15-16 CE are depicted on coins showing Tiberius in a quadriga.\nIn Republican tradition, a general was expected to wear his triumphal regalia only for the day of his triumph; thereafter, they were presumably displayed in the atrium of his family home. As one of the nobility, he was entitled to a particular kind of funeral in which a string of actors walked behind his bier wearing the masks of his ancestors; another actor represented the general himself and his highest achievement in life by wearing his funeral mask, triumphal laurels, and \"toga picta\". Anything more was deeply suspect; Pompey was granted the privilege of wearing his triumphal wreath at the Circus, but he met with a hostile reception. Julius Caesar's penchant for wearing his triumphal regalia \"wherever and whenever\" was taken as one among many signs of monarchical intentions which, for some, justified his murder. In the Imperial era, emperors wore such regalia to signify their elevated rank and office and to identify themselves with the Roman gods and Imperial order \u2013 a central feature of Imperial cult.\nThe building and dedication of monumental public works offered local, permanent opportunities for triumphal commemoration. In 55 BCE, Pompey inaugurated Rome's first stone-built Theatre as a gift to the people of Rome, funded by his spoils. Its gallery and colonnades doubled as an exhibition space and likely contained statues, paintings, and other trophies carried at his various triumphs. It contained a new temple to Pompey's patron goddess Venus Victrix (\"Victorious Venus\"); the year before, he had issued a coin which showed her crowned with triumphal laurels. Julius Caesar claimed Venus as both patron and divine ancestress; he funded a new temple to her and dedicated it during his quadruple triumph of 46 BCE. He thus wove his patron goddess and putative ancestress into his triumphal anniversary.\nAugustus, Caesar's heir and Rome's first emperor, built a vast triumphal monument on the Greek coast at Actium, overlooking the scene of his decisive sea-battle against Antony and Egypt; the bronze beaks of captured Egyptian warships projected from its seaward wall. Imperial iconography increasingly identified Emperors with the gods, starting with the Augustan reinvention of Rome as a virtual monarchy (the principate). Sculpted panels on the arch of Titus (built by Domitian) celebrate Titus' and Vespasian's joint triumph over the Jews after the siege of Jerusalem, with a triumphal procession of captives and treasures seized from the temple of Jerusalem \u2013 some of which funded the building of the Colosseum. Another panel shows the funeral and apotheosis of the deified Titus. Prior to this, the senate voted Titus a triple-arch at the Circus Maximus to celebrate or commemorate the same victory or triumph.\nAwarding a triumph.\nIn Republican tradition, only the Senate could grant a triumph. A general who wanted a triumph would dispatch his request and report to the Senate. Officially, triumphs were granted for outstanding military merit; the state paid for the ceremony if this and certain other conditions were met \u2013 and these seem to have varied from time to time, and from case to case \u2013 or the Senate would pay for the official procession, at least. Most Roman historians rest the outcome on an open Senatorial debate and vote, its legality confirmed by one of the people's assemblies; the senate and people thus controlled the state's coffers and rewarded or curbed its generals. Some triumphs seem to have been granted outright, with minimal debate. Some were turned down but went ahead anyway, with the general's direct appeal to the people over the senate and a promise of public games at his own expense. Others were blocked or granted only after interminable wrangling. Senators and generals alike were politicians, and Roman politics was notorious for its rivalries, shifting alliances, back-room dealings, and overt public bribery. The senate's discussions would likely have hinged on triumphal tradition, precedent, and propriety; less overtly but more anxiously, it would hinge on the extent of the general's political and military powers and popularity, and the possible consequences of supporting or hindering his further career. There is no firm evidence that the Senate applied a prescribed set of \"triumphal laws\" when making their decisions, Valerius Maximus extrapolated various \"triumphal laws\" from disputed historic accounts of actual practice. They included one law that the general must have killed at least 5,000 of the enemy in a single battle, and another that he must swear an oath that his account was the truth. No evidence has survived for either of these laws, or any other laws relating to triumphs.\nOvation.\nA general might be granted a \"lesser triumph\", known as an Ovation. He entered the city on foot, minus his troops, in his magistrate's toga and wearing a wreath of Venus' myrtle. In 211 BCE, the Senate turned down Marcus Marcellus' request for a triumph after his victory over the Carthaginians and their Sicilian-Greek allies, apparently because his army was still in Sicily and unable to join him. They offered him instead a thanksgiving (supplicatio) and ovation. The day before it, he celebrated an unofficial triumph on the Alban Mount. His ovation was of triumphal proportions. It included a large painting, showing his siege of Syracuse, the siege engines themselves, captured plate, gold, silver, and royal ornaments, and the statuary and opulent furniture for which Syracuse was famous. Eight elephants were led in the procession, symbols of his victory over the Carthaginians. His Spanish and Syracusan allies led the way wearing golden wreaths; they were granted Roman citizenship and lands in Sicily.\nIn 71 BCE, Crassus earned an ovation for quashing the Spartacus revolt, and increased his honours by wearing a crown of Jupiter's \"triumphal\" laurel. Ovations are listed along with triumphs on the \"Fasti Triumphales\".\nSources.\nThe \"Fasti Triumphales\" (also called \"Acta Triumphalia\") are stone tablets that were erected in the Forum Romanum around 12 BCE, during the reign of Emperor Augustus. They give the general's formal name, the names of his father and grandfather, the people(s) or command province whence the triumph was awarded, and the date of the triumphal procession. They record over 200 triumphs, starting with three mythical triumphs of Romulus in 753 BCE and ending with that of Lucius Cornelius Balbus (19 BCE). Fragments of similar date and style from Rome and provincial Italy appear to be modeled on the Augustan \"Fasti\", and have been used to fill some of its gaps.\nMany ancient historical accounts also mention triumphs. Most Roman accounts of triumphs were written to provide their readers with a moral lesson, rather than to provide an accurate description of the triumphal process, procession, rites, and their meaning. This scarcity allows only the most tentative and generalised (and possibly misleading) reconstruction of triumphal ceremony, based on the combination of various incomplete accounts from different periods of Roman history.\nEvolution.\nOrigins and Regal era.\nThe origins and development of this honour are obscure. Roman historians placed the first triumph in the mythical past; some thought that it dated from Rome's foundation; others thought it more ancient than that. Roman etymologists thought that the soldiers' chant of \"triumpe\" was a borrowing via Etruscan of the Greek \"thriambus\" (\"\u03b8\u03c1\u03af\u03b1\u03bc\u03b2\u03bf\u03c2\"), cried out by satyrs and other attendants in Dionysian and Bacchic processions. Plutarch and some Roman sources traced the first Roman triumph and the \"kingly\" garb of the \"triumphator\" to Rome's first king Romulus, whose defeat of King Acron of the Caeninenses was thought coeval with Rome's foundation in 753 BCE. Ovid projected a fabulous and poetic triumphal precedent in the return of the god Bacchus/Dionysus from his conquest of India, drawn in a golden chariot by tigers and surrounded by maenads, satyrs, and assorted drunkards. Arrian attributed similar Dionysian and \"Roman\" elements to a victory procession of Alexander the Great. Like much in Roman culture, elements of the triumph were based on Etruscan and Greek precursors; in particular, the purple, embroidered \"toga picta\" worn by the triumphal general was thought to be derived from the royal toga of Rome's Etruscan kings.\nFor triumphs of the Roman regal era, the surviving Imperial \"Fasti Triumphales\" are incomplete. After three entries for the city's legendary founder Romulus, eleven lines of the list are missing. Next in sequence are Ancus Marcius, Tarquinius Priscus, Servius Tullius, and finally Tarquin \"the proud\", the last king. The \"Fasti\" were compiled some five centuries after the regal era, and probably represent an approved, official version of several different historical traditions. Likewise, the earliest surviving written histories of the regal era, written some centuries after it, attempt to reconcile various traditions, or else debate their merits. Dionysius, for example, gives Romulus three triumphs, the same number given in the \"Fasti\". Livy gives him none, and credits him instead with the first \"spolia opima\", in which the arms and armour were stripped off a defeated foe, then dedicated to Jupiter. Plutarch gives him one, complete with chariot. Tarquin has two triumphs in the \"Fasti\" but none in Dionysius. No ancient source gives a triumph to Romulus' successor, the peaceful king Numa.\nThe Republic.\nRome's aristocrats expelled their last king as a tyrant and legislated the monarchy out of existence. They shared among themselves the kingship's former powers and authority in the form of magistracies. In the Republic, the highest possible magistracy was an elected consulship, which could be held for no more than a year at a time. In times of crisis or emergency, the Senate might appoint a dictator to serve a longer term; but this could seem perilously close to the lifetime power of kings. The dictator Camillus was awarded four triumphs but was eventually exiled. Later Roman sources point to his triumph of 396 BCE as a cause for offense; the chariot was drawn by four white horses, a combination properly reserved for Jupiter and Apollo \u2013 at least in later lore and poetry. The demeanour of a triumphal Republican general, and the symbols he employed in his triumph, would have been closely scrutinised by his aristocratic peers, alert for any sign that he might aspire to be more than \"king for a day\".\nIn the Middle to Late Republic, Rome's expansion through conquest offered her political-military adventurers extraordinary opportunities for self-publicity; the long-drawn series of wars between Rome and Carthage \u2013 the Punic Wars \u2013 produced twelve triumphs in ten years. Towards the end of the Republic, triumphs became still more frequent, lavish, and competitive, with each display an attempt (usually successful) to outdo the last. To have a triumphal ancestor \u2013 even one long-dead \u2013 counted for a lot in Roman society and politics. Cicero remarked that, in the race for power and influence, some individuals were not above vesting an inconveniently ordinary ancestor with triumphal grandeur and dignity, distorting an already fragmentary and unreliable historical tradition.\nTo Roman historians, the growth of triumphal ostentation undermined Rome's ancient \"peasant virtues\". Dionysius of Halicarnassus (c.\u200960 BCE to after 7 BCE) claimed that the triumphs of his day had \"departed in every respect from the ancient tradition of frugality\". Moralists complained that successful foreign wars might have increased Rome's power, security, and wealth, but they also created and fed a degenerate appetite for bombastic display and shallow novelty. Livy traces the start of the rot to the triumph of Gnaeus Manlius Vulso in 186, which introduced ordinary Romans to such Galatian fripperies as specialist chefs, flute girls, and other \"seductive dinner-party amusements\". Pliny adds \"sideboards and one-legged tables\" to the list, but lays responsibility for Rome's slide into luxury on the \"1400 pounds of chased silver ware and 1500 pounds of golden vessels\" brought somewhat earlier by Scipio Asiaticus for his triumph of 189 BCE.\nThe three triumphs awarded to Pompey the Great were lavish and controversial. The first in 80 or 81 BCE was for his victory over King Hiarbas of Numidia in 79 BCE, granted by a cowed and divided Senate under the dictatorship of Pompey's patron Sulla. Pompey was only 24 and a mere equestrian. Roman conservatives disapproved of such precocity but others saw his youthful success as the mark of a prodigious military talent, divine favour, and personal brio; and he also had an enthusiastic, popular following. His triumph, however, did not go quite to plan. His chariot was drawn by a team of elephants in order to represent his African conquest \u2013 and perhaps to outdo even the legendary triumph of Bacchus. They proved too bulky to pass through the triumphal gate, so Pompey had to dismount while a horse team was yoked in their place. This embarrassment would have delighted his critics, and probably some of his soldiers \u2013 whose demands for cash had been near-mutinous. Even so, his firm stand on the matter of cash raised his standing among the conservatives, and Pompey seems to have learned a lesson in populist politics. For his second triumph (71 BCE, the last in a series of four held that year) his cash gifts to his army were said to break all records, though the amounts in Plutarch's account are implausibly high: 6,000 \"sesterces\" to each soldier (about six times their annual pay) and about 5\u00a0million to each officer.\nPompey was granted a third triumph in 61 BCE to celebrate his victory over Mithridates VI of Pontus. It was an opportunity to outdo all rivals \u2013 and even himself. Triumphs traditionally lasted for one day, but Pompey's went on for two in an unprecedented display of wealth and luxury. Plutarch claimed that this triumph represented Pompey's domination over the entire world \u2013 on Rome's behalf \u2013 and an achievement to outshine even Alexander's. Pliny's narrative of this triumph dwells with ominous hindsight upon a gigantic portrait-bust of the triumphant general, a thing of \"eastern splendor\" entirely covered with pearls, anticipating his later humiliation and decapitation.\nImperial era.\nFollowing Caesar's murder, his adopted son Gaius Octavian assumed the permanent title of \"imperator\" and became the permanent head of the Senate from 27 BCE (see principate) under the title and name Augustus. Only the year before, he had blocked the senatorial award of a triumph to Marcus Licinius Crassus the Younger, despite the latter's acclamation in the field as Imperator and his fulfillment of all traditional, Republican qualifying criteria except full consulship. Technically, generals in the Imperial era were legates of the ruling Emperor (Imperator). Augustus claimed the victory as his own but permitted Crassus a second, which is listed on the \"Fasti\" for 27 BCE. Crassus was also denied the rare (and technically permissible, in his case) honour of dedicating the \"spolia opima\" of this campaign to Jupiter Feretrius.\nThe last triumph listed on the \"Fasti Triumphales\" is for 19 BCE. By then, the triumph had been absorbed into the Augustan imperial cult system, in which only the emperor would be accorded such a supreme honour, as he was the supreme \"Imperator\". The Senate, in true Republican style, would have held session to debate and decide the merits of the candidate; but this was little more than good form. Augustan ideology insisted that Augustus had saved and restored the Republic, and it celebrated his triumph as a permanent condition, and his military, political, and religious leadership as responsible for an unprecedented era of stability, peace, and prosperity. From then on, emperors claimed \u2013 without seeming to claim \u2013 the triumph as an Imperial privilege. Those outside the Imperial family might be granted \"triumphal ornaments\" (\"Ornamenta triumphalia\") or an ovation, such as Aulus Plautius under Claudius. The senate still debated and voted on such matters, though the outcome was probably already decided. In the Imperial era, the number of triumphs fell sharply.\nImperial panegyrics of the later Imperial era combine triumphal elements with Imperial ceremonies such as the consular investiture of Emperors, and the \"adventus\", the formal \"triumphal\" arrival of an emperor in the various capitals of the Empire in his progress through the provinces. Some emperors were perpetually on the move and seldom or never went to Rome. Christian emperor Constantius II entered Rome for the first time in his life in 357, several years after defeating his rival Magnentius, standing in his triumphal chariot \"as if he were a statue\". Theodosius I celebrated his victory over the usurper Magnus Maximus in Rome on June 13, 389. Claudian's panegyric to Emperor Honorius records the last known official triumph in the city of Rome and the western Empire. Emperor Honorius celebrated it conjointly with his sixth consulship on January 1, 404; his general Stilicho had defeated Visigothic King Alaric at the battles of Pollentia and Verona. In Christian martyrology, Saint Telemachus was martyred by a mob while attempting to stop the customary gladiatorial games at this triumph, and gladiatorial games (\"munera gladiatoria\") were banned in consequence. In 438 CE, however, the western emperor Valentinian III found cause to repeat the ban, which indicates that it was not always enforced.\nIn 534, well into the Byzantine era, Justinian I awarded general Belisarius a triumph that included some \"radically new\" Christian and Byzantine elements. Belisarius successfully campaigned against his adversary Vandal leader Gelimer to restore the former Roman province of Africa to the control of Byzantium in the 533\u2013534 Vandalic War. The triumph was held in the Eastern Roman capital of Constantinople. Historian Procopius, an eyewitness who had previously been in Belisarius's service, describes the procession's display of the loot seized from the Temple of Jerusalem in 70 CE by Roman Emperor Titus, including the Temple Menorah. The treasure had been stored in Rome's Temple of Peace after its display in Titus' own triumphal parade and its depiction on his triumphal arch; then it was seized by the Vandals during their sack of Rome in 455; then it was taken from them in Belisarius' campaign. The objects themselves might well have recalled the ancient triumphs of Vespasian and his son Titus; but Belisarius and Gelimer walked, as in an ovation. The procession did not end at Rome's Capitoline Temple with a sacrifice to Jupiter, but terminated at Hippodrome of Constantinople with a recitation of Christian prayer and the triumphant generals prostrate before the emperor.\nInfluence.\nDuring the Renaissance, kings and magnates sought ennobling connections with the classical past. Ghibelline Castruccio Castracani defeated the forces of the Guelph Florence in the 1325 Battle of Altopascio. Holy Roman Emperor Louis IV made him Duke of Lucca, and the city gave him a Roman-style triumph. The procession was led by his Florentine captives, made to carry candles in honour of Lucca's patron saint. Castracani followed, standing in a decorative chariot. His booty included the Florentines' portable, wheeled altar, the \"carroccio\".\nFlavio Biondo's \"Roma Triumphans\" (1459) claimed the ancient Roman triumph, divested of its pagan rites, as a rightful inheritance of Holy Roman Emperors. Italian poet Petrarch's \"Triumphs\" (\"I triomfi\") represented the triumphal themes and biographies of ancient Roman texts as ideals for cultured, virtuous rule; it was influential and widely read. Andrea Mantegna's series of large paintings on the \"Triumphs of Caesar\" (1484\u201392, now Hampton Court Palace) became immediately famous and was endlessly copied in print form. The \"Triumphal Procession\" commissioned by Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I (1512\u201319) from a group of artists including Albrecht D\u00fcrer was a series of woodcuts of an imaginary triumph of his own that could be hung as a frieze long.\nIn the 1550s, the fragmentary \"Fasti Triumphales\" were unearthed and partially restored. Onofrio Panvinio's \"Fasti\" continued where the ancient \"Fasti\" left off. The last triumph recorded by Panvinio was the Royal Entry of Holy Roman Emperor Charles V into Rome on April 5, 1536, after his conquest of Tunis in 1535. Panvinio described it as a Roman triumph \"over the infidel.\" The Emperor followed the traditional ancient route, \"past the ruins of the triumphal arches of the soldier-emperors of Rome\", where \"actors dressed as ancient senators hailed the return of the new Caesar as \"miles christi\",\" (a soldier of Christ).\nThe extravagant triumphal entry into Rouen of Henri II of France in 1550 was not \"less pleasing and delectable than the third triumph of Pompey\u00a0... magnificent in riches and abounding in the spoils of foreign nations\". A triumphal arch made for the Royal entry into Paris of Louis XIII in 1628 carried a depiction of Pompey.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38013", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38013", "title": "Mollusc", "text": ""}
{"id": "38014", "revid": "4", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38014", "title": "Multiple Independent Re-entry Vehicles", "text": ""}
{"id": "38015", "revid": "1607861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38015", "title": "Epic", "text": "Epic commonly refers to:\nEpic(s) or EPIC(s) may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38018", "revid": "44857712", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38018", "title": "M198 howitzer", "text": "American 155 mm towed howitzer\nThe M198 is a medium-sized, towed 155 mm artillery piece, developed for service with the United States Army and Marine Corps. It was commissioned to be a replacement for the World War II-era M114 155 mm howitzer. It was designed and prototyped at the Rock Island Arsenal in 1969 with firing tests beginning in 1970 and went into full production there in 1978. It entered service in 1979 and since then 1,600 units have been produced.\nThe M198 was replaced in US and Australian service by the M777 howitzer.\nDescription.\nThe M198 155\u00a0mm howitzer weighs less than , allowing it to be dropped by parachute or transported by a CH-53E Super Stallion or CH-47 Chinook. The M198 is towed by a truck that is used to carry the nine person crew with supplies and ammunition; it is transported tail first. The gun tube can be rotated over the howitzer's trail legs to reduce its length, though this requires removal of the muzzle brake, or left in the firing position for faster deployment. When firing, the weapon is lowered onto its baseplate rather than anchored to the ground, allowing for rapid emplacement. The breech is operated manually via a screw type mechanism that rests low in an ergonomic position.\nThe M198 fires separate-loading (non-fixed or semi-fixed) ammunition and can be loaded with a variety of propellants and projectiles. The effective range is when firing standard projectiles, which increases to when firing rocket-assisted projectiles and guided ammunition. With the 52-caliber modification, the range can surpass . The weapon system requires a crew of nine, and is capable of firing at a maximum rate of four rounds per minute, two sustained.\nThe M198 was deployed in separate corps- and army-level field artillery units, as well as in artillery battalions of light and airborne divisions. It provided field artillery fire support for all Marine Air-Ground Task Force organizations until the adoption of the M777 howitzer.\n(M-107 NC/DC): Explosive Composition B material packed into a thick, internally scored shell which causes a large blast and sends razor-sharp fragments at extreme velocities (). The kill zone has an approximate radius of , and the casualty radius is . The Marine Corps and US Army also uses the M795 High Explosive round.\n A high-explosive rocket-assisted (HERA) M549 round with a greater range than the normal HE. The maximum range is .\n A base-ejecting projectile which can come in two versions: felt-wedge and standard. White phosphorus smoke is used to start fires, burn a target, or to create smoke which is useful in concealing the movements of friendly units.\n Illumination projectiles are base-ejecting rounds which deploy a bright parachute flare ideally above the ground and illuminate an area of approximately 1 grid square (). Illumination rounds are often used in conjunction with HE rounds to illuminate the target area so that HE rounds can be fired more effectively. Illumination rounds can also be used during the daytime to mark targets for aircraft. The M485 illumination round burns for 120 seconds.\n A base-ejecting projectile that drops 88 bomblets above a target. Each bomblet has a shaped-charge munition capable of penetrating two inches of solid steel as well as a fragmentation casing which is effective against infantry in the open. The DPICM round is effective against armored vehicles, even tanks (since the deck armor is usually the thinnest on the vehicle), and is also extremely useful against entrenched infantry in positions with overhead cover.\n An artillery round that releases anti-personnel mines. These mines eject tripwires to act as booby traps, and when triggered are launched upward before exploding. They are designed to self-destruct after a predetermined period.\n An artillery round that releases anti-armor mines, usually used along with ADAMS rounds to prevent the antitank mines from being removed. Designed to self-destruct after a predetermined period.\n An artillery launched guided high-explosive munition used for very precise targeting of high-value targets such as tanks and bunkers. No longer produced or used by the US military, it required the target to be designated with a laser designator system.\n An experimental munition fired in the general direction of an enemy vehicle. The shell activates at a certain point in time ejecting a parachute and then guides itself to the nearest vehicle.\n The XM454 AFAP (W48) nuclear artillery shell had a 155mm caliber and an explosive yield of only . All units were retired from service in 1992.\nReplacement.\nBAE Systems won the contract to replace the M198 in the US Army and Marine Corps with its M777 155\u00a0mm/39 cal towed howitzer, which weighs less than . It was introduced in 2005.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38020", "revid": "494861", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38020", "title": "Gregory of Nyssa", "text": "4th-century bishop of Nyssa, Asia Minor\nGregory of Nyssa (; , ; c.\u2009335\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009394), also known as Gregory Nyssen (; , ), was an early Christian theologian who served as the bishop of Nyssa from 372 to 376 and from 378 until his death in 394. He is venerated as a saint in Eastern Orthodoxy, the Catholic Church, Oriental Orthodox Churches, Anglicanism, and Lutheranism. Gregory, his elder brother Basil of Caesarea, and their friend Gregory of Nazianzus are collectively known as the Cappadocian Fathers.\nGregory lacked the administrative ability of his brother Basil or the contemporary influence of Gregory of Nazianzus, but he was an erudite Christian theologian who made significant contributions to the doctrine of the Trinity and the Nicene Creed. Gregory's philosophical writings were influenced by Origen. Since the mid-twentieth century, there has been a significant increase in interest in Gregory's works from the academic community, particularly involving universal salvation, which has resulted in challenges to many traditional interpretations of his theology. Gregory is also notable for being the first person in recorded history to have written against all forms of slavery, declaring the institution inherently sinful.\nBackground.\nThe Acts of the Apostles depicts that on the Pentecost there were visiting Jews who were \"residents of ...Cappadocia\" in attendance in Acts 2:9. In the First Epistle of Peter, written after 65, the author greets Christians who are \"exiles scattered throughout\u2026Cappadocia\". There is no further reference to Cappadocia in the rest of the New Testament.\nEarly Christianity arose in Cappadocia relatively late, with no evidence of a Christian community before the late second century. Alexander of Jerusalem was the first bishop of the province in the early to mid-third century, a period in which Christians suffered persecution from the local Roman authorities. The community remained very small throughout the third century: when Gregory Thaumaturgus acceded to the bishopric in c. 250, according to Gregory of Nyssa, there were only seventeen members of the Church in Caesarea.\nCappadocian bishops were among those at the First Council of Nicaea. Because of the broad distribution of the population, rural bishops () were appointed to support the Bishop of Caesarea. During the late fourth century, there were around fifty of them. In Gregory's lifetime, the Christians of Cappadocia were devout, with the veneration of the Forty Martyrs of Sebaste and Saint George being particularly significant and represented by a considerable monastic presence. There were some adherents of heretical branches of Christianity, most notably Arians, Encratites and Messalians.\nBiography.\nEarly life and education.\nGregory was a Cappadocian Greek, born around 335, probably in or near the city of Neocaesarea, Pontus. His family was aristocratic and Christian\u2014according to Gregory of Nazianzus, his mother was Emmelia of Caesarea, and his father, a rhetorician, has been identified either as Basil the Elder or as a Gregory. Among his eight siblings were St. Macrina the Younger, St. Naucratius, St. Peter of Sebaste and St. Basil of Caesarea. The precise number of children in the family was historically contentious: the commentary on 30 May in the \"Acta Sanctorum\", for example, initially states that they were nine, before describing Peter as the tenth child. It has been established that this confusion occurred due to the death of one son in infancy, leading to ambiguities in Gregory's own writings. Gregory's parents had suffered persecution for their faith: he writes that they \"had their goods confiscated for confessing Christ.\" Gregory's paternal grandmother, Macrina the Elder, is also revered as a saint and his maternal grandfather was a martyr, as Gregory put it \"killed by Imperial wrath\" under the persecution of the Roman Emperor Maximinus II. Between the 320s to the early 340s, the family rebuilt its fortunes, with Gregory's father working in the city of Neocaesarea as an advocate and rhetorician.\nGregory's temperament is said to have been quiet and meek, in contrast to his brother Basil who was known to be much more outspoken. Gregory was first educated at home, by his mother Emmelia and sister Macrina. Little is known of what further education he received. Apocryphal hagiographies depict him studying at Athens, but this is speculation probably based on the life of his brother Basil. It seems more likely that he continued his studies in Caesarea, where he read classical literature, philosophy and perhaps medicine. Gregory himself claimed that his only teachers were Basil, \"Paul, John and the rest of the Apostles and prophets\".\nWhile his brothers Basil and Naucratius lived as hermits from c.\u2009355, Gregory initially pursued a non-ecclesiastical career as a rhetorician. He did, however, act as a lector. He is known to have married a woman named Theosebia during this period, who is sometimes identified with Theosebia the Deaconess, venerated as a saint by Orthodox Christianity. This is controversial, however, and other commentators suggest that Theosebia the Deaconess was one of Gregory's sisters.\nEpiscopate.\nIn 371, the Emperor Valens split Cappadocia into two new provinces, Cappadocia Prima and Cappadocia Secunda. This resulted in complex changes in ecclesiastical boundaries, during which several new bishoprics were created. Gregory was elected bishop of the new see of Nyssa in 372, presumably with the support of his brother Basil, who was metropolitan of Caesarea. Gregory's early policies as bishop often went against those of Basil; for instance, while his brother condemned the Sabellianist followers of Marcellus of Ancyra as heretics, Gregory may have tried to reconcile them with the church.\nGregory faced opposition to his reign in Nyssa and, in 373, Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium, had to visit the city to quell discontent. In 375, Desmothenes of Pontus convened a synod at Ancyra to try Gregory on charges of embezzlement of church funds and irregular ordination of bishops. He was arrested by imperial troops in the winter of the same year but escaped to an unknown location. The synod of Nyssa, which was convened in the spring of 376, deposed him. However, Gregory regained his see in 378, perhaps due to an amnesty promulgated by the new emperor, Gratian. In the same year Basil died, and despite the relative unimportance of Nyssa, Gregory took over many of his brother's former responsibilities in Pontus.\nHe was present at the Synod of Antioch in April 379, where he unsuccessfully attempted to reconcile the followers of Meletius of Antioch with those of Paulinus. After visiting the village of Annisa to see his dying sister, Macrina, he returned to Nyssa in August. In 380 he travelled to Sebaste, in the province of Armenia Prima, to support a pro-Nicene candidate for the election to the bishopric. To his surprise, he himself was elected to the seat, perhaps due to the population's association of him with his brother. However, Gregory deeply disliked the relatively unhellenized society of Armenia, and he was confronted by an investigation into his orthodoxy by local opponents of the Nicene theology. After a stay of several months, a substitute was found\u2014possibly Gregory's brother Peter, who was bishop of Sebaste from 381\u2014and Gregory returned home to Nyssa to write books I and II of \"Against Eunomius\".\nGregory participated in the First Council of Constantinople (381), and perhaps gave there his famous sermon \"In suam ordinationem\". He was chosen to eulogise at the funeral of Meletius, which occurred during the council. The council sent Gregory on a mission to Arabia, perhaps to ameliorate the situation in Bostra where two men, Agapius and Badagius, claimed to be bishop. If this is the case, Gregory was unsuccessful, as the see was still contested in 394. He then travelled to Jerusalem where Cyril of Jerusalem faced opposition from local clergy due to the fact that he had been ordained by Acacius of Caesarea, an Arian heretic. Gregory's attempted mediation of the dispute was unsuccessful, and he himself was accused of holding unorthodox views on the nature of Christ. His later reign in Nyssa was marked by conflict with his metropolitan, Helladius. Gregory was present at a 394 synod convened at Constantinople to discuss the continued problems in Bostra. While the year of his death is unknown, it is generally accepted that he died in 394.\nTheology.\nThe traditional view of Gregory is that he was an orthodox Trinitarian theologian, who was influenced by the Neoplatonism of Plotinus and believed in universal salvation following Origen. However, as a highly original and sophisticated thinker, Gregory is difficult to classify, and many aspects of his theology are contentious among both conservative Eastern Orthodox theologians and Western academic scholarship. This is often due to the lack of systematic structure and the presence of terminological inconsistencies in Gregory's work.\nConception of the Trinity.\nGregory, following Basil, defined the Trinity as \"one essence [\u03bf\u1f50\u03c3\u03af\u03b1] in three persons [\u1f51\u03c0\u03bf\u03c3\u03c4\u03ac\u03c3\u03b5\u03b9\u03c2]\", the formula adopted by the Council of Constantinople in 381. Like the other Cappadocian Fathers, he was a homoousian, and \"Against Eunomius\" affirms the truth of the consubstantiality of the trinity over Eunomius' Aristotelian belief that the Father's substance is unengendered, whereas the Son's is engendered. According to Gregory, the differences between the three persons of the Trinity reside in their differing hypostatic origin, and the triune nature of God is revealed through divine action (despite the unity of God in His action). The Son is therefore defined as begotten of the Father, the Holy Spirit as proceeding from the Father, and the Father by his role as progenitor. However, this doctrine would seem to subordinate the Son to the Father, and the Holy Spirit to the Son. Robert Jenson suggests that Gregory implies that each member of the Godhead has an individual priority: the Son has epistemological priority, the Father has ontic priority and the Spirit has metaphysical priority. Other commentators disagree: Morwenna Ludlow, for instance, argues that epistemic priority resides primarily in the Spirit in Gregory's theology.\nModern proponents of social trinitarianism often claim to have been influenced by the Cappadocians' dynamic picture of the Trinity. However, it would be fundamentally incorrect to identify Gregory as a social Trinitarian, as his theology emphasises the unity of God's will, and he clearly believes that the identities of the Trinity are the three persons, not the relations between them.\nInfinitude of God.\nGregory was one of the first theologians to argue that God is infinite. His main argument for the infinity of God, found in \"Against Eunomius\", is that God's goodness is limitless, and as God's goodness is essential, God is also limitless.\nAn important consequence of Gregory's belief in the infinity of God is his belief that God, as limitless, is essentially incomprehensible to the limited minds of created beings. In \"Life of Moses\", Gregory writes: \"...every concept that comes from some comprehensible image, by an approximate understanding and by guessing at the Divine nature, constitutes an idol of God and does not proclaim God.\" Gregory's theology was thus apophatic: he proposed that God should be defined in terms of what we know He is not rather than what we might speculate Him to be.\nAccordingly, the Nyssen taught that due to God's infinitude, a created being can never reach an understanding of God, and thus for man in both life and the afterlife there is a constant progression [\u1f10\u03c0\u03ad\u03ba\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2] towards the unreachable knowledge of God, as the individual continually transcends all which has been reached before. In the \"Life of Moses\", Gregory speaks of three stages of this spiritual growth: initial darkness of ignorance, then spiritual illumination, and finally a darkness of the mind in mystic contemplation of the God who cannot be comprehended.\nUniversalism.\nGregory was one of the earlier proponents of Christian universalism. Gregory argues that when Paul says that God will be \"all in all\" (1 Cor. 15:28), this means that though some may need to undergo a long period of purification, eventually \"no being will remain outside the number of the saved\" and that \"no being created by God will fall outside the Kingdom of God\". Due to the unity of human nature in Christ \"all, thanks to the union with one another, will be joined in communion with the Good, in Jesus Christ Our Lord\". Christ's incarnation, death and resurrection results in \"total salvation for human nature\".\nGregory also described God's work this way: \"His [God's] end is one, and one only; it is this: when the complete whole of our race shall have been perfected from the first man to the last\u2014some having at once in this life been cleansed from evil, others having afterwards in the necessary periods been healed by the Fire, others having in their life here been unconscious equally of good and of evil\u2014to offer to every one of us participation in the blessings which are in Him, which, the Scripture tells us, 'eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,' nor thought ever reached.\" That this is what Gregory believed and taught is affirmed by most scholars. A minority of scholars have argued that Gregory affirmed only the universal resurrection.\nIn the \"Life of Moses\", Gregory writes that just as the darkness left the Egyptians after three days, perhaps redemption [\u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03ac\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2] will be extended to those suffering in hell [\u03b3\u03ad\u03b5\u03bd\u03bd\u03b1]. This salvation may extend not only to humans; following Origen, there are passages where he seems to suggest (albeit through the voice of Macrina) that even the demons will have a place in Christ's \"world of goodness\". Gregory's interpretations of 1 Corinthians 15:28 (\"And when all things shall be subdued unto him\u00a0...\") and Philippians 2:10 (\"That at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things in earth, and things under the earth\") support this understanding of his theology.\nNevertheless, in the \"Great Catechism\", Gregory suggests that while every human will be resurrected, salvation will be accorded only to the baptised, although he also states that others driven by their passions can be saved after being purified by fire. While he believes that there will be no more evil in the hereafter, it is arguable that this does not preclude a belief that God might justly damn sinners for eternity. Thus, the main difference between Gregory's conception of \u1f00\u03c0\u03bf\u03ba\u03b1\u03c4\u03ac\u03c3\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2 and that of Origen would be that Gregory believes that mankind will be collectively returned to sinlessness, whereas Origen believes that personal salvation will be universal. This interpretation of Gregory has recently been criticized, however. After all, at the end of chapter XXXV of the \"Great Catechism\" Gregory writes that those who have not been purified by water through baptism \"must needs be purified by fire\" so that \"after long succeeding ages, their nature may be restored pure again to God\".\nAttempting to reconcile these disparate positions, Eastern Orthodox theologian Dr. Mario Baghos notes that \"when taken at face value the saint seems to be contradicting himself in these passages; on the one hand he asserted the salvation of all and the complete eradication of evil, and, on the other, that the fire needed to purge evil is 'sleepless', i.e. everlasting. The only solution to this inconsistency is to view any allusion to universal salvation in St Gregory as an expression of God's intention for humanity, which is in fact attested to when his holy sister states that God has \"one goal ... some straightway even in this life purified from evil, others healed hereafter through fire for the appropriate length of time.\" That we can choose either to accept or ignore this purification is confirmed by the saint's many exhortations that we freely undertake the virtuous path.\" Dr. Ilaria Ramelli has made the observation that for Gregory free will was compatible with universal salvation since every person would eventually accept the good having gone through purification. Nevertheless, some interpret Gregory as conceding that Judas and similar sinners will never be completely purified when he wrote, \"that which never existed is to be preferred to that which has existed in such sin. For, as to the latter, on account of the depth of the ingrained evil, the chastisement in the way of purgation will be extended into infinity\". However, Ramelli renders the original Greek \"\u03b5\u1f30\u03c2 \u1f04\u03c0\u03b5\u03b9\u03c1\u03bf\u03bd \u03c0\u03b1\u03c1\u03b1\u03c4\u03b5\u03af\u03bd\u03b5\u03c4\u03b1\u03b9 \u1f21 \u03b4\u03b9\u1f70 \u03c4\u1fc6\u03c2 \u03ba\u03b1\u03b8\u03ac\u03c1\u03c3\u03b5\u03c9\u03c2 \u03ba\u03cc\u03bb\u03b1\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\" as \"the punishment provided for the purpose of purification will tend to an indefinite duration.\"\nAnthropology.\nGregory's anthropology is founded on the ontological distinction between the created and uncreated. Man is a material creation, and thus limited, but infinite in that his immortal soul has an indefinite capacity to grow closer to the divine. Gregory believed that the soul is created simultaneous to the creation of the body (in opposition to Origen, who believed in preexistence), and that embryos were thus persons. To Gregory, the human being is exceptional, being created in the image of God. Humanity is theomorphic both in having self-awareness and free will, the latter which gives each individual existential power, because to Gregory, in disregarding God one negates one's own existence. In the \"Song of Songs\", Gregory metaphorically describes human lives as paintings created by apprentices to a master: the apprentices (the human wills) imitate their master's work (the life of Christ) with beautiful colours (virtues), and thus man strives to be a reflection of Christ. Gregory, in stark contrast to most thinkers of his age, saw great beauty in the Fall: from Adam's sin from two perfect humans would eventually arise myriad.\nSlavery.\nGregory was the first voice in the ancient world known to write against all forms of slavery, declaring the institution inherently sinful.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If [man] is in the likeness of God, ... who is his buyer, tell me? Who is his seller? To God alone belongs this power; or rather, not even to God himself. [...] God would not therefore reduce the human race to slavery, since [God] himself, when we had been enslaved to sin, spontaneously recalled us to freedom. But if God does not enslave what is free, who is he that sets his own power above God's?\u2014\u200a\nGregory used Plato's definition of virtue as \u2018something that admits of no master [\u1f00\u03b4\u03ad\u03c3\u03c0\u03bf\u03c4\u03bf\u03bd]\u2019 in the service of his own theological arguments against slavery: (1) each human is an image of God and therefore free, (2) the equality of all humans reflects the equality of the divine Persons and (3) just as the divine nature cannot be divided into slavery (\u03b4\u03bf\u03c5\u03bb\u03b5\u03af\u03b1) and mastery (\u03b4\u03c5\u03bd\u03b1\u03c3\u03c4\u03b5\u03af\u03b1, \u03ba\u03c5\u03c1\u03b9\u03cc\u03c4\u03b7\u03c2), neither can human nature; the whole creation is a slave but of God alone.\nAlthough the stoic Seneca had criticized cruel slave masters and advised slave masters to treat slaves with kindness (or at least those of good character), the stoics never questioned the institution of slavery, which was considered an ordinary part of daily life in the ancient world; and other ancient philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle also supported slavery. Gregory of Nyssa's critique was the first and only sustained critique of the institution of slavery itself made in the ancient world.\nNeoplatonism.\nThere are many similarities between Gregory's theology and Neoplatonism, especially that of Plotinus. Specifically, they share the idea that the reality of God is completely inaccessible to human beings and that man can come to see God only through a spiritual journey in which knowledge (gnosis) is rejected in favour of meditation. Gregory does not refer to any Neoplatonist philosophers in his work, and there is only one disputed passage which may directly quote Plotinus. Considering this, it seems possible that Gregory was familiar with Plotinus and perhaps other figures in Neoplatonism. However, some significant differences exist between Neoplatonism and Gregory's thought, such as Gregory's assertion that beauty and goodness are equivalent, which contrasts with Plotinus' view that they are distinct qualities. However Plotinus does say, \"And Beauty, this Beauty which is also the Good\", implying the Monad which is the Good is also Beauty in Enneads 6:1, Beauty:6.\nEastern Orthodox theologians are generally critical of the theory that Gregory was influenced by Neoplatonism. For example, Hierotheos Vlachos argues in \"Life After Death\" that Gregory opposed all philosophical (as opposed to theological) endeavour as tainted with worldliness. This view is supported by \"Against Eunomius\", where Gregory denounces Eunomius for placing the results of his systematic Aristoteleanism above the traditional teachings of the Church.\nFeast day.\nThe Eastern Orthodoxy and Eastern Catholic Churches commemorate Gregory of Nyssa on 10 January. The Latin Church, following editions of the \"Roman Martyrology\" published prior to the Second Vatican Council, along with \"The Calendar of the Church Year\" of the Episcopal Church commemorate his death on 9 March. Editions of the Roman Martyrology published after the year 2000 list his feast day under 10 January. The Lutheran Church \u2013 Missouri Synod commemorates Gregory along with the other Cappadocian Fathers on 10 January.\nGregory is remembered in the Church of England (with Macrina the Younger) with a lesser festival on 19 July.\nLegacy.\nGregory is revered as a saint. However, unlike the other Cappadocian fathers, he is not a Doctor of the Church. He is venerated chiefly in the East. His relics were held by the Vatican until 2000 when a portion of them were transferred to the Greek Orthodox church of St. Gregory of Nyssa, San Diego, California.\nProfessor of theology, Natalie Carnes wrote: \"One reason Gregory was not taken up into the theological stream in the West is that he was little translated into Latin. John Scotus Eriugena (c. 800\u2013c. 877) should be greatly credited for the influence Gregory did have. Not only was Eriugena himself influenced by Gregory, but he also translated \"On the Making of the Human\" into Latin.\"\nGregory's work received little scholarly attention in the West until the mid-twentieth century, and he was historically treated as a minor figure in comparison to Basil the Great or Gregory of Nazianzus. As late as 1942, Hans Urs von Balthasar wrote that his work was virtually unknown. However, the 6th-century Latin translation of \"De opificio hominis\" by Dionysius Exiguus was very widespread in the Medieval period, and Francisco Bastitta Harriet argues that Nyssen's conceptions of indeterminate human nature and ontological freedom were among the core influences on Renaissance anthropology, particularly on the works of Nicholas of Cusa and Giovanni Pico della Mirandola. \"The renewed enthusiasm of 15th-century philosophers and humanists for classical antiquity also led to a revival of the study and translation of Greek patristic works. Against this background, some of Gregory of Nyssa\u2019s works which remained unknown to the West during the medieval centuries received their first Latin translations by leading representatives of Italian and Byzantine culture.\" These include the early Renaissance translations of \"De vita Moysis\" by George of Trebizond in 1446, of \"De vita Macrinae\" and \"De anima et resurrectione\" by Pietro Balbi between 1465 and 1473, and of \"De oratione dominica\" by the Byzantine scholar Athanasius Chalkeopoulos around 1465.\nIn part due to the scholarship of Balthasar and Jean Dani\u00e9lou, by the 1950s Gregory had become the subject of much serious theological research, with a critical edition of his work published (\"Gregorii Nysseni Opera\"), and the founding of the International Colloquium on Gregory of Nyssa. This attention has continued to the present day. Modern studies have focused on Gregory's eschatology rather than his more dogmatic writings, and he has gained a reputation as an unconventional thinker whose thought arguably prefigures postmodernism. Major figures in contemporary research include Sarah Coakley, John Zizioulas and Robert Jenson. In 2003, theologian David Bentley Hart published a book seemingly influenced by Gregory.\nCommentary on Gregory.\nIn 787, the Second Council of Nicaea, the last of the first seven ecumenical councils, honored Gregory of Nyssa:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Let us then, consider who were the venerable doctors and indomitable champions of the Church [including] Gregory Primate of Nyssa, who all have called the father of fathers.\nHenry Fairfield Osborn wrote in his work on the history of evolutionary thought, (1894):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAnthony Meredith writes of Gregory's mystical and apophatic writings in his book \"Gregory of Nyssa (The Early Church Fathers)\" (1999): \nGregory has often been credited with the discovery of mystical theology, or rather with the perception that darkness is an appropriate symbol under which God can be discussed. There is much truth in this...Gregory seems to have been the first Christian writer to have made this important point.\nJ. Kameron Carter writes about Gregory's stance on slavery, in the book \"Race a Theological Account \"(2008):\nWhat interests me is the defining features of Gregory's vision of the just society: his unequivocal stance against 'the peculiar institution of slavery' and his call for the manumission of all slaves. I am interested in reading Gregory as a fourth century abolitionist intellectual...His outlook surpassed not only St. Paul's more moderate (but to be fair to Paul, in his moment, revolutionary) stance on the subject but also those of all ancient intellectuals -- Pagan, Jewish and Christian - from Aristotle to Cicero and from Augustine in the Christian West to his contemporary, the golden mouthed preacher himself, John Crysotom in the East. Indeed, the world would have to wait another fifteen centuries -- until the nineteenth century, late into the modern abolitionist movement -- before such an unequivocal stance against slavery would appear again.\nCatholic theologian and author Hans Urs von Balthasar, describes Gregory in his book \"Presence and Thought: An Essay on the Religious Philosophy of Gregory of Nyssa (1988):\"Less prolific than Origen, less cultivated than Gregory Nazianzen, less practical than Basil, Gregory of Nyssa nonetheless outstrips them all in the profundity of his thought.\nBibliography.\nThe complete works of Gregory of Nyssa are published in the original Greek with Latin commentary as \"Gregorii Nysseni Opera\":\nThe following are editions of English translations of Gregory's writings:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38021", "revid": "44631585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38021", "title": "M102 howitzer", "text": "The M102 is a light, towable 105 mm howitzer used by the United States Army in the Vietnam War, the Gulf War, and the Iraq War.\nOverview.\nThe M102 105\u2009mm howitzer is used in air mobile (helicopter), attack plane, and light infantry operations. The weapon carriage is lightweight welded aluminum, mounted on a variable recoil mechanism. The weapon is manually loaded and positioned, and can be towed by a 2-ton truck or High Mobility Multipurpose Wheeled Vehicle (HMMWV), can be transported by UH-60 Black Hawk helicopters, or can be dropped by parachute with airborne units. When emplaced, the howitzer's high volume of fire compensates in large measure for the lower explosive weight of the projectile compared to the Army's 155 mm and 203 mm howitzers. Since 1964, the Army acquired 1,150 M102 towed howitzers. The weapon is being replaced by the M119-series 105\u2009mm howitzer.\nResistance to change.\nUnits were initially equipped with the M101A1 howitzer, virtually the same 105\u2009mm howitzer that had been used to support U.S. forces since World War II. In 1966 a new 105\u2009mm towed howitzer, the M102, was received in Vietnam. The first M102s were issued to the 1st Battalion, 21st Field Artillery, in March 1966. Replacement of the old howitzers continued steadily over the next four years.\nMany of the more seasoned artillerymen did not want the old cannon replaced. Over the years they had become familiar with its every detail and were confident that it would not disappoint them in the clutch. These experienced artillerymen could offer some seemingly convincing reasons why the M101 was still the superior weapon: its waist-high breech made it easier to load; it had higher ground clearance when in tow; but most important, it was considerably less expensive than the M102. Their arguments, however, were futile.\nThe new M102 was substantially lighter, weighing little more than whereas the M101A1 weighed approximately ; as a result, more ammunition could be carried during heliborne operations, and a 3/4-ton truck rather than a 2\u00bd-ton truck was its prime mover for ground operations. Another major advantage of the M102 was that it could be traversed a full 360\u00b0; the M101A1 had a limited on-carriage traverse, which required its trails (stabilizing legs) to be shifted if further traverse was necessary. The M102 fires the same semi-fixed ammunition as the M101, but its longer barrel (32 calibres versus 22 calibres on M101) allows a slightly higher muzzle velocity and thus enhanced firing range. A low silhouette made the new weapon a more difficult target for the enemy, an advantage that far outweighed the disadvantage of being somewhat less convenient to load.\nDesign.\nThe 105\u00a0mm howitzer M102 is a lightweight towed weapon, which has a very low silhouette when in the firing position. The M102 howitzer fires a projectile of semifixed ammunition and at charge 7 it will fire to . It has a muzzle velocity of . The maximum rate of fire is 10 rounds per minute for the first 3 minutes, with a sustained rate of 3 rounds per minute.\nA roller tire attached to the trail assembly of the M102 permits the weapon to be rotated 6,400 mils (360 degrees) around a firing platform, which provides the pivot for the weapon. It can be elevated from \u221289 mils (\u22125 degrees) to a maximum of 1,333 mils (75 degrees). The panoramic telescope has a four power, fixed focus optical system, with 178 mils (10 degrees) field of view. It contains dry nitrogen gas to retard fogging and condensation. The parallax shield used during boresighting protects the lens.\nThe trails are made of aluminum alloy. They are a single box trail in wishbone shape, and serve three purposes: mobility; stability; and stowage of section equipment. The lunette is the towing pintle that allows the weapon to be connected to the vehicle. When towing, vehicle has a fixed or seized tow pintle; remove the lock plate located under the lunette. The drawbar has two positions: lowered for travel and raised for firing. There are two lifting brackets to connect slings to when the howitzer is being lifted by helicopter. A third bracket is located on front yoke. The carriage handles are used by crew members to lifting and shifting the howitzer during loading, unloading, and emplacing the howitzer.\nThe firing platform attaches to the howitzer lower carriage by using a socket and a locking handle. The eight holes are for the stakes needed to stake the howitzer in position. Platform stakes are issued in three sizes. There are four stakes issued for use in frozen or rocky terrain, and are normally issued only where needed, such as extremely cold areas. There are eight stakes issued, and are used for hard packed ground. Four stakes are issued for use in soft ground.\nThe first production versions were displayed with a muzzle brake, most likely to allow long range 105\u00a0mm rounds to be fired, but was discontinued before shipment to Vietnam.\nCurrent usage.\nWhile the M102 is no longer in active use by the United States Army, having been replaced by the M119, it is still in use by the National Guard. The M102 was last deployed to combat in 2004 by the 1st Battalion, 206th Field Artillery, Arkansas Army National Guard. Seventeen M102 howitzers were deployed to Camp Taji, Iraq. The 1-206th FA provided fire and conducted counter-fire missions in support of 39th BCT operations, an element of the 1st Cavalry Division. The 1-206th scavenged spare parts from nine M102 howitzers that were located in the Camp Taji Boneyard. These howitzers were allegedly captured by the Iraqi Army during the Iran\u2013Iraq War in the 1980s.\nThe M102 is also used on the United States Air Force's Lockheed AC-130 gunship. The M102 105\u2009mm cannon was modified to be fired from the left rear side door of the AC-130. To accommodate the cannon, the rear side-firing 40\u2009mm guns were replaced by the radome that formerly had been installed in the door cavity. That change provided enough space for the 105\u2009mm gun to be mounted in the doorway in place of the radome. The gun was first used in the later stages of the Vietnam War. The latest AC-130J Ghostrider gunship was not originally planned to include the 105\u2009mm, but designed with enough spare power and room to mount it at some later point. The Air Force decided to include it in January 2015, starting installation on the third aircraft, then having the first two be retrofitted when guns become available; M102s will be pulled off retiring AC-130Us and put into the AC-130Js.\nThe M102 is used in extremely limited roles by the United States Marine Corps, primarily for firing salutes.\nThe Malaysian Army used the M102 during Malaysia's second communist insurgency (1968\u20131988) to bombard insurgent positions on the Malaysia-Thailand border. The guns were transported by helicopter to remote firing positions. All Malaysian M102s have now been decommissioned and are only used for firing salute.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38022", "revid": "36915781", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38022", "title": "M109 howitzer", "text": "American 155 mm self-propelled howitzer\nThe M109 Paladin is an American 155 mm turreted self-propelled howitzer, first introduced in the early 1960s to replace the M44 and M52. It has been upgraded a number of times, most recently to the M109A7. The M109 family is the most common Western indirect-fire support weapon of maneuver brigades of armored and mechanized infantry divisions. It has a crew of four: the section chief/commander, the driver, the gunner, and the ammunition handler/loader.\nThe British Army replaced its M109s with the AS-90. Several European armed forces have or are currently replacing older M109s with the German PzH 2000. Upgrades to the M109 were introduced by the U.S. (see variants) and by Switzerland (KAWEST). With the cancellation of the U.S. Crusader, non-line-of-sight cannon and M1299, the M109A6 (\"Paladin\") will likely remain the principal self-propelled howitzer for the U.S. until a replacement enters service.\nOperational history.\nThe M109 was the medium variant of a U.S. program to adopt a common chassis for its self-propelled artillery units. The light version, the M108 Howitzer, was phased out during the Vietnam War, but many were rebuilt as M109s.\nThe M109 saw its combat debut in Vietnam. Around 200 vehicles were deployed in 1966, but the entire fleet suffered a mechanical malfunction within a year of operation. The U.S. dispatched engineers and mechanics, but all M109s were recalled back to the U.S. in 1967 after failing to repair in the field. The howitzer underwent upgrades afterward, which resulted in the M109A1.\nIsrael used the M109 against Egypt in the 1973 Yom Kippur War and in the 1982 and 2006 Lebanon Wars. Iran used the M109 in the Iran\u2013Iraq War in the 1980s. The M109 saw service with the British, U.S. Army, Egyptian and Saudi Arabian Armies in the 1991 Gulf War. The M109 also saw service with the U.S. Army in the Iraq War from 2003 to 2011.\nUpgrades to the cannon, ammunition, fire control, survivability, and other electronics systems over the design's lifespan have expanded the system's capabilities, including tactical nuclear projectiles, guided projectiles (Copperhead), rocket-assisted projectiles (RAP), family of scatterable mines (FASCAM), and cluster munitions (the dual-purpose improved conventional munition, DPICM).\nIn August 2015, South Korean K55A1s fired rounds behind the Military Demarcation Line as a warning after several North Korean provocations.\nDuring the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Ukraine has used M109 howitzers donated by Western countries. According to video and photographic evidence compiled by the open-source intelligence website Oryx, as of 24 September 2024, at least 70 units of different variants had been lost (54 destroyed and 16 damaged).\nDesign.\nThe M109 was developed by the Ground System Division of United Defense LP, now BAE Systems Land and Armaments.\nMobility.\nThe M109 was powered by the 8V71T, a 8-cylinder water-cooled diesel engine, produced by the Detroit Diesel Engine Division of General Motors Corporation. The 8V71T is a turbocharged version of the 8V71 commercial truck engine. It was rated 390 hp at 2300 rpm and was used in the M107, M108, M110, and M578 series as well.\nVariants.\nM109.\nFirst produced in 1963. It had a 155\u00a0mm M126 cannon in an M127 mount, and carried 28 rounds of 155\u00a0mm ammunition. It was also armed with a .50cal M2HB machine gun with 500 rounds of ammunition. Easily identified by its short barrel and a double baffle muzzle brake with a large fume extractor just behind it. Maximum range of 14,600 meters.\nM109G.\nThe West German army M109s were designated as the M109G, and featured a breechblock system developed by Rheinmetall extending the effective range to or according to some sources, a new fire control system, and three smoke dischargers mounted on either side of the turret as well.\nIn December 1966, the United States and Norway signed an agreement related to the co-production of the M109G.\nM109A1.\nFielded in 1973, this modification replaced the M126 cannon with a 39 caliber M185, featuring a longer barrel while increasing maximum range to 18,100 meters.\nM109A1B.\nThe M109 rebuilt to M109A1 standard.\nM109 66/74.\nThe M109 (Pz Hb) 66/74 is a Swiss upgraded M109 (Pz Hb 66) to M109A1B (Pz Hb 74) standard.\nSwitzerland purchased 146 M109 under the armament program 1968, and introduction of the howitzer started in 1971. All vehicles received upgrade to M109A1B (Pz Hb 74) standard and were delivered from May 1977 to February 1979.&lt;ref name=\"Pz Hb 66/74\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;\nM109A2.\nIncorporated 27 Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability (RAM) mid-life improvements. Most notably, the long barreled 155\u00a0mm M185 Cannon in the new M178 gun mount, ballistic protection for the panoramic telescope, counterbalanced travel lock, and the ability to mount the M140 bore sight alignment device. Stowage of 155 mm rounds increased from 28 to 36 rounds; .50cal ammunition remained at 500 rounds. Fielded in 1979.\nDuring M109A2 production, a slightly simplified version was also produced for export. This had minor internal changes and deleted the hull flotation feature. These were designated M109A1B.\nK55.\nThe K55 is a South Korean license produced variant of the M109A2. In the 1960s, the South Korean Army received M107 and M110 from the United States. However, the number of these self-propelled guns was insufficient to counter rapidly-growing North Korean artillery capabilities. In the 1970s, South Korea began mass-producing towed howitzers locally, but intelligence reports of North Korean 170 mm self-propelled artillery forced South Korea to look for a new self-propelled artillery system.\nIn December 1983, the ministers of defense of the United States and South Korea signed a memorandum of understanding (MOU) to co-produce M109A2 in South Korea using American technical data. The United States delivered two completed M109A2s to South Korea for operational review, and the Agency for Defense Development began to translate the data package and created field and maintenance manuals for soldiers. South Korea wanted to produce every part of the vehicle domestically; however, due to the amendment bill by Rep. Samuel S. Stratton of New York, which established a limit for foreign military technology cooperation, the turret and the M185 cannon from Watervliet Arsenal were imported from the United States.\nCompared to the M109A2, besides 63 percent of parts being produced locally, K55 has a driver's night periscope and light exposure minimization device to enhance night-time operations as well as additional radio systems. The vehicle has a nuclear, biological and chemical protection system and halon fire extinguishers. A total of 1,180 K55s were produced between 1985 and 1996. The vehicle's name was changed from KM109A2 to K55, originally a code name from the Samsung factory.\nIn November 1990, the United States and South Korea signed an agreement to allow South Korea to supply M109 parts to third parties. In May 1997, during the Security Cooperation Committee held in Washington D.C., South Korea requested that the United States revise the MOU to export complete K55s, originally intended for domestic use only. South Korea was expecting to export 72 K55s and four ammunition support vehicles to Brazil for $160 million over Belgium's offer, but the United States Department of Defense declined the request to avoid an arms race in the region.\nIn May 1998, the South Korean military began operating a K55 simulator to boost artillery operator training. The simulator took a year and a billion KRW budget to develop. It is expected to save 150 million KRW per year per device.\nM109A3.\nM109A1s rebuilt to M109A2 standard, also fielded in 1979. Some A3s feature three contact arm assemblies, while all A2s have five.\nM109A3B.\nM109A1B rebuilt to M109A2 standard.\nM109A3G.\nIn 1983, the German Army purchased 586 conversion kits from the FMS Corporation (now Marvin Land Systems) to convert its fleet of M109Gs to the M109A3G standard. This upgraded variant uses a new gun barrel developed by Rheinmetall, giving an extended range of . It also features a new fire-control system, and three forward firing 76\u00a0mm smoke grenade launchers on either side of the turret.\nM109A3GN.\nBetween 1969 and 1971 Norway acquired 126 M109Gs from West Germany. They were then upgraded to the M109A3GN configuration during the latter half of the 1980s.\nM109A4.\nSoon after the adoption of A2/A3 versions, the Division Weapon Support System study was initiated in 1980, which by the end of the decade resulted in the development of several modernization packages. The most modest one was the Howitzer Extended Life Program update originally designated as M1903A3E1 and later adopted as M109A4, initially scheduled for 1985-1987 but actually fielded in 1989 in the Reserve Component of the US Army.\nThis modernization program fitted M109A2s and M109A3s with Nuclear, Biological, and Chemical / Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability (NBC/RAM) improvements, including air purifiers, heaters, and Mission Oriented Protective Posture (MOPP) (protective) gear.\nThe traversing mechanism's clutch was changed to be hydraulic (as compared to the electric mechanism on previous M109s), and added a manual override. The M109A4 also gained a second hydraulic filter and more reliable engine starting equipment which greatly improved the ability to start the vehicle in an emergency.\nAmmunition stowage remained the same as in previous models.\nM109A5.\nThis modification was also designed for the US Army Reserve, originally planned as an update for all M109A4s under the second phase of the Reserve Component Modified Armament System to bring the range up to the version adopted as M109A6. It was fielded in 1991 in much smaller numbers than originally devised due to the end of the Cold War.\nIt replaced the 155\u00a0mm M185 cannon in an M178 mount with a 39-caliber 155\u00a0mm M284 cannon in an M182 mount developed for the M109A3E2 (see below), giving the A5 a maximum range of 22,000 meters with unassisted projectiles and 30,000 meters with rocket-assisted projectile (RAP) rounds. The vehicle can carry 36 complete rounds of ammunition and has a 440\u00a0hp engine instead of the standard 405\u00a0hp engine.\nM109A5+.\nVarious manufacturers have upgraded the fire control and other components of the M109A5. BAE Systems in York, PA recently delivered 12 M109A5+ vehicles to Chile and 32 M109A5+ vehicles for Brazil.\nM109A6 Paladin.\nAlso originating in the Division Weapon Support System study in early 1980s, the Howitzer Improvement Program was devised as a more extensive modernization than the Howitzer Extended Life Program. The vehicle was originally designed as M109A3E2 before being adopted as M109A6 and is now better known as Paladin (M109A3E3 was to feature a longer barrel but was not adopted). \nThe Paladin model has improvements in the areas of survivability, RAM, and armament. This includes increased armor, a redesigned internal arrangement for safer ammunition and equipment storage, engine and suspension upgrades, and improvement of the M284 Cannon and M182A1 Mount. The greatest difference is the integration of an inertial navigation system, sensors detecting the weapons' lay, automation, and an encrypted digital communication system, which utilizes computer controlled frequency-hopping to avoid enemy electronic warfare and allow the howitzer to send grid location and altitude to the battery Fire Direction Center (FDC). \nThe battery FDCs coordinates fire through a battalion or higher FDC. This allows the Paladin to halt from the move and fire within 30 seconds, with an accuracy equivalent to the previous models when properly emplaced, laid, and safed\u2014a process that previously required several minutes under the best of circumstances. Tactically, this improves the system's survivability by allowing the battery to operate dispersed in pairs across the countryside, and allowing the howitzer to quickly move between salvos, or if attacked by indirect fire, aircraft, or ground forces.\nAmmunition storage of 155\u00a0mm rounds was increased from 36 to 39.\nDeveloped from 1984, it was adopted in 1990 with original plans to field the weapon in 1991 later slipping to 1992 and finally to 1993. The US Army received the last of 950 Paladins it had ordered in June 1999. Seven further Paladins were ordered for the National Guard in July 2000, with an additional eighteen received in January 2002. In May 2022, the US Army began shipping its M109A6 Paladins for refitting to the M109A7 standard in order to begin the process of modernization.\nM109 KAWEST.\nThis Swiss improved version produced by RUAG incorporates a new Swiss-designed L47 155\u00a0mm gun with an increased firing range of up to 36\u00a0km. It features an inertial navigation system coupled with a new gun-laying system, along with an ammunition storage increase of 40 rounds and 64 charges. The KAWEST (lit. \"Kampfwertsteigerung\" = upgrade of combat capabilities) requires only six crew members instead of eight. It is able to fire three-round bursts within 15 seconds, or maintain a constant firing rate of over one round per minute.\nUpgraded Swiss PzHb (Panzerhaubitze)74, 79 and 88 (M109A1B) are known as respectively PzHb 74/95\",\" PzHb 79/95 and PzHb 88/95.\nM109A3GNM.\nThe latest version in service with the Norwegian Army's Artilleribataljonen. \nIn 2006, there were 56 M109A3GNs in the Army's inventory, meaning that at least 70 SPGs had been scrapped after the end of the Cold War. 14 of the M109A3GNs received upgrades in 2007, and were designated M109A3GNM. The upgrade includes a new intercom and new navigation and positioning systems.\nIn 2020 the 14 units with A3GNM upgrades and those still with A3GN specs were placed in storage because all the new Korean K9 Thunder units had been delivered. In May 2022, Norway donated 22 A3GN-spec M109s to Ukraine. Two M109A3GN howitzers were destroyed and three damaged during the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine.\nM109 KAWEST WE.\nImprovement of the Swiss Kawest variant, 133 in total were brought up to this standard:\nK55A1.\nThe K55A1 is a South Korean overhaul and modernization of the K55, augmenting the proven systems of the K9 Thunder and the K9A1. The development took three years between 2007 and 2010. The upgrade started in 2010. In November 2010, in the wake of the North Korean artillery attack, the South Korean government authorized a massive increase in military spending. South Korea allocated 11.5 billion KRW on K55A1 upgrades for FY2011, more than a 1500% increase from 700 million KRW for FY2010. The upgrade was performed by Samsung Techwin, and the first vehicle was fielded by the South Korean Army in early 2011.\nThe K55A1 is fitted with the same electronics and fire control system as the K9. The self-propelled gun has significantly enhanced field operability and accuracy through the installation of Honeywell Aerospace's TALIN 5000 INS (inertial navigation system), a satellite navigation device (GPS), and a speed calibrator. As a result, the vehicle automatically lays the gun in the desired direction and delivers a first round within 45 seconds between stops, or 75 seconds between maneuvers after receiving the shooting specification, which required 2 minutes and 11 minutes, respectively, on the K55.\nWith the help of a new semi-autoloader, while charges are still inserted manually, the howitzer can fire 4 rounds per minute, increased from 2 to 3 rounds per minute. The improved suspension, involving a strut-type hydropneumatic buffer from Mottrol Co, Ltd., along with an enhanced chamber, allowed the vehicle to shoot K307 and K310 ammunition designed for K9 platform without laying spades at a maximum distance of 32\u00a0km. An APU (auxiliary power unit) was installed to operate the howitzer without turning on the main engine.\nThe Army Consolidated Maintenance Depot joined the K55A1 upgrade, releasing its first results in December 2013. The upgrade cost 20% of the K9 Thunder, 800 million KRW, as of 2021. The K55A1 upgrade program was completed in December 2022.\nM109A7.\nThe newest M109 version for U.S. service is the M109A7, formerly known as the M109A6 Paladin Integrated Management (PIM). The M109A7 shares common chassis components with the Bradley Fighting Vehicle (BFV) such as the engine, transmission, and tracks. This creates commonality with other systems and maximizes cost savings in production, parts inventory, and maintenance personnel. The M109A7's 600-volt onboard power system harnesses technologies originally developed for the XM1203 non-line-of-sight cannon, including the electric turret drives and electric gun rammer.\nThe electric drive is faster than the previous hydraulic system, and the automatic rammer more consistently rams the round into the gun for consistent velocities and better accuracy. The updated power system was intended to \"accommodate emerging networking technologies as they become ready\" including \"automation or electronic packages\". The M109A7 can sustain a one-round per-minute rate of fire and a maximum rate of fire of four rounds per minute. Weighing , the M109A7 is heavier than its predecessor, and it has the capacity to grow to . Even with the weight increase, the M109A7 can travel faster than previous versions at and is more maneuverable than a BFV.\nPrototypes of the vehicle underwent government testing in preparation for a Low-Rate Initial Production (LRIP) decision. The testing included RAM, mission and ballistic hull and turret testing. The M109A7 was slated to begin LRIP by 2013. The U.S. Army planned on procuring a fleet of 580 sets of M109A7 howitzers and M992A3 field artillery ammunition supply vehicles.\nIn October 2013, the Defense Acquisition Board approved the decision to start M109A7 production. The FY 2014 budget called for $340.8 million in Paladin funding, which would be two dozen vehicle sets at $14.4 million per vehicle. The Army plans to buy 133 vehicles, in 66 one-half vehicle sets starting in 2014. One M109A7 howitzer and two supporting M992A3 ammunition carriers will be destroyed during tests. A Full-Rate Production (FRP) decision was planned for February 2017. \nIn October 2013, BAE received a $668 million contract to begin LRIP of the M109A7. The first M109A6 and M992A2 vehicles were rebuilt to M109A7 and M992A3 standards as part of LRIP beginning in summer 2014. LRIP deliveries began in April 2015. The contract for FRP was signed in December 2017, with 48 vehicles slated for construction. The Army plans to upgrade 689 Paladins to A7-standard.\nThe Army is looking to increase the capabilities of the M109A7. By introducing the new XM1113 Rocket-Assisted Projectile (RAP), it can reach from the current 39-caliber barrel. An additional XM1113 improvement over the legacy RAP round is the replacement of the high explosive, TNT, with an insensitive munition that is less volatile and less prone to unplanned detonation. The Army is working on an autoloader to increase the sustained rate of fire to 6\u201310 rounds per minute.\nAnother part of the effort is the use of a new supercharged propellant to fire the shells, which required redesigning the howitzer to handle higher pressures.\nHypervelocity projectile (HVP).\nIn January 2016, the U.S. Army test-fired hypervelocity projectiles originally designed for use by U.S. Navy electromagnetic railguns. They found that they significantly increased the gun's range. The Army is looking into using the M109 Paladin firing the HVP for ballistic missile defense, as traditional missile interceptors are expensive, and gun-based missile defense used for point defense would use artillery at a much lower cost per round. \nThe HVP is capable of being fired out to from a conventional cannon. It weighs with a flight body containing its guidance and warhead\u2014less powerful, but more agile to hit small, high-speed targets. Modifications will be needed for the Paladin to effectively shoot the HVP, possibly including different propellant to achieve higher velocities, automated reloading systems to fire quickly enough to defeat salvo launches, improved barrel life, and a new fire control and sensor system. During a test of the Air Force's Advanced Battle Management System (ABMS) in September 2020, an HVP fired from an Army Paladin howitzer successfully intercepted a BQM-167 target drone simulating a cruise missile.\nHVP was renamed to gun-launched guided projectile (GLGP), canceled in the 2022 budget, and tests continued in 2023.\nExperimental vehicles.\nP-52.\nThe P-52 was a 52-caliber variant of M109A6 Paladin offered to South Korea by BMY Combat Systems in 1992. It was rejected by South Korea in favor of K9 Thunder. Proposal stage only.\nM109L52.\nJointly developed by the Dutch firm RDM and the German firm Rheinmetall, the M109L52 was first revealed in 2002. The main improvement was replacing the M126 series gun with the longer 52-caliber cannon from the PzH 2000, thus the MTLS ammunition of the PzH 2000 can be used. Improvements to the loading system were also made, resulting in an increased rate of fire from 3 rds/min to 9\u201310 rds/min, able to be sustained for up to 2 minutes. A total of 35 rounds can be carried.\nM109-52.\nThe M109-52 is a 52-caliber variant of M109 developed by BAE Systems by integrating Rheinmetall L52 cannon.\nM1299.\nThe M1299 was a prototype self-propelled howitzer developed by BAE Systems in 2019 under the Extended Range Cannon Artillery (ERCA) program. It was based on the M109A7, and was primarily designed for the purpose of improving the M109A7's effective range. One battalion of vehicles is planned to begin a year-long operational assessment in 2023. It was expected to be fitted with an autoloader, which would have increased its rate of fire from 3 to 10 rounds per minute. The M1299 was cancelled in March 2024 due, at least in part, to excessive barrel wear. Advanced ammunition developed for the M1299 will continue development, and the U.S. Army will look for existing alternatives to fulfil its re-evaluated long-range fire support needs.\nDerivatives.\nM992.\nThe M992 field artillery ammunition supply vehicle (FAASV) is built on the chassis of the M109. It replaced the M548. Unlike the M548, it is armored. This ammunition vehicle has no turret, but has a taller superstructure to store 93 rounds and an equivalent number of powders and primers.\nThis vehicle is fitted with a Halon fire suppression system and a weapons mount similar to that on the M109 turret, usually mounting a Mk 19 grenade launcher for local defense against infantry and light armored vehicles.\nThe vehicle contains a 2-stroke diesel powered auxiliary power unit that can power all non-automotive energy requirements on the FAASV and on the M109.\nK66.\nThe K66 was a planned ammunition support vehicle for the K55. As a follow-up to the K55 program, Samsung Aerospace Industries prepared for licensing a local variant of the M992, featuring such modifications as NBC protection and an increase of ammunition storage capacity to 110 rounds, 116 packs of powders, and 132 primers.\nIn 1987, Samsung Aerospace Industries competed against the Daewoo Heavy Industries' ammunition support vehicle based on the K200 APC. Daewoo Heavy Industries' vehicle was selected as the K66, but failed the test evaluation. The K66 project was cancelled in the mid-1990s, resulting in a lawsuit.\nK77 FDCV (fire direction center vehicle).\nThe K77 FDCV is a command &amp; control post vehicle variant based on the K55 platform.\nK56 ARV (ammunition resupply vehicle).\nThe K56 ARV is an ammunition resupply vehicle based on the K55 platform. Unlike the K10 ARV, the K56 can resupply both the K55A1 and the K9 Thunder. It has a 45.7% (4,197 out of 9,191 total parts) compatibility with the K55A1.\nAfter 10 months of pilot experiment, the K56 program was authorized by the DAPPC (Defense Acquisition Program Promotion Committee) in February 2007. In May 2007, the DAPPC allocated 16 billion KRW for research and development for 2008 to 2010, with plans to produce 520 vehicles between 2011 and 2020. In June 2008, Samsung Techwin was selected as the main contractor for the project. Later, the development completion schedule was delayed to 2011, while the total production amount was increased to 700 vehicles with a cost of 1.3 trillion KRW between 2012 and 2021.\nIn September 2010, the Board of Audit and Inspection claimed that the Army was biased during evaluation, and demanded re-analysis of the project regarding inefficiency of the system. The Defense Acquisition Program Administration (DAPA) ignored the Board and continued with the project while the Army purposely delayed complying. In June 2011, the Ministry of Defense again ordered a reexamination of the resupply vehicle. DAPA instead requested a budget for the program, and the development was completed in October 2011. In July 2013, the DAPA announced the 1st production batch of the K56 between 2013 and 2015 for 65 billion KRW.\nIn December 2015, Hanwha Techwin signed a contract with the DAPA for a 2nd production batch. In January 2018, Hanwha Land Systems announced a 166.4 billion KRW contract with the DAPA for a 3rd production batch and related products. In June 2020, Hanwha Defense announced 380.3 billion KRW contract with the DAPA for a 4th production batch. South Korea plans a 5th production batch and to achieve full operational capability by 2025. All K56s were delivered to the western front.\nTraining systems.\nThe US Army uses the fire support combined arms tactical trainer (FSCATT) in two versions, for initial and sustainment training of the M109A6 and M109A5. The system uses an actual surplus turret and a simulated ammunition system.\nThe Swiss Army uses a highly advanced KAWEST trainer from Van Halteren Metaal of the Netherlands.\nThe Dutch, Belgian, Thai, and Israeli armies have various configurations of the Van Halteren Metaal M109 Howitzer Crew Trainer (HCT).\nThe US Army PEO STRI had a program called M109A7 Howitzer Crew Trainer (HCT). The plan was to procure 16 systems beginning in the 3rd Quarter of FY 20.\nSuccessors.\nThe U.S. Army sought to replace the M109 with the XM2001 Crusader, initially part of the Armored Systems Modernization program. The program was canceled in May 2002 amid criticism that the program was not in line with the Army's long-term plans for lighter armored brigades. Funding was redirected to the Future Combat Systems Manned Ground Vehicles program, which produced the 18-ton XM1203 non-line-of-sight cannon as the program's lead effort. The Pentagon terminated the MGV program in 2009 due to concerns over its affordability. The U.S. Army's M1299 howitzer was planned to be completed in 2021 and was to undergo operational assessment in 2023. Due to issues with excessive wear on its barrel, the project was cancelled in April 2024. Sometime after, the U.S. Army initiated the Next Generation Howitzer (NGH) program utilizing studies and tests from the ERCA program, with the U.S. Army requesting $8 million for NGH RDT&amp;E for FY2025.\nInternational equivalents.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38024", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38024", "title": "Many-valued logic", "text": "Propositional calculus in which there are more than two truth values\nMany-valued logic (also multi- or multiple-valued logic) is a propositional calculus in which there are more than two truth values. Traditionally, in Aristotle's logical calculus, there were only two possible values (i.e., \"true\" and \"false\") for any proposition. Classical two-valued logic may be extended to \"n\"-valued logic for \"n\" greater than 2. Those most popular in the literature are three-valued (e.g., \u0141ukasiewicz's and Kleene's, which accept the values \"true\", \"false\", and \"unknown\"), four-valued, nine-valued, the finite-valued (finitely-many valued) with more than three values, and the infinite-valued (infinitely-many-valued), such as fuzzy logic and probability logic.\nHistory.\nAristotle, the \"father of [two-valued] logic\", accepted the law of excluded middle but made an important distinction about the principle of bivalence. In (\"De Interpretatione\", \"ch. IX\"), he argued that statements about future events cannot always be definitively true or false. However, he didn't develop this insight into a systematic multi-valued logic \u2014 it remained a specific exception within his classical framework.\nLogicians followed this Aristotelian logic tradition until the 20th century, consistently using the law of the excluded middle while acknowledging his concerns about future contingents. Systematic alternatives to classical logic only emerged in modern times.\nThe 20th century brought back the idea of multi-valued logic. The Polish logician and philosopher Jan \u0141ukasiewicz began to create systems of many-valued logic in 1920, using a third value, \"possible\", to deal with Aristotle's paradox of the sea battle. Meanwhile, the American mathematician, Emil L. Post (1921), also introduced the formulation of additional truth degrees with \"n\"\u00a0\u2265 2, where \"n\" are the truth values. Later, Jan \u0141ukasiewicz and Alfred Tarski together formulated a logic on \"n\" truth values where \"n\"\u00a0\u2265 2. In 1932, Hans Reichenbach formulated a logic of many truth values where \"n\"\u2192\u221e. Kurt G\u00f6del in 1932 showed that intuitionistic logic is not a finitely-many valued logic, and defined a system of G\u00f6del logics intermediate between classical and intuitionistic logic; such logics are known as intermediate logics.\nExamples.\nKleene (strong) \"K\"3 and Priest logic \"P\"3.\nKleene's \"(strong) logic of indeterminacy\" \"K\"3 (sometimes formula_1) and Priest's \"logic of paradox\" add a third \"undefined\" or \"indeterminate\" truth value I. The truth functions for negation (\u00ac), conjunction (\u2227), disjunction (\u2228), implication (\u2192\"K\"), and biconditional (\u2194\"K\") are given by:\nThe difference between the two logics lies in how tautologies are defined. In \"K\"3 only T is a \"designated truth value\", while in \"P\"3 both T and I are. (A logical formula is considered a tautology if it evaluates to a designated truth value). In Kleene's logic I can be interpreted as being \"underdetermined\", being neither true nor false, while in Priest's logic I can be interpreted as being \"overdetermined\", being both true and false. \"K\"3 does not have any tautologies, while \"P\"3 has the same tautologies as classical two-valued logic.\nBochvar's internal three-valued logic.\nAnother logic is Dmitry Bochvar's \"internal\" three-valued logic formula_2, also called Kleene's weak three-valued logic. Except for negation and biconditional, its truth tables are all different from the above.\nThe intermediate truth value in Bochvar's \"internal\" logic can be described as \"contagious\" because it propagates in a formula regardless of the value of any other variable.\nBelnap logic (\"B\"4).\nBelnap's logic \"B\"4 combines \"K\"3 and \"P\"3. The overdetermined truth value is here denoted as \"B\" and the underdetermined truth value as \"N\".\nG\u00f6del logics \"Gk\" and \"G\"\u221e.\nIn 1932 G\u00f6del defined a family formula_3 of many-valued logics, with finitely many truth values formula_4, for example formula_5 has the truth values formula_6 and formula_7 has formula_8. In a similar manner he defined a logic with infinitely many truth values, formula_9, in which the truth values are all the real numbers in the interval formula_10. The designated truth value in these logics is 1.\nThe conjunction formula_11 and the disjunction formula_12 are defined respectively as the minimum and maximum of the operands:\n formula_13\nNegation formula_14 and implication formula_15 are defined as follows:\n formula_16\nG\u00f6del logics are completely axiomatisable, that is to say it is possible to define a logical calculus in which all tautologies are provable. The implication above is the unique Heyting implication defined by the fact that the suprema and minima operations form a complete lattice with an infinite distributive law, which defines a unique complete Heyting algebra structure on the lattice.\n\u0141ukasiewicz logics Lv and \"L\"\u221e.\nImplication formula_17 and negation formula_18 were defined by Jan \u0141ukasiewicz through the following functions:\n formula_19\nAt first \u0141ukasiewicz used these definitions in 1920 for his three-valued logic formula_20, with truth values formula_21. In 1922 he developed a logic with infinitely many values formula_22, in which the truth values spanned the real numbers in the interval formula_10. In both cases the designated truth value was 1.\nBy adopting truth values defined in the same way as for G\u00f6del logics formula_24, it is possible to create a finitely-valued family of logics formula_25, the abovementioned formula_22 and the logic formula_27, in which the truth values are given by the rational numbers in the interval formula_28. The set of tautologies in formula_22 and formula_27 is identical.\nProduct logic \u03a0.\nIn product logic we have truth values in the interval formula_28, a conjunction formula_32 and an implication formula_33, defined as follows\n formula_34\nAdditionally there is a negative designated value formula_35 that denotes the concept of \"false\". Through this value it is possible to define a negation formula_36 and an additional conjunction formula_37 as follows:\n formula_38\nand then formula_39.\nPost logics \"Pm\".\nIn 1921 Post defined a family of logics formula_40 with (as in formula_25 and formula_3) the truth values formula_43. Negation formula_44 and conjunction formula_45 and disjunction formula_46 are defined as follows:\n formula_47\nRose logics.\nIn 1951, Alan Rose defined another family of logics for systems whose truth-values form lattices.\nRelation to classical logic.\nLogics are usually systems intended to codify rules for preserving some semantic property of propositions across transformations. In classical logic, this property is \"truth\". In a valid argument, the truth of the derived proposition is guaranteed if the premises are jointly true, because the application of valid steps preserves the property. However, that property doesn't have to be that of \"truth\"; instead, it can be some other concept.\nMulti-valued logics are intended to preserve the property of designationhood (or being designated). Since there are more than two truth values, rules of inference may be intended to preserve more than just whichever corresponds (in the relevant sense) to truth. For example, in a three-valued logic, sometimes the two greatest truth-values (when they are represented as e.g. positive integers) are designated and the rules of inference preserve these values. Precisely, a valid argument will be such that the value of the premises taken jointly will always be less than or equal to the conclusion.\nFor example, the preserved property could be \"justification\", the foundational concept of intuitionistic logic. Thus, a proposition is not true or false; instead, it is justified or flawed. A key difference between justification and truth, in this case, is that the law of excluded middle doesn't hold: a proposition that is not flawed is not necessarily justified; instead, it's only not proven that it's flawed. The key difference is the determinacy of the preserved property: One may prove that \"P\" is justified, that \"P\" is flawed, or be unable to prove either. A valid argument preserves justification across transformations, so a proposition derived from justified propositions is still justified. However, there are proofs in classical logic that depend upon the law of excluded middle; since that law is not usable under this scheme, there are propositions that cannot be proven that way.\nFunctional completeness of many-valued logics.\nFunctional completeness is a term used to describe a special property of finite logics and algebras. A logic's set of connectives is said to be \"functionally complete\" or \"adequate\" if and only if its set of connectives can be used to construct a formula corresponding to every possible truth function. An adequate algebra is one in which every finite mapping of variables can be expressed by some composition of its operations.\nClassical logic: CL = ({0,1}, \u00ac, \u2192, \u2228, \u2227, \u2194) is functionally complete, whereas no \u0141ukasiewicz logic or infinitely many-valued logics has this property.\nWe can define a finitely many-valued logic as being L\"n\" ({1, 2, ..., \"n\"} \u01921, ..., \u0192\"m\") where \"n\" \u2265 2 is a given natural number. Post (1921) proves that assuming a logic is able to produce a function of any \"m\"th order model, there is some corresponding combination of connectives in an adequate logic L\"n\" that can produce a model of order \"m+1\".\nApplications.\nKnown applications of many-valued logic can be roughly classified into two groups. The first group uses many-valued logic to solve binary problems more efficiently. For example, a well-known approach to represent a multiple-output Boolean function is to treat its output part as a single many-valued variable and convert it to a single-output characteristic function (specifically, the indicator function). Other applications of many-valued logic include design of programmable logic arrays (PLAs) with input decoders, optimization of finite-state machines, testing, and verification.\nThe second group targets the design of electronic circuits that employ more than two discrete levels of signals, such as many-valued memories, arithmetic circuits, and field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). Many-valued circuits have a number of theoretical advantages over standard binary circuits. For example, the interconnect on and off chip can be reduced if signals in the circuit assume four or more levels rather than only two. In memory design, storing two instead of one bit of information per memory cell doubles the density of the memory in the same die size. Applications using arithmetic circuits often benefit from using alternatives to binary number systems. For example, residue and redundant number systems can reduce or eliminate the ripple-through carries that are involved in normal binary addition or subtraction, resulting in high-speed arithmetic operations. These number systems have a natural implementation using many-valued circuits. However, the practicality of these potential advantages heavily depends on the availability of circuit realizations, which must be compatible or competitive with present-day standard technologies. In addition to aiding in the design of electronic circuits, many-valued logic is used extensively to test circuits for faults and defects. Basically all known automatic test pattern generation (ATG) algorithms used for digital circuit testing require a simulator that can resolve 5-valued logic (0, 1, x, D, D'). The additional values\u2014x, D, and D'\u2014represent (1) unknown/uninitialized, (2) a 0 instead of a 1, and (3) a 1 instead of a 0.\nResearch venues.\nAn IEEE International Symposium on Multiple-Valued Logic (ISMVL) has been held annually since 1970. It mostly caters to applications in digital design and verification. There is also a \"Journal of Multiple-Valued Logic and Soft Computing\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\nGeneral\nSpecific"}
{"id": "38025", "revid": "48886350", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38025", "title": "Ballistic missile", "text": "Missile that follows a sub-orbital ballistic flightpath\nA ballistic missile is a type of missile that follows a ballistic trajectory and is powered only during a relatively brief initial period\u2014most of the flight is unpowered. Short-range ballistic missiles (SRBM) typically stay within the Earth's atmosphere, while most larger missiles travel outside the atmosphere. The type of ballistic missile with the greatest range is an intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBM). The largest ICBMs are capable of full orbital flight.\nThese missiles are in a distinct category from cruise missiles, which are aerodynamically guided in powered flight and thus restricted to the atmosphere.\nHistory.\nOne modern pioneer ballistic missile was the A-4, commonly known as the V-2, developed by Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s under the direction of Wernher von Braun. The first successful launch of a V-2 was on October 3, 1942, and it began operation on September 6, 1944, against Paris, followed by an attack on London two days later. By the end of World War II in Europe in May 1945, more than 3,000 V-2s had been launched. In addition to its use as a weapon, a vertically launched V-2 became the first human-made object to reach outer space on June 20, 1944.\nThe R-7 Semyorka was the first intercontinental ballistic missile.\nThe largest ballistic missile attack in history took place on 1 October 2024 when the Iranian Revolutionary Guard launched about 200 missiles at Israel, a distance of about 1,500 kilometers. The missiles arrived about 15 minutes after launch. It is believed that Iran's Fattah-1 and Kheybar Shekan missiles were used, which both have a range of about 1,400\u00a0km.\nFlight.\nIn order to cover large distances, ballistic missiles are usually launched into a high sub-orbital spaceflight; for intercontinental missiles, the highest altitude (apogee) reached during free-flight is about . A ballistic missile's trajectory consists of three parts or phases: the boost phase, the mid-course phase and the terminal phase. Special systems and capabilities are required to facilitate the successful passage from one phase to the other.\nThe boost phase is the powered flight portion, beginning with the ignition of the engines and concluding with the end of powered flight. The powered flight portion can last from a few tenths of seconds to several minutes and can consist of multiple rocket stages. Internal computers keep the missile aligned on a preprogrammed trajectory. On multi-stage missiles, stage separation (excluding any post-boost vehicles or MIRV bus) occurs primarily during the boost phase.\nThe mid-course phase is the longest in the missile's trajectory, beginning with the conclusion of powered flight. When the fuel is exhausted, no more thrust is provided and the missile enters free flight. During this phase the missile, now largely consisting of a warhead or payload and possibly defensive countermeasures and small propulsion systems for further alignment toward its target, will reach its highest altitude and may travel in space for thousands of kilometres (or even indefinitely, in the case of some fractional-orbital capable systems) at speeds of up to .\nThe last phase in the missile's trajectory is the terminal or re-entry phase, beginning with the re-entry of the missile into the Earth's atmosphere (if exoatmospheric) where atmospheric drag plays a significant part in missile trajectory, and lasts until missile impact. Re-entry vehicles re-enter the Earth's atmosphere at very high velocities, on the order of at intercontinental ballistic missile ranges. During the beginning of this phase, the missile's trajectory is still relatively well defined, though as the missile reaches the heavier layers of atmosphere it is increasingly influenced by gravity and aerodynamic drag, which can affect its landing.\nTypes.\nBallistic missiles can be launched from fixed sites or mobile launchers, including vehicles (e.g., transporter erector launchers), aircraft, ships, and submarines. Ballistic missiles vary widely in range and use, and are often divided into categories based on range. Various schemes are used by different countries to categorize the ranges of ballistic missiles:\nLong- and medium-range ballistic missiles are generally designed to deliver nuclear weapons because their payload is too limited for conventional explosives to be cost-effective in comparison to conventional bomber aircraft.\nQuasi-ballistic missiles.\nA quasi-ballistic missile is a category of SRBM that is largely ballistic but can perform maneuvers in flight or make unexpected changes in direction and range. Large guided MLRS rockets with range comparable to an SRBM are sometimes categorized as quasi-ballistic missiles.\nHypersonic ballistic missile.\nMany ballistic missiles reach hypersonic speeds (i.e. Mach 5 and above) when they re-enter the atmosphere from space. However, in common military terminology, the term \"hypersonic ballistic missile\" is generally only given to those that can be maneuvered before hitting their target and don't follow a simple ballistic trajectory.\nThrow-weight.\nThrow-weight is a measure of the effective weight of ballistic missile payloads. It is measured in kilograms or tonnes. Throw-weight equals the total weight of a missile's warheads, reentry vehicles, self-contained dispensing mechanisms, penetration aids, and any other components that are part of the delivered payload, and not of the rocket itself (such as the launch rocket booster and launch fuel). Throw-weight may refer to any type of warhead, but in normal modern usage, it refers almost exclusively to nuclear or thermonuclear payloads. It was once also a consideration in the design of naval ships and the number and size of their guns.\nThrow-weight was used as a criterion in classifying different types of missiles during Strategic Arms Limitation Talks between the Soviet Union and the United States. The term became politically controversial during debates over the arms control accord, as critics of the treaty alleged that Soviet missiles were able to carry larger payloads and so enabled the Soviets to maintain higher throw-weight than an American force with a roughly comparable number of lower-payload missiles.\nThe missiles with the world's heaviest payloads are the Russian SS-18 and Chinese CSS-4 and as of 2017[ [update]], Russia was developing a new heavy-lift, liquid-propellant ICBM called the Sarmat.\nDepressed trajectory.\nThrow-weight is normally calculated using an optimal ballistic trajectory from one point on the surface of the Earth to another. A \"minimum-energy trajectory\" maximizes the total payload (throw-weight) using the available impulse of the missile. By reducing the payload weight, different trajectories can be selected, which can either increase the nominal range or decrease the total time in flight.\nA depressed trajectory is non-optimal, as a lower and flatter trajectory takes less time between launch and impact but has a lower throw-weight. The primary reasons to choose a depressed trajectory are to evade anti-ballistic missile systems by reducing the time available to shoot down the attacking vehicle (especially during the vulnerable burn-phase against space-based ABM systems) or a nuclear first-strike scenario. An alternate, non-military purpose for a depressed trajectory is in conjunction with the spaceplane concept with use of airbreathing jet engines, which requires the ballistic missile to remain low enough inside the atmosphere for air-breathing engines to function.\nIn contrast, a \"lofted\" trajectory is frequently used for testing purposes, as it reduces the range of the missile (allowing for a controlled and observed impact), as well as signals a lack of hostile intention with the test.\nCombat use.\nThe following ballistic missiles have been used in combat:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38027", "revid": "86247", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38027", "title": "Risa", "text": "Risa may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38028", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38028", "title": "ABM Treaty", "text": ""}
{"id": "38029", "revid": "15", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38029", "title": "Hazardous Wastes", "text": ""}
{"id": "38030", "revid": "34602126", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38030", "title": "M110 howitzer", "text": "203 mm Self-propelled artillery\nThe 8-inch (203\u00a0mm) M110 self-propelled howitzer is an American self-propelled artillery system consisting of an M115 203 mm howitzer installed on a purpose-built chassis. Before its retirement from US service, it was the largest available self-propelled howitzer in the United States Army's inventory; it continues in service with the armed forces of other countries, to which it was exported. Missions include general support, counter-battery fire, and suppression of enemy air defense systems.\nDescription.\nAccording to the operator's manual, the M110's typical rate of fire was three rounds per two minutes when operated at maximum speed, and one round per two minutes with sustained fire. The M110 featured a hydraulically operated rammer to automatically chamber the + projectile. These rammers were prone to breakdown and generally slowed operation of the gun because the rammers required crews to completely lower the massive barrel before using it. Well trained and motivated crews could achieve two to four rounds per minute for short periods by using the manual rammer, essentially a heavy steel pole with a hard rubber pad on one end. Using the manual rammer was physically demanding, but crews were not required to lower the barrels as much as with the hydraulic rammer.\nThe M110's range varied from to approximately when firing standard projectiles, and up to when firing rocket-assisted projectiles.\nHistory.\nThe M110 howitzer first entered service with the U.S. Army in 1963 and was used in the Vietnam War by the United States Army. Later versions were used in the Gulf War - Operation Desert Shield and Operation Desert Storm by Tango Battery 5th Battalion 11th Marines, and the British Army's 32nd Regiment Royal Artillery.\nIn 1977 the upgraded M110A1 entered service, featuring a longer M201 series barrel which gave it an increased range. The final version, the M110A2, added a double muzzle brake. The M110A2s were made from refitted M110s or M107 175\u00a0mm self-propelled guns. The 2nd Battalion 18th Field Artillery (U.S. Army), which inactivated in 1994 at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, and the 5th Battalion 18th Field Artillery served in Desert Storm with the M110A2, as did the 142nd Field Artillery Brigade (Arkansas Army National Guard) and 1st Battalion 181st Field Artillery (Tennessee Army National Guard). Most of the U.S. Army and Marine Corps relied on M109 series 155-millimeter howitzer systems during this conflict, sending remaining M110s to reserve or National Guard units. These units then took possession of M109s as they returned from combat operations. M110s were still in service with the 3rd Battalion 92nd Field Artillery (US Army Reserve) and running fire missions at Camp Atterbury as late as the summer of 1994.\nThe howitzer has been retired from U.S. Army service, replaced by the M270 multiple launch rocket system.\nAt the end of the Cold War under U.S. Division Plan 86, all armored and mechanized infantry divisions included a battalion of heavy artillery that included two batteries of M110A2 SP howitzers with six guns each for a total of 12 guns, plus one battery of nine M270s.\nIsrael used M110s along with M107s during the Yom Kippur War against Egyptian and Syrian forces. Later, in 1982, Israel used M110 systems against the Palestine Liberation Organization and their Lebanese allies with deadly effect during the Siege of Beirut as part of Operation Peace for Galilee.\nIran used its M110s during its offensives against Iraq in the Iran\u2013Iraq War.\nThe Turkish Armed Forces have used M110A2 systems against the Kurdistan Workers' Party since the 1990s, as well as in the Turkish military intervention in Syria, mainly against the People's Protection Units.\nIn early October 2025, it was reported that Greece is considering selling at least 60 M110A2 guns and 150,000 high-explosive (HE) and cluster shells to Ukraine via the Czech Republic for about 199.4 million euros; According to the Hellenic National Defence General Staff, these howitzers no longer meets the Armed Forces needs.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38031", "revid": "36384157", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38031", "title": "Hazardous waste", "text": "Ignitable, reactive, corrosive and/or toxic unwanted or unusable materials\nHazardous waste is waste that must be handled properly to avoid damaging human health or the environment. Waste can be hazardous because it is toxic, reacts violently with other chemicals, or is corrosive, among other traits. As of 2022, humanity produces 300\u2013500 million metric tons of hazardous waste annually. Some common examples are electronics, batteries, and paints. An important aspect of managing hazardous waste is safe disposal. Hazardous waste can be stored in hazardous waste landfills, burned, or recycled into something new. Managing hazardous waste is important to achieve worldwide sustainability. Hazardous waste is regulated on national scale by national governments as well as on an international scale by the United Nations (UN) and international treaties. A controlled waste is subject to legislative control in its handling or its disposal.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nTypes.\nUniversal wastes.\nUniversal wastes are a special category of hazardous wastes that (in the U.S.) generally pose a lower threat relative to other hazardous wastes, are ubiquitous and produced in very large quantities by a large number of generators. Some of the most common \"universal wastes\" are: fluorescent light bulbs, some specialty batteries (e.g. lithium or lead containing batteries), cathode-ray tubes, and mercury-containing devices.\nUniversal wastes are subject to somewhat less stringent regulatory requirements. Small quantity generators of universal wastes may be classified as \"conditionally exempt small quantity generators\" (CESQGs) which release them from some of the regulatory requirements for the handling and storage hazardous wastes. Universal wastes must still be disposed of properly.\nHousehold Hazardous Waste.\nHousehold Hazardous Waste (HHW), also referred to as domestic hazardous waste or home generated special materials, is a waste that is generated from residential households. HHW only applies to waste coming from the use of materials that are labeled for and sold for \"home use\". Waste generated by a company or at an industrial setting is not HHW.\nThe following list includes categories often applied to HHW. It is important to note that many of these categories overlap and that many household wastes can fall into multiple categories:\nDisposal.\nHistorically, some hazardous wastes were disposed of in regular landfills. Hazardous wastes must often be stabilized and solidified in order to enter a landfill and must undergo different treatments in order to stabilize and dispose of them. Most flammable materials can be recycled into industrial fuel. Some materials with hazardous constituents can be recycled, such as lead acid batteries. Many landfills require countermeasures against groundwater contamination. For example, a barrier has to be installed along the foundation of the landfill to contain the hazardous substances that may remain in the disposed waste.\nRecycling.\nSome hazardous wastes can be recycled into new products. Examples may include lead\u2013acid batteries or electronic circuit boards. When heavy metals in these types of ashes go through the proper treatment, they could bind to other pollutants and convert them into easier-to-dispose solids, or they could be used as pavement filling. Such treatments reduce the level of threat of harmful chemicals, like fly and bottom ash, while also recycling the safe product. \nIncineration.\nIncinerators burn hazardous waste at high temperatures (1600\u00b0-2500\u00b0F, 870\u00b0-1400\u00b0C), greatly reducing its amount by decomposing it into ash and gases. Incineration works with many types of hazardous waste, including contaminated soil, sludge, liquids, and gases. An incinerator can be built directly at a hazardous waste site, or more commonly, waste can be transported from a site to a permanent incineration facility.\nThe ash and gases leftover from incineration can also be hazardous. Metals are not destroyed, and can either remain in the furnace or convert to gas and join the gas emissions. The ash needs to be stored in a hazardous waste landfill, although it takes less space than the original waste. Incineration releases gases such as carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, ammonia, and volatile organic compounds. Reactions in the furnace can also form hydrochloric acid gas and sulfur dioxide. To avoid releasing hazardous gases and solid waste suspended in those gases, modern incinerators are designed with systems to capture these emissions.\nLandfill.\nHazardous waste may be sequestered in a hazardous waste landfill or permanent disposal facility. \"In terms of hazardous waste, a landfill is defined as a disposal facility or part of a facility where hazardous waste is placed or on land and which is not a pile, a land treatment facility, a surface impoundment, an underground injection well, a salt dome formation, a salt bed formation, an underground mine, a cave, or a corrective action management unit (40 CFR 260.10).\"\nPyrolysis.\nSome hazardous waste types may be eliminated using pyrolysis in a high temperature not necessarily through electrical arc but starved of oxygen to avoid combustion. However, when electrical arc is used to generate the required ultra heat (in excess of 3000 degree C temperature) all materials (waste) introduced into the process will melt into a molten slag and this technology is termed Plasma not pyrolysis. Plasma technology produces inert materials and when cooled solidifies into rock like material. These treatment methods are very expensive but may be preferable to high temperature incineration in some circumstances such as in the destruction of concentrated organic waste types, including PCBs, pesticides and other persistent organic pollutants.\nIn society.\nManagement and health effects.\nHazardous waste management and disposal comes with consequences if not done properly. If disposed of improperly, hazardous gaseous substances can be released into the air resulting in higher morbidity and mortality. These gaseous substances can include hydrogen chloride, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, sulfur dioxide, and some may also include heavy metals. With the prospect of gaseous material being released into the atmosphere, several organizations (RCRA, TSCA, HSWA, CERCLA) developed an identification scale in which hazardous materials and wastes are categorized in order to be able to quickly identify and mitigate potential leaks. F-List materials were identified as non-specific industrial practices waste, K-List materials were wastes generated from specific industrial processes - pesticides, petroleum, explosive industries, and the P &amp; U list were commercially used generated waste and shelf stable pesticides. Not only can mismanagement of hazardous wastes cause adverse direct health consequences through air pollution, mismanaged waste can also contaminate groundwater and soil. In an Austrian study, people who live near industrial sites are \"more often unemployed, have lower education levels, and are twice as likely to be immigrants.\" This creates disproportionately larger issues for those who depend heavily on the land for harvests and streams for drinking water; this includes Native American populations. Though all lower-class and/or social minorities are at a higher risk for being exposed to toxic exposure, Native Americans are at a multiplied risk due to the facts stated above (Brook, 1998). Improper disposal of hazardous waste has resulted in many extreme health complications within certain tribes. Members of the Mohawk Nation at Akwesasne have suffered elevated levels of PCB [Polychlorinated Biphenyls] in their bloodstreams leading to higher rates of cancer.\nGlobal goals.\nThe UN has a mandate on hazardous substances and wastes with recommendations to countries for dealing with hazardous waste. 199 countries signed the 1992 Basel Convention, seeking to stop the flow of hazardous waste from developed countries to developing countries with less stringent environmental regulations.\nThe international community has defined the responsible management of hazardous waste and chemicals as an important part of sustainable development by including it in Sustainable Development Goal 12. Target 12.4 of this goal is to \"achieve the environmentally sound management of chemicals and all wastes throughout their life cycle\". One of the indicators for this target is: \"hazardous waste generated per capita; and proportion of hazardous waste treated, by type of treatment\".\nRegulatory history.\nIn the United States.\nResource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA).\nHazardous wastes are wastes with properties that make them dangerous or potentially harmful to human health or the environment. Hazardous wastes can be liquids, solids, contained gases, or sludges. They can be by-products of manufacturing processes or simply discarded commercial products, like cleaning fluids or pesticides. In regulatory terms, RCRA hazardous wastes are wastes that appear on one of the four hazardous wastes lists (F-list, K-list, P-list, or U-list), or exhibit at least one of the following four characteristics; ignitability, corrosivity, reactivity, or toxicity. in the US, Hazardous wastes are regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), Subtitle C.\nBy definition, EPA determined that some specific wastes are hazardous. These wastes are incorporated into lists published by the Agency. These lists are organized into three categories: F-list (non-specific source wastes) found in the regulations at 40 CFR 261.31, K-list (source-specific wastes) found in the regulations at 40 CFR 261.32, and P-list and the U-list (discarded commercial chemical products) found in the regulations at 40 CFR 261.33.\nRCRA's record keeping system helps to track the life cycle of hazardous waste and reduces the amount of hazardous waste illegally disposed.\nComprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act.\nThe Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA) was enacted in 1980. The primary contribution of CERCLA was to create a \"Superfund\" and provide for the clean-up and remediation of closed and abandoned hazardous waste sites. CERCLA addresses historic releases of hazardous materials, but does not specifically manage hazardous wastes.\nIn India.\nEnvironmental Act and Hazardous Waste Rules.\nIn 1984, a deadly methyl isocyanate gas leak known as the Bhopal disaster raised environmental awareness in India. In response, the Indian government produced the Environmental Act in 1986, followed by the Hazardous Waste Rules in 1989. With these rules, companies are only permitted by the state to produce hazardous waste if they are able to dispose of it safely. However, state governments did not make these rules effective. There was around a decade delay between when hazardous waste landfills were requested and when they were built. During this time, companies disposed hazardous waste in various \"temporary\" hazardous waste locations, such as along roads and in canal pits, with no immediate plan to move it to proper facilities.\nSupreme Court action.\nThe Supreme Court stepped in to prevent damage from hazardous waste in order to protect the right to life. A 1995 petition by the Research Foundation for Science, Technology, and Natural Resource Policy spurred the Supreme Court to create the High Powered Committee (HPC) of Hazardous Waste, since data from pre-existing government boards was not usable. This committee found studies linking pollution and improper waste treatment with higher amounts of hexavalent chromium, lead, and other heavy metals. Industries and regulators were effectively ignoring these studies. In addition, the state was also not acting in accordance with the Basel Convention, an international treaty on the transport of hazardous waste. The Supreme Court modified the Hazardous Waste Rules and began the Supreme Court Monitoring Committee to follow up on its decisions. With this committee, the Court has been able to force companies polluting hazardous wastes to close.\nCountry examples.\nUnited States.\nIn the United States, the treatment, storage, and disposal of hazardous waste are regulated under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). Hazardous wastes are defined under RCRA in 40 CFR 261 and divided into two major categories: characteristic and listed.\nThe requirements of the RCRA apply to all the companies that generate hazardous waste and those that store or dispose of hazardous waste in the United States. Many types of businesses generate hazardous waste. Dry cleaners, automobile repair shops, hospitals, exterminators, and photo processing centers may all generate hazardous waste. Some hazardous waste generators are larger companies such as chemical manufacturers, electroplating companies, and oil refineries.\nA U.S. facility that treats, stores, or disposes of hazardous waste must obtain a permit under the RCRA. Generators and transporters of hazardous waste must meet specific requirements for handling, managing, and tracking waste. Through the RCRA, Congress directed the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to create regulations to manage hazardous waste. Under this mandate, the EPA has developed strict requirements for all aspects of hazardous waste management, including treating, storing, and disposing of hazardous waste. In addition to these federal requirements, states may develop more stringent requirements that are broader in scope than the federal regulations. Furthermore, RCRA allows states to develop regulatory programs that are at least as stringent as RCRA, and after review by EPA, the states may take over responsibility for implementing the requirements under RCRA. Most states take advantage of this authority, implementing their own hazardous waste programs that are at least as stringent and, in some cases, stricter than the federal program.\nThe U.S. government provides several tools for mapping hazardous wastes to particular locations. These tools also allow the user to view additional information.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38032", "revid": "636570", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38032", "title": "Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck", "text": "US Army heavy tactical truck, in service since 1982\nThe Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck (HEMTT) is an eight-wheel drive, diesel-powered, tactical truck. The M977 HEMTT entered service in 1982 with the United States Army as a replacement for the M520 Goer, and has remained in production for the U.S. Army and other nations. By Q2 2021, around 35,800 HEMTTs in various configurations had been produced by Oshkosh Defense through new-build contracts and around 14,000 of them had been re-manufactured. Latest variants have the A4 suffix.\nThe 10\u00d710 Logistic Vehicle System Replacement (LVSR) is the United States Marines Corps' (USMC) equivalent to the U.S. Army's 8\u00d78 HEMTT and 10\u00d710 Palletized Load System (PLS). The USMC does not use the HEMTT or PLS, and the Army does not use the LVSR, but both services use a common trailer (M1076) with all three truck types.\nHistory.\nFollowing the evaluation of proposals submitted by AM General, MAN, Pacific Car &amp; Foundry (PACCAR) and Oshkosh Truck Corporation (with PACCAR\u2013GMC team being the apparent leader of the competition, with pre-production assembly line already established) in May 1981, the then U.S. Army Tank-Automotive Command awarded an initial five-year contract valued at US$251.13 million to Oshkosh Truck Corporation for production of the 8\u00d78 Heavy Expanded Mobility Tactical Truck (HEMTT).\nThe first prototype HEMTT was completed in December 1981, pre-production examples followed during March 1982, with the first production vehicles produced in September 1982. Over five contract years, 2,140 vehicles were to be delivered. Contract options allowed for up to an additional 5,351 HEMTTs to be ordered, bringing production totals to 7,490 vehicles. The bulk of these options were exercised.\nThe second HEMTT contract was awarded to Oshkosh Truck Corporation in April 1987. This contract called for a base quantity of 1,403 vehicles, with options for an additional 1,684 vehicles; all contract options were exercised. A supplemental agreement added a further 1,449 vehicles (plus an option for 363 vehicles) to the second HEMTT contract in April 1989; the contract option was exercised. The third HEMTT production contract was awarded mid-1994 and when deliveries under this concluded over 14,000 HEMTTS had been produced. The fourth HEMTT production contract was awarded in August 1995, this extending production through September 2001.\nThe Family of Heavy Tactical Vehicles (FHTV) contract was awarded to Oshkosh by the U.S. Army in March 2001. In addition to the HEMTT (both new and re-manufacture), the contract covered the M1070 HET, M1074, and M1075 Palletized Load System (PLS) trucks, and M1076 PLS trailers and called for up to 5,398 trucks and 1,100 trailers (including options). FHTV covered the production period from March 2001 until mid-fiscal year 2006 (FY06). The FHTV contract was extended and renegotiated, and in February 2007, Oshkosh announced it had been awarded a contract to continue production of FHTVs. The follow-on FHTV contract (FHTV 2) covered new production of HEMTTs (including current A4 variants from mid-2008) and PLS vehicles plus PLS trailers. In total, 2,173 new-build HEMTT A4 and 104 Recap HEMTT A4 were ordered under FHTV 2.\nProduction of product-improved HEMTT A2s continued until production of the HEMTT A4 began in July 2008. The exception was the M1977, which initially remained at A2 configuration for fleet commonality reasons; there is now an M1977A4.\nOshkosh Defense announced in October 2008 that it had been awarded the FHTV 3 contract by the U.S. Army's TACOM. More than 6,000 vehicles and trailers could be delivered under this three-year contract. FHTV 3 covered the HEMTT A4 and A1 models of the PLS and HET, and both new and recapitalized (Recap) vehicles. HEMTT A4 models were required to be Long Term Armor Strategy (LTAS) compliant and came off the assembly line fitted with upgraded suspensions and integral composite (A-kit) armor, and ready to receive an add-on (B-kit) armor appliqu\u00e9.\nThe first FHTV 3 order was valued at US$1.2 billion and delivery commenced in November 2008. By late-2009, about 11,500 HEMTT A4s (new-build and Recap) had been ordered under the FHTV 2 and 3 contracts.\nOshkosh Defense announced in 2012 that it had been awarded a bridge contract to continue production and support of the FHTV. In October 2013, the U.S. Army released a revised pre-solicitation notice associated with FHTV 4 (presented FHTV IV). The original synopsis had been released in July 2013. According to the October release, the government intends to award a five-year requirements contract with an estimated value of US$822 million on a sole source basis to Oshkosh Corporation. It is understood the aim of the U.S. Army, was to ensure negotiations with Oshkosh Defense for FHTV IV were concluded in time to ensure there was no break in production between FHTV 3 and FHTV IV production and deliveries.\nOn 19 June 2015, Oshkosh Defense announced the U.S. Army had awarded the company a five-year requirements contract worth a potential $780 million to Recapitalize (Recap) its Family of Heavy Tactical Vehicles (FHTV). The FHTV 4 contract covers an estimated 1,800 FHTVs and in addition to HEMTTs covers PLS trucks and also includes the production of approximately 1,000 new production PLS trailers. HEMTT models account for around 75 per cent of the Recap potential, and all work performed under the contract will be completed in Oshkosh, Wisconsin. Deliveries will run from 2015 to 2019. In March 2016, Oshkosh received FHTV 4 awards valued at $430 million and covering the Recap of 1212 HEMTTs and PLS, plus the production of 345 new-build PLS trailers. Deliveries are slated for 2016\u20132017. In April 2017, Oshkosh announced further FHTV 4 awards valued at more than $258 million for the Recap of 670 FHTVs plus the production of 356 PLS trailers. Deliveries commence in December 2017. On 23 May 2018 Oshkosh announced a further FHTV-4 award, this valued at $235.2 million for the Recap of 410 FHTVs and the manufacture of 680 new PLS trailers. Deliveries commence in FY19. On 8 February 2019 Oshkosh announced an FHTV-4 award valued at $225.7 million for the Recap of 407 FHTVs and the manufacture of 601 new PLS trailers. Deliveries commence in FY19.\nThe final FHTV 4 award was announced by Oshkosh in March 2020. The award was valued at US$346.4 million and called for an undisclosed quantity of U.S. Army and U.S Army Reserve FHTVs to be Recap\u2019d. Quantities/breakdown were not revealed, and deliveries were scheduled to conclude in December 2021.\nOn 3 May 2021 the U.S. Army announced that it had awarded Oshkosh Defense a three-year extension to the FHTV 4 contract. Under the extension, Oshkosh will provide new and Recap'd HEMTT, PLS trucks and trailers, and HETs. The initial delivery orders call for a total of 353 new and recapitalized vehicles, with HEMTTs accounting for US$130.5 million (inc. 33.8 million for M1977A4 CBTs) of the US$146.8 million total.\nUsed vehicles can be returned to Oshkosh as part of a recapitalization program where they are stripped to their frame rails and then fully rebuilt to a zero-hour, zero-mile, like-new condition. Recapitalized vehicles are assembled on the same production line as new vehicles, and put through the same performance tests and inspection procedures as new vehicles. Recapitalized vehicles are returned to the Army with a new bumper-to-bumper warranty and include air-conditioned and armor-ready cabs; electrical upgrades, and an anti-lock braking system.\nCommon Tactical Truck (CTT); previously Next Generation Future Truck (NGFT).\nParallel to the FHTV 4 extension effort, the U.S. Army's Heavy Tactical Vehicles (HTV) PEO CS&amp;CSS issued on 20 July 2020 Notice ID W56HZV-20-R-0237, a Request for Information (RfI) for the Next Generation Future Truck (NGFT). Responses were due by 24 August 2020 for what was quickly renamed the Common Tactical Truck (CTT). It is the intent that CTT will replace the HEMTT, plus the PLSA1 and M915 Truck Tractor, Line Haul. The Army desires five variants of the NGFT/CTT, and all with the option to perform semi-autonomous or autonomous operations. The five variants currently mooted are: a wrecker to recover Stryker, MRAPs, and other tactical wheeled vehicles up to 40 US tons; an LHS Heavy variant with crane to transport flatrack with up to 16 tons of cargo payload; a Tractor variant operable with the M870, M871, M172, M872, M967 tanker, M1062 tanker, future tanker (8,200 gallons), and commercial standard trailers; a Tanker variant with a 2,500 gallon threshold or objective fuel payload greater than 2,500 gallons; and a Cargo variant with crane capable of carrying a payload of up to 22 tons or greater.\nDescription.\nThe HEMTT's objective is to provide heavy transport capabilities for supply and re-supply of combat vehicles and weapons systems. Compared to earlier generation 5-ton trucks in U.S. Army service it offers increased payload and mobility. The HEMTT is available in a variety of configurations, including cargo, tanker, tractor and wrecker.\nThe HEMTT was developed from the outset as a tactical truck, but to minimize procurement and life cycle costs included militarized commercial automotive components where possible, these including the engine and transmission. Some components used in early HEMTTs are common with the Oshkosh Logistics Vehicle System (LVS) vehicles which were supplied to the U.S. Marine Corps.\nWith the exception of the M984 wrecker variant (254 \u00d7 89 \u00d7 9.5\u00a0mm, front; 356 \u00d7 89 \u00d7 9.5\u00a0mm, rear), on all HEMTT variants the chassis is formed of 257 \u00d7 89 \u00d7 9.5\u00a0mm heat-treated carbon manganese steel with a yield strength of 758 MPa. Bolted construction with Grade 8 bolts is used throughout. A centrally mounted self-recovery winch is an option and this is fitted to around 20% of production.\nThe HEMTT's two-door forward control cab seats two. It is of heavy-duty welded steel construction with corrosion-resistant sheet metal skins. Simula Inc. (acquired by Armor Holdings in 2003 and now BAE Systems) supplied 186 add-on cab armoring kits for use in the former Yugoslavia. These were not issued, but from 2004 were used in Iraq. BAE systems supplied a next-generation armor kit for the HEMTT and by late-2006 had supplied the U.S. Army with around 3600 kits for the Oshkosh HEMTT and PLS. The HEMTT A4 is fitted with the slightly larger from the Oshkosh PLS A1. This cab complies with the U.S. Army's Long Term Armor Strategy (LTAS) requirements of an A- and B-kit armoring philosophy. It also comes as standard with integrated floor armor, an integrated mount for a machine gun and gunner protection kit, and air-conditioning.\nA Detroit Diesel 8V92TA V-8 two-stroke diesel developing is fitted in HEMTT A0 and A1 models, with the DDECIV version of this engine fitted to A2 HEMTTs. An EPA 2004 compliant Caterpillar (CAT) C-15 six-cylinder, 15.2-liter diesel developing a peak of is fitted to HEMTT A4 models. HEMTT A0 and A1 models are fitted with an Allison HT 740D 4F/1R automatic transmission, torque converter, and Oshkosh two-speed transfer case. HEMTT A2 models have the Allison HD 4560P 6F/1R automatic transmission. HEMTT A4 models are fitted with an Allison 4500SP 5F/1R automatic transmission and an uprated version of Oshkosh's two-speed transfer case.\nThe front axles on all HEMTTs are single-reduction Oshkosh 46K, the rear are Dana single-reduction which vary according to configuration. Drive to the front axles is selectable and all axles have differential locks. Suspension on A0/A1/A3 models is by Hendrickson leaf springs with equalizing beams. Suspension on A4 models is Holland air suspension, load rating on the rear axles varying by configuration. Tire size is 1600 R20 on all models, and standard tire fit is Michelin XZL.\nAll models are capable of fording water crossings up to deep, and can climb a gradient of at least 60%. All original variants are air transportable in the C-130. All variants are air-transportable in the C-17.\nOriginal HEMTT models now have the suffix A0. Only the M984 wrecker was produced in A1 configuration. All models were produced in A2 configuration. The A3 suffix is applied to HEMTT technology demonstrators with a diesel\u2013electric drive system. Current HEMTT production models have the suffix A4.\nOperators.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38033", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38033", "title": "HEMTT", "text": ""}
{"id": "38034", "revid": "1033808711", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38034", "title": "Hazardous wastes", "text": ""}
{"id": "38035", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38035", "title": "M978 tanker", "text": ""}
{"id": "38036", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38036", "title": "M984 recovery vehicle", "text": ""}
{"id": "38037", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38037", "title": "M983 tractor", "text": ""}
{"id": "38038", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38038", "title": "M977 cargo truck", "text": ""}
{"id": "38039", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38039", "title": "M985 cargo truck", "text": ""}
{"id": "38040", "revid": "50526230", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38040", "title": "MGM-31 Pershing", "text": "The MGM-31A Pershing was the missile used in the Pershing 1 and Pershing 1a field artillery missile systems. It was a solid-fueled two-stage theater ballistic missile designed and built by Martin Marietta to replace the PGM-11 Redstone missile as the primary nuclear-capable theater-level weapon of the United States Army and replaced the MGM-1 Matador cruise missiles operated by the German Air Force. Pershing later replaced the European-based MGM-13 Mace cruise missiles deployed by the United States Air Force and the German Air Force. Development began in 1958, with the first test missile fired in 1960, the Pershing 1 system deployed in 1963 and the improved Pershing 1a deployed in 1969. The U.S. Army replaced the Pershing 1a with the Pershing II Weapon System in 1983 while the German Air Force retained Pershing 1a until all Pershings were eliminated in 1991. The U.S. Army Missile Command (MICOM) managed the development and improvements while the Field Artillery Branch deployed the systems and developed tactical doctrine.\nPershing 1.\nDevelopment.\nGeorge Bunker, president of the Martin Company, paid a courtesy call on General John Medaris, USA, of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) at Redstone Arsenal, Alabama in 1956. Medaris noted that it would be helpful to the Army if there was a missile plant near the Air Force Missile Test Center (present-day Cape Canaveral Air Force Station) in Florida. The Martin Company subsequently began construction of their Sand Lake facility in Orlando, Florida which opened in late 1957. Edward Uhl, the co-inventor of the bazooka, was the vice-president and general manager of the new factory, which continues to operate today as the Lockheed Martin Missiles and Fire Control facility.\nThe U.S. Army began studies in 1956 for a ballistic missile with a range of about . Later that year, Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson issued the \"Wilson Memorandum\" that removed from the U.S. Army all missiles with a range of or more. The United States Department of Defense (DoD) rescinded the memorandum in 1958 and ABMA began development of the class of ballistic missile.\nThe missile was initially called the Redstone-S, where the S meant solid propellant (and the name Redstone came from the Redstone missile it was supposed to replace), but renamed to Pershing in honor of General of the Armies John J. Pershing. ABMA selected seven companies to develop engineering proposals: Chrysler, the Lockheed Corporation, the Douglas Aircraft Company, the Convair Division of General Dynamics, the Firestone Corp., the Sperry-Rand Company, and the Martin Company.\nThe Secretary of the Army, Wilber M. Brucker, the former governor of Michigan \u2013 was apparently under pressure from his home state to award the contract to a company in Michigan. Chrysler was the only contractor from Michigan, but Medaris persuaded Brucker to leave the decision entirely in the hands of the ABMA. After a selection process by General Medaris and Dr. Arthur Rudolph, the Martin Company (later Martin Marietta after a merger in 1961) was awarded a CPFF (cost-plus-fixed-fee) contract for research, development, and first production of the Pershing system under the technical supervision and concept control of the government. Martin's quality control manager for the Pershing, Phil Crosby developed the concept of Zero Defects that enhanced the production and reliability of the system.\nThe first launch of the XM14 R&amp;D Pershing 1 test missile (P-01) was on 25 February 1960. The first launch from the tactical transporter erector launcher (TEL) was on 26 July 1960 (P-06). For training there was an inert Pershing 1 missile designated XM19. In June 1963, the XM14 and XM19 Pershing missiles were redesignated as XMGM-31A and XMTM-31B, respectively. The production version of the tactical missile was later designated as MGM-31A and the XMTM-31B designation was dropped.\nDeployment.\nPresident Eisenhower viewed the Pershing missile when he visited Cape Canaveral on 11 February 1960, and at Fort Benning on 5 May 1960 as part of Project MAN (Modern Army Needs). President Kennedy viewed Pershing three times: as part of the inaugural parade in 1961, at Fort Bragg on 12 October 1961, and at White Sands Missile Range in 1963.\nPlans were for the organization of ten missile battalions: one at Fort Sill, one in Korea and eight in West Germany; this was eventually reduced to one battalion at Fort Sill and three in West Germany.\nEach missile battalion organized at Fort Sill for deployment. The first tactical Pershing unit was the 2nd Missile Battalion, 44th Artillery Regiment, followed by the 4th Missile Battalion, 41st Artillery Regiment deployed to Schw\u00e4bisch Gm\u00fcnd and the 1st Missile Battalion, 81st Artillery to McCully Barracks in Wackernheim. Each missile battalion had four launchers.\nThe 2nd Missile Battalion, 79th Artillery Regiment formed for deployment to South Korea in February 1964. The deployment was placed on hold and the battalion supported the 56th Artillery Group and the German Air Force missile wings when they launched missiles from White Sands Missile Range. The 85th U.S. Army Field Artillery Detachment was organized in Fort Sill in November 1966 and attached to 2/79th Artillery. The deployment to Korea was canceled and the 2/79th Artillery was deactivated.\nThe Secretary of Defense assigned the Pershing weapon system to a Quick Reaction Alert (QRA) role in 1964 after a DoD study showed that the Pershing would be superior to tactical aircraft for the QRA mission. The German Air Force began training at Fort Sill. Each missile battalion was then authorized six launchers. In 1965 this increased to eight launchers, two per firing battery. By 1965, three U.S. Army battalions and two German Air Force wings were operational in Germany. The 579th Ordnance Company was tasked with maintenance and logistical general support for the Pershing artillery units in Germany.\nMissile.\nTwo Thiokol solid-propellant motors powered the Pershing 1 missile. Since a solid-propellant motor cannot be turned off, the missile used thrust reversal and case venting for a selective range. Splice bands and explosive bolts attached the rocket motors. \nThe missile was controlled by an analog guidance computer using a ball-and-disk integrator and a control computer. As directed by the onboard computers, the bolts exploded and ejected the splice band. Another squib would open the thrust reversal ports in the forward end of the stage and ignite the propellant in the forward end, causing the motor to reverse direction. Testing found that the second stage would draft behind the warhead and cause it to drift off course, so explosive charges on the side of the motor opened the case and vented the propellant. The range could be graduated but the maximum was . Jet vanes in the motor nozzles and air vanes on the motor case steered the missile. The onboard analog guidance computer and the Eclipse-Pioneer ST-120 (Stable Table-120) inertial navigation system provided guidance. The warhead could be conventional explosive or a W50 nuclear weapon with three yield options\u2014 the Y1 with 60 kiloton yield, Y2 with 200 kiloton yield and Y3 with 400 kiloton yield; the conventional warhead was never deployed.\nGround equipment.\nThe Pershing 1 firing platoon consisted of four M474 tracked-vehicles manufactured by FMC Corporation\u2014 by comparison, Redstone needed twenty vehicles. The transporter erector launcher (TEL) transported the two stages and the guidance section as an assembly and provided the launch platform after the warhead was mated. It used a removable erector launcher manufactured by Unidynamics. The warhead carrier transported the warhead, the missile fins and the azimuth laying set used to position the missile. The PTS/PS carrier transported the programmer test station (PTS) and power station (PS). A fourth vehicle transported the Radio Terminal Set. The four vehicles were known as the land train.\nThe PTS featured rapid missile checkout and countdowns, with complete computer control, and automatic self-test and malfunction isolation. Additionally, the PTS would perform tests that simulated airborne missile operation, programmed the trajectory of the missile and controlled the firing sequence. Plug-in micromodules increased maintainability and allowed the PTS operator to perform 80% of all repairs at the firing position. A turbine driven Power Station mounted behind the PTS, provided the primary electrical and pneumatic power and conditioned air for the missile and ground support equipment at the firing position.\nCollins Radio Company produced the AN/TRC-80 Radio Terminal Set specifically for the Pershing system. The \"Track 80\" used an inflatable dish antenna to provide line-of-sight or tropospheric-scatter voice and teleprinter communications between missile firing units and higher headquarters. The erector-launcher, PTS, PS and RTS could be removed from the carriers and air-transported in fourteen CH-47 Chinook loads.\nOrientation.\nThe missile was positioned or laid in on a pre-surveyed site with a system of two theodolites and a target card. Directional control passed from one theodolite to the one next to the missile. The missile then oriented to north by an operator using a horizontal laying theodolite aimed at a window in the guidance section of the missile. Using a control box, the ST-120 inertial navigation system in the guidance section rotated into alignment and the north direction programmed into the computer.\nSatellite launcher.\nIn 1961, Martin proposed a satellite launch system based on the Pershing. Named Pegasus, it would have had a lighter, simplified guidance section and a short third stage booster. A payload could be boosted to a circular orbit, or to an elliptical orbit with a apogee. Pegasus would have used the Pershing erector-launcher and could be placed in any open area. Martin seems to have targeted the nascent European space program, but this system was never developed.\nAPL.\nIn 1965, the Army contracted with the Applied Physics Laboratory (APL) of Johns Hopkins University to develop and implement a test and evaluation program. APL provided technical support to the Pershing Operational Test Unit (POTU), identified problem areas and improved the performance and survivability of the Pershing systems.\nPershing 1a.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1964 a series of operational tests and follow-on tests were performed to determine Pershing reliability. The Secretary of Defense then requested that the Army define the modifications required to make Pershing suitable for the Quick Reaction Alert (QRA) role. The Pershing 1a development program was approved in 1965, the original Pershing renamed to Pershing 1 and Martin Marietta received the Pershing 1a production contract in 1967. Project SWAP replaced all the Pershing equipment in Germany by mid-1970 and the first units quickly achieved QRA status. Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara directed that the U.S. Air Force's MGM-13 Mace missile would be replaced by the Pershing 1a in 1965.\nPershing 1a was a Quick Reaction Alert system and so had faster vehicles, launch times and newer electronics. The total number of launchers increased from 8 to 36 per battalion. Production of the Pershing 1a missile ended in 1975 and reopened in 1977 to replace missiles expended in training.\nPershing 1a was further improved in 1971 with the Pershing Missile and Power Station Development Program. The analog guidance computer and the control computer in the missile were replaced by a single digital guidance and control computer. The main distributor in the missile that routed power and signals was replaced with a new version. The missile used a rotary inverter to convert DC to AC that was replaced by a solid-state static inverter. The power station was improved for accessibility and maintenance. Further improvements in 1976 allowed the firing of a platoon's three missiles in quick succession and from any site without the need for surveying. The Automatic Reference System (ARS) used an optical laser link and a north-seeking gyro with encode to eliminate the need for pre-selected and surveyed points. The Sequential Launch Adapter connected the PTS to three missiles, eliminating the need to cable and uncable each launcher.\nA total of 754 MGM-31A missiles were built.\nDeployment.\nThe battalions in Europe reorganized under a new table of organization and equipment (TOE); an infantry battalion was added to provide additional security; and the 56th Artillery Group was reorganized and redesignated the 56th Field Artillery Brigade. Due to the nature of the weapon system, officer positions were increased by one grade: batteries were commanded by a major instead of a captain; battalions were commanded by a colonel; and the brigade was commanded by a brigadier general.2-4\nPershing 1a was deployed with three U.S. battalions in Europe and two German Air Force wings. Each battalion or wing had 36 mobile launchers. The constitution of West Germany prohibited owning nuclear weapons, thus control of the nuclear warheads remained in the hands of the U.S. Army. During peacetime operations, a portion of the Pershing 1a assets were deployed on the QRA mission. The remainder would be conducting field training or were maintained in kasernes awaiting alert. The system was designed to be highly mobile, permitting its dispersal to clandestine sites in times of alert or war and was deployed at distances greater than 100\u00a0km behind the forward edge of battle area or political border. Owing to its mobility and setback, Pershing was considered one of the most survivable theater nuclear weapons ever deployed in Europe.\nThe primary mission in the Supreme Allied Commander, Europe scheduled plan took one of two forms: peacetime or an increased state of readiness called the period of tension. Different levels or techniques of tasking were used for these mission forms. The peacetime Quick Reaction Alert role required that for each battalion or wing, one firing battery or a portion thereof would be combat alert status (CAS) on a permanent hard site, covering assigned targets.\nIn peacetime the four batteries of each battalion rotated through four states or conditions of alert readiness, the highest being that of the CAS battery. The purpose of this rotation was to assume the CAS status, to share the burden of CAS responsibility, to provide time for field tactical training and equipment maintenance, and to give ample leave and pass time to personnel without adverse impact on operational requirements.\nDuring periods of increased tension, the firing batteries of each battalion were deployed to previously unused field tactical sites. At these sites, they assumed responsibility for coverage of all assigned targets. During the transition from the peacetime to full combat status, coverage was maintained on the highest priority targets that were assigned to the peacetime CAS batteries.\nOnce all firing batteries were at their field sites, the firing elements of the battalions were deployed by platoons, which were then separated from each other geographically to reduce vulnerability. The platoons then moved to new firing positions on a random schedule to increase survivability.\nLauncher and support equipment.\nThe M790 erector launcher (EL) was a modified low-boy flat-bed trailer towed by a Ford M757 5-ton tractor. The erection booms used a 3,000\u00a0psi pneumatic over hydraulic system that could erect the five\u00a0ton missile from horizontal to vertical in nine seconds. Due to the overall missile length and for security, the warhead was not mated during travel. It was stored in a carrier and mated using a hand-pumped davit after the launcher was emplaced. The EL was pulled by a Ford M757 tractor for U.S. Army units and by a Magirus-Deutz Jupiter 6\u00d76 for German Air Force units.\nThe PTS and PS were mounted on a Ford M656 truck for U.S. Army units and a Magirus-Deutz or MAN 630 for German Air Force units. Launch activation was performed from a remote fire box that could be deployed locally or mounted in the battery control central (BCC). One PTS controlled three launchers\u2014 when one launch count was complete, ten large cables were unplugged from the PTS and the PTS was moved up and connected to the next launcher.\nFurther improvements.\nMissile and power station upgrades in 1974 provided easier access to missile components, reduce maintenance and improved reliability. A new digital guidance and control computer combined the functions of the analog control computer and the analog guidance computer into one package. The mean time to repair decreased from 8.7 hours to 3.8 hours and the mean time between failures increased from 32 hours to 65 hours.\nMore modifications in 1976 greatly reduced the launch time. The sequential launch adapter (SLA) was an automatic switching device mounted in a 10-ton trailer that allowed the PTS to remain connected to all three launchers allowing all three missiles to stay hot. The automatic reference system (ARS) eliminated the theodolites previously used to lay and orient the missile. It included a north-seeking gyro and a laser link to the ST-120 that more quickly oriented the missile.\nAfter the Pershing II explosion in 1985, the Pershing 1a launchers of the German Air Force were retrofitted with ballistic shields.\nIn 1987 a joint Army/Department of Energy study concluded that it was technically and financially feasible to replace the W50 warhead carried by Pershing 1a with the W85 warhead developed for Pershing II. However, with the signing of the INF Treaty, development on the conversion was terminated.\nPershing II.\nThe Pershing II Weapon System was a solid-fueled two-stage ballistic missile designed and built by Martin Marietta to replace the Pershing 1a Field Artillery Missile System as the United States Army's primary nuclear-capable theater-level weapon. The U.S. Army replaced the Pershing 1a with the Pershing II in 1983 while the German Air Force retained Pershing 1a until all Pershings were eliminated in 1991.\n United States Army\nOperators.\n West Germany: German Air Force\nElimination.\nThe Pershing systems were eliminated after the ratification of the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty on 27 May 1988. The missiles began to be withdrawn in October 1988 and the last of the missiles were destroyed by the static burn of their motors and subsequently crushed in May 1991 at the Longhorn Army Ammunition Plant near Caddo Lake, Texas. Although not covered by the treaty, West Germany agreed unilaterally to the removal of the Pershing 1a missiles from its inventory in 1991, and the missiles were destroyed in the United States.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38041", "revid": "49534670", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38041", "title": "Human skin color", "text": "Human skin color ranges from the darkest brown to the lightest hues. Differences in skin color among individuals is caused by variation in pigmentation, which is largely the result of genetics (inherited from one's biological parents), and in adults in particular, due to exposure to the sun, disorders, or some combination thereof. Differences across populations evolved through natural selection and sexual selection, because of social norms and differences in environment, as well as regulation of the biochemical effects of ultraviolet radiation penetrating the skin.\nHuman skin color is influenced greatly by the amount of the pigment melanin present. Melanin is produced within the skin in cells called melanocytes; it is the main determinant of the skin color of darker-skin humans. The skin color of people with light skin is determined mainly by the bluish-white connective tissue under the dermis and by the hemoglobin circulating in the veins of the dermis. The red color underlying the skin becomes more visible, especially in the face, when, as a consequence of physical exercise, sexual arousal, or the stimulation of the nervous system (e.g. due to anger or embarrassment), arterioles dilate. Color is not entirely uniform across an individual's skin; for example, the skin of the palm and the soles of the feet is lighter than most other skin; this is more noticeable in darker-skinned people.\nThere is a direct correlation between the geographic distribution of ultraviolet radiation (UVR) and the distribution of indigenous skin pigmentation around the world. Areas that receive higher amounts of UVR, generally located closer to the equator or at higher altitudes, tend to have darker-skinned populations. Areas that are far from the tropics and closer to the poles have lower intensity of UVR, which is reflected in lighter-skinned populations. By the time modern \"Homo sapiens\" evolved, all humans were dark-skinned. Some researchers suggest that human populations over the past 50,000 years have changed from dark-skinned to light-skinned and that such major changes in pigmentation may have happened in as little as 100 generations (\u22482,500 years) through selective sweeps. Natural skin color can also darken as a result of tanning due to exposure to sunlight. The leading theory is that skin color adapts to intense sunlight irradiation to provide partial protection against the ultraviolet fraction that produces damage and thus mutations in the DNA of the skin cells.\nThe social significance of differences in skin color has varied across cultures and over time, as demonstrated with regard to social status and discrimination.\nMelanin and genes.\nMelanin is produced by cells called melanocytes in a process called melanogenesis. Melanin is made within small membrane\u2013bound packages called melanosomes. As they become full of melanin, they move into the slender arms of melanocytes, from where they are transferred to the keratinocytes. Under normal conditions, melanosomes cover the upper part of the keratinocytes and protect them from genetic damage. One melanocyte supplies melanin to thirty-six keratinocytes according to signals from the keratinocytes. These keratinocytes regulate melanin production and replication of melanocytes. People have different skin colors mainly because their melanocytes produce different amount and kinds of melanin.\nThe genetic mechanism behind human skin color is mainly regulated by the enzyme tyrosinase, which creates the color of the skin, eyes, and hair shades. Differences in skin color are also attributed to differences in size and distribution of melanosomes in the skin. Melanocytes produce two types of melanin. The most common form of biological melanin is eumelanin, a brown-black polymer of dihydroxyindole carboxylic acids, and their reduced forms. Most are derived from the amino acid tyrosine. Eumelanin is found in hair, areola, and skin, and the hair colors gray, black, blond, and brown. In humans, it is more abundant in people with dark skin. Pheomelanin, a pink to red hue is found in particularly large quantities in red hair, the lips, nipples, glans of the penis, and vagina.\nBoth the amount and type of melanin produced is controlled by a number of genes that operate under incomplete dominance. One copy of each of the various genes is inherited from each parent. Each gene can come in several alleles, resulting in the great variety of human skin tones. Melanin controls the amount of ultraviolet (UV) radiation from the sun that penetrates the skin by absorption. While UV radiation can assist in the production of vitamin D, excessive exposure to UV can damage health.\nEvolution of skin color.\nTime scale of skin color evolution.\nLoss of body hair in \"Homo\" links to the thermoregulation through perspiration heat dissipation required for activity in hot open environments and endurance running. Humans as primates have a particular need for this thermoregulation since unlike other mammals they lack a carotid rete that allows precooling of blood to the brain, an organ extremely sensitive to changes in body temperature. Given endurance running and its needs for thermoregulation arose with \"H. erectus\", this links hairlessness with the origin of \"H. erectus\" about 2 million years ago.\nAs hominids gradually lost their fur between 1.2 and 4 million years ago, to allow for better cooling through sweating, their naked skin was exposed to sunlight. In the tropics, natural selection favoured dark-skinned human populations as high levels of skin pigmentation protected against the harmful effects of sunlight. Indigenous populations' skin reflectance (the amount of sunlight the skin reflects) and the actual UV radiation in a particular geographic area is highly inversely correlated, which supports this idea. Genetic evidence also supports this notion, demonstrating that around 1.2\u00a0million years ago there was a strong evolutionary pressure which acted on the development of dark skin pigmentation in early members of the genus \"Homo\". Hairlessness exposes folate circulating subcutaneously and in the dermis to degradation from UV-radiation. The effect of sunlight on folic acid levels has been crucial in the development of dark skin and favored the emergence of skin pigmentation in order to protect from folate depletion due to the increased exposure to sunlight.\nIn 2017, a study showed that both dark and light pigmentation alleles arose before the origin of modern humans, with the older version of the variants in many cases being associated with lighter skin. The earliest hominid ancestors of humans most likely had pale non-pigmented skin covered with dark black hair, like the chimpanzee and other great apes.\nWith the evolution of hairless skin, abundant sweat glands, and skin rich in melanin, early humans could walk, run, and forage for food for long periods of time under the hot sun without brain damage due to overheating, giving them an evolutionary advantage over other species. Research on the MC1R alleles using assumptions about past population size and an absence of population bottlenecks suggests the allele for dark skin present in modern Africans arose at least by 1.2 million years ago.\nThis was the genotype inherited by anatomically modern humans, but retained only by part of the extant populations, thus forming an aspect of human genetic variation. About 100,000\u201370,000 years ago, some anatomically modern humans (\"Homo sapiens\") began to migrate away from the tropics to the north where they were exposed to less intense sunlight. This was possibly in part due to the need for greater use of clothing to protect against the colder climate. Under these conditions, there was less photodestruction of folate and so the evolutionary pressure working against the survival of lighter-skinned gene variants was reduced. In addition, lighter skin is able to generate more vitamin D (cholecalciferol) than darker skin, so it would have represented a health benefit in reduced sunlight if there were limited sources of vitamin D. Hence the leading hypothesis for the evolution of human skin color proposes that:\nThe genetic mutations leading to light skin, though partially different among East Asians and Western Europeans, suggest the two groups experienced a similar selective pressure after settlement in northern latitudes.\nThe theory is partially supported by a study into the SLC24A5 gene which found that the allele associated with light skin in Europe \"determined [\u2026] that 18,000 years had passed since the light-skin allele was fixed in Europeans\" but may have originated as recently as 12,000\u20136,000 years ago\"given the imprecision of method\" , which is in line with the earliest evidence of farming. Paleolithic Cro-Magnon groups, as well as Early Holocene Western and central European hunter-gatherers (Western Hunter Gatherers) have been suggested to have been dark skinned based on DNA analysis, with a number of the most prominent light-skin tone gene variants found in modern Europeans being introduced by Anatolian Neolithic Farmers that migrated into Europe beginning around 9,000 years ago, with selection pressure for lighter skin intensifying from the Neolithic period onwards.\nResearch by Nina Jablonski suggests that an estimated time of about 10,000 to 20,000 years is enough for human populations to achieve optimal skin pigmentation in a particular geographic area but that development of ideal skin coloration may happen faster if the evolutionary pressure is stronger, even in as little as 100 generations. The length of time is also affected by cultural practices such as food intake, clothing, body coverings, and shelter usage, which can alter the ways in which the environment affects populations.\nPopulation and admixture studies suggest a three-way model for the evolution of human skin color, with dark skin evolving in early \"Homo sapiens\" in Africa and light skin evolving only recently after modern humans had expanded out of Africa. For the most part, the evolution of light skin has followed different genetic paths in Western and Eastern Eurasian populations; however, some mutations associated with lighter skin have estimated origin dates after humans spread out of Africa but before the divergence of the two lineages.\nAccording to Crawford et al. (2017), most of the genetic variants associated with light and dark pigmentation in African populations appear to have originated more than 300,000 years ago. African, South Asian and Australo-Melanesian populations also carry derived alleles for dark skin pigmentation that are not found in Europeans or East Asians. Huang et al. 2021 found the existence of \"selective pressure on light pigmentation in the ancestral population of Europeans and East Asians\", prior to their divergence from each other. Skin pigmentation was also found to be affected by directional selection towards darker skin among Africans, as well as lighter skin among Eurasians. Crawford et al. (2017) similarly found evidence for selection towards light pigmentation prior to the divergence of West Eurasians and East Asians.\nFunctional considerations.\nElias et. al. in 2010 showed a superior barrier function in darkly pigmented skin. Most protective functions of the skin, including the permeability barrier and the antimicrobial barrier, reside in the stratum corneum and the researchers surmise that the stratum corneum has undergone the most genetic change since the loss of human body hair. Natural selection would have favored mutations that protect this essential barrier; one such protective adaptation is the pigmentation of interfollicular epidermis, because it improves barrier function as compared to non-pigmented skin.\nThe authors argue that lack of significant differences between modern light-skinned and dark-skinned populations in vitamin D deficiency, early death from UV-induced cancers and birth defects \u2014 as well as instances of light and dark populations living side-by-side in areas with similar UV \u2014 suggest the standard model is insufficient to explain the strong selection drive for pigmented skin. Jablonski rejects this theory on the grounds that the human tanning response is driven by UV-B exposure, not xeric stress, and that the positive selection for vitamin D production is \"well-established\".\nGenetics.\nTo some extent, skin color is determined independently of eye and hair color, as can be seen from variation in skin coloration in human populations.\nFor skin color, heritability is very high, even though it can be modified by exposure to sunlight.\nA recent systematic study found 169 genes involved in human skin coloration. Most of the genes were involved in melanosome biogenesis, endosomal transport, and gene regulation. Notably, the function of these genes was verified in tissue culture experiments using CRISPR-Cas9 knockouts, showing that these genes are indeed involved in melanin production.\nDark skin.\nAll modern humans share a common ancestor who lived around 200,000 years ago in Africa. Comparisons between known skin pigmentation genes in chimpanzees and modern Africans show that dark skin evolved along with the loss of body hair about 1.2 million years ago and that this common ancestor had dark skin. Investigations into dark-skinned populations in South Asia and Melanesia indicate that skin pigmentation in these populations is due to the preservation of this ancestral state and not due to new variations on a previously lightened population.\nMC1R.\nThe melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) gene is primarily responsible for determining whether pheomelanin and eumelanin are produced in the human body. Research shows at least 10 differences in MC1R between African and chimpanzee samples and that the gene has probably undergone a strong positive selection (a selective sweep) in early Hominins around 1.2 million years ago. This is consistent with positive selection for the high-eumelanin phenotype seen in Africa and other environments with high UV exposure.\nLight skin.\nFor the most part, the evolution of light skin has followed different genetic paths in European and East Asian populations.\nKITLG.\nThe KIT ligand (KITLG) gene is involved in the permanent survival, proliferation and migration of melanocytes. A mutation in this gene, \"A326G\" (rs642742), has been positively associated with variations of skin color in African-Americans of mixed West African and European descent and is estimated to account for 15\u201320% of the melanin difference between African and European populations. and occurs in over 80% of European and Asian samples, compared with less than 10% in African samples.\nASIP.\nStudies have found two alleles in the vicinity of ASIP Agouti signalling peptide are associated with skin color variation in humans. One, rs2424984, has been identified as an indicator of skin reflectance in a forensics analysis of human phenotypes across Caucasian, African-American, South Asian, East Asian, Hispanic and Native American populations and is about three times more common in non-African populations than in Africa. The other allele, \"8188G\" (rs6058017) is significantly associated with skin color variation in African-Americans and the ancestral version occurs in only 12% of European and 28% of East Asian samples compared with 80% of West African samples.\nEurope.\nA number of genes have been positively associated with the skin pigmentation difference between European and non-European populations. Mutations in SLC24A5 and SLC45A2 are believed to account for the bulk of this variation and show very strong signs of selection. A variation in TYR has also been identified as a contributor.\nResearch indicates the selection for the light-skin alleles of these genes in Europeans is comparatively recent, having occurred later than 20,000 years ago and perhaps as recently as 12,000 to 6,000 years ago. In the 1970s, Luca Cavalli-Sforza suggested that the selective sweep that rendered light skin ubiquitous in Europe might be correlated with the advent of farming and thus have taken place only around 6,000 years ago; This scenario found support in a 2014 analysis of Mesolithic (7,000 years old) hunter-gatherer DNA from La Bra\u00f1a, Spain, which showed a version of these genes not corresponding with light skin color. \nIn 2015, researchers analysed for light skin genes in the DNA of 94 ancient skeletons ranging from 8,000 to 3,000 years old from Europe and Russia. They found c. 8,000-year-old hunter-gatherers in Spain, Luxembourg, and Hungary were dark skinned while similarly aged hunter gatherers in Sweden were light skinned (having predominately derived alleles of SLC24A5, SLC45A2 and also HERC2/OCA2). Neolithic farmers entering Europe at around the same time were intermediate, being nearly fixed for the derived SLC24A5 variant but only having the derived SLC45A2 allele in low frequencies. The SLC24A5 variant spread very rapidly throughout central and southern Europe from about 8,000 years ago, whereas the light skin variant of SLC45A2 spread throughout Europe after 5,800 years ago.\nSome authors have expressed caution regarding the skin pigmentation predictions. According to Ju et al. (2021), in a study addressing 40,000 years of modern human history, stated:\"Relatively dark skin pigmentation in Early Upper Paleolithic Europe would be consistent with those populations being relatively poorly adapted to high-latitude conditions as a result of having recently migrated from lower latitudes. On the other hand, although we have shown that these populations carried few of the light pigmentation alleles that are segregating in present-day Europe, they may have carried different alleles that we cannot now detect.\"\nSLC24A5.\nSolute carrier family 24 member 5 (SLC24A5) regulates calcium in melanocytes and is important in the process of melanogenesis. The SLC24A5 gene's derived \"Ala111Thr\" allele (rs1426654) has been shown to be a major factor in light skin pigmentation and is common in Western Eurasia. Recent studies have found that the variant represents as much as 25\u201340% of the average skin tone difference between Europeans and West Africans. This derived allele is a reliable predictor of phenotype across a range of populations. It has been the subject of recent selection in Western Eurasia, and is fixed in European populations.\nSLC45A2.\nSolute carrier family 45 member 2 (SLC45A2 or MATP) aids in the transport and processing of tyrosine, a precursor to melanin. It has also been shown to be one of the significant components of the skin color of modern Europeans through its \"Phe374Leu\" (rs16891982) allele that has been directly correlated with skin color variation across a range of populations. This variation is ubiquitous in European populations but extremely rare elsewhere and shows strong signs of selection.\nTYR.\nThe TYR gene encodes the enzyme tyrosinase, which is involved in the production of melanin from tyrosine. It has an allele, \"Ser192Tyr\" (rs1042602), found solely in 40\u201350% of Europeans and linked to light-colored skin in studies of South Asian and African-American populations.\nEast Asia.\nA number of genes known to affect skin color have alleles that show signs of positive selection in East Asian populations. Of these, only OCA2 has been directly related to skin color measurements, while DCT, MC1R and ATRN are marked as candidate genes for future study.\nOCA2.\nOculocutaneous albinism II (OCA2) assists in the regulation of pH in melanocytes. The OCA2 gene's derived \"His615Arg\" (rs1800414) allele has been shown to account for about 8% of the skin tone difference between African and East Asian populations in studies of an East Asian population living in Toronto and a Chinese Han population. This variant is essentially restricted to East Asia, with highest frequencies in Eastern East Asia (49\u201363%), midrange frequencies in Southeast Asia, and the lowest frequencies in Western China and some Eastern European populations.\nCandidate genes.\nA number of studies have found genes linked to human skin pigmentation that have alleles with statistically significant frequencies in Chinese and East Asian populations. While not linked to measurements of skin tone variation directly, dopachrome tautomerase (DCT or TYRP2 rs2031526), melanocortin 1 receptor (MC1R) \"Arg163Gln\" (rs885479) and attractin (ATRN) have been indicated as potential contributors to the evolution of light skin in East Asian populations.\nTanning response.\nTanning response in humans is controlled by a variety of genes. \"MC1R\" variants \"Arg151Sys\" (rs1805007), \"Arg160Trp\" (rs1805008), \"Asp294Sys\" (rs1805009), \"Val60Leu\" (rs1805005) and \"Val92Met\" (rs2228479) have been associated with reduced tanning response in European and/or East Asian populations. These alleles show no signs of positive selection and only occur in relatively small numbers, reaching a peak in Europe with around 28% of the population having at least one allele of one of the variations. A study of self-reported tanning ability and skin type in American non-Hispanic Caucasians found that \"SLC24A5 Phe374Leu\" is significantly associated with reduced tanning ability and also associated \"TYR Arg402Gln\" (rs1126809), \"OCA2 Arg305Trp\" (rs1800401) and a 2-SNP haplotype in \"ASIP\" (rs4911414 and rs1015362) to skin type variation within a \"fair/medium/olive\" context.\nAlbinism.\nOculocutaneous albinism (OCA) is a lack of pigment in the eyes, skin and sometimes hair that occurs in a very small fraction of the population. The four known types of \"OCA\" are caused by mutations in the \"TYR\", \"OCA2\", \"TYRP1\", and \"SLC45A2\" genes.\nAge.\nIn hominids, the parts of the body not covered with hair, like the face and the back of the hands, start out pale in infants and turn darker as the skin is exposed to more sun. All human babies are born pale, regardless of what their adult color will be. In humans, melanin production does not peak until after puberty.\nThe skin of children becomes darker as they go through puberty and experience the effects of sex hormones. This darkening is especially noticeable in the skin of the nipples, the areola of the nipples, the labia majora in females, and the scrotum in males. In some people, the armpits become slightly darker during puberty. The interaction of genetic, hormonal, and environmental factors on skin coloration with age is still not adequately understood, but it is known that men are at their darkest baseline skin color around the age of 30, without considering the effects of tanning.\nHuman skin color fades with age. Humans over the age of thirty experience a decrease in melanin-producing cells by about 10% to 20% per decade as melanocyte stem cells gradually die. The skin of face and hands has about twice the amount of pigment cells as unexposed areas of the body, as chronic exposure to the sun continues to stimulate melanocytes. The blotchy appearance of skin color in the face and hands of older people is due to the uneven distribution of pigment cells and to changes in the interaction between melanocytes and keratinocytes.\nSexual dimorphism.\nWomen from some darker-skinned populations may have lighter skin than men so their bodies can absorb more vitamin D during pregnancy, which improves calcium absorption. In light skinned populations, namely those of European descent, multiple different studies using up-to-date and robust statistical methods find that women have similar skin color as men.\nIt is unknown why skin color is sexually dimorphic in some populations. Prior to menopause, women may have darker skin than men due to the female sex hormone estrogen increasing skin pigmentation. To the extent that women's skin is darker than men's results in lower rates of skin cancer in women than men.\nIn populations where women have lighter skin than men, it has been hypothesized that the requirement for high amounts of calcium during pregnancy and lactation may be related to the dimorphism. Breastfeeding newborns, whose skeletons are growing, require high amounts of calcium intake from the mother's milk (about 4 times more than during prenatal development), part of which comes from reserves in the mother's skeleton.\nAdequate vitamin D resources are needed to absorb calcium from the diet, and it has been shown that deficiencies of vitamin D and calcium increase the likelihood of various birth defects such as spina bifida and rickets. Natural selection may have led to females with lighter skin than males in some indigenous populations because women must get enough vitamin D and calcium to support the development of fetus and nursing infants and to maintain their own health. However, some authors have cast doubt on the theory that vitamin D synthesis is related to the sexual dimorphism of human skin color in these populations. \nThe sexes also differ in how their skin color changes over time. Women's pigmentation in certain parts of their body, such as the areola and nipples, changes throughout the menstrual cycle and during pregnancy. Between 50 and 70% of pregnant women will develop the \"mask of pregnancy\", which refers to the browning and yellowing of the cheeks, upper lips, and forehead that occurs during pregnancy. This is caused by increases in estrogen, and it can also develop in women who take birth control pills or due to hormone replacement therapy.\nDisorders of pigmentation.\nUneven pigmentation of some sort affects most people, regardless of bioethnic background or skin color. Skin may either appear lighter, or darker than normal, or lack pigmentation at all; there may be blotchy, uneven areas, patches of brown to gray discoloration or freckling. Apart from blood-related conditions such as jaundice, carotenosis, or argyria, skin pigmentation disorders generally occur because the body produces either too much or too little melanin.\nDepigmentation.\nAlbinism.\nSome types of albinism affect only the skin and hair, while other types affect the skin, hair and eyes, and in rare cases only the eyes. All of them are caused by different genetic mutations. Albinism is a recessively inherited trait in humans where both pigmented parents may be carriers of the gene and pass it down to their children. Each child has a 25% chance of being albino and a 75% chance of having normally pigmented skin. One common type of albinism is oculocutaneous albinism or OCA, which has many subtypes caused by different genetic mutations.\nAlbinism is a serious problem in areas of high sunlight intensity, leading to extreme sun sensitivity, skin cancer, and eye damage.\nAlbinism is more common in some parts of the world than in others, but it is estimated that 1 in 70 humans carry the gene for OCA.\nThe most severe type of albinism is OCA1A, which is characterized by complete, lifelong loss of melanin production, other forms of OCA1B, OCA2, OCA3, OCA4, show some form of melanin accumulation and are less severe. The four known types of \"OCA\" are caused by mutations in the \"TYR\", \"OCA2\", \"TYRP1\", and \"SLC45A2\" genes.\nAlbinos often face social and cultural challenges (even threats), as the condition is often a source of ridicule, racism, fear, and violence. Many cultures around the world have developed beliefs regarding people with albinism. Albinos are persecuted in Tanzania by witchdoctors, who use the body parts of albinos as ingredients in rituals and potions, as they are thought to possess magical power.\nVitiligo.\nVitiligo is a condition that causes depigmentation of sections of skin. It occurs when melanocytes die or are unable to function. The causes of vitiligo are not clear, but research suggests several possibilities, including autoimmune reactions, genetic make-up, oxidative stress, and neural or viral causes. The incidence worldwide is less than 1%. Individuals affected by vitiligo sometimes suffer psychological discomfort because of their appearance.\nHyperpigmentation.\nIncreased melanin production, also known as hyperpigmentation, can be a few different phenomena:\nAside from sun exposure and hormones, hyperpigmentation can be caused by skin damage, such as remnants of blemishes, wounds or rashes. This is especially true for those with darker skin tones.\nThe most typical cause of darkened areas of skin, brown spots or areas of discoloration is unprotected sun exposure. Once incorrectly referred to as liver spots, these pigment problems are not connected with the liver.\nOn lighter to medium skin tones, solar lentigenes emerge as small- to medium-sized brown patches of freckling that can grow and accumulate over time on areas of the body that receive the most unprotected sun exposure, such as the back of the hands, forearms, chest, and face. For those with darker skin colors, these discolorations can appear as patches or areas of ashen-gray skin.\nExposure to the sun.\nMelanin in the skin protects the body by absorbing solar radiation. In general, the more melanin there is in the skin the more solar radiation can be absorbed. Excessive solar radiation causes direct and indirect DNA damage to the skin and the body naturally combats and seeks to repair the damage and protect the skin by creating and releasing further melanin into the skin's cells. With the production of the melanin, the skin color darkens, but can also cause sunburn. The tanning process can also be created by artificial UV radiation.\nThere are two different mechanisms involved. Firstly, the UVA-radiation creates oxidative stress, which in turn oxidizes existing melanin and leads to rapid darkening of the melanin, also known as IPD (immediate pigment darkening). Secondly, there is an increase in production of melanin known as melanogenesis. Melanogenesis leads to delayed tanning and first becomes visible about 72 hours after exposure. The tan that is created by an increased melanogenesis lasts much longer than the one that is caused by oxidation of existing melanin. Tanning involves not just the increased melanin production in response to UV radiation but the thickening of the top layer of the epidermis, the stratum corneum.\nA person's natural skin color affects their reaction to exposure to the sun. Generally, those who start out with darker skin color and more melanin have better abilities to tan. Individuals with very light skin and albinos have no ability to tan. The biggest differences resulting from sun exposure are visible in individuals who start out with moderately pigmented brown skin: the change is dramatically visible as tan lines, where parts of the skin which tanned are delineated from unexposed skin.\nModern lifestyles and mobility have created mismatch between skin color and environment for many individuals. Vitamin D deficiencies and UVR overexposure are concerns for many. It is important for these people individually to adjust their diet and lifestyle according to their skin color, the environment they live in, and the time of year. For practical purposes, such as exposure time for sun tanning, six skin types are distinguished following Fitzpatrick (1975), listed in order of decreasing lightness:\nFitzpatrick scale.\nThe following list shows the six categories of the Fitzpatrick scale in relation to the 36 categories of the older von Luschan scale:\nDark skin with large concentrations of melanin protects against ultraviolet light and skin cancers; light-skinned people have about a tenfold greater risk of dying from skin cancer, compared with dark-skinned persons, under equal sunlight exposure. Furthermore, UV-A rays from sunlight are believed to interact with folic acid in ways that may damage health. In a number of traditional societies the sun was avoided as much as possible, especially around noon when the ultraviolet radiation in sunlight is at its most intense. Midday was a time when people stayed in the shade and had the main meal followed by a nap, a practice similar to the modern siesta.\nGeographic variation.\nApproximately 10% of the variance in skin color occurs within regions, and approximately 90% occurs between regions. Because skin color has been under strong selective pressure, similar skin colors can result from convergent adaptation rather than from genetic relatedness; populations with similar pigmentation may be genetically no more similar than other widely separated groups. Furthermore, in some parts of the world where people from different regions have mixed extensively, the connection between skin color and ancestry has substantially weakened. In Brazil, for example, skin color is not closely associated with the percentage of recent African ancestors a person has, as estimated from an analysis of genetic variants differing in frequency among continent groups.\nIn general, people living close to the equator are highly darkly pigmented, and those living near the poles are generally very lightly pigmented. The rest of humanity shows a high degree of skin color variation between these two extremes, generally correlating with UV exposure. The main exception to this rule is in the New World, where people have only lived for about 10,000 to 15,000 years and show a less pronounced degree of skin pigmentation.\nIn recent times, humans have become increasingly mobile as a consequence of improved technology, domestication, environmental change, strong curiosity, and risk-taking. Migrations over the last 4000 years, and especially the last 400 years, have been the fastest in human history and have led to many people settling in places far away from their ancestral homelands. This means that skin colors today are not as confined to geographical location as they were previously.\nSocial status, colorism and racism.\nAccording to classical scholar Frank Snowden, skin color did not determine social status in ancient Egypt, Greece or Rome. These ancient civilizations viewed relations between the major power and the subordinate state as more significant in a person's status than their skin colors.\nSome social groups favor specific skin coloring. The preferred skin tone varies by culture and has varied over time. A number of indigenous African groups, such as the Maasai, associated pale skin with being cursed or caused by evil spirits associated with witchcraft. They would abandon their children born with conditions such as albinism and showed a sexual preference for darker skin.\nMany cultures have historically favored lighter skin for women. Before the Industrial Revolution, inhabitants of the continent of Europe preferred pale skin, which they interpreted as a sign of high social status. The poorer classes worked outdoors and got darker skin from exposure to the sun, while the upper class stayed indoors and had light skin. Hence light skin became associated with wealth and high position. Women would put lead-based cosmetics on their skin to whiten their skin tone artificially. However, when not strictly monitored, these cosmetics caused lead poisoning.\nColonization and enslavement was a cause of discrimination due to skin color and racism. Slavery in the Americas led to the perception that lighter-skinned African-Americans were more intelligent and cooperative. Such lighter-skinned individuals had a greater likelihood of receiving preferential treatment from overseers and for opportunities for higher education. The preference for fair skin remained prominent until the end of the Gilded Age, but racial stereotypes about worth and beauty persisted throughout the 20th century.\nA preference for fair or lighter skin continues in some countries, including Latin American countries where whites form a minority. In Brazil, a dark-skinned person is more likely to experience discrimination. \nSignificant exceptions to a preference for lighter skin started to appear in Western culture in the mid-20th century. Though sun-tanned skin was once associated with the sun-exposed manual labor of the lower class, the associations became dramatically reversed during this time\u2014a change usually credited to the trendsetting Frenchwoman Coco Chanel (1883\u20131971) presenting tanned skin as fashionable, healthy, and luxurious. \nMany people within the United States regard tanned skin as both more attractive and healthier than pale or very dark skin. Pale skin has become associated with indoor office-work while tanned skin has become associated with increased leisure time, sportiness and good health that comes with wealth and higher social status. Studies have also emerged indicating that the degree of tanning is directly related to how attractive a young woman is.\nSkin whitening.\nIn South Asia, society regards fair skin as more attractive and associates dark skin with lower class status. This results in a massive market for skin-whitening creams. Fairer skin-tones also correlate to higher caste-status in the Hindu social order\u2014although the system is not based on skin tone. Actors and actresses in Indian cinema tend to have light skin tones, and Indian cinematographers have used graphics and intense lighting to achieve more \"desirable\" skin tones. Fair skin tones are advertised as an asset in Indian marketing.\nIn 2013, 77% of Nigerian women, 52% of Senegalese women, and 25% of Malian women were using lightening products. In 2020, \"Der Spiegel\" reported that in Ghana, \"When You Are Light-Skinned, You Earn More\", and that \"[s]ome pregnant women take tablets in the hopes that it will lead their child to be born with fair skin. Some apply bleaching lotion [...] to their babies, in the hopes that it will improve their child's chances.\"\nSkin-whitening products have remained popular over time, often due to historical beliefs and perceptions about fair skin. Sales of skin-whitening products across the world grew from $40 billion to $43 billion in 2008. In South and East Asian countries, people have traditionally seen light skin as more attractive, and a preference for lighter skin remains prevalent. In ancient China and Japan, for example, pale skin can be traced back to ancient drawings depicting women and goddesses with fair skin tones. In ancient China, Japan, and Southeast Asia, pale skin was seen as a sign of wealth. Thus skin-whitening cosmetic products are popular in East Asia. \nIn 2010, four out of ten women surveyed in Hong Kong, Malaysia, the Philippines and South Korea used a skin-whitening cream, and more than 60 companies globally compete for Asia's estimated $18 billion market. Changes in regulations in the cosmetic industry led to skin-care companies introducing harm-free skin lighteners. In Japan, the geisha have a reputation for their white-painted faces, and the appeal of the , or \"beautiful white\", ideal leads many Japanese women to avoid any form of tanning. \nThere are exceptions to this, with Japanese fashion trends such as ganguro emphasizing tanned skin. Skin whitening is also not uncommon in Africa, and several research projects have suggested a general preference for lighter skin in the African-American community. In contrast, one study on men of the Bikosso tribe in Cameroon found no preference for attractiveness of females based on lighter skin color, bringing into question the universality of earlier studies that had exclusively focused on skin-color preferences among non-African populations.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38042", "revid": "48372777", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38042", "title": "Harry Enfield", "text": "English actor, comedian and writer (born 1961)\nHenry Richard Enfield (born 30 May 1961) is an English comedian and actor. He is known in particular for his television work, including \"Harry Enfield's Television Programme\", \"Harry Enfield &amp; Chums\" and \"Harry &amp; Paul\", across which he created and portrayed comedy characters such as Kevin the Teenager, Loadsamoney, Smashie and Nicey, The Scousers, Tim Nice-But-Dim and Mr \"You Don't Want to Do It Like That\".\nEarly life.\nEnfield was born on 30 May 1961, in Horsham, Sussex, and is the eldest of four children (and only son) of English television, radio and newspaper journalist and presenter Edward Enfield and his wife, Deirdre Jenkins. The Enfield family are descendants of the nineteenth-century philanthropist Edward Enfield. He spent his childhood living in Billingshurst, West Sussex.\nHe was educated at the independent Arundale School in Pulborough, Dorset House School, Worth School, Collyer's Sixth Form College (all in West Sussex) and the University of York, where he was a member of Derwent College and studied politics. He squatted in Hackney and worked for a while as a milkman.\nCareer.\nEnfield started his comedy career after being recruited at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival, as a writer for 3 episodes of the Radio 4 comedy programme \"Week Ending\" (1982-1983). In 1985, he took on a voice actor role alongside Chris Barrie, Rory Bremner, Steve Coogan, Hugh Dennis, and Ade Edmondson in the British satirical television comedy puppet show, \"Spitting Image\" (1985\u20131989, 1996).\nHe captured wider public attention when appearing on Channel 4's \"Saturday Live\" (1986-1988), as several different characters created with Paul Whitehouse. These quickly entered the national consciousness. Among these characters were Stavros, a Greek kebab shop owner with fractured English; and Loadsamoney, an obnoxious plasterer who constantly boasted about how much money he earned. The Loadsamoney character was created in reaction to the policies of the Thatcher government of the day, and took on a life of its own, sampling the songs \"Money, Money\" from the musical \"Cabaret\" and \"Money, Money, Money\" by ABBA to spawn a hit single in 1988 and a sell-out live tour. In May 1988, Labour Party leader Neil Kinnock used the term \"loadsamoney\" to criticise the policies of the Conservative government and journalists began to refer to the \"loadsamoney mentality\" and the \"loadsamoney economy\".\nAs a foil to Loadsamoney, Enfield and Whitehouse created the Geordie \"Bugger-All-Money\" and in 1988 Enfield appeared as both characters during the Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute Concert at Wembley Stadium. In time, Whitehouse and Enfield became disturbed that Loadsamoney was being seen in a positive light, rather than as a satirical figure, and they had him run over during a Comic Relief Red Nose Day show while leaving the studio after presenting host Lenny Henry with \"the biggest cheque of the night\"\u2014a physically huge cheque for ten pence. Enfield created \"Tory Boy\", a character which portrayed a young male Conservative Member of Parliament (MP).\nIn 1989, Enfield realised a personal project, \"Norbert Smith - a Life\", a spoof on British theatrical knights \"slumming\" in the film industry. He starred as Dirk Gently in the BBC Radio adaptations of \"Dirk Gently's Holistic Detective Agency\" (1986-1987).\nTV series.\nIn 1990, Enfield developed his BBC sketch show \"Harry Enfield's Television Programme\", later retitled \"Harry Enfield &amp; Chums\", with Whitehouse and Kathy Burke. Eschewing the alternative comedy style prevalent at the time, both versions of the show were indebted to comedians such as Dick Emery and Morecambe and Wise. Enfield and his co-performers created another group of nationally recognised characters for these shows, such as \"The Old Gits\", \"Tim Nice-But-Dim\", \"The Scousers\", \"Smashie and Nicey\", \"Wayne and Waynetta Slob\", \"Mr You-Don\u2019t-Wanna-Do-It-Like-That\", \"Annoying Kid Brother\", who grew into \"Kevin the Teenager\", and two old-fashioned presenters, \"Mr Cholmondley-Warner and Grayson\".\nIn 1991, Enfield played Dermot in the Thames Television sitcom \"Men Behaving Badly\" (1992), alongside Martin Clunes, Caroline Quentin and Leslie Ash. Enfield left after the first series, and was replaced in the second series by Neil Morrissey as Tony. Enfield is a professed fan of opera and fronted a Channel 4 documentary series on the subject. In 1991 Harry starred as Little Jim Morley in the series \"Gone to the Dogs\" (1991).\nAfter a short break from television, Enfield signed a new contract with BSkyB, but produced only one series, \"Harry Enfield's Brand Spanking New Show\". In 2002 Enfield returned to the BBC as the ageing rockstar Gary Bloke in \"Celeb\", which received poor audience ratings.\nIn 2002, Enfield was the first guest on the revamped version of BBC's \"Top Gear\" where he did a 1 minute 49.7 second lap. He also appeared on the show on 23 November 2008. Enfield has also narrated various TV documentaries, such as Discovery Wings' \"Classic British Aircraft\".\nIn 2007, he played Jim Stonem in the Channel 4 series \"Skins\". He reprised this role in the second series in 2008, and the third series in 2009, and directed two episodes in season two entitled \"Chris\" and \"Tony\" in 2008. He directed and starred alongside Paul Whitehouse in their own comedy series \"Harry &amp; Paul\" (originally titled \"Ruddy Hell! It's Harry &amp; Paul\") in 2007. For their work on this series, they both jointly won the 2009 British Academy Television Award for Best Comedy (Programme or Series). \nIn September 2013 Enfield appeared as Martin, the father of Jack Whitehall's character Alfie, in the BBC Three comedy series \"Bad Education\". In October 2014, Enfield and Paul Whitehouse returned to the characters of Frank and George in a sketch for Channel 4's testicular cancer awareness comedy show \"The Feeling Nuts Comedy Night\".\nIn August 2015, Enfield, alongside Whitehouse, in celebration of their 25-year partnership, presented \"An Evening With Harry Enfield and Paul Whitehouse\".\nIn 2016, he appeared as John Shakespeare, father of William Shakespeare, in the sitcom \"Upstart Crow\".\nSince 2016, Enfield has appeared as Prince Charles (later King Charles III) in the Channel 4 sitcom \"The Windsors\". For his portrayal of Charles, he was nominated for the British Academy Television Award for Best Male Comedy Performance in 2017.\nFilms.\nIn 2000, Enfield appeared in his first leading film role playing Kevin alongside Kathy Burke, who played the character's (male) friend Perry\u2014roles originally created for Enfield's television series\u2014in \"Kevin &amp; Perry Go Large\" (2000). The film charted the pair's attempt to become professional DJs by travelling to the nightclubs of Ibiza and pestering their idol, the DJ Eyeball Paul, played by Rhys Ifans, while gaining love and losing their virginity. Enfield also appeared as King George VI in \"\" (2004), a satire on Hollywood's tendency to change elements of history. In 2012, he starred with Simon Callow in the film \"Acts of Gordfrey\".\nHe reprised his role as Martin in \"The Bad Education Movie\" (2015). He appeared as Bill in the 2015 film \"Scottish Mussel\".\nIn 2015 Enfield and Jessica Hynes appeared as Mr and Mrs Jackson in a BBC film of the Arthur Ransome children's novel \"Swallows and Amazons\".\nIn 2022, Enfield appeared as Tony Blair in the made-for-television biographical musical comedy film \"\".\nVideo games.\nIn 2012, a likeness of his character Loadsamoney, named \"Harold Lott\", was released as a DLC skin for the game \"Killing Floor\".\nCommercials.\nEnfield appeared in some television commercials before becoming famous, including one made in 1987 for Tetley. Enfield's commercials include a series made in 1994 for Dime Bar. One commercial in this series had Enfield as a yokel refusing a Dime bar\u2014smooth on the outside, crunchy on the inside\u2014because he preferred armadillos\u2014smooth on the inside, crunchy on the outside. Later Enfield, with Paul Whitehouse, starred in a series of commercials for Hula Hoops as The Self-Righteous Brothers, characters from Enfield's television show. In 2004 Enfield starred in a series of commercials for Burger King in Paraguay as Dr Angus, a character intended to promote the company's newest hamburger. Two more characters from Enfield's TV series, Mr Cholmondley-Warner and Grayson, also appeared in commercials, for Mercury Communications. Also in 2004 Enfield provided the voice of \"The Roaming Gnome\" character used in Travelocity's U.S. advertising campaign. Enfield was also in commercials for Worthington Bitter.\nMusic.\nEnfield made a cameo appearance as 'the tea lady' during Blur's performance at the Olympics Closing Ceremony Celebration Concert in London's Hyde Park in 2012.\nHe also appeared alongside Damon Albarn's other project the Good, the Bad &amp; the Queen, as compere, during a live performance at the Tower of London, on 9 July 2007.\nIn January 2025, Enfield featured in \"Ego Death\", a film of 10 interconnected music videos accompanying an album by Archie Henderson's musical persona, Jazz Emu.\nTheatre.\nIn 2021 Enfield starred as Prince Charles in \"The Windsors: Endgame\" at the Prince of Wales Theatre in London. The show ran for a limited time and closed on 9 October 2021.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1997, Enfield married Lucy Lyster; they have three children. It was announced in August 2020 that the couple had separated.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38044", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38044", "title": "Heavy Equipment Transport System", "text": "US logistics vehicle\nHeavy Equipment Transporter System (HETS) is the name of a U.S. Army logistics vehicle transport system, the primary purpose of which is to transport the M1 Abrams tank. It is also used to transport, deploy, and evacuate armored personnel carriers, self-propelled artillery, armored bulldozers, and other heavy vehicles and equipment.\nThe current U.S. Army vehicle used in this role is an Oshkosh-built M1070 tractor unit in A0 and A1 configurations which is coupled to a DRS Technologies M1000 semi-trailer. This combination replaced the earlier Oshkosh-built M911 tractor unit and M747 semi-trailer.\nM1070 and M1000.\nTo meet a US Army requirement for the transport of the M1 Abrams series main battle tank (MBT) Oshkosh Truck Corporation, now Oshkosh Defense, proposed the M1070. A contract for 1,044 M1070s was placed, with production commencing in July 1992. The final U.S. Army contract for the original A0 version called for 195 vehicles. These were delivered between March 2001 and March 2003. A total of 2,488 A0 versions were delivered to the U.S. Army. Following extensive use, some M1070s have been reset to the original build standard by Oshkosh.\nThe M1070E1 model was developed in the mid-1990s in conjunction with the U.S. Army as a possible Technology Insertion Program (TIP) for the M1070. No orders were placed.\nIn March 2008, Oshkosh Defense announced a contract award from the U.S. Army to begin engineering and initial production of the next-generation of HET. Oshkosh announced in October 2010 its first delivery order for the M1070A1 HET. Production of the M1070A1 concluded in August 2014, with 1,591 new vehicles built.\nThe M1000 trailer is used with the M1070A0 and M1070A1 tractors. The M1000 was originally developed as a private venture by Southwest Mobile Systems, later Systems &amp; Electronics Inc (SEI), now DRS Technologies, as a response to a possible US Army requirement for transporting M1 and M1A1 MBTs. A production order for 1,066 M1000 units was placed by the U.S. Army in 1989. By July 2009 more than 2,600 M1000 trailers had been ordered.\nPrevious heavy equipment transports.\nM25 tank transporter.\nThe \"M25 tank transporter\" was a heavy tank transporter and tank recovery vehicle used in World War II and beyond by the US Army. Nicknamed the \"Dragon Wagon\", the M25 was composed of a 6\u00d76 armored tractor (\"M26\") and 40-ton trailer (\"M15\").\nM746/M747 \u2013 M911/M747.\nPrior to 1993, the U.S. Army employed the Commercial Heavy Equipment Transporter (C-HET), which consisted of either the M746 or the M911 truck tractor and the M747 semitrailer.\nDuring operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm the M911 vehicles were employed primarily to haul M1 Abrams tanks. However, they demonstrated poor durability when loads exceeded 60 tons. Some are still serving as heavy transports of other military equipment, such as cargo handling equipment.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38046", "revid": "830002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38046", "title": "M746 tractor", "text": ""}
{"id": "38047", "revid": "830002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38047", "title": "M911 tractor", "text": ""}
{"id": "38048", "revid": "830002", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38048", "title": "M747 trailer", "text": ""}
{"id": "38049", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38049", "title": "FIM-92 Stinger", "text": "U.S. man-portable surface-to-air missile\nThe FIM-92 Stinger is an American man-portable air-defense system (MANPADS) that operates as an infrared homing surface-to-air missile (SAM). It can be adapted to fire from a wide variety of ground vehicles, and from helicopters and drones as the Air-to-Air Stinger (ATAS). It entered service in 1981 and is used by the militaries of the United States and 29 other countries. It is principally manufactured by Raytheon Missiles &amp; Defense and is produced under license by Airbus Defence and Space in Germany and by Roketsan in Turkey.\nDescription.\nThe FIM-92 Stinger is a passive surface-to-air missile that can be shoulder-fired by a single operator (although standard military procedure calls for two operators\u00a0\u2013 team chief and gunner). The Stinger was intended to supplant the FIM-43 Redeye system, the principal difference being that, unlike the Redeye, the Stinger can acquire the target from head-on, giving much more time to acquire and destroy the target. The FIM-92B missile can also be fired from the M1097 Avenger and the M6 Linebacker. The missile is also capable of being deployed from a Humvee Stinger rack and can be used by airborne troops. A helicopter launched version exists and is called Air-to-Air Stinger (ATAS).\nThe missile is long and in diameter, with fins. The missile itself weighs , while the missile with its launch tube and integral sight, fitted with a gripstock and identification friend or foe (IFF) antenna, weighs approximately . It has a targeting range of up to and can engage low-altitude enemy threats at up to .\nThe Stinger is launched by a small ejection motor that pushes it a safe distance from the operator before engaging the main two-stage solid-fuel sustainer, which accelerates it to a maximum speed of . The warhead contains of HTA-3 (a mix of HMX, TNT, and aluminium powder) explosive with an impact fuze and a self-destruct timer that functions 17\u00a0seconds after launch.\nTo fire the missile, a BCU (Battery Coolant Unit) is inserted into the gripstock. This device consists of a supply of high-pressure gaseous argon, which is injected into the seeker to cryogenically cool it to operating temperature, and a thermal battery, which provides power for target acquisition: a single BCU provides power and coolant for roughly 45\u00a0seconds, after which another must be inserted if the missile has not been fired. The BCUs are somewhat sensitive to abuse and have a limited shelf life due to argon leakage. The IFF system receives power from a rechargeable battery, which is part of the IFF interrogator box, which plugs into the base of the gripstock's pistol grip. Guidance to the target is initially through proportional navigation, then switches to another mode that directs the missile towards the target airframe instead of its exhaust plume.\nThere are three main variants in use: the Stinger Basic, Stinger-Passive Optical Seeker Technique (POST), and Stinger-Reprogrammable Microprocessor (RMP). These correspond to the FIM-92A, FIM-92B, and FIM-92C and later variants respectively.\nThe POST and RMP variants have a dual-detector seeker: IR and UV. This allows it to distinguish targets from countermeasures much better than the Redeye and FIM-92A, which have IR-only. While modern flares can have an IR signature that is closely matched to the launching aircraft's engine exhaust, there is a readily distinguishable difference in UV signature between flares and jet engines. The Stinger-RMP is so-called because of its ability to load a new set of software via ROM chip inserted in the grip at the depot. If this download to the missile fails during power-up, basic functionality runs off the onboard ROM. The four-processor RMP has 4\u00a0KB of RAM for each processor. Since the downloaded code runs from RAM, there is little space to spare, particularly for processors dedicated to seeker input processing and target analysis.\nHistory.\nThe missile began as a program by General Dynamics to produce an improved variant of their 1967 FIM-43 Redeye. Production of the Redeye ran from 1969 to 1982, with a total production of around 85,000 missiles. The program was accepted for further development as Redeye II by the U.S. Army in 1971 and designated FIM-92; the \"Stinger\" appellation was chosen in 1972. Because of technical difficulties that dogged testing, the first shoulder launch was not until mid-1975. Production of the FIM-92A began in 1978. An improved Stinger with a new seeker, the FIM-92B, was produced from 1983 alongside the FIM-92A. Production of both the A and B types ended in 1987 with around 16,000 missiles produced.\nThe replacement FIM-92C began development in 1984, and production began in 1987. The first examples were delivered to frontline units in 1989. C-type missiles were fitted with a reprogrammable microprocessor, allowing for incremental firmware updates. Later missiles designated D received improvements to improve their ability to defeat countermeasures, and later upgrades to the D were designated G.\nThe FIM-92E or Stinger RMP Block I was developed from 1992 and delivered from 1995 (certain sources state that the FIM-92D is also part of the Block I development). The main changes were again in the sensor and the software, improving the missile's performance against low-signature targets. A software upgrade in 2001 was designated FIM-92F. The development of the Stinger RMP Block II began in 1996 using a new focal plane array sensor to improve the missile's effectiveness in \"high clutter\" environments and increase the engagement range to about 25,000 feet (7,600 m). Production was scheduled for 2004, but was cancelled due to budget cuts.\nSince 1984 the Stinger has been issued to many U.S. Navy warships for point defense, particularly in Middle Eastern waters, with a three-man team that can perform other duties when not conducting Stinger training or maintenance. Until it was decommissioned in September 1993, the U.S. Navy had at least one Stinger Gunnery Detachment attached to Beachmaster Unit Two in Little Creek Virginia. The sailors of this detachment would deploy to carrier battlegroups in teams of two to four sailors per ship as requested by Battle Group Commanders.\nReplacement.\nThe original Stinger's reprogrammable microprocessor has become obsolete in 2023, and a service life extension will keep the Block I in service until 2030. With the arsenal declining from obsolescence, on 10 November 2020 the U.S. Army issued a request for information for a replacement MANPADS. The new system will be compatible with the Stinger Vehicle Universal Launcher used on the IM-SHORAD and be able to defeat fixed and rotary-wing aircraft, as well as Group 2 and 3 UAS as well as or better than the Stinger. A contract for up to 8,000 missiles is planned to be awarded by 2026. The request for information to interested firms only went out in April 2022, and RTX and Lockheed Martin were selected to competitively develop the Stinger replacement in September 2023.\nAccording to Reuters, the U.S. government has signed a contract for 1,468 Stingers worth a total of $687 million, to replenish stock sent to Ukraine. Raytheon Chief Executive Greg Hayes said on 26 April 2022: \"Some of the components are no longer commercially available, and so we're going to have to go out and redesign some of the electronics in the missile of the seeker head. That's going to take us a little bit of time\".\nIn January 2023, the U.S. Army said it expected to increase Stinger production to 60 missiles per month by 2025, an increase of 50% from the current rate. The Dual Detector Assembly (DDA) will be redesigned because a previous DDA part is no longer being made. The old DDA will continue to be used in production up until stocks are exhausted, which is expected by 2026 when deliveries of Stingers with the new component are expected to begin.\nThe U.S. Army Combat Capabilities Development Command Aviation &amp; Missile Center (DEVCOM AvMC) launched the Red Wasp program, an advanced air defense interceptor initiative designed to enhance the capabilities of the long-serving FIM-92 Stinger missile. Red Wasp integrates solid fuel ramjet propulsion into the Stinger\u2019s form factor to significantly increase its effective range. The system uses an integral rocket ramjet, a dual-mode propulsion cycle that begins with a conventional solid rocket motor to accelerate the missile to supersonic speeds. After burnout, a front-end port opens to allow air into the combustion chamber, where it ignites the ramjet fuel. This air-breathing phase eliminates the need for onboard oxidizers, improving fuel efficiency and overall performance. Red Wasp is intended to enable soldiers to engage Short Range Air Defense (SHORAD) threats such as unmanned aerial systems equipped with Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities at much longer distances, helping to deny adversarial targeting and increase force survivability. As ISR sensor technology advances and extends the effective range of enemy surveillance, Red Wasp offers a critical countermeasure by allowing U.S. forces to intercept threats at greater ranges. Following a successful 2024 flight test at Dugway Proving Ground, ongoing development is focused on refining ramjet fuel formulations and thermal insulation, with plans to collaborate with industry partners and scale the technology for broader Army applications.\nService.\nFalklands War.\nThe Stinger's combat debut occurred during the Falklands War () fought between the United Kingdom and Argentina. At the onset of the conflict soldiers of the British Army's Special Air Service (SAS) had been clandestinely equipped with six missiles, although they had received little instruction in their use. The sole SAS trooper who had received training on the system, and was due to train other troops, was killed in a helicopter crash on 19 May.\nNonetheless, on 21 May 1982 an SAS soldier engaged and shot down an Argentine Pucar\u00e1 ground attack aircraft with a Stinger. On 30 May, at about 11:00 a.m., an A\u00e9rospatiale SA 330 Puma helicopter was brought down by another missile, also fired by the SAS, in the vicinity of Mount Kent. Six Argentine National Gendarmerie Special Forces troops were killed and eight more wounded.\nThe main MANPADS used by both sides during the Falklands War was the Blowpipe missile.\nSoviet War in Afghanistan.\nIn late 1985, several groups, such as Free the Eagle, began arguing the CIA was not doing enough to support the Mujahideen in the Soviet\u2013Afghan War. Michael Pillsbury, Vincent Cannistraro, and others put enormous bureaucratic pressure on the CIA to provide the Stinger to the rebels. The idea was controversial because up to that point, the CIA had been operating with the pretense that the United States was not involved in the war directly, for various reasons. All weapons supplied up to that point were non-U.S. sourced weapons, including Kalashnikov style assault rifles made in China and Egypt.\nThe final say-so came down to President General Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq of Pakistan, through whom the CIA had to pass all of its funding and weapons to the Mujahideen. President Zia constantly had to gauge how much he could \"make the pot boil\" in Afghanistan without provoking a Soviet invasion of his own country. According to George Crile III, U.S. Representative Charlie Wilson's relationship with Zia was instrumental in the final go-ahead for the Stinger introduction.\nWilson and his associates at first viewed the Stinger as \"just adding another component to the lethal mix we were building.\" Their increasingly successful Afghanistan strategy, formed largely by Michael G. Vickers, was based on a broad mix of weapons, tactics, and logistics, not a 'silver bullet solution' of a single weapon. Furthermore, the previous attempts to provide MANPADs to the Mujahideen, namely the SA-7 and Blowpipe, hadn't worked very well.\nAnother account came from Richard Clarke. In his book \"Against All Enemies\", he, as a junior Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Intelligence at the State Department, told his boss, Morton Abramowitz, they should release Stinger missiles to the Mujahideen. However, the CIA blocked it. Clarke was told to see his friend, Richard Perle who was then Assistant Secretary of Defense for Global Strategic Affairs. Perle didn't know about the CIA blocking the transfer and went to see Caspar Weinberger, the then United States Secretary of Defense who also didn't know CIA's move. Finally, the State and Defence Department and the United States National Security Council all in favour of arming the Mujahideen, the missiles were released. The condition via Perle was the Mujahideen had to be trained in Pakistan as not US Army personnel would enter Afghanistan.\nEngineer Ghaffar, of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar's Hezb-i-Islami, brought down the first Hind gunship with a Stinger on 25 September 1986 near Jalalabad. As part of Operation Cyclone, the CIA eventually supplied nearly 500 Stingers (some sources claim 1,500\u20132,000) to the Mujahideen in Afghanistan, and 250 launchers.\nThe impact of the Stinger on the outcome of the war is contested, particularly in the translation between the impact on the tactical battlefield to the strategic level withdrawal, and the influence the first had on the second. Dr. Robert F. Baumann (of the Staff College at Fort Leavenworth) described its impact on \"Soviet tactical operations\" as \"unmistakable\". This opinion was shared by Yossef Bodansky. Soviet, and later, Russian, accounts give little significance to the Stinger for strategically ending the war.\nAccording to the 1993 U.S. Air Defense Artillery Yearbook, the Mujahideen gunners used the supplied Stingers to score approximately 269 total aircraft kills in about 340 engagements, a 79% kill probability. If this report is accurate, Stingers would be responsible for over half of the 451 Soviet aircraft losses in Afghanistan. But these statistics are based on Mujahideen self-reporting, which is of unknown reliability. Selig Harrison rejects such figures, quoting a Russian general who claims the United States \"greatly exaggerated\" Soviet and Afghan aircraft losses during the war. According to Soviet figures, in 1987\u20131988, only 35 aircraft and 63 helicopters were destroyed by all causes. The Pakistan Army fired 28 Stingers at enemy aircraft with no kill. According to Soviet figures, by 25 December 1987, only 38 aircraft (airplanes, helicopters) were lost and 14 more were damaged by MANPADS (Blowpipe or Stinger), or 10.2% kill probability.\nAccording to Crile, who includes information from Alexander Prokhanov, the Stinger was a \"turning point\". Milt Bearden saw it as a \"force multiplier\" and morale booster. Representative Charlie Wilson, the politician behind Operation Cyclone, described the first Stinger Mi-24 shootdowns in 1986 as one of the three crucial moments of his experience in the war, saying \"we never really won a set-piece battle before September 26, and then we never lost one afterwards.\" He was given the first spent Stinger tube as a gift and kept it on his office wall. That launch tube is now on exhibit at the U.S. Army Air Defense Artillery Museum, Fort Sill, Oklahoma.\nOther military analysts tend to be dismissive of the impact of the Stinger. According to Alan J. Kuperman, the Stingers did make an impact at first but within a few months flares, beacons, and exhaust baffles were installed to disorient the missiles, along with night operation and terrain-hugging tactics to prevent the rebels from getting a clear shot. By 1988, Kuperman states, the Mujahideen had all but stopped firing them. Another source (Jonathan Steele) states that Stingers forced Soviet helicopters and ground attack planes to bomb from higher altitudes with less accuracy, but did not bring down many more aircraft than Chinese heavy machine guns and other less sophisticated anti-aircraft weaponry.\nThe last Stingers were supplied in 1988 after increasing reports of fighters selling them to Iran and thawing relations with Moscow. After the 1989 Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the U.S. attempted to buy back the Stinger missiles, with a $55 million program launched in 1990 to buy back around 300 missiles (US$183,300 each). The U.S. government collected most of the Stingers it had delivered, but by 1996 around 600 were unaccounted for and some found their way into Croatia, Iran, Sri Lanka, Qatar, and North Korea. According to the CIA, already in August 1988 the U.S. had demanded from Qatar the return of Stinger missiles. Wilson later told CBS he \"lived in terror\" that a civilian airliner would be shot down by a Stinger, but he did not have misgivings about having provided Stingers to defeat the Soviets.\nThe story of the Stingers in Afghanistan was popularly told in the media by Western sources primarily, notably in \"\" by George Crile, and \"Ghost Wars\" by Steve Coll.\nAngolan civil war.\nThe Reagan administration provided 310 Stingers to Jonas Savimbi's UNITA movement in Angola between 1986 and 1989. As in Afghanistan, efforts to recover missiles after the end of hostilities proved incomplete. The battery of a Stinger lasts for four or five years, so any battery supplied in the 1980s would now be inoperative but during the Syrian Civil War, insurgents showed how easily they switched to different batteries, including common car batteries, as power sources for several MANPADS models.\nLibyan invasion of Chad.\nThe French army used 15 firing positions and 30 missiles purchased in 1983 for operations in Chad. The 35th Parachute Artillery Regiment made an unsuccessful fire during a Libyan bombardment on 10 September 1987 and shot down a Hercules transport aircraft on 7 July 1988.\nThe Chadian government received Stinger missiles from the United States, when Libya invaded the northern part of the African country.\nOn 8 October 1987, a Libyan Su-22MK was shot down by a FIM-92A fired by Chadian forces. The pilot, Capt. Diya al-Din, ejected and was captured. He was later granted political asylum by the French government. During the recovery operation, a Libyan MiG-23MS was shot down by a FIM-92A.\nTajik civil war.\nTajik Islamist opposition forces operating from Afghanistan during the 1992\u201397 Tajik civil war encountered a heavy air campaign launched by Russia and Uzbekistan to prop up the government in Dushanbe that included border and cross-border raids. During one of these operations, a Sukhoi Su-24M was shot down on 3 May 1993 with a Stinger fired by the opposition. Both Russian pilots were rescued.\nChechen War.\nRussian officials claimed several times that the Chechen militia and insurgents possessed US-made Stinger missiles. They attributed a few of their aerial losses to the American MANPADS. The presence of such missiles was confirmed by photo evidence, and were said to originate from Afghan smuggling routes that passed through Georgia.\nIt is believed one Sukhoi Su-24 was shot down by a Stinger missile during the Second Chechen War.\nSri Lankan civil war.\nThe Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam also managed to acquire one or several Stingers, possibly from former Mujahideen stocks, and used at least one to down a Sri Lanka Air Force Mi-24 on 10 November 1997.\nUnited States.\nIn 2000, the U.S. inventory contained 13,400 missiles. The total cost of the program is $7,281,000,000.\nIt is rumored that the United States Secret Service has Stinger missiles to defend the President, a notion that has never been dispelled; however, U.S. Secret Service plans favor moving the President to a safer place in the event of an attack rather than shooting down the plane, lest the missile (or the wreckage of the target aircraft) hit innocents.\nDuring the 1980s, the Stinger was used to support different US-aligned guerrilla forces, notably the Afghan Mujahidins, the Chad government against the Libyan invasion and the Angolan UNITA. The Nicaraguan contras were not provided with Stingers due to the lack of fixed wing aircraft of the Sandinista government, as such the previous generation FIM-43 Redeye was considered adequate.\nSyrian civil war.\nIn the Syrian civil war, Turkey reportedly helped to transport a limited amount of FIM-92 Stingers to the Free Syrian Army.\nOn 27 February 2020, during the northwestern offensive launched in December 2019 by the Syrian regime (backed by Russia, Iran and Hezbollah), Russian and Syrian aircraft (variously reportedly as Russian Su-34s and Syrian Su-22) attacked a Turkish military convoy near Idlib, killing 36 Turkish soldiers. That day, video footage emerged of alleged Turkish soldiers (backing Syrian opposition fighters) firing what apparently looks like a Roketsan-made Stinger against either Russian or Syrian aircraft (or possibly against both).\nRusso-Ukrainian War.\nIn February 2022, several countries announced that they were providing Stinger missiles to Ukrainian forces defending against the Russian invasion.\nGermany announced that it would provide 500 missiles.\nDenmark said that it will provide parts for 300 missiles, to be assembled in the United States.\nThe Netherlands stated they would supply 200 units.\nItaly,\nLatvia,\nLithuania,\nand the United States each stated that they would provide undisclosed amounts.\nBy 7 March, the U.S. reported that it and its NATO allies had together sent more than 2,000 Stinger missiles to Ukraine. In late April 2022, Raytheon Technologies CEO Greg Hayes told investors that the company was experiencing supply chain issues and would not be able to ramp up production of Stinger missiles until 2023. This delay was in part due to the fact the Stinger was scheduled to be replaced in the 2020s and thus contained obsolete components, which have to be redesigned for modern procurement. As of 11 May 2022, the U.S. had sent a quarter of its aging Stinger missile stockpile to Ukraine.\nOn 20 August 2022, Russia supplied a single Stinger to Iran, for them to attempt reverse engineering the modern version of it.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38050", "revid": "45976574", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38050", "title": "Aden", "text": "Temporary capital of Yemen\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nHistorical affiliations\n Kingdom of Awsan\n Himyarite Kingdom\n Kingdom of Aksum\n Sasanian Yemen\n First Islamic state\n Rashidun Caliphate\n Umayyad Caliphate\n Abbasid Caliphate\n Ziyadid dynasty\n Najahid dynasty\n Sulayhid dynasty\n Zurayid dynasty\n Ayyubid dynasty\n Rasulid dynasty\n Tahirid Sultanate\n Mamluk Sultanate\n Portuguese Aden\n Yemen Eyalet\n Qasimid State\n Yemen Vilayet\n Qasimid State\n Sultanate of Lahej 1728\u20131839\n Aden Province 1839\u20131937\n Aden Colony 1937\u20131963\n Aden protectorate 1937\u20131963\n State of Aden within the FSA 1963\u20131967\n South Yemen 1967\u20131990\n Republic of Yemen 1990\u20131994\n Democratic Republic of Yemen 1994\n Republic of Yemen 1994\u2013present\nAden (; ) is a port city located in Yemen in the southern part of the Arabian peninsula, on the north coast of the Gulf of Aden, positioned near the eastern approach to the Red Sea. It is situated approximately 170\u00a0km (110\u00a0mi) east of the Bab-el-Mandeb strait. With its strategic location on the coastline, Aden serves as a gateway between the Red Sea and the Arabian Sea, making it a crucial maritime hub connecting Africa, Asia, and the Middle East. As of September 2025, Aden has a population of approximately 1,154,000 residents, making it one of the largest cities in Yemen.\nAden is the capital and principal part of Aden Governorate, encompassing eight districts. During the colonial period, the name \"Aden\" referred to the area along the north coast of the gulf, encompassing Tawahi, Mualla, Crater, and much of Khor Maksar district. The western harbour peninsula, known as \"Little Aden\", now falls within the Al Buraiqeh district.\nBefore gaining independence, Aden comprised distinct sectors: Crater, the original port; Ma'alla, the modern port; Tawahi, formerly \"Steamer Point\"; and Gold Mohur resorts. Khormaksar, on the isthmus connecting Aden to the mainland, hosts diplomatic missions, Aden University's main offices, and Aden International Airport. On the mainland, sectors include Sheikh Othman, an old oasis area; Al-Mansura, a British-planned town; and Madinat ash-Sha'b (formerly Madinat al-Ittihad), the former capital of the South Arabian Federation, now housing a large power/desalination facility and additional Aden University faculties.\nAden encloses the eastern side of a vast, natural harbour that constitutes the modern port. Little Aden was developed as the site of the oil refinery and tanker port. Both were established and operated by British Petroleum until they were turned over to South Yemeni government ownership and control in 1978.\nAden used to be the capital of South Yemen until its unity with North Yemen on 22 May 1990. It is currently the temporary capital of Yemen since the 2014 \"Coup d'\u00e9tat\", hosting some members of the Cabinet of Yemen mainly in al-Maashiq Palace. It is also the seat of the secessionist Southern Transitional Council, which exercises control over the city.\nEtymology.\nAden is a home and a place for ships, and the word Aden means reside in the place, so the word \"Aden\" means resident, and it is said \"Aden Al-Balad\", meaning the settlement of the country. Among the sayings of geographers about the city:\nYaqut al-Hamwi said: \"It is a famous city on the coast of the Indian Sea, towards the Yemen, and it is poor, with no water or pasture. They drink from a spring between it and Aden, about a distance of about today, and despite that, it is bad, except that this place is the port for Indian ships, and merchants gather there for that reason, as it is a town of trade.\" And it is added to Abyan, which is the opposite of Aden in its entirety.\nIbn Manzur said: \"It is a country on the edge of the sea in the furthest part of Yemen.\"\nIbn Khaldun said: \"This Aden is one of the most fortified cities in Yemen, and it is on the bank of the Indian Sea. It is still a country of trade from the time of the Trabaids, and most of them were built with stones, which is why silk merchants visit it often.\"\nHistory.\nAntiquity.\nAden is an ancient port and was mentioned by the Greeks under the name (), which means an Arabic trade port. The port's convenient position on the sea route between India and Europe has made Aden desirable to rulers who sought to possess it at various times throughout history. Known as Eudaemon (, meaning \"blissful, prosperous\") in the 1st century BC, it was a transshipping point for the Red Sea trade, but fell on hard times when new shipping practices by-passed it and made the daring direct crossing to India in the 1st century AD, according to the \"Periplus of the Erythraean Sea\". The same work describes Aden as \"a village by the shore\", which would well describe the town of Crater while it was still little developed. There is no mention of fortification at this stage. Aden was more an island than a peninsula, as the isthmus (a tombolo) was not then so developed as it is today. Aden was explicitly mentioned by this name in the Book of Ezekiel, which talks about Jerusalem, and it says:\"The merchants of Sheba and Raamah are your merchants. They set up your markets with the finest perfumes and every precious stone and gold. Harran, Qena, and Aden are the merchants of Sheba, and Assyria and Kilmud are your merchants.\"At its beginning, the city was a small peninsula with no significant natural resources, but its location between Egypt and India made it important in the ancient Indian Ocean trade route. The city was the home of the ancient Kingdom of Awsan from the eighth to seventh centuries BC. In the beginning of the seventh century BC, Karib\u02beil Watar I, king of the Kingdom of Sheba, launched a campaign against Awsan during which, according to the Sabaean texts, sixteen thousand people were killed, forty thousand people were enslaved, and the kings of Awsan made offerings to the god Almaqah, according to the inscription that Karib\u02beil Watar I left in Sirwah, commemorating his victory.\nIn the second half of the first century BC, the Roman Emperor Augustus Caesar determined to control Arabia Felix and reach the Indian Ocean. Aelius Gallus' Roman expedition to Arabia Felix (26\u201325 BCE) aimed to capture the Sabaean capital of Marib but failed due to extreme desert conditions, disease, and logistical challenges. After an unsuccessful week-long siege, the army, weakened by illness and dehydration, withdrew, losing most of its ~10,000 troops to environmental factors and disease\" The Himyarites overthrew the Kingdom of Sheba in 275 AD and took control of Aden. Recent incomplete archaeological studies suggest that the Himyarites were the ones who built the huge water cisterns currently known as the \"Cisterns of Aden\", which stored approximately 136,382,757 liters of water.\nThe Himyarite Kingdom fell in the first quarter of the sixth century AD. Yusuf Dhu Nuwas mentioned Bab al-Mandab in one of his writings. The forces of the Kingdom of Aksum were entering Yemen through it. The Byzantine Emperor Justinian I sent a fleet to fight the Himyarite Jews and support the Kingdom of Aksum and the Christians of Najran. The fleet entered through Aden. Byzantine sources indicate that the Sasanian Empire took control of the city in 571 AD.\nA local legend in Yemen states that Aden may be as old as human history itself. Some also believe that Cain and Abel are buried somewhere in the city.\nMedieval history.\nAlthough the pre-Islamic Himyar civilisation was capable of building large structures, there seems to have been little fortification at this stage. Fortifications at Mareb and other places in Yemen and the Hadhramaut make it clear that both the Himyar and the Sabean cultures were well capable of it. Thus, watchtowers, since destroyed, are possible. However, the Arab historians Ibn al Mujawir and Abu Makhramah attribute the first fortification of Aden to Beni Zuree'a. Abu Makhramah has also included a detailed biography of Muhammad Azim Sultan Qamarbandi Naqsh in his work, Tarikh ul-Yemen. The aim seems to have been twofold: to keep hostile forces out and to maintain revenue by controlling the movement of goods, thereby preventing smuggling. In its original form, some of this work was relatively feeble.\nWith the introduction of Islam to Yemen in the seventh century AD, Aden experienced a period of stagnation that lasted until the ninth century AD. In the early years of Islam, Aden belonged to the province of Jund (Taiz). It was controlled by the state of Ziyadid and the Sulayhid. After the death of Ali bin Muhammad Al-Sulayhi, his son took charge of Zurayids, and Aden continued to pay the annual royalty until Queen Arwa bint Ahmed Al-Sulayhi reduced it. After the fall of the Sulayhid state, the Banu Zurayi became independent in Aden, taking advantage of the Sulayhids\u2019 preoccupation with the Khawlan tribes. The Zurayites continued to rule Aden, Lahj, and Abyan for less than forty years until they fell under the Ayyubids\u2019 control of the city. A major battle took place between Turan Shah bin Ayyub and Yasser bin Bilal al-Muhammadi, Minister of State, and the Zurayiyyah were defeated and al-Muhammadi fled to Taiz. One of the most important contributors to the defeat of the Zurayids was their ongoing wars with the Bani Mahdi in Tihama and the departure of their army to confront the Ayyubids instead of fortifying themselves in Aden.\nAfter 1175, rebuilding in a more solid form began, and ever since then Aden has been a popular city attracting sailors and merchants from Egypt, Sindh, Gujarat, East Africa and even China. According to Muqaddasi, Persians formed the majority of Aden's population in the 10th century. It was visited by the medieval scholar Ibn Battuta in the 14th century, who described Aden's reservoirs, the Cisterns of Tawila, \"These reservoirs accumulate rainwater for the sole purpose of drinking for the city's citizens.\"\nDuring the Ayyubid period in Yemen, Sana'a and its environs were more hostile to their presence than other regions. The Zaidi tribes were able to defeat the Ayyubids in 1226, but Omar bin Rasul, the founder of the Rasulid state, was able to repel them, so he tightened his control over Aden. The city regained its position during the days of the Rasulids, so they dug wells and built schools, and Aden flourished commercially. The kings of Bani Rasul were also merchants and enacted a number of laws and regulations to codify trade in the city.\nThe Banu Tahir were able to control Aden after the Banu Rasool, and the Italian traveller Lodovico di Verthama describes it as one of the most powerful cities seen on Earth during the days of the Tahirids.\nIn 1513, the Portuguese, led by Afonso de Albuquerque, launched an unsuccessful four-day naval siege of Aden. The Mamluks in Egypt sensed the danger and sent a force led by Hussein al-Kurdi. The victorious King Amer bin Abdul Wahhab provided great aid to the Kurds, but he suffered a heavy defeat in the Battle of Diu. The Mamluks sent a second fleet, but the victorious king refused to cooperate with the Mamluks because he had succeeded in repelling the Portuguese from Aden without their help. Hussein al-Kurdi became angry and allied with the Zaidi Imam, who was opposed to the Tahirids, al-Mutawakkil Sharaf al-Din, and the Tahirid cities fell successively, with the exception of Aden. The Ottoman Empire took control of the city in 1538. The Ottomans' goal was to prevent the Portuguese from controlling Aden, so the city witnessed difficult days, in addition to the fact that the port of Mocha gained greater importance at the expense of Aden during the sixteenth century. The city's population declined and it turned into a small village with a population of no more than 600 people. While its population was approximately eighty thousand people during the days of the Rasulid state.In 1421, China's Ming dynasty Yongle Emperor ordered principal envoy grand eunuch Li Xing and grand eunuch Zhou Man of Zheng He's fleet to convey an imperial edict with hats and robes to bestow on the king of Aden. The envoys boarded three treasure ships and set sail from Sumatra to the port of Aden. This event was recorded in the book \"Yingyai Shenglan\" by Ma Huan who accompanied the imperial envoy.\nAfter Ottoman rule, Aden was ruled by the Sultanate of Lahej, under suzerainty of the Zaidi imams of Yemen. The first political intercourse between Lahej and the British took place in 1799, when a naval force was sent from Great Britain, with a detachment of troops from India, to occupy the island of Perim and prevent all communication of the French in Egypt with the Indian Ocean, by way of the Red Sea. The island of Perim was found unsuitable for troops, and the Sultan of Lahej, Ahmed bin Abdul Karim, received the detachment for some time at Aden. He proposed to enter into an alliance and to grant Aden as a permanent station, but the offer was declined. A Treaty was, however, concluded with the Sultan in 1802 by Admiral Sir Home Popham, who was instructed to enter into political and commercial alliances with the chief rulers on the Arabian coast of the Red Sea.\nModern history.\nThe situation was different in the north of the country, where the Zaidis did not recognise the authority of the Ottomans and revolted against them many times, the most recent of which was the revolution of Imam \"Al-Mansur Billah Al-Qasim bin Muhammad bin Al-Qasim\", who and his son \"Al-Mu'ayyad Billah Muhammad\" were able to unite the tribes and expel the Ottomans. The imams relied on the revenues from the port of Mocha, and Aden was not as important as the Abadlahs were. At the end of the eighteenth century, Sultan \"Fadl al-Abdali\" concluded an alliance with the Yafi tribes to rebel against the Zaidi imams and monopolise Aden's revenues equally among them. The Sultan of Lahej got rid of the imams, but he did not fulfil his promise to Yafa. The Zaidi imams did not recognise inheritance and saw fighting for the imamate, so the war between \"Al-Nasir Muhammad bin Ishaq\" and \"Al-Mansur Al-Hussein bin Al-Mutawakkil\" prolonged, so Al-Abdali took the opportunity to declare his independence in Lahej and Aden. The English had been visiting Aden and Mocha from 1609, led by Sir Henry Middleton, who was imprisoned, his ships confiscated, and eight of his men killed.\nThe British tried to conclude treaties with the Zaidi imams after the Ottomans were expelled from Aden. They visited Sana'a and Mocha, but they treated the British ambassador poorly and rejected his offer. Things were different when the Abdali gained independence from Lahj and Medina. They signed a treaty with the British in 1802, stipulating that they build a factory in Crater and allocate a special cemetery for British subjects free of charge. The Abdali wanted protection from the tribes. Sultan Fadl bin Ali was killed by Yafi\u2019 gunmen, then one of the sheikhs of Al-Hujariya invaded Lahj and besieged it for five months. Al-Awaliq also besieged it with eight thousand fighters, and they did not leave until Sultan Ahmed bin Abdul Karim paid them seven thousand dollars. Then the Fadl family attacked Aden in 1836.\nBritish administration 1839\u20131967.\nIn 1609 \"The Ascension\" was the first English ship to visit Aden, before sailing on to Mocha during the fourth voyage of the East India Company.\nBritish interests in Aden began in 1796 with Napoleon's invasion of Egypt, after which a British fleet docked at Aden for several months at the invitation of the sultan. The French were defeated in Egypt in 1801, and their privateers were tracked down over the subsequent decade. By 1800, Aden was a small village with a population of 600 Arabs, Somalis, Jews, and Indians\u2014housed for the most part in huts of reed matting erected among ruins recalling a vanished era of wealth and prosperity. As there was little British trade in the Red Sea, most British politicians until the 1830s had no further interest in the area beyond the suppression of piracy. However, a small number of government officials and the East India Company officials thought that a British base in the area was necessary to prevent another French advance through Egypt or Russian expansion through Persia. The emergence of Muhammad Ali of Egypt as a strong local ruler only increased their concerns. The governor of Bombay from 1834 to 1838, Sir Robert Grant, was one of those who believed that India could only be protected by preemptively seizing \"places of strength\" to protect the Indian Ocean.\nThe Red Sea increased in importance after the steamship sailed from Bombay to the Suez isthmus in 1830, stopping at Aden with the sultan's consent to resupply with coal. Although cargo was still carried around the Cape of Good Hope in sailing ships, a steam route to the Suez could provide a much quicker option for transporting officials and important communications. Grant felt that armed ships steaming regularly between Bombay and Suez would help secure British interests in the region and did all he could to progress his vision. After lengthy negotiations due to the costs of investing in the new technology, the government agreed to pay half the costs for six voyages per year and the East India Company board approved the purchase of two new steamers in 1837. Grant immediately announced that monthly voyages to Suez would take place, despite the fact that no secure coal supplying station had been found. The British first stationed a coal depot on the island of Socotra in 1834. However, due to the lack of suitable infrastructure there, they quickly lost interest in Socotra and turned towards Aden instead.\nIn 1838, under Muhsin bin Fadl, Lahej ceded including Aden to the British. On 19 January 1839, the British East India Company landed Royal Marines at Aden to definitively conquer the territory (the so-called Aden Expedition) and stop attacks by pirates against British shipping to India. In 1850 it was declared a free trade port, with the liquor, salt, arms, and opium trades developing duties as it won all the coffee trade from Mokha. The port lies about equidistant from the Suez Canal, Bombay, and Zanzibar, which were all important British possessions. Aden had been an entrep\u00f4t and a way-station for ships in the ancient world. There, supplies, particularly water, were replenished, so, in the mid-19th century, it became necessary to replenish coal and boiler water. Thus Aden acquired a coaling station at Steamer Point and Aden was to remain under British control until November 1967.\nUntil 1937, Aden was governed as part of British India and was known as the Aden Settlement. Its original territory was enlarged in 1857 by the island of Perim, in 1868 by the Khuriya Muriya Islands, and in 1915 by the island of Kamaran. The settlement would become Aden Province in 1935.\nIn 1937, the settlement was detached from India and became the Colony of Aden, a British Crown colony. The change in government was a step towards the change in the official currency unit. When British India became independent in 1947, Indian rupees (divided into annas) were replaced in Aden by East African shillings. The hinterland of Aden and Hadhramaut were also loosely tied to Britain as the Aden Protectorate, which was overseen from Aden.\nAden's location also made it a useful \"entrep\u00f4t\" for mail passing between places around the Indian Ocean and Europe. Thus, a ship passing from Suez to Bombay could leave mail for Mombasa at Aden for collection (See \"Postage stamps and postal history of Aden\"). In December 1947, a three-day riot broke out in reaction to the drafting of the Partition Plan for Palestine. The riots and their repression by the Aden Protectorate Levies saw the killing of 76-82 Jews, 33 Arabs, 4 Muslim Indians and 1 Somali, in addition to looting and damaging of property. After the Suez Crisis in 1956, the British held on to Aden as an outpost in the region for another decade. The British authorities had already decided to further expand its port shortly before the Suez Canal's 1956 closure.\nAden sent a team of two to the 1962 British Empire and Commonwealth Games in Perth, Western Australia.\nFederation of South Arabia and the Aden Emergency.\nIn order to stabilise Aden and the surrounding Aden Protectorate from the designs of the Egyptian backed republicans of North Yemen, the British attempted gradually to unite the disparate states of the region in preparation for eventual independence. On 18 January 1963, the Colony of Aden was incorporated into the Federation of Arab Emirates of the South against the wishes of North Yemen. The city became the State of Aden and the Federation was renamed the Federation of South Arabia (FSA).\nAn insurgency against British administration known as the Aden Emergency began with a grenade attack by the communist National Liberation Front (NLF), against the British High Commissioner on 10 December 1963, killing one person and injuring fifty, and a \"state of emergency\" was declared.\nIn 1964, Britain announced its intention to grant independence to the FSA in 1968, but that British troops would remain in Aden. The security situation deteriorated as NLF and FLOSY (Front for the Liberation of Occupied South Yemen) vied for the upper hand.\nIn January 1967, there were mass riots between the NLF and their rival FLOSY supporters in the old Arab quarter of Aden town. This conflict continued until mid February, despite the intervention of British troops. On 20 June 1967, 23 British Army soldiers were ambushed and shot dead by members of Aden Police during the Aden Mutiny in the Crater District. During the period there were as many attacks on the British troops by both sides as against each other culminating in the destruction of an Aden Airways DC3 plane in the air with no survivors.\nThe increased violence was a determining factor in the British ensuring all families were evacuated more quickly than initially intended, as recorded in \"From Barren Rocks to Living Stones\".\nOn 30 November 1967, British troops were evacuated, leaving Aden and the rest of the FSA under NLF control. The Royal Marines, who had been the first British troops to arrive in Aden in 1839, were the last to leave \u2013 with the exception of a Royal Engineer detachment (10 Airfields Squadron left Aden on 13 December 1967). As part of a larger Royal Navy task force, 's helicopters lifted off remaining Royal Marine commandos left to secure the airfield.\nPost-independence.\nThe last British soldier left Aden on November 30, 1967, and the National Liberation Front had the upper hand at the expense of the Front for the Liberation of Occupied South Yemen, whose members were divided between joining the National Front or leaving for North Yemen, so Abdullah Al-Asanj and Muhammad Basindwa left for North Yemen. Qahtan al-Sha'bi assumed the presidency of the new state, and the sheikhdoms of the Eastern Protectorate of Hadramaut and Al-Mahra were annexed to the new state. Al-Shaabi took over a new country with a collapsed economy. Civilian workers and businessmen left, and British support ceased. The closure of the Suez Canal in 1967 played an important role in the country's economy, as it reduced the number of ships crossing Aden by 75%.\nThe new state was divided into six governorates on December 11, 1967, in order to end the manifestations of tribalism in the state and ignore the tribal borders between the defunct sheikhdoms. On March 20, 1968, Qahtan dismissed all leftist leaders from the government and party membership. He was able to put down a rebellion led by leftist factions in the army in May of the same year, and faced new rebellions from leftist parties in July, August and December 1968. This is because all Arab countries welcomed the front. National Liberation received a cold reception. Regimes like Egypt wanted to merge the National Front with the Front for the Liberation of Occupied South Yemen, where the leftist section was more numerous than the supporters of the popular Qahtan. They wanted a regime that would lead the masses and face the great challenges facing the new state, the most important of which was the bankruptcy of the treasury.\nQahtan al-Shaabi dismissed Interior Minister Muhammad Ali Haitham on 16 June 1969, but the latter, with his ties to the tribes and the army, reassembled the leftist forces that had been dispersed by President Qahtan al-Shaabi, and they were able to place him under house arrest on 22 June. A presidential committee was formed from Five people: Salem Rabie Ali, who became president, Muhammad Saleh Al-Awlaki, Ali Antar, Abdel Fattah Ismail, and Muhammad Ali Haitham, who became prime minister. This group took an extreme leftist line, declaring its support for the Palestinians and the Dhofar Revolution, and strengthening its relationship with the Soviet Union. West Germany severed its relationship with the state due to its recognition of East Germany, and the United States also severed its relationship in October 1969. The new powers issued a new constitution, nationalised foreign banks and insurance companies, and changed the name of the country to the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen in line with the Marxist\u2013Leninist approach they followed. A centrally planned economy was established. The port of Aden was the largest source of national income for the Republic of South Yemen, but the closure of the Suez Canal by Egypt between 1967 and 1975 - reduced commercial activities in the port.\nSalem Rabie Ali wanted to adopt a practical approach, so he communicated with the President of North Yemen, Ibrahim al-Hamdi, and made attempts to restore normal relations with Western countries. During his presidency, relations between South Yemen and Saudi Arabia were established in 1976. President Salmin, as he is known, coveted more Soviet support, so the contract with Saudi Arabia worried him. The Soviets pushed them to increase aid, but relations with Saudi Arabia became strained again in 1977 following the assassination of North Yemeni President Ibrahim al-Hamdi. It is believed that Salem Rabie Ali orchestrated the assassination of Ahmed Hussein al-Ghashmi in revenge for Ibrahim al-Hamdi. Salem Rabie Ali was subjected to a quick trial that ended with his execution and Abdel Fattah Ismail assuming the presidency of South Yemen. Relations with North Yemen became tense, due to Fattah's support for the factions opposing Ali Abdullah Saleh, who was more fanatical than his predecessors. Relations with the Soviet Union became active in an unprecedented way, so the Front War broke out in 1978, in which the Soviet Union and the United States intervened.\nAli Nasser Muhammad was able to force Abd al-Fattah Ismail al-Jawfi to resign for \"health reasons\", and Ismail was exiled to Moscow two years after he assumed the presidency. Despite the approach of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen and its removal of tribal aspects, tribalism remained alive among politicians and the public despite the exposure of its sheikhs. Tribes from their authorities. Tribal and regional favouritism and nepotism remained rife in southern Yemen, as political forces called on their tribal and regional affiliations during crises.\nBy January 1986, Aden was torn apart by the rivalry of two factions in the ruling Socialist Party, when President Ali Nasser Muhammad's guards launched a surprise attack on the political party's office in Aden on January 13, 1986. This was the beginning of the 1986 civil war in South Yemen. The basis of the war was regional. Ali Nasser Muhammad was from Abyan Governorate, while most of those killed in the political party office were from Al-Dhalea and Lahj. Military brigades from those areas bombed Aden from land and sea, forcing Ali Nasser Muhammad to flee and hundreds of thousands of civilians and soldiers to flee to northern Yemen, including Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi. This was followed by systematic killings and liquidations against the people of Abyan Governorate, on charges that they were collaborating with Ali Nasser Muhammad. Nearly ten thousand people were killed and thousands migrated towards North Yemen, most of whom were from Abyan and Shabwa.\nWith the unification of north and south Yemen in 1990, Aden was no longer a national capital but remained the capital of \"Aden Governorate\" which covered an area similar to that of the Aden Colony.\nOn 29 December 1992, Al Qaeda conducted its first known terrorist attack in Aden, bombing the Gold Mohur Hotel, where US servicemen were known to have been staying en route to Somalia for Operation Restore Hope. A Yemeni and an Austrian tourist died in the attack.\nThat war marked the end of the state of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, and Haider Abu Bakr Al-Attas assumed the presidency until May 22, 1990, the unity of South Yemen with North Yemen, and the establishment of the Republic of Yemen. At that time, Ali Salem Al-Baidh was considered Ali Abdullah Saleh's deputy, and Haider Abu Bakr Al-Attas was considered prime minister, and after the 1993 elections. Conflicts began within the ruling coalition, and Vice President Ali Salem Al-Beidh retreated to Aden in August 1993. The general security situation in the country deteriorated, and the complete integration of the two armies failed. The southern forces, which were transferred to Amran, clashed with the northern forces there, and the forces of the northern giants, which were transferred to Amran, clashed. Abyan with the southern forces, and the political parties signed the 1994 Covenant and Agreement, in the Jordanian capital, on February 20, 1994, in an attempt to end the crisis, and successive events led to the outbreak of the Summer 1994 civil war, and the southern military leaders who fled after the events of 1986 joined the ranks of the forces loyal to former President Ali Abdullah Saleh, and supported the Unity Army in the war against their former comrades in 1994 in the war against the separatists. At the forefront of these emerged a group of the brightest officers, such as President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi, who became Minister of Defense at the time, the former Chief of Staff, Major General Abdullah Aliwa, and Major General Salem Qatan, who was assassinated by an Al-Qaeda gunman. After the war, Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi was appointed Vice President of the Republic, and remained in office. He held his position until 2012, when he was elected president of the country.\nMembers of al Qaeda attempted to bomb the US guided-missile destroyer \"The Sullivans\" at the port of Aden as part of the 2000 millennium attack plots. The boat that had the explosives in it sank, forcing the planned attack to be aborted.\nThe bombing attack on destroyer USS \"Cole\" took place in Aden on 12 October 2000.\nIn 2007 growing dissatisfaction with unification led to the formation of the secessionist South Yemen Movement. According to \"The New York Times\", the Movement's mainly underground leadership includes socialists, Islamists and individuals desiring a return to the perceived benefits of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen.\nTemporary capital and civil war.\nAden remained in a state of political stagnation for 25 years until President Abd Rabbuh Mansour Hadi took refuge there and carried out his work from the Republican Palace in Aden. Hadi declared Aden the temporary capital on March 7, 2015, instead of Sana\u2019a, which he described as occupied by the Houthis. This was after the Houthis took control of Sanaa on September 21, 2014, and imposed a siege on the Republican Palace and the home of President Hadi on January 20. Hadi submitted his resignation on January 22 to Parliament, which did not hold a session to accept or reject the resignation, and Hadi remained under house arrest imposed by the Houthis. Until he was able to leave for Aden on February 21, 2015, he retracted his resignation, and announced a statement in which he said, \"All decisions taken since September 21 are invalid and have no legitimacy.\"\nPresident Abd Rabbuh Mansur Hadi fled to Aden, his hometown, in February 2015 after being deposed in the coup d'\u00e9tat that many consider to be the start of the Yemeni civil war. Others consider that the civil war began in September 2014 when Houthi forces took over the capital city Sana'a, which was followed by a rapid Houthi takeover of the government.\nHadi declared in Aden that he was still Yemen's legitimate president and called on state institutions and loyal officials to relocate to Aden. In a televised speech on 21 March 2015, he declared Aden to be Yemen's \"economic and temporary capital\" while Sana'a is controlled by the Houthis.\nAden was hit by violence in the aftermath of the coup d'\u00e9tat, with forces loyal to Hadi clashing with those loyal to former president Ali Abdullah Saleh in a battle for Aden International Airport on 19 March 2015. After the airport battle, the entire city became a battleground for the Battle of Aden, which left large parts of the city in ruins and has killed at least 198 people since 25 March 2015.\nSome Arab and foreign embassies were transferred to Aden, and Defense Minister Mahmoud Al-Subaihi was able to leave Sanaa for Aden and met with President Hadi. On March 4, 2016, unidentified gunmen stormed the Mother Teresa House in the city and killed sixteen people, including four nuns. A number of the old city's churches have also been destroyed by Islamic extremists since mid-2015.\nOn 14 July 2015, the Saudi Arabian Army launched an offensive to win control of the city. Within three days, the city was cleared of Houthi rebels, ending the Battle of Aden with a coalition victory.\nBeginning on 28 January 2018, separatists loyal to the Southern Transitional Council (STC) seized control of the Yemeni government headquarters in Aden in a coup d'\u00e9tat against the Hadi-led government.\nOn 30 December 2020, the undersecretary of labour and deputy minister of public works were killed along with between 20 and 30 others at the Aden airport while they conducted an international press briefing about their new arrangements with the STC, which includes the partition of forces inside Aden, as they returned from hiding in the Saudi capital. Prime Minister Maeen Abdulmalik Saeed, his ministers and his entourage were conducted to safety under the barrage of hostile fire.\nCulture.\nDialects.\nThe entry of the Yemenis into Islam contributed to their abandoning their ancient script and replacing it with the late Nabataean alphabet in which the Qur\u2019an was written. Today, Yemenis speak Arabic in the Yemeni dialect, which is a developed dialect and closely linked to the ancient language. It has three dialects with branches: the Sanani dialect, the Hadrami dialect, and the Taizi-Adeni dialect, in addition to the Bedouin dialect of the residents of Marib. Al-Jawf, Shabwa, and Inner Hadhramaut, and each of these dialects has characteristics and features.\nMusic and poetry.\nAdeni art or the \"Adeniyat\" is an art of Arabic music. Among the ancient artists of Aden are Iskander Thabet Saleh and Muhammad Murshid Naji, and among the poets are Abdul Rahman Ibrahim Muhammad, Ahmed Ghaleb Muhammad Al-Jabri, Abdullah Abdul Karim Muhammad, Ali Abdullah Jaafar Aman, Farid Muhammad Barakat, Lotfi Jaafar Aman, and Mohsen Ali Brik.\n\"Adeni music\" played a major role in Aden society, and artists in the Aden dialect were called \"al-Mutariba\", meaning people of music. Adeni music began in 1920 when the army of the Aden Protectorate was formed, and after it the National Guard, where there were teams for those forces and those teams participated On special occasions and weddings.\nSports.\nPre-independence.\nThe first beginning of Adenian sports dates back to the year 1902, when the Adeni Tennis Club was established, with its headquarters in the Al-Qatee\u2019 neighbourhood in Crater, and Youssef Muhammad Khan founded the \"Recreational Club United\" in the city of Crater, and it was known as the Yousef Khan Stadium. The city of Aden is considered the first city in which sports were practiced in the Arabian Peninsula, and the first private club in Aden was founded in 1905 under the name \"Al-Ittihad Al-Muhammadi Club\", as the first sports club in Yemen and the Arab world. He was fighting the occupation army divisions and the fleet divisions coming and passing to the port of Aden.\nIn 1924, the \"Al-Husseini Sports Club\" was founded in Crater, and a third club appeared in Tawahi under the name \"Al-Bamboot Club\" and Sheikh Othman. The 1930s witnessed the emergence of a number of clubs. In 1933, the \"Nujoom Al-Layl Club\", Al-Aidrousi Club, and Nujoom Al-Sabah Club appeared in Crater, and in Tawahi, the \"Al-Ittihad Al-Islami Club\" (Al-Mawlada) appeared.\nUntil that year, football matches were played in a friendly manner between the teams of the Crater, Al-Tawahi, and Sheikh Othman regions, as there were no federations regulating sports activity. In 1934, the occupation authority announced the establishment of a sports association called the \"Adeniya Sports Association\", after the increasing number of local clubs. Its members were appointed by the Governor-General of Aden, and all of its members were English, headed by the English Governor of Aden, Bernard Reilly, as sponsor. The association's board of directors consists of Hikam Bottom as president, the Indian Rosario as secretary, and two other members.\nThis association began holding the first club tournament, which was the \"Rosario Cup Championship\". Six clubs participated in the tournament, three from Crater (Al-Ittihad Al-Mohammadi, Al-Husseini, and Nojoom Al-Layl), from Al-Tawahi (Al-Mawalda, and Al-Bamiot), and from Sheikh Othman, Sheikh Othman Club, which includes Players from various small teams in the Sheikh Othman area, and Al-Ittihad Al-Mohammadi Club won this championship.\nAmong the most important tournaments held in Aden before independence were the Rosario Cup, the Riley Cup, the Somali Bassem Al-Nar Cup, the Aramco Cup, and the Kik Muncherji Championship.\nPost-independence.\nAfter independence, the \"Football Federation\" was established on January 18, 1968, on the ruins of the \"Adeniya Sports Association\". The Federation took a decision regarding the Adeniya clubs, which had numbered about 64 sports clubs, reducing and merging the clubs in Aden and Lahj to only 16 clubs, and the clubs were forced to join or unite with large teams. In February 1968, several sports clubs were abolished, leaving only 12 clubs remaining. In December 1968, Al-Islah Club and Al-Shaab Club were merged into one club under the name of the latter in Al-Tawahi. In 1969, the Al-Ittihad Al-Muhammadi Club and Al-Tadamon Club were united in Crater, under the name Al-Tadamon Al-Muhammadi Club.\nIn the \"First General Sports Conference\" in 1973, the clubs were merged and reduced again, so that their number became only 7 clubs: Al-Ahrar Club, Al-Ahly Club, Shamsan Club, Al-Shaab Club, Al-Hilal Club, United Youth Club, and Aden Tennis Club. On July 18, 1975, the stage of forming urban clubs, and the beginning of the stage of politicisation of the clubs in favour of the National Liberation Front, took place. It was decided to change their names and reduce them to become 5 clubs: Al-Tilal Club, Shamsan Club, Al-Minaa Club, Al-Wahda Club, and Al-Shoula Club.\nOn July 18, 1975, the \"Al-Tilal Sports Club\" appeared, headed by Yassin Saeed Noman, as a new name for the \"Al-Ittihad Al-Muhammadi Club\", which was founded in 1905, and in 1976 the \"Yemeni Football Federation\" appeared. Al-Tilal Club participated in the \"September 26 Cup Competition\" in 1980, as the first football competition in which it participated with teams from northern and southern Yemen, such as the national team of Ibb Governorate, Taiz Governorate, Hadhramaut Governorate, Lahj and Hodeidah, at the Shaheed Al-Dharafi Stadium in Sana\u2019a, and Al-Hilal was crowned champion of the September 26 Cup, after victory over Hodeidah national team by five clean goals.\nFootball is the most popular sport in Aden. There are 9 stadiums in Aden, including the May 22 International Stadium, and 10 sports clubs. In November 2010, Aden hosted the 2010 Arabian Gulf Football Cup.\nTourist sites.\nAden has several historical and natural sites of interest to visitors. These include:\nEconomy and transportation.\nThe industrial activity in Aden is represented by a group of factories and production units, the forefront of which is the oil refinery. The oil refinery in Aden is considered one of the first refineries to be established in the region, and began operating in 1954 AD. The Aden Refineries Company has facilities such as an oil tanker port, a network of storage tanks, and a centre to supply ships with fuel.\nHistorically, Aden was a station for importing goods from the African coast and from Europe, the United States, and India. As of 1920, Aden was a major commercial centre for trade in the Arabian Peninsula, and the port exported small quantities of local products to most Arab ports. Aden provided coal and salt to passing ships, and the port was a stopping point for ships when they entered Bab al-Mandab.\nTransport.\nHistorically, the port of Aden was the main transport port in the region. Passenger ships land in Al-Tawahi District, and the city is served by Aden International Airport, which is about 10 kilometres (6\u00a0mi) from the city. The airport is the main headquarters of Al-Saeeda Airlines and its operations centre. The airport is considered the second largest airport. In Yemen, after Sana'a International Airport, it is considered the best airport in Yemen in terms of location due to the mountainous nature of Yemen. However, this airport is surrounded by the Arabian Sea in terms of take-off and landing. The establishment of Aden Airport dates back to the year 1927 when the British forces established a military airport in the district. Khor Maksar. After World War II, Britain carried out extensive urban modernisation and built Aden International Airport, known today, next to the military airport. Al-Yamda Airlines was the official carrier of South Yemen, before unification, and was based in Aden, before merging with Yemen Airways in 1996. Before the Battle of Aden Airport and the 2015 military intervention in Yemen closed this airport along with other airports in Yemen. On 22 July, Aden International Airport was declared fit for operation again after the Houthi forces were driven from the city, and a Saudi plane carrying aid reportedly became the first plane to land in Aden in four months. The same day, a ship chartered by the World Food Programme carrying fuel docked in Aden's port.\nHistorically, Aden's harbour has been a major hub of transportation for the region. As of 1920, the harbour was in size. Passenger ships landed at Steamer Point now called Tawahi.\nDuring the British colonial period motor vehicles drove on the left, as in the United Kingdom. On 2 January 1977, Aden, along with the rest of South Yemen, changed to driving on the right, bringing it into line with neighbouring Arab states.\nDuring the early 20th century, Aden was a prominent export centre for coffee grown in the Jubail highlands. And also to export frankincense, wheat, barley, alfalfa and millet, which are produced and exported from Aden. The leaves and stems of clover, millet, and corn produced in Aden were generally used as fodder. Beginning in 1920, Aden was desalinating seawater to produce table salt. Between 1916 and 1917, Aden produced more than 120,000 tons of salt. Aden also produced potash, which was exported to Mumbai.\nEconomy.\nHistorically, Aden would import goods from the African coast and from Europe, the United States, and India. As of 1920, the British described it as \"the chief emporium of Arabian trade, receiving the small quantities of native produce, and supplying the modest wants of the interior and of most of the smaller Arabian ports.\" At the docks, the city provided coal to passing ships. The only item being produced by the city, as of 1920, was salt. Also, the port was the stop ships had to take when entering the Bab-el-Mandeb; this was how cities like Mecca had received goods by ship. Yemen Airlines, the national airline of South Yemen, had its head office in Aden. On 15 May 1996, Yemen Airlines merged with Yemenia.\nDuring the early 20th century Aden was a notable centre of coffee production. Women processed coffee beans, grown in the Yemen highlands. Frankincense, wheat, barley, alfalfa, and millet was also produced and exported from Aden. The leaves and stalks of the alfalfa, millet and maize produced in Aden were generally used as fodder. As of 1920, Aden was also gathering salt from salt water. An Italian company called Agostino Burgarella Ajola and Company gathered and process the salt under the name Aden Salt Works. There was also a smaller company from India, called Abdullabhoy and Joomabhoy Lalji &amp; Company that owned a salt production firm in Aden. Both companies exported the salt. Between 1916 and 1917, Aden produced over 120,000 tons of salt. Aden has also produced potash, which was generally exported to Mumbai.\nAden produced jollyboats. Charcoal was produced as well, from acacia, and mainly in the interior of the region. Cigarettes were produced by Jewish and Greek populations in Aden. The tobacco used was imported from Egypt.\nSince the outbreak of the Yemeni Civil War spread to Aden in 2015, the city has been struck by constant protests over a range of issues, but especially concerning electricity generation. Aden's power grid is composed solely of diesel generators and is thus heavily dependent on imported fuel. The main power plant is al-Hasswa diesel power plant, which in June 2021 had only two turbines out of five running, producing up to 50 megawatts (MW) of power in a region where the deficit hovers around 300 MW. Nawfal al-Mojamal, the plant director, said \"In its 35 years of existence, al-Hasswa station never had any kind of maintenance, except in 2016 ... when the two turbines were restored\".\nFree zone.\nThe free zone, which was opened in 1991, represents Yemen's economic gateway and the meeting point of the continents of Asia and Africa. The free zone gains its strategic importance from the special location of the port of Aden, as it is located directly on the main trade route around the world and from the Middle East to Europe and America, and is distinguished by the possibility of providing transit services. To East Africa, the Red Sea, the Indian subcontinent and the Arabian Gulf. The free zone represents a storage and distribution area suitable for Africa, the Red Sea and the Arabian Gulf.\nGeography and climate.\nGeography.\nAden is located on the coast of the Gulf of Aden, and is about 363 kilometres away from the capital, Sana\u2019a. It is located between latitudes 47 and 12 north of the equator, and at an altitude of 6 metres above sea level. It is surrounded by Lahj Governorate to the north and east, and the Governorate of Abyan is from the northwest, and Aden has an air port represented by Aden International Airport, and a sea port represented by the port of Aden, and it has land routes from the north linking it to Hajj, Abyan and Taiz.\nLandforms.\nThe city of Aden is a coastal city, as it overlooks a large body of water, the Gulf of Aden, which in turn opens to the Indian Ocean. The shape of the city of Aden in the form of two peninsulas helped this factor to make the city of Aden unique in this particularity, which clearly affected the occurrence of the phenomenon of land and sea breezes. Which occurs due to air exchange between land and water during the day and night. Its location on the water surface also affects the daily and annual temperature range. This does not mean that there are no significant differences in temperatures in summer and winter.\nThe surface of the city of Aden slopes south, and the highlands appear in the southern part of Aden, represented by the highlands of Jabal Shamsan, whose highest peaks exceed 500 metres, and the highlands of Jabal Ihsan and Jabal Al-Muzalqim in Little Aden, which are lower in height than Jabal Shamsan, and the highlands of Aden do not differ from the rest of the highlands of Yemen in terms of In terms of composition, it is of volcanic origin, and although the mountain highlands occupy large areas of the city, their influence is weak and limited on the climate of the city of Aden.\nClimate.\nAden has a hot desert climate (BWh) in the K\u00f6ppen-Geiger climate classification system. Although Aden sees next to no precipitation year-round, it is humid throughout the year.\nEnvironment.\nCoasts.\nMost of the coasts of Aden Governorate along the coastal strip are sandy coasts, and the governorate has coastal beaches, including the Golden Coast in Al-Tawahi District, the coast of Abyan Bakhour Maksar, Al-Ghadeer Beach, and Kud Al-Nimr Beach in Buraiqa.\nOffshore islands.\nThere are about 21 islands around the peninsulas of Aden, Aden Lesser, and Ras Amran. They are mostly rocky islands, some of which are surrounded by incomplete coral reefs, and most of them are considered fishing areas. A number of islands have many activities, especially on Al-Ummal Island and Sirah Island.\nWild and domestic animal diversity.\nYemen is considered one of the countries rich in bird species in the Middle East due to the availability of many suitable coastal environments that helped attract many migratory birds to wetland sites, coasts and islands. The Aden region (Khor Maksar - Al-Haswah) was registered on the list of important areas of the World Bird Organization as a habitat. The last three species that are globally threatened with extinction are: the great eagle, the gull eagle, and the eastern king eagle.\nThere are dozens of bird species recorded in the wetlands of Aden and the Caltex swamp area, which are rich in a wide variety of endemic and migratory birds, including birds that are present throughout the year. There are many birds in the area, including great flamingos, dwarf flamingos, and rock egrets. And the spoonbill, the hooked tern and the seagull.\nPublic services.\nEducation.\nThere are 95 schools in Aden, including 13 kindergartens, and 82 basic education schools, including 29 schools for boys, 29 schools for girls, and 29 joint schools for boys and girls. There are also 29 secondary schools, including 15 schools for boys and 14 schools for girls, all of which are in a double shift system. Until 2004, the number of male students reached In basic education, there were 57,941 students and 48,081 female students, with a total of 104,622 students. In secondary education, the number of male students reached 11,029 students, and 9,643 female students.\nAs for vocational, technical and vocational education centres and institutes, their number is 13, with 2,214 students enrolled, including 453 teachers. The health institutes have one institute, with 864 students enrolled, including 147 teachers, according to 2010 statistics. As for higher education, there is one government university in Aden, which is the University of Aden, which has 9 colleges. More than 29 thousand students are enrolled, according to 2010 statistics.\nHealth.\nThere are 15 hospitals in the economic capital, Aden, including 5 public government hospitals, 6 belonging to the private sector, and 37 health centres. There are 34 facilities in the city that provide maternity and childhood services, and the number of specialised workforce in health facilities is 2,825 specialists.\nEndemic areas.\nIn June 2015, the International Red Cross team present in conflict areas in Yemen during the events of the Yemeni civil war announced that the cities of Crater, Al-Mualla, Khor Maksar and Al-Tawahi in the Aden Governorate in the south of the country were areas affected by dengue fever. The health authorities in Aden said that this fever had spread remarkably and widely. Since the beginning of May, health services have deteriorated and infrastructure facilities, such as electricity, water, and sanitation, have been damaged as a result of the ongoing fighting in the city for months.\nMail.\nAden has known mail since June 15, 1839, that is, a year after the British occupation, although the official post office was not inaugurated until 1857. Postage stamps of both Britain and India were used in Aden until it became called the Aden Colony on April 1, 1937, although the stamps of this stage It bears no distinctive sign, but the use of the number 124 as a postal code is attributed to Aden as part of the Indian postal numerical system.\nThen, when it became a colony in 1937, it had sets of postage stamps containing pictures and the name Aden printed on them. In 1939, a new postage set was issued containing a picture of King George VI, but the Sultans of Hadhramaut - who were under the umbrella of the Aden Protectorate - controlled Britain has had it since the 1880s - they refused to do so, and so Britain issued a separate postal set in 1942, but this time with the inclusion of a phrase and pictures expressing the Kathiri Sultanate in Sayun and the Qu\u2019aiti Sultanate in Shihr and Mukalla, in addition to pictures of the sultans.\nMedia.\nJournalism.\nThe weekly Al-Amal newspaper was founded in 1957 in Aden. Its slogan was (Freedom, Bread, and Peace). The British authorities allowed only 1,500 copies to be printed weekly, and the newspaper was banned shortly after.\nIn 1958, Al-Ayyam newspaper was established in Aden, as an independent daily newspaper in the Arabic language, during the British occupation. The first issue was published on July 30, 1958, and its founder and editor-in-chief was Brigadier General Muhammad Ali Bashraheel. It stopped publishing after independence during the era of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, and then resumed publication. After achieving Yemeni unity, the first issue of the second edition was on November 7, 1990, after a hiatus that lasted more than 23 years. In 1998, Al-Ayyam was the first newspaper in Yemen that the government prosecuted under a criminal law. Other cases followed until it became public by the end of the year. 2008, responsible for 73% of the total number of cases filed by the Ministry of Information and the Yemeni government against the press in Yemen. When the protests and clashes intensified in Aden in April 2009, \"Al-Ayyam covered the events extensively, and pictures of blood and injuries were on the cover of the newspaper for days.\" President Ali Abdullah Saleh sent delegations to the newspaper, asking them to reduce the severity of their coverage, and to stop using pictures of the injured and bleeding blood. On May 12, 2009, security forces launched an attack on the headquarters of Al-Ayyam newspaper in Aden.\nRadio and television.\nRadio Aden was established on August 17, 1954, under the name \"Aden Radio Station\". It is currently broadcast in two periods, morning and evening. The British occupation opened the Aden Channel on September 11, 1964, following the revolution of October 14, 1963. Television transmission was limited to covering populated neighbourhoods in the city of Aden, especially where soldiers and families of the British forces were present. In January 1979, the television headquarters moved to the \"Radio and Television Building\" in Tawahi. Which was prepared, and at that time the broadcast was in black and white, and in March 1981 the gradual transition to colour broadcasting began, and in June 1981 the channel began broadcasting via satellite. After the Yemeni unification on May 22, 1990, Aden Channel was the second official channel of Yemeni TV.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38051", "revid": "0", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38051", "title": "UNMIBH", "text": ""}
{"id": "38052", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38052", "title": "United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina", "text": "United Nations' mission\nThe United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina (UNMIBH) was a United Nations peacekeeping mission formed under the United Nations Security Council Resolution 1035 on 21 December 1995. It completed its mandate on 31 December 2002, when it was succeeded by the European Union Police Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina.\nFrom the UNMIBH website:\n\"UNMIBH\u2019s mandate is to contribute to the establishment of the rule of law in Bosnia and Herzegovina by assisting in reforming and restructuring the local police, assessing the functioning of the existing judicial system, and monitoring and auditing the performance of the police and others involved in the maintenance of law and order.\"\nUNMIBH was headed by a Special Representative of the Secretary-General (SRSG) appointed by UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan. The SRSG exercised authority over the UN\u2019s IPTF Police Commissioner and coordinated other United Nations activities in Bosnia and Herzegovina. The main components of UNMIBH were: IPTF (International Police Task Force); the Criminal Justice Advisory Unit; a Civil Affairs Unit; and a Human Rights Office. The Mission had a nation-wide presence with regional headquarters in Banja Luka, Bihac, Doboj, Mostar, Sarajevo, Tuzla and a district headquarters in Brcko.\nFrom 2001 through 2003, at the request of United Nations Secretary General Kofi Annan, Jacques Paul Klein served as his Special Representative and Coordinator of the United Nations Mission in Bosnia and Herzegovina, with the rank of Under-Secretary-General. As Chief of Mission, he had overall management authority and day-to-day management responsibility of 2,700 international police officers from 48 different countries with a budget of $168.2 million. UNMIBH restructured and downsized a 44,000 pre-war police force to approximately 16,000 trained personnel. The Mission recruited and trained the first BiH police contingent that was deployed to the United Nations Mission in East Timor and the first group of Bosnian United Nations military observers. He focused on combating international terrorism, illegal migration and organized crime and within eighteen months was able to cut the number of illegal persons entering BiH, through its three airports, from 25,000 to 300 per year.\nIn 2003 Officer Kathryn Bolkovac discovered a ring of human trafficking involving UN officers, after two young girls appeared after being sold and abused in illegal brothels. Dozens of girls raised 'eerily similar' accounts of abuse: including emigrating to take a job as a waitress or in domestic service, including at the insistence of their own families \u2013 but were diverted into human trafficking. They were trafficked to different locations, forcibly stripped and sold to individuals who beat and raped them in brothels in Bosnia.\nBolkovac stated accusations that mission head Klein dismissed several high-profile cases that were escalated to his level after she forwarded a number to the internal affairs unit. Bolkovac's story was adapted into the film \"The Whistleblower\". A UN audit, released by the US government in 2008, into Klein's actions in both Bosnia and Liberia accused him of a significant role in a number of scandals, though specifically clearing him of corruption. In 2010, a UN review into the audit stated the investigation was inadequate and allegations lacked merit, including a complete failure to notify Klein of the allegations and allow him a chance to respond to them."}
{"id": "38053", "revid": "49657519", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38053", "title": "Theodoret", "text": "5th century Byzantine theologian and bishop\nTheodoret of Cyrus or Cyrrhus (; c. 393 \u2013 c. 458) was a notable theologian of the School of Antioch, biblical commentator, and bishop of Cyrrhus (423\u2013457). He participated in several 5th-century Christological controversies within the Eastern Roman Church that resulted in various ecumenical acts and schisms. Theodoret wrote against Cyril of Alexandria's \"Twelve Anathemas\", which were sent to Nestorius, and did not condemn Nestorius until the Council of Chalcedon. Selected writings by Theodoret directed against Cyril formed part of the subject matter of the Three Chapters Controversy and were condemned posthumously at the Second Council of Constantinople (533). He is accorded the epithet \"Blessed\" in the Eastern Orthodox Church.\nBiography.\nAccording to the historian Tillemont, he was born at Antioch in 393 and died about 458, either at Cyrrhus (an estimated eighty Roman miles east of Antioch) or at the monastery near Apamea (fifty-four Roman miles southeast of Antioch). \nInformation regarding his life is derived primarily from his \"Epistles\" and his \"Religious History\" (\"Philotheos historia\"). He was the child of a prosperous Antiochene couple. Encouraged after his mother was cured of a serious eye complaint and converted to a strict religious life by Peter the Galatian, an ascetic living in the locality, Theodoret's parents sought further help from local holy men, as she had been childless for the twelve years of her marriage. For years their hopes remained unfulfilled. Eventually, Theodoret's birth was promised by a hermit named Macedonius the Barley-Eater on the condition of the child's dedication to God, from which the name Theodoret (\"gift of God\") is derived.\nTheodoret received an extensive education. Although his own writings suggest his training was exclusively religious, his literary output demonstrates that he also acquired a broad classical education, a common expectation for a child of prosperous parents in a city known as a centre of secular learning. He visited Peter the Galatian weekly, was instructed by Macedonius and other ascetics, and at an early age became a \"lector\" among the clergy of Antioch. He studied the works of Diodore of Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia, having been raised in their theological tradition. His correspondents included the sophists Aerius and Isokasius. He understood Syriac as well as Greek, but knew neither Hebrew nor Latin. In his letters, he quotes from Homer, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, Demosthenes, and Thucydides. By the age of twenty-three, following the death of his parents, he divided his fortune among the poor and became a monk in the monastery of Nicerte, near Apamea, where he lived for about seven years.\nIn 423, he left the monastery upon his appointment as Bishop of Cyrrhus. The diocese covered approximately 1,600 square miles and comprised 800 parishes, with a small town as its see. Supported by the appeals of local hermits, and despite facing personal danger, Theodoret vigorously maintained his doctrinal positions. He converted more than 1,000 Marcionites in his diocese, in addition to many Arians and Macedonians. He removed more than 200 copies of Tatian's \"Diatessaron\" from the churches, erected new church buildings, and supplied them with relics.\nHis philanthropic and economic interests were extensive. He endeavoured to secure relief for people oppressed by taxation and, using his episcopal revenues, erected baths, bridges, halls, and aqueducts. He attracted rhetoricians and physicians to the city and reminded officials of their duties. He sent letters of encouragement to the persecuted Christians of Persian Armenia and provided refuge to Celestiacus, a Carthaginian who had fled the rule of the Vandals.\nThe Nestorian controversy.\nTheodoret was a prominent figure in the Christological controversies of the 5th century involving Nestorius of Constantinople and Cyril of Alexandria. Theodoret joined in the petition of John I of Antioch to Nestorius to affirm the term \"Theotokos\" (\"Mother of God\"), and at John's request, wrote against Cyril's Twelve Anathemas.\nHe may have drafted the Antiochian confession of faith, intended to present a clear exposition of the Nicene Creed to the emperor. He was a member and spokesman of the deputation of eight from Antioch called by the emperor to Constantinople in 431, following the First Council of Ephesus. He did not assent to the condemnation of Nestorius. John, reconciled to Cyril by the emperor's order, sought to bring Theodoret to submission by entrenching upon Theodoret's eparchy.\nTheodoret sought to preserve the peace of the Church by obtaining the adoption of a formula avoiding the unconditional condemnation of Nestorius, and toward the close of 434 worked for reconciliation between the Eastern churches. However, Cyril maintained his position. When Cyril launched an attack in 437 against Diodorus of Tarsus and Theodore of Mopsuestia, John sided with them, and Theodoret assumed the defence of the Antiochian party (c. 439). Domnus II, the successor of John, retained him as his counsellor. After the death of Cyril, adherents of Antiochian theology were appointed to bishoprics. Irenaeus, a friend of Nestorius, with the cooperation of Theodoret, became bishop of Tyre, despite the protests of Dioscorus, Cyril's successor. Dioscorus turned specifically against Theodoret and secured an order from the court confining him to Cyrrhus.\nTheodoret then composed the \"Eranistes\". His efforts at court for self-justification against the charges of Dioscorus, as well as the countercharge of Domnus accusing Eutyches of Apollinarianism, were in vain. The Emperor Theodosius II excluded Theodoret from the Second Council of Ephesus in 449. At the council, because of his \"Epistle 151\" against Cyril and his defence of Diodorus and Theodore, he was condemned without a hearing and excommunicated; his writings were ordered to be burned. Domnus gave his assent.\nTheodoret was compelled by imperial authorities to leave Cyrrhus and retire to his monastery at Nicerte, near Apamea. He appealed to Pope Leo I of Rome, but the revocation of the judgments against him was not granted by imperial edict until the new rulers, Marcian and Pulcheria, took power after the death of Emperor Theodosius II in 450. He was ordered to participate in the Council of Chalcedon, which created violent opposition from the Alexandrian party. He first took part only as an accuser, yet sat among the bishops, in contrast to Dioscorus, who was seated with the accused despite being the canonical Patriarch of Alexandria. Then, he was pressured by the Council Fathers (October 26, 451) to pronounce the anathema against Nestorius. His conduct suggests he performed this with a reservation: his anathema was restricted to Nestorius's alleged teaching of \"two Sons in Christ\" and the denial of the term \"Theotokos\". Upon this, he was declared orthodox and restored to his see.\nFollowing the Council of Chalcedon, his activity is primarily documented by a letter from Leo charging him to guard the Chalcedonian Definition. With Diodorus and Theodore, he was no less reviled by the Monophysites than Nestorius himself, and was considered a heretic by them and their associates. After Chalcedon, he lived in Cyrrhus until his death, which is traditionally dated to c.\u2009458\u2013460.\nThe Three Chapters Controversy led to the condemnation of his writings against Cyril in the Second Council of Constantinople (553), despite his personal exoneration earlier at Chalcedon as \"orthodox\".\nWorks.\nExegetical.\nTheodoret's exegetical works constitute his most extensive literary output and are considered his most significant contribution to theology. Scholars establish a chronology of these works by studying Theodoret's references in later works to his earlier ones. The commentary on the Song of Songs, written while he was a young bishop (though not before 430), precedes his work on the Psalms. His commentaries on the prophets began with Daniel, followed by Ezekiel and the Minor Prophets. Subsequently, his commentary on the Psalms was completed before 436, while those on Isaiah, Jeremiah, and the Pauline Epistles (including Hebrews) were written before 448. Theodoret's last exegetical works were the \"Interpretations of Difficult Passages\" in the \"Octateuch\" and the \"Quaestiones\" dealing with the books of \"Samuel\", \"Kings\", and \"Chronicles\", written c.\u2009452\u2013453.\nWith the exception of a few verses from the commentary on Galatians (2:6\u201313) and fragments of the commentary on Isaiah preserved in the \"catenae\", Theodoret's exegetical writings are extant. Exegetical material attributed to him on the Gospels in the \"catenae\" may have originated from his other works, and spurious interpolations occur in his comments on the \"Octateuch\".\nHis representation of orthodox doctrine consists of a collection of Scripture passages. For Theodoret, the biblical authors are instruments of the Holy Spirit, though they do not lose their individual characteristics. He states that understanding is hindered by the unavoidable imperfection of translations. Unacquainted with Hebrew, Theodoret uses the Syriac translation, the Septuagint, and other Greek versions.\nIn principle, his exegesis is grammatical-historical, and he criticizes the intrusion of the commentator's own ideas. His aim is to avoid the extremes of excessive literalism and unrestrained allegory. Consequently, he protests against the literal interpretation of the Song of Songs as Solomonic erotic poetry, viewing it as degrading to the Holy Spirit; instead, he argues that Scripture often speaks \"figuratively\" and \"in riddles.\" In the Old Testament, many elements carry typological significance and already prophetically embody Christian doctrine. Divine illumination affords the right understanding, following apostolic teaching and recognizing New Testament fulfillment. The exegetical tradition of the Church Fathers is considered valuable, though not binding. Theodoret prefers to select the best among various interpretations available to him, especially those of Theodore of Mopsuestia, and supplements them with his own insights. His work is characterized by clarity and simplicity of statement; he is credited with preserving the exegetical heritage of the School of Antioch.\nDogmatic.\nMany of Theodoret's dogmatic works have been lost; five major treatises, however, have survived.\nHis chief Christological work is the \"Eranistes\" (The Beggar), written in three dialogues. In it, Theodoret describes his opponents, principally the Eutychians, as beggars passing off their doctrines gathered by scraps from diverse heretical sources, and himself as the orthodox defender. The work is interspersed with lengthy \"florilegia\" (anthologies of patristic citations), which scholars suggest may be the reason for its preservation. These \"florilegia\" provide evidence of Theodoret's learning, comprising 238 texts drawn from 88 works, including pre-Nicene writers such as Ignatius, Irenaeus, and Hippolytus, as well as theologians such as Athanasius and the Cappadocian Fathers. This use of \"florilegia\" is cited as heralding a new stage in doctrinal development by creating a new authority for Christian theology: that of the Fathers.\nTwo works, \"On the Holy and Life-giving Trinity\" and \"On the Incarnation of the Lord\", survived historically through misattribution to his opponent, Cyril of Alexandria.\nAnother surviving work is the \"Refutation of the Twelve Anathemas\", a rejection of the anathemas pronounced against Nestorius by Cyril of Alexandria. The text was preserved within Cyril's apology against Theodoret. Theodoret identifies Apollinarianism in Cyril's teaching and rejects the idea of a \"contracting into one\" of the two natures of the Only-Begotten, as well as a separation into two sons (\"Epistle 143\"). Instead of a \"hypostatic union,\" he accepts only a union that \"manifests the essential properties or modes of the natures.\" The man united to God was born of Mary; between God the \"Logos\" and the form of a servant, a distinction must be drawn.\nThe \"Expositio rectae fidei\" (Exposition of the True Faith) was preserved among the writings of Justin Martyr. However, Lebon (1930) and Sellers (1945) independently identified it as the work of Theodoret, likely dating it to before the outbreak of the Nestorian controversy.\nOnly minor fragments (cf. \"Epistle\" 16) of Theodoret's defence of Diodorus and Theodore of Mopsuestia (438-444) have been preserved.\nTheodoret mentions having written against Arius and Eunomius, which is generally assumed to be a single combined work, to which were joined three treatises against the Macedonians. Additionally, there were two works against the Apollinarians, and of the \"Opus adversus Marcionem\", no complete text has been preserved.\nFor Theodoret, God is immutable even in becoming man; the two natures are separate in Christ, and God the Logos is ever immortal and impassible. Each nature remained \"pure\" after the union, retaining its properties to the exclusion of all transmutation and intermixture. Of a collection of twenty-seven orations in defence of various propositions, the first six align with Theodoret's theology. A few extracts from the five panegyric orations on John Chrysostom were preserved by Photius (\"Bibliotheca, codex 273\").\nApologetic and Historical.\nOne of the apologetic writings was the \"Ad quaestiones magorum\" (composed between 429 and 436), now lost, in which Theodoret justified the Old Testament sacrifices as alternatives to Egyptian idolatry and criticised the accounts of the Magi who worshipped the elements; the work is mentioned in his \"Ecclesiastical\" \"History\" (Book V, Chapter 38).\n\"De providentia\", or \"Ten Discourses on Providence\", consists of apologetic discourses arguing for divine providence based on the physical order (Discourses I-IV) and the moral and social order (Discourses VI-X). Scholars generally place their delivery to the educated Greek-speaking audience of Antioch between 431 and 435. Unlike most sermons of the period, they consist of systematic philosophical arguments and lectures rather than homilies on scriptural texts.\nThe \"Graecarum Affectionum Curatio\" (\"Cure of the Greek Maladies\"), subtitled \"The Truth of the Gospel proved from Greek Philosophy,\" is a work in twelve books that attempted to demonstrate the truth of Christianity using Greek philosophy, in contrast to pagan ideas and practices. It forms one of the last apologies written, as the need for such works diminished in an age of Christian dominance. Theodoret argued that the truth is self-consistent where it is not obscured by error and that it validates itself as the power of life, whereas philosophy is only a presentiment of it. Scholars consider this work noteworthy for its clarity of arrangement and style.\nThe \"Ecclesiastical History\" of Theodoret, which begins with the rise of Arianism and ends with the death of Theodore of Mopsuestia in 429, is different in style from the histories of Socrates Scholasticus and Sozomen; although the work was completed in 449\u2013450, it does not cover the period between 429 and its completion. It contains many sources otherwise lost, especially letters on the Arian controversy. However, critics describe the book as partisan, noting that opposing theological factions are consistently portrayed negatively and described as afflicted with the \"Arian plague.\" The narrative is more concise than that of other historians, and Theodoret often juxtaposes documents with only brief commentary. Original material regarding the church of Antioch appears chiefly in the latter books.\nScholarly opinion regarding the sources used by Theodoret varies. According to Henricus Valesius, the main sources were Socrates and Sozomen. Albert G\u00fcldenpenning placed Rufinus first in importance, followed by Eusebius of Caesarea, Athanasius, Sozomen, Sabinus, Philostorgius, Gregory Nazianzen, and Socrates. N. Glubokovskij identifies Eusebius, Rufinus, Philostorgius, and, perhaps, Sabinus as sources.\nAt the request of Sporacius, a military commander, Theodoret compiled a \"Compendium of Heretical Accounts\" (\"Haereticarum fabularum compendium\"), which includes a heresiology (Books I-IV) and a \"Compendium of Divine Dogmas\" (Book V). Apart from Origen's \"De principiis\" and the \"De fide orthodoxa\" of John of Damascus, scholars consider this work to be one of the few systematic representations of the theology of the Greek Fathers.\n\"A History of the Monks of Syria\".\nThe \"Philotheos historia,\" also known as \"A History of the Monks of Syria\", which includes the treatise \"De divina charitate\", contains the biographies of thirty ascetics and anchorites, presented as religious models. It presents a view into the distinct monastic tradition of northern Syria; it is also remarkable for presenting a model of ascetic authority that contrasts sharply with Athanasius's \"Life of Anthony\".\nOf the thirty ascetics detailed in \"A History of the Monks of Syria\", the last ten subjects were living when Theodoret completed the work, generally dated to c.\u2009444.\nLetters.\nCompared to the more than 500 letters known to Nikephoros Kallistos Xanthopoulos in the fourteenth century, only 232 have survived to the modern era. Three collections survive, though there is some overlap between them. 179 letters were edited by Jacques Sirmond in 1642. To these, Ioannes Sakkelion added another 48 letters (known as the \"Collectio Patmensis\") which he published from a manuscript he found at the Monastery of Saint John the Theologian in 1885. Thirty-six letters have been preserved in the official records (Acta) of the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon. These letters document rural Christianity in northern Syria, as well as insight into episcopal relationships; the development of Christological issues between the Councils of Ephesus and Chalcedon is evident. There are letters of consolation and commendation, valued for their detail on episcopal life and rhetoric.\nAn English translation of the surviving letters is part of the \"Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers\" (Second Series, Vol. 3, pp. 250\u2013348).\nLinguistics.\nTheodoret's works address linguistic issues regarding translations of sacred texts and theological works, and his interest was focused mainly on the exchange between Greek and Syriac. Because of his fluency in Syriac and his life in the Hellenized regions of western Roman Syria, he had a degree of familiarity with the dialect and noted its variations. He explained that \"the Osroenians, the Syrians, the people of the Euphrates, the Palestinians, and the Phoenicians all speak Syriac,\" a term he used to refer to various local Aramaic dialects, \"but with a multitude of pronunciation differences.\" In this passage, he distinguished \"Syrians\" as the inhabitants to the west of the Euphrates and \"Osroenians\" (the people of Edessa) to the east, noting their different dialects of the same language.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38055", "revid": "32801982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38055", "title": "Bank for International Settlements", "text": "International financial institution owned by central banks\nThe Bank for International Settlements (BIS) is an international financial institution which is owned by member central banks. Its primary goal is to foster international monetary and financial cooperation while serving as a bank for central banks. With its establishment in 1930 it is the oldest international financial institution. Its initial purpose was to oversee the settlement of World War I war reparations.\nThe BIS carries out its work through its meetings, programmes and through the Basel Process, hosting international groups pursuing global financial stability and facilitating their interaction. It also provides banking services, but only to central banks and other international organizations.\nThe BIS is based in Basel, Switzerland, with representative offices in Hong Kong and Mexico City.\nHistory.\nBackground.\nInternational monetary cooperation started to develop tentatively in the course of the 19th century. An early case was a \u00a3400,000 loan in gold coins, in 1825 and facilitated by the Rothschilds, from the Bank of France to the Bank of England, which was facing a bank run. The Bank of England again borrowed from its French counterpart (and from the Hamburger Bank) in 1836 and 1839, and lent to it in return in 1847.\nIn 1860\u20131861, because of the disruption from the incipient American Civil War, the Bank of France entered a series of swap agreements in specie with the Bank of England as well as the State Bank of the Russian Empire and De Nederlandsche Bank. That episode was recorded as the \"war of the banks\", ostensibly because of friction between the Bank of France and the Bank of England about the transaction.\nA few years later, monetary cooperation took a novel form with a series of international monetary conferences devoted to better coordination of the coinage system, even though these initiatives, like the Latin Monetary Union started in 1865, did not extend to money other than coins, and therefore involved treasury and mint officials rather than bankers.69\nAt the Brussels Conference in 1892, German academic Julius Wolff submitted a blueprint for an international currency that would be used for emergency lending to national central banks and would be issued by an institution based in a neutral country. In 1893, French economist Rapha\u00ebl-Georges L\u00e9vy suggested the establishment of an international central bank in Bern.\nIn 1907, Italian statesman Luigi Luzzatti published an article in the Austrian \"Neue Freie Presse\", referencing past examples of bilateral cooperation between central banks and emphasizing the need for more institutionalized cooperation at the international level.21\nThe practice of formalized central bank cooperation made unprecedented advances among allies in the course of World War I. In 1916, the Bank of England and Bank of France made agreements on bilateral lending and established a direct telegraph line between their respective offices to facilitate communication. Similar formal agreements were made that year between those two banks and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, and in 1917 the Bank of Italy opened an office in New York.17\nIn the war's immediate aftermath, Dutch central banker Gerard Vissering advocated an international currency without reliance on a common gold pool.22 Similar ideas burgeoned at the Brussels Conference of 1920, the first major discussion of international financial challenges following the war, endorsed by luminaries such as Belgian prime minister L\u00e9on Delacroix and American banker Frank A. Vanderlip, who suggested reorganizing Europe's national central banks along similar lines to the U.S. Federal Reserve which he had helped establish in the previous decade. At the Genoa Conference of 1922, following advocacy by several experts that included Ralph Hawtrey, Robert Horne and John Maynard Keynes, a resolution was passed that recommended the creation of \"an association or permanent understanding for cooperation amongst central banks, not necessarily limited to Europe, to coordinate credit policies, without detriment to the freedom of each individual central bank.\"23\nIt was decided to create the BIS in the context of negotiations over World War I reparations which plagued international relations in Europe throughout the 1920s. Following the Treaty of Versailles, a Reparation Commission was set up in January 1920 to determine the amount of German reparations. Conferences at Spa in July 1920 and London in March 1921 were followed by the occupation of the Ruhr in January 1923, and eventually the Dawes Plan approved at another London conference in July\u2013August 1924. The Dawes Plan allowed for a more constructive atmosphere, materialized in diplomacy by the Locarno Treaties in October 1925 and encouraging Montagu Norman, the influential governor of the Bank of England, to envisage the creation of what he described in September 1925 as \"a private and eclectic Central Banks' 'Club', small at first, larger in the future.\"30 That vision was first materialized at a meeting in early July 1927 which brought together Montagu, his friend Benjamin Strong, head of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Reichsbank president Hjalmar Schacht, and Bank of France vice governor Charles Rist at a private home on Long Island (the Bank of Italy had hoped for an invitation but was not included). A second meeting was scheduled in Algeciras, but was not held because of the bad health of Strong, who eventually died in October 1928.31\nThe Young Plan and the Hague Conference.\nA deadline for French repayment of its bilateral debt to the United States provided impetus for a new initiative, which took the form of a Committee of Experts appointed to work out a final settlement of the German reparations, known as the Young Committee for its chairman the American banker Owen D. Young. The committee first met at the Bank of France on none }}, then in 28 successive sessions ending on none }} at the Hotel George V. The seven participating countries were Belgium, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States. The need for a jointly governed bank emerged in these discussions as a means to overcome information asymmetries and increase the likelihood that commitments would be effectively met, not least by helping the creditors to act collectively and facilitating the reinvestment of German payments into the German economy.34 The first draft concept for the new bank was presented by Belgian banker \u00c9mile Francqui on none }}, and amended with suggestions from Bank of France governor \u00c9mile Moreau. It was envisaged as a private institution with shareholders from all participating countries (including Germany) that would settle reparation payments, issue bonds to be serviced by the reparation transfers, and (as advocated by Schacht) provide international long-term credit for countries in need, including Germany.35 In a memo to Young a few days later, Schacht first used the name \"International Settlements Bank\" while referring to the projected new institution.36 Young asked his American peers Warren Randolph Burgess, Shepard Morgan and Walter W. Stewart to sail promptly to Paris, and on none }} they presented a compromise text that formed the basis for subsequent developments.\nUnder the Young Committee's consensus concept, made public on none }}, the bank would serve a threefold purpose as a trustee, bank, and international organization of central bankers:\nIt would rely on nonpolitical staff located in a country not directly involved in the reparations disputes. Subsequent fine-tuning discussions revolved around the scope for the bank's lending to foster economic growth and trade, which would have given it a role similar to that of the later World Bank. Such a role was advocated by Schacht but opposed by France and by commercial bankers, on the grounds that it could be inflationary and create unfair competition to private-sector lenders. 37 An overall agreement on the future bank, with draft statutes prepared by the Bank of England's Charles Stewart Addis, was achieved by the Young Committee on none }}.38\nPolitical positions within the Herbert Hoover administration made it impossible for U.S. Federal Reserve System officials to be formally involved in the initiative, but the U.S. was still able to retain major influence in the proceedings because of a shared perception amongst negotiators that the project would fail without U.S. participation. Major figures of the U.S. financial world would participate in the joint bank, and act in close cooperation with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The leverage held by the U.S. allowed Young and J. P. Morgan Jr. to make sure that Americans would be in leadership position at the bank when it started operations, as indeed happened.\nThe BIS concept was agreed to in August 1929 at the first part of the Hague conference on reparations. The bank's Charter, Statutes, Trust Agreement, and Convention on its relations with the host country were subsequently drafted by a special Organisation Committee chaired by Jackson Reynolds, president of the First National Bank of New York,47 which met in the discreet location of H\u00f4tel St\u00e9phanie (part of which later became Brenners Park-Hotel &amp; Spa) at Baden-Baden from 3 October to none }}; the intense work was marred by the death of Delacroix from a heart attack during the proceedings. Aside from Reynolds, American participants in Baden-baden also included Melvin Alvah Traylor, president of the First National Bank of Chicago, Warren Randolph Burgess, Shepard Morgan, and Leon Fraser (a legal expert with the Agent General for Reparation Payments), with J. P. Morgan Jr. monitoring the proceedings and advising from London.616-618\nAs in the Paris discussions earlier in the year, the Baden-Baden committee had to reconcile the different visions for the future BIS, from purely a creation of central banks (as espoused by Italy's Alberto Beneduce and by Montagu Norman) to a supranational development bank with policy tasks such as developing world trade (as advocated by Schacht and UK Chancellor Philip Snowden). Other points of contention included the future institution's official language(s), for which the committee endorsed French, and location. For the latter, several delegates favored London, but that was vetoed by the French who proposed Brussels instead, which in turn was vetoed by the British; after Amsterdam failed to gain sufficient support, a consensus was eventually found on Basel, which combined neutral country status and good railway connections.40-44 The founding texts of the BIS were then approved at the second part of the Hague conference, on none }}, with only minor changes from the Baden-Baden drafts such as the addition of English to French as official language.41 These texts included the constituent Charter and Statutes for the bank, and a Convention (intergovernmental agreement) between Germany, Belgium, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, Japan, the United States, and Switzerland, establishing the bank's special status on Swiss soil and committing Switzerland to grant the Charter and approve the Statutes.\nCreation.\nThe Convention and Charter were approved by the Swiss Federal Council and thus obtained force of law on none }}. The governors met that day and the next to formally approve and sign the statutes in Rome, out of consideration for the Bank of Italy's governor Bonaldo Stringher who was both the most senior in the group, and in poor health (he would pass away in December 1930). Aside from Stringher, who chaired the meeting, the other participants were: Vincenzo Azzolini and Alberto Beneduce, for Italy; Bank of England governor Montagu Norman and Harry Arthur Siepmann, for the UK; Bank of France governor \u00c9mile Moreau, Cl\u00e9ment Moret and Pierre Quesnay, for France; Reichsbank governor Schacht, for Germany; National Bank of Belgium governor Louis Franck and Paul van Zeeland, for Belgium; and the Bank of Japan's London representative Tetsuzaburo Tanaka and diplomat Hiroshi Saito, for Japan.61 Thus the BIS was formally created in Rome on none }}. The BIS promptly opened its doors in Basel on 17 May 1930, ahead of the first German annuities under the Young Plan due in June.61\nThe legal status of the bank combined features of a private-sector company and of a public international organization. It was a limited-liability company incorporated under Swiss law, whose shares could be held by individuals and non-governmental entities. However, the rights of voting and representation at the Bank's General Meeting were to be exercised exclusively by the central banks of the countries in which shares had been issued. At the same time, the BIS possessed \"de facto\" international legal personality, was exempted from Swiss taxation and banking supervision, and its senior management enjoyed diplomatic status. The Charter stipulated that \"The Bank, its property and assets and all deposits and other funds entrusted to it shall be immune in time of peace and in time of war from any measure such as expropriation, requisition, seizure, confiscation, prohibition or restriction of gold or currency export or import, and any other similar measures.\" Under the Statutes, the governor of each of the founding central banks was a member of the BIS Board of Directors \"ex officio\", and had the right to appoint a second Board member, plus additional right for France and Germany to appoint a third Board member each or the duration of the Young Plan. In principle the Board could appoint up to nine additional directors, in practice however only the Dutch, Swedish and Swiss central bank governors in the BIS's first decades.49-50 The inaugural BIS Board had 16 members: Franck and Francqui (Belgium); Moreau, Georges Brincard and Melchior de Vog\u00fc\u00e9 (France); Hans Luther, Carl Melchior and Paul Reusch (Germany); Stringher and Beneduce (Italy); Tanaka and Daisuke Nohara (Japan); Norman and Addis (UK); and Gates McGarrah and Fraser (United States).62\nEarly activity.\nThe BIS had a quick start, even though its intended task of facilitating World War I reparation payments soon became obsolete. Even before the founding meeting in Rome, the Organisation Committee had secured a two-year lease of a convenient building in Basel, the former across the street from Basel railway station. By mid-April, Fraser had arrived from the United States and was working on the BIS's behalf from the Paris office of the Agent General for Reparation Payments, joined by McGarrah in April. The board members first met for an informal meeting in Basel on 22\u201323 April 1930, and adopted the bank's Statutes. They unanimously elected McGarrah as President of the BIS and Chairman of its Board, Fraser as alternate President, and Addis, Melchior and Moreau as Vice-Chairmen \"with equal rank\". Quesnay was appointed General Manager, albeit with the three German Board members voting against \"for serious reasons of principle\" (i.e. objecting to the choice of a French national rather than to Quesnay as an individual). These foundational decisions were later ratified by the first formal Board meeting on none }}, as the April meeting had also agreed that the ordinary meetings of the Board would henceforth take place in Basel on the second Monday of each month. On 17 May the BIS opened for business and formally took over the funds, accounts, capital, and records of the Agent General for Reparation Payments. On 20 May, the bank's shares were publicly issued.62-63\nReparation payments were first suspended for one year (Hoover moratorium, June 1931) and then stopped altogether after the Lausanne Agreement of July 1932 failed to be ratified. Instead, the BIS focused on its second statutory task, i.e. fostering the cooperation between its member central banks. It acted as a meeting forum for central banks and provided banking facilities to them. For instance, in the late 1930s, the BIS was instrumental in helping continental European central banks ship out part of their gold reserves to London.\nAs a purportedly apolitical organization, the BIS was unable to prevent transactions that reflected contemporaneous geopolitical realities, but were also widely regarded as unconscionable. As a result of the policy of appeasement of Nazi Germany by the UK and France, in March 1939 the BIS transferred 23 tons of gold it held, on behalf of Czechoslovakia, to the German Reichsbank, following the German annexation of Czechoslovakia. The transfer was authorized by both the Bank of England and Bank of France, which the BIS consulted in a hurry; Montagu Norman approved it without consulting the UK treasury, arguing at the time: \"I can't imagine any step more improper than to bring government into the current banking affairs of the BIS. I guess it would mean ruin\".208 The transfer to the Reichsbank of the Czechoslovak gold reserves has been considered the most controversial action ever taken by the BIS. \nWorld War II.\nAt the outbreak of World War II in September 1939, the BIS Board of Directors decided that the Bank should remain open, but that, for the duration of hostilities, no meetings of the Board were to take place and the Bank should maintain a neutral stance in the conduct of its business. The neutral stance, however, was increasingly hard to maintain as BIS operations were beneficial to an otherwise financially isolated Germany. German conquests disrupted the previous balance within the BIS's governance bodies: at their peak, the Reichsbank together with central banks of Nazi-occupied countries held as much as 67.4 percent of the BIS voting stock.79 Reichsbank official Emil Puhl went as far as referring to the BIS as the Reichsbank's \"only real foreign branch\".229 While Board meetings were suspended, annual general meetings continued with shareholder banks voting by proxy.79 Between 1933 and 1945 the BIS Board of directors included Walther Funk, a prominent Nazi official, as well as Hermann Schmitz, the director of IG Farben, and Baron von Schroeder, the owner of the J. H. Stein Bank, all of whom were later convicted of war crimes or crimes against humanity; the Reichsbank's Puhl was responsible for processing dental gold looted from concentration camp victims, and was convicted at the Nuremberg Ministries Trial for war crimes.\nThe BIS's operations collapsed during the war, with business volume down 95 percent in 1943 compared with the prewar period. Interest payments from the Reichsbank made the bulk of its income, reaching 82 percent by the war's end. These payments were initially made in currency but from 1940 onwards were made in gold.85 For that, the Reichsbank used resources partly derived from Nazi plunder, which came under intense criticism in the United States. So-called Nazi gold was either confiscated from prisoners or seized in victory, and was thus unacceptable as payment to the BIS. Operations conducted by the BIS were viewed with increasing suspicion by the UK and US governments, albeit less so by the respective central banks. The 1944 Bretton Woods Conference recommended the \"liquidation of the Bank for International Settlements at the earliest possible moment\". This resulted in the BIS being the subject of a disagreement between the U.S. and British delegations. The liquidation of the bank was supported by other European delegates, as well as Americans (including Harry Dexter White and Secretary of the Treasury Henry Morgenthau Jr.). Abolition was opposed by John Maynard Keynes, head of the British delegation. Keynes went to Morgenthau hoping to prevent or postpone the dissolution, but the next day it was approved. \nDespite the Bretton Woods resolution, the BIS eventually escaped liquidation, partly thanks to the dedicated advocacy on its behalf by Belgian governor Maurice Fr\u00e8re.167 In April 1945, the new U.S. president Harry S. Truman ended U.S. involvement in the scheme. The British government suspended the dissolution, and the decision to liquidate the BIS was officially reversed in 1948.\nPostwar decades.\nAfter World War II, the BIS had to rebuild both its reputation and its business model - in 1946 it registered a loss, for the first time in its history.139 It was also more narrowly focused on Europe. According to an announcement made by the Swiss Government on none }}, Japan renounced all rights, titles and interests in the BIS it had acquired under the Hague Convention of January 1930. The BIS acted as Agent for the European Payments Union (EPU, 1950\u201358), an intra-European clearing arrangement designed to help the European countries in restoring currency convertibility and free, multilateral trade. During the 1960s \u2013 the heyday of the Bretton Woods fixed exchange rate system \u2013 the BIS once again became the locus for transatlantic monetary cooperation. It coordinated the central banks' Gold Pool416 and a number of currency support operations (e.g. Sterling Group Arrangements of 1966 and 1968). The United States kept a distance but sent a senior Federal Reserve official, from 1960 to 1975 Charles Coombs, to attend the monthly governors' meetings.180 The Group of Ten (G10), including the main European economies, Canada, Japan, and the United States, became the most prominent grouping.\nThe BIS acquired land near the Basel SBB railway station between 1966 and 1972. Architect Martin Burckhardt made three design proposals in 1969, among which the Board of the BIS selected an 82-meter high round tower. This was opposed by locals and their representation in the Swiss Heritage Society, which led to a public referendum in 1971 in which 69% of voters endorsed a revised design with reduced height. The BIS moved into the new premises, the BIS Tower, in 1977.\nWith the end of the Bretton Woods system (1971\u201373) and the return to floating exchange rates, financial instability came to the fore. The collapse of some internationally active banks, such as Herstatt Bank (1974), highlighted the need for improved banking supervision at an international level. The G10 Governors created the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), which remains active. The BIS developed into a global meeting place for regulators and for developing international standards (Basel Concordat, Basel Capital Accord, Basel II and III). Through its member central banks, the BIS was actively involved in the resolution of the Latin American debt crisis (1982).\nFrom 1964 until 1993, the BIS provided the secretariat for the Committee of Governors of the Central Banks of the Member States of the European Community (Committee of Governors). This committee had been created by the European Council decision to improve monetary cooperation among the EC central banks. Likewise, the BIS in 1988\u201389 hosted most of the meetings of the Delors Committee (Committee for the Study of Economic and Monetary Union), which produced a blueprint for monetary unification subsequently adopted in the Maastricht Treaty (1992). In 1993, when the Committee of Governors was replaced by the European Monetary Institute (EMI \u2013 the precursor of the ECB), it moved from Basel to Frankfurt, cutting its ties with the BIS.\nIn 1998, the BIS acquired a second building on Aeschenplatz 1 in Basel, designed in 1986 by Mario Botta and previously owned and used by UBS. Since then, the BIS has used that building to host its banking operations on behalf of member central banks.\n21st century.\nIn the 1990s\u20132000s, the BIS successfully globalized, breaking out of its traditional European core. This was reflected in a gradual increase in its membership (from 33 shareholding central bank members in 1995 to 60 in 2013, which together represent roughly 95% of global GDP), and also in the much more global composition of the BIS Board of Directors. In 1998, the BIS opened a Representative Office for Asia and the Pacific in the Hong Kong SAR. A BIS Representative Office for the Americas was established in 2002 in Mexico City.\nAfter the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, in March 2022 the BIS suspended the Bank of Russia's membership.\nMembership and shareholding structure.\nThe BIS members are central banks of 63 jurisdictions: 34 in Europe, 16 in Asia, 5 in South America, 3 in North America, 3 in Africa, and 2 in Oceania. The United States is represented by two members, the United States Federal Reserve System and Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The Central Bank of Russia is a member but its engagement with the BIS has been suspended since early March 2022 (see History section above). In the list below, (*) indicates members of the BIS Global Economy Meetings (see below) and (**) indicates observers to these meetings.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;* Bank of Algeria**\nThe BIS was originally owned by both central banks and private individuals, since the United States, Belgium and France had decided to sell all or some of the shares allocated to their central banks to private investors. BIS shares traded on stock markets, which made the bank an unusual organization: an international organization (in the technical sense of public international law), yet allowed for private shareholders. Many central banks had similarly started as such private institutions; for example, the Bank of England was privately owned until 1946. \nAt the end of 2000, such private shareholders still owned 72,648 shares, or nearly 14 percent of the BIS's capital at the time. The BIS subsequently initiated a buyback of these private owners at 16,000 Swiss francs per share, but a group of shareholders led by New York-based First Eagle Investments sued and won a court ruling that raised the repurchase price to SFR 25,052.90 per share - which the specialized publication \"Central Banking Journal\" called a \"humiliating rebuff\" for the BIS Board.242 The buyback operation was eventually completed in 2005. Since then, the BIS has been wholly owned by the member central banks.\nCentral banking cooperation.\nThe original goal of the BIS was \"to promote the co-operation of central banks and to provide additional facilities for international financial operations; and to act as trustee or agent in regard to international financial settlements entrusted to it under agreements with the parties concerned\", as stated in its Statutes of 1930. The BIS pursues its mission by:\nBasel Meetings.\nThe activity of the BIS has always revolved around the regular meetings of its membership in Basel. In the 1930s, these meetings were held every month, with two interruptions resulting in ten meetings per year.4 Since 1998, these meetings have been held every other month, so six times a year.\nThe meetings follow a perennial sequence. On Sunday evening, the inner group of governors gather at 7pm for the so-called Economic Consultative Committee, which typically lasts for about an hour followed by dinner, a key moment for informal exchange and coordination. On Monday morning, the Global Economy Meeting (GEM) brings together a broader group of central banks, typically from 9:30am to 12:30pm. On Monday afternoon, the so-called Governors' Meeting lasts from 2pm to 5pm.xi-xii With the suspension of Russia since March 2022, 30 jurisdictions are members of the GEM and an additional 22 participate as observers.\nThe sequence has not changed markedly from the BIS's beginnings. In the 1930s, the governors' monthly meetings started at 4pm on the Sunday, and the next two days were filled with meetings and social activities.49\nBasel Committee on Banking Supervision.\nThe BIS hosts the Secretariat of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), colloquially referred to simply as the \"Basel Committee\", and with it has played a central role in establishing the Basel Capital Accords (now commonly referred to as Basel I) of 1988, Basel II framework in 2004 and more recently Basel III framework in 2010\u20132017.\nCapital adequacy policy applies to equity and capital assets. These can be overvalued in many circumstances because they do not always reflect current market conditions or adequately assess the risk of every trading position. Accordingly, the Basel standards require the capital adequacy ratio of internationally active commercial banks to be above a prescribed minimum international standard, to improve the resilience of the banking sector.\nCommittee on the Global Financial System.\nThe Committee on the Global Financial System (CGFS) was established in 1971 as the Euro-currency Standing Committee, and adopted its current name in 1999. It reports to the Global Economy Meeting.\nAs of 2023, it had 28 members: Central Bank of Argentina, Reserve Bank of Australia, National Bank of Belgium, Central Bank of Brazil, Bank of Canada, People's Bank of China, European Central Bank, Bank of France, Deutsche Bundesbank, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Reserve Bank of India, Bank of Italy, Bank of Japan, Bank of Korea, Central Bank of Luxembourg, Bank of Mexico, De Nederlandsche Bank, Central Bank of Russia, Saudi Central Bank, Monetary Authority of Singapore, South African Reserve Bank, Bank of Spain, Sveriges Riksbank, Swiss National Bank, Bank of Thailand, Bank of England, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.\nMarkets Committee.\nThe Markets Committee is the oldest of the BIS-hosted committees, originally established in 1962 as the Committee on Gold and Foreign Exchange. It also reports to the Global Economy Meeting.\nAs of 2023, it had 27 members: Reserve Bank of Australia, National Bank of Belgium, Central Bank of Brazil, Bank of Canada, People's Bank of China, European Central Bank, Bank of France, Deutsche Bundesbank, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Reserve Bank of India, Bank of Indonesia, Bank of Italy, Bank of Japan, Bank of Korea, Central Bank of Malaysia, Bank of Mexico, De Nederlandsche Bank, Central Bank of Russia, Monetary Authority of Singapore, South African Reserve Bank, Bank of Spain, Sveriges Riksbank, Swiss National Bank, Central Bank of the Republic of T\u00fcrkiye, Bank of England, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.\nCommittee on Payments and Market Infrastructure.\nAnother of the committees hosted at the BIS is the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI). The Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) was established in 1990 and extended the prior work of the Group of Experts on Payment Systems (1980) and Committee on Interbank Netting Schemes (1989), and was in turn renamed to CPMI in 2014. Its membership was extended in 1997\u201398, 2009, and 2018 to reach the following 28 members: Central Bank of Argentina, Reserve Bank of Australia, National Bank of Belgium, Central Bank of Brazil, Bank of Canada, People's Bank of China, European Central Bank, Bank of France, Deutsche Bundesbank, Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Reserve Bank of India, Bank Indonesia, Bank of Italy, Bank of Japan, Bank of Korea, Bank of Mexico, De Nederlandsche Bank, Central Bank of Russia, Saudi Central Bank, Monetary Authority of Singapore, South African Reserve Bank, Bank of Spain, Sveriges Riksbank, Swiss National Bank, Central Bank of the Republic of T\u00fcrkiye, Bank of England, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Reserve Bank of New York.\nOne of the Group's first projects, a detailed review of payment system developments in the G10 countries, was published by the BIS in 1985 in the first of a series that has become known as \"Red Books\". Currently, the red books cover countries participating in the CPMI. A sample of statistical data in the red books appears in the table below, where local currency is converted to US dollars using end-of-year rates.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Table alignment/tables.css\" /&gt;\nIrving Fisher Committee.\nThe Irving Fisher Committee on Central Bank Statistics gathers 100 members, mostly national central banks as well as a few regional organizations such as the Center for Latin American Monetary Studies (CEMLA), Central American Monetary Council, and South East Asian Central Banks Research and Training Centre (SEACEN). It is led by an 11-member executive elected by its members.\nReserve policy is also important, especially to consumers and the domestic economy. To ensure liquidity and limit liability to the larger economy, banks cannot create money in specific industries or regions without limit. To make bank depositing and borrowing safer for customers and reduce the risk of bank runs, banks are required to set aside or \"reserve\".\nReserve policy is harder to standardize, as it depends on local conditions and is often fine-tuned to make industry-specific or region-specific changes, especially within large developing nations. For instance, the People's Bank of China requires urban banks to hold 7% reserves while letting rural banks continue to hold only 6%, and simultaneously telling all banks that reserve requirements on certain overheated industries would rise sharply or penalties would be laid if investments in them did not stop completely. The PBoC is thus unusual in acting as a national bank focused on the country and not on the currency, but its desire to control asset inflation is increasingly shared among BIS members who fear \"bubbles\", and among exporting countries that find it difficult to manage the diverse requirements of the domestic economy, especially rural agriculture, and an export economy, especially in manufactured goods.\nEffectively, the PBoC sets different reserve levels for domestic and export styles of development. Historically, the United States also did this, by dividing federal monetary management into nine regions, in which the less-developed western United States had looser policies.\nFor various reasons, it has become quite difficult to accurately assess reserves on more than simple loan instruments, and this plus the regional differences has tended to discourage standardizing any reserve rules at the global BIS scale. Historically, the BIS did set some standards which favoured lending money to private landowners (at about 5 to 1) and for-profit corporations (at about 2 to 1) over loans to individuals. These distinctions reflecting classical economics were superseded by policies relying on undifferentiated market values \u2013 more in line with neoclassical economics.\nFinancial Stability Institute.\nThe Financial Stability Institute is dedicated to debates and exchanges of practices among supervisors and financial stability policymakers. It was established in 1999 in the wake of the 1997 Asian financial crisis. It has been led by Josef To\u0161ovsk\u00fd from December 2000 to December 2016, and by Fernando Restoy since January 2017.\nBIS Innovation Hub.\nThe BIS Innovation Hub, launched in 2019, extends the BIS mission of collaboration through digital innovation, developing technology-based public goods to support central banks and enhance the functioning of the financial system.\nThe BIS Innovation Hub has offices in Hong Kong SAR, Singapore, Switzerland, London, Stockholm and Toronto.\nAmong other Innovation Hub projects, the BIS signed an agreement with Central Bank of Malaysia, Bank of Thailand, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Monetary Authority of Singapore, and the Reserve Bank of India on 30 June 2024 as founding member of Project Nexus, a multilateral international initiative to enable retail cross-border payments. Bank Indonesia involved as a special observer. The platform, which in 2024 was expected to go live by 2026, would interlink domestic fast payment systems of the member countries.\nOther associations hosted by the BIS.\nThe BIS hosts the secretariats of the Financial Stability Board, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and International Association of Deposit Insurers. These entities, unlike the above listed committees, have no direct reporting links to the BIS.\nFinancials.\nThe BIS operates in the private market as a counterparty, asset manager and lender for central banks and international financial institutions. It denominates its financials in IMF special drawing rights. The balance sheet total of the BIS on 31 March 2019 was SDR 291.1 billion (US$403.7 billion) and a net profit of SDR 461.1 million (US$639.5 million).\nLeadership.\nThe Chairmen concurrently held the role of President from April 1930 to May 1937. Johan Beyen of the Netherlands served as President from May 1937 to December 1939, succeeded by American national Thomas H. McKittrick from January 1940 to June 1946. The position of President remained vacant from June 1946 to June 1948, when the roles of President and Chair of the Board were again reunited until the former was abolished on 27 June 2005. Meanwhile, the Chair had been left vacant from May 1940 to December 1942.\nBoard of directors.\nAs of August 2024:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nControversy.\nIn May 1935, the BIS was the focus of allegations of insider trading, relayed by an article in the Berner Tagblatt. The BIS undertook an internal investigation but did not take punitive action.39-40\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38056", "revid": "2807487", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38056", "title": "Shawn Fanning", "text": "American computer programmer, entrepreneur, and angel investor\nShawn Fanning (born November 22, 1980) is an American computer programmer, entrepreneur, and angel investor. He developed Napster, one of the first popular peer-to-peer (P2P) file sharing platforms, in 1999. The popularity of Napster was widespread and Fanning was featured on the cover of \"Time\" magazine.\nThe site in its initial free P2P incarnation was shut down in 2001 after the company's unsuccessful appeal of court orders arising from its encouraging the illegal sharing of copyrighted material. A paid subscription version of the site followed, and was purchased by Rhapsody on December 1, 2011. Following his involvement with Napster, he joined, and invested in, a number of early-stage technology startup companies.\nComputer career.\nNapster.\nOn June 1, 1999, Fanning released a preliminary beta program of Napster and soon, hundreds of college students at Northeastern were trading music. Sean Parker was the co-founder. They got the name from Shawn's Harwich High School nickname \"Nappy\", in reference to his hair texture. Shawn played on the Harwich tennis team.\nSnocap.\nIn 2002, Fanning was named to the MIT Technology Review TR100 as one of the top 100 innovators in the world under the age of 35. In 2003, he opened a new company, Snocap, along with Jordan Mendelson (Napster's chief architect), and Ron Conway. The company aspired to be a legitimate marketplace for digital media. However, their partners and the public did not respond well. Customer support was poor, and technical issues were numerous. One of their primary partners, CD Baby, wrote a scathing account of their relationship. In late 2007, Snocap laid off 60% of its workforce. ValleyWag wrote an article that Fanning had long left Snocap and began to work on another venture, Rupture. The ValleyWag article stated that the failure was largely due to Snocap's CEO Rusty Rueff and that of former VP Engineering Dave Rowley, who \"made a mess of engineering before he was fired\". Snocap was looking to sell itself and fast. In 2008, they found a buyer: imeem acquired Snocap in a fire sale.\nRupture.\nThe Rupture project was announced in 2007 with seed funding.\nIn December 2006, Fanning, along with Co-founder Jon Baudanza, developed Rupture, a social networking tool designed to handle the task of publishing gamers' individual profiles to a communal space and facilitating communication between \"World of Warcraft\" players. Rupture was later acquired by Electronic Arts for $30 million. Fanning's career at Electronic Arts was short-lived as a round of layoffs in November 2009 included him and his team at Rupture.\nPath.\nA few months after Fanning was laid off from Electronic Arts, he started a new company called Path.com. In January 2010, Dave Morin announced he was leaving Facebook, where he was a Senior Platform Manager, to join Fanning and become CEO at Path.\nAirtime.\nIn 2011 Fanning reunited with Napster cofounder Sean Parker to found Airtime.com. Some of the investors were Ron Conway, Michael Arrington, and Ashton Kutcher. Fanning is CEO and Parker as executive chairman.\nAirtime launched in June 2012 at a disastrous public event where Parker and Fanning paid huge amounts of money to have celebrities present but the product repeatedly crashed and ultimately failed to work. Greg Sandoval of CNET commented, \"To launch his new start-up, Sean Parker should have spent less of his billions on celebrity guests and more of it on fixing his technology.\"\nHelium Systems.\nIn 2013 Fanning founded Helium Systems together with Amir Haleem, and Sean Carey. In December 2014, the company announced that it had raised $16 million in funding led by Khosla Ventures, with participation from FirstMark Capital, Digital Garage, Marc Benioff, SV Angel, and Slow Ventures among others.\nIn popular culture.\nIn 2000, Fanning appeared as a presenter at the MTV Video Music Awards. He appeared wearing a Metallica T-shirt as the \"Metallica v. Napster, Inc.\" lawsuit had been filed a few months prior. \"For Whom the Bell Tolls\" played in the background. When asked where he got the shirt, Fanning stated, \"a friend of mine shared it with me.\" Lars Ulrich was sitting in the audience, and his reaction was shown as feigned boredom. In October 2000, Fanning was featured on the cover of \"Time\" magazine.\nFanning had a cameo appearance as himself in the 2003 film \"The Italian Job\". In the film, Seth Green's character Lyle accused Fanning of stealing Napster from him while he was taking a nap in their Northeastern University dorm room. Although other characters see this as mere bragging, a scene shows Fanning in fact creeping over Lyle's sleeping body and stealing a floppy disk. In early 2008, Fanning appeared in a Volkswagen commercial directed by Roman Coppola, in which he poked fun at his file-sharing past. Fanning and Napster were the subject of Alex Winter's documentary \"Downloaded\" in 2013.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38057", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38057", "title": "Gregory Nazianzen", "text": ""}
{"id": "38058", "revid": "26391951", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38058", "title": "Permanent Court of Arbitration", "text": "Intergovernmental organization\nThe Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA) is an intergovernmental organization headquartered at the Peace Palace, in The Hague, Netherlands. Unlike a judicial court in the traditional sense, the PCA provides administrative support in international arbitrations involving various combinations of States, State entities, international organizations and private parties. The cases span a range of legal issues involving territorial and maritime boundaries, sovereignty, human rights, international investment, and international and regional trade. The PCA is constituted through two separate multilateral conventions with a combined membership of 126 Contracting Parties. The PCA is not a United Nations agency,\nbut has been a United Nations observer since 1993.\nThe PCA was established by the Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes, concluded at The Hague in 1899 during the first Hague Peace Conference of 1899. The Conference had been convened at the initiative of emperor Nicholas II of Russia \"with the object of seeking the most objective means of ensuring to all peoples the benefits of a real and lasting peace, and above all, of limiting the progressive development of existing armaments\".\nIn the first three decades of its existence, the PCA was a major forum for resolving inter-state disputes. Subsequently, the organization went dormant for much of the 20th century, as states opted to use the Permanent Court of International Justice instead of the PCA. In the 21st century, the PCA has resurged as a venue for resolving investor-state disputes.\nOrganization.\nThe PCA is not a conventional court, but an administrative organization with the objective of having permanent and readily available means to serve as the registry for purposes of international arbitration and other related procedures, including commissions of enquiry and conciliation.\nThe \"Administrative Council\" (formally the \"Permanent Administrative Council\") is a body composed of all the diplomatic representatives of the Contracting Parties accredited to the Netherlands. It is presided by the Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands, who is also a Contracting Party. It is responsible for the \"direction and control\" of the International Bureau, directs the organisation's budget and reports on its activities.\nThe \"International Bureau\" is the Secretariat of the PCA and is headed by the Secretary-General. It provides linguistic, research, administrative and financial support to PCA arbitration tribunals.\nThe third organ of the PCA are the \"Members of the Court\". Each Contracting Party may appoint up to four persons \"of known competency in questions of international law, of the highest moral reputation and disposed to accept the duties of arbitrators\" for a renewable 6-year term. In addition to forming a panel of potential arbitrators, the Members of the Court from each Contracting Party constitute a \u201cnational group,\u201d which is entitled to nominate candidates for the election to the International Court of Justice. The Members of the Court (along with the judges of the International Court of Justice) are among a handful of groups entitled to nominate candidates for the Nobel Peace Prize.\nParties to a dispute may, but are not obliged to, select arbitrators from the list of the Members of the Court.\nThe PCA sometimes gets confused with the International Court of Justice, which also has its seat in the Peace Palace. The PCA is not part of the UN system, holding observer status in the UN General Assembly since 1993.\nProcedure.\nIn the Articles 30\u201357 of the Hague Convention of 1899 the rules of arbitration procedure are outlined. These rules are an adapted version of pre-existing treaties among the states. They were amended in 1907, the creation of a summary procedure for simple cases being the most conspicuous change, and were relevant in the 1920s development of rules for the Court of International Justice.\nThe first act of parties before the PCA is the submission of the so-called \"compromisis\", stating the issue and the competence of the arbitrator(s). Proceedings are then conducted in two phases: written pleadings and oral discussion. The Court retires once the debate is over to deliberate and conclude the case by a simple majority of votes.\nThe decision is published as an award, along with any dissenting opinions. Early Court decisions were countersigned by the arbitrators themselves, but in 1907, that responsibility was passed to the president and secretary (of the PCA). The award is read in a public session in the presence of the agents and lawyers of the parties to the case. The decision is binding on the parties, and there is no mechanism for appeal.\nBudget and fees.\nBetween 2007 and 2008, the budget was \u20ac1.8 million.\nThe budget of the PCA comes from the contributions of its Contracting Parties and income through arbitration cases. The distribution of the amounts to be paid by the individual Contracting Parties is based on the system in use by the Universal Postal Union.\nParties to arbitration have to pay the expenses of the arbitral tribunal set up to hear the case, including the salary of the arbitrators, registry and administrative functions, but not including overheads of the organization. The costs of arbitration vary from case to case and discussions may be held between the PCA and the parties over fee arrangements.\nThe fixed costs for action as an appointing authority are \u20ac3000.\nContracting Parties.\nParties to the Convention on the Pacific Settlement of disputes of 1899 (71 Parties) and 1907 (101 Parties) are automatically parties to the PCA. As 52 are parties to both conventions, the PCA has 126 Contracting Parties: 124 members of the United Nations, as well as Kosovo and Palestine.\nHistory.\nThe PCA is the oldest institution for international dispute resolution. It was established in 1899 by the first Hague Peace Conference under Articles 20 to 29 of the 1899 Hague Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes. At the second Hague Peace Conference, the earlier Convention was revised by the 1907 Convention for the Pacific Settlement of International Disputes. The Conference was convened at the initiative of emperor Nicholas II of Russia \"with the object of seeking the most objective means of ensuring to all peoples the benefits of a real and lasting peace, and above all, of limiting the progressive development of existing armaments\".\nList of PCA Secretaries-General.\nThe current Secretary-General of the PCA is Dr. Hab. Marcin Czepelak, who was elected on 14 February 2022 by the PCA Administrative Council for a term of 5 years (from 1 June 2022 until 31 May 2027).\nThe below table lists all the Secretaries-General who have served the PCA since its founding.\nFunctions.\nPCA tribunals have jurisdiction for disputes based on the PCA founding documents (the Conventions on Pacific Settlement of International Disputes), or based on bilateral and multilateral treaties. Its Secretary General furthermore acts as an appointing authority for arbitration.\nAppointing authority.\nWhen problems arise in designating arbitrators for an arbitration under UNCITRAL arbitration rules (e.g. because one of the parties refuses to designate an arbitrator, or when the designated arbitrators are unable to agree on designation of a third arbitrator), the PCA Secretary-General may be requested to serve as an appointing authority. This option is also open for other arbitration agreements, in which the Secretary General is designated. Between 2011, and 2015, 257 of such requests were submitted.\nInterstate arbitration based on the Hague Convention.\nArbitration between two states takes place when two member states of the PCA decide to submit a dispute for arbitration to a PCA Tribunal. The Tribunal consists of five arbitrators: two (one of whom may be a national of the party concerned) are selected by each party to the arbitration; these four arbitrators then choose the fifth and presiding arbitrator.\nInterstate arbitration based on UNCLOS.\nThe United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provides for a dispute resolution mechanism regarding maritime boundaries in which member states can choose either the \nIf two member states have elected different dispute resolution measures, the third option is to be used. As of August 2016, the PCA has administered twelve of the thirteen cases initiated by states under Annex VII to the UNCLOS.\nInvestor\u2013state investment disputes.\nMany free trade agreements provide for a mechanism to resolve disputes between investors and states through arbitration through so-called investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) clauses. The PCA may play a role in such proceedings as appointing authority for arbitrators, by use of its arbitration rules or by providing support to the arbitration case.\nCases.\nExamples of cases are shown below:\nInterstate\nInterstate: Annex VII UNCLOS\nInvestor-state\nOther\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38059", "revid": "44062", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38059", "title": "PCA", "text": "PCA may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38062", "revid": "431183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38062", "title": "Die Entf\u00fchrung aus dem Serail", "text": "1782 opera by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart\n () (K. 384; The Abduction from the Seraglio; also known as ) is a singspiel in three acts by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. The German libretto is by Gottlieb Stephanie, based on Christoph Friedrich Bretzner's . The plot concerns the attempt of the hero Belmonte, assisted by his servant Pedrillo, to rescue his beloved Constanze from the seraglio of Pasha Selim. The work premiered on 16 July 1782 at the Vienna Burgtheater, with the composer conducting.\nOrigins.\nThe opera loosely refers to the practice of the North African Barbary corsairs, who operated primarily in the western Mediterranean, of hijacking ships belonging to Christian states. Under the pretext of jihad, the ship and cargo were sold or returned only after a ransom was paid. The actual goal, however, was the kidnapping of crew and passengers, to extort ransom money or to sell them into slavery. It was also common to force affected seafaring nations of non-Muslim faith to pay protection money or tribute. The corsairs acted on behalf of or with the acquiescence of the local Muslim rulers in Algiers, Tunis and Tripoli. This type of state-backed piracy finally ended after the French conquest of Algiers (1830).\nThe company that first sponsored the opera was the (\"national Singspiel\"), a pet project (1778\u20131783) of the Austrian emperor Joseph II. The Emperor had set up the company to perform works in the German language (as opposed to the Italian opera style widely popular in Vienna). This project was ultimately given up as a failure, but along the way it produced a number of successes, mostly a series of translated works. Mozart's opera emerged as its outstanding original success.\nThe inspector of the was Gottlieb Stephanie. When the 25-year-old Mozart arrived in Vienna in 1781, seeking professional opportunity, one of the first tasks to which he addressed himself was to become acquainted with Stephanie and lobby him for an opera commission. To this end, he brought a copy of his earlier unfinished opera \"Zaide\" and showed it to Stephanie, who was duly impressed. Mozart also made a strong impression on the manager of the theater, Count Franz Xaver Orsini-Rosenberg, when in the home of Mozart's friend and patroness Maria Wilhelmine Thun the Count heard him play excerpts from his opera \"Idomeneo\", premiered with great success the previous year in Munich. With this backing, it was agreed that Stephanie would find appropriate material and prepare a libretto for Mozart. Stephanie complied by preparing an altered version of an earlier work without attributing or seeking permission from its original author Christoph Friedrich Bretzner. Bretzner later complained loudly and publicly about the theft.\nComposition.\nMozart received the libretto from Stephanie on 29 July 1781. He had few opportunities to compose professionally during the summer and he set to work on the libretto at a very rapid pace, finishing three major numbers in just two days. A letter to his father Leopold indicates he was excited about the prospect of having his opera performed in Vienna and worked enthusiastically on his project.\nAt first Mozart thought he needed to finish his opera in only two months, because tentative plans were made to perform it at the September visit of the Russian Grand Duke Paul (son of Catherine the Great and heir to the Russian throne). However, it was ultimately decided to perform operas by Gluck instead, giving Mozart more time.\nIt was around this time that Mozart articulated his views about the role of the composer and the librettist in the preparation of an opera. He wrote to his father (13 October 1781):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I would say that in an opera the poetry must be altogether the obedient daughter of the music. Why are Italian comic operas popular everywhere \u2013 in spite of the miserable libretti? \u2026 Because the music reigns supreme, and when one listens to it all else is forgotten. An opera is sure of success when the plot is well worked out, the words written solely for the music and not shoved in here and there to suit some miserable rhyme ... The best thing of all is when a good composer, who understands the stage and is talented enough to make sound suggestions, meets an able poet, that true phoenix; in that case, no fears need be entertained as to the applause \u2013 even of the ignorant.\nIt would seem that something along these lines did happen\u2014that is, Mozart decided to play a major role in the shaping of the libretto, insisting that Stephanie make changes for dramatic and musical effect. On 26 September Mozart wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Now comes the rub! The first act was finished more than three weeks ago, as was also one aria in act 2 and the drunken duet [\"Vivat Bacchus\", act 2] ... But I cannot compose any more, because the whole story is being altered \u2013 and, to tell the truth, at my own request. At the beginning of act 3 there is a charming quintet or rather finale, but I would prefer to have it at the end of act 2. In order to make this practicable, great changes must be made, in fact an entirely new plot must be introduced \u2013 and Stephanie is up to his neck in other work. So we must have a little patience.\nMozart was evidently quite pleased to have in Stephanie a librettist who would listen to him. The same letter also says:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Everyone abuses Stephanie. It may be the case he is only friendly to my face. But after all he is preparing the libretto for me \u2013 and, what is more, exactly as I want it \u2013 and by Heaven, I don't ask anything more of him.\nWith the delays for rewriting, the composition took several more months. The premiere took place on 16 July 1782, at the Burgtheater in Vienna.\nCharacter.\n is in the genre of \"Singspiel\", thus the music lacks recitatives and consists entirely of set numbers. As Spike Hughes notes, the action is mostly carried forward by the spoken dialogue, so the libretto gave Mozart little opportunity to display an achievement for which his later operas are celebrated, namely the construction of scenes in which the plot is both reflected in and driven forward by the music.\n is lighthearted and frequently comic, with little of the deep character exploration or darker feelings found in Mozart's later operas. The opera was inspired by a contemporary interest in the exotic culture of the Ottoman Empire, a nation which had only recently ceased to be a military threat to Austria. Mozart's opera includes a Westernized version of Turkish music, based very loosely on the Turkish Janissary band music.\nCertain aspects of the opera conform to an eighteenth-century European view of orientalism. The Pasha's titular harem, for example, reprised themes of sexual libertinage. And the comically sinister overseer, Osmin, is a send-up of earlier stereotypes of Turkish despotism. However, the opera also defies the stereotype of despotic Turkish culture, since its climax entails a selfless act of forgiveness on the part of the Pasha.\nThe music includes some of the composer's most spectacular and difficult arias. Osmin's act 3 aria \" includes characteristic 18th century coloratura passage work, and twice goes down to a low D (D2), one of the lowest notes demanded of any voice in opera. Perhaps the most famous aria in the opera is the long and elaborate \" (\"Tortures of all kinds\") for Konstanze, an outstanding challenge for sopranos. Konstanze sings in a kind of sinfonia concertante with four solo players from the orchestra; the strikingly long orchestral introduction, without stage action, also poses problems for stage directors.\nThe virtuosity of these roles is perhaps attributable to the fact that when he took up the task of composing the opera, Mozart already knew the outstanding reputations of the singers for whom he was writing, and he tailored the arias to their strengths. The first Osmin was Ludwig Fischer, a bass noted for his wide range and skill in leaping over large intervals with ease. Similarly, Mozart wrote of the first Konstanze, Caterina Cavalieri, \"I have sacrificed Konstanze's aria a little to the flexible throat of Mlle. Cavalieri.\"\nReception.\n The opera was a huge success. The first two performances brought in the large sum of 1200 florins. The work was repeatedly performed in Vienna during Mozart's lifetime, and throughout German-speaking Europe. In 1787, Goethe wrote (concerning his own efforts as a librettist):\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;All our endeavour ... to confine ourselves to what is simple and limited was lost when Mozart appeared. \"Die Entf\u00fchrung aus dem Serail\" conquered all, and our own carefully written piece has never been so much as mentioned in theater circles.\nAlthough the opera greatly raised Mozart's standing with the public as a composer, it did not make him rich: he was paid a flat fee of 100 Imperial ducats (about 450 florins) for his work, and made no profits from the many subsequent performances.\nThe opera reached Paris in November 1801, when Fr\u00e9d\u00e9ric Blasius conducted Ellmenreich's company in performances at the .\nThe American premiere in English was given by the Rochester Opera Company on 1 November 1926 under the direction of Vladimir Rosing. A second production with a new English libretto by Robert A. Simon was debuted by the American Opera Company at the Gallo Opera House in New York on 31 January 1928, and was then performed on tour in Boston and Chicago.\n\"Too many notes\".\nThe complexity of Mozart's work noted by Goethe also plays a role in a well-known tale about the opera which appeared in the early (1798) biography of Mozart by Franz Xaver Niemetschek. In the version of the anecdote printed in \"Bartlett's Book of Anecdotes\", a reference work, the story is told like this:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The Emperor Joseph II commissioned the creation of \"The Abduction from the Seraglio\", but when he heard it, he complained to Mozart, \"That is too fine for my ears \u2013 there are too many notes.\" Mozart replied, \"There are just as many notes as there should be.\"\nThe authenticity of this story is not accepted by all scholars. Moreover, the version given by the Bartlett reference (and many other places) includes a translation of the original German that is dubious. The original reads: \"\" \"Too many notes\" is not a plausible translation of the German phrase \"\". Mautner, translating Niemetschek, renders this as \"an extraordinary number of notes\", while Branscombe translates it simply as \"very many notes\". William Stafford translates the phrase as \"Too beautiful for our ears, and an enormous number of notes, dear Mozart!\" The anecdote, which is often repeated, is considered by some scholars to unfairly give the Emperor a bad reputation concerning both his musical abilities and his appreciation and support of Mozart.\nInstrumentation.\nThe singers perform with a Classical-era orchestra: pairs of flutes, oboes, clarinets, bassoons, horns, trumpets, a set of two timpani, and strings. They are augmented with the instruments needed for \"Turkish\" music: tamburo grande (tamburo turco), cymbals, triangles, and piccolo. The aria \"\" is augmented by two basset horns.\nThe orchestra for the premiere included a number of eminent musicians of the day: first cellist Joseph Franz Weigl, first oboist Josef Triebensee, second oboist Johann Went second horn Joseph Leutgeb, and the clarinettist brothers Anton and Johann Stadler. In the first violin section was Franz de Paula Hofer, who later became Mozart's brother-in-law. The four musicians who played the \"Turkish\" instruments remain anonymous, though it is known that they were recruited for this purpose by one Franz Tyron, Kapellmeister of the Austrian Second Field Artillery Regiment.\nPlace: the country house of the Pasha (German \"Bassa\"), in Turkey\nTime: 16th century\nSynopsis.\nAct 1.\nAfter a lively overture Belmonte enters, looking for his betrothed, Konstanze, who, with her English servant, Blonde, has fallen into the hands of pirates and been sold to Pasha Selim (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"Here surely I must find her\"). Osmin, the Pasha's bad-tempered servant, comes to pluck figs in the garden and contemptuously ignores Belmonte's questions (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"You may think, you've found a maiden\"). Belmonte tries to obtain news of his servant, Pedrillo, who has been captured with the women and is serving as a servant in the Pasha's palace. Osmin replies with insults and abuse (Duet: \"\" \u2013 \"The devil take you and your song, sir\"). Belmonte leaves in disgust. Pedrillo enters and Osmin rages at him, vowing to get him tortured and killed in many different ways (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"These young men who go a-spying\"). Osmin leaves and Belmonte enters and happily reunites with Pedrillo. Together, they resolve to rescue Konstanze and Blonde, who is Pedrillo's fianc\u00e9e (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"Konstanze, Konstanze, to see thee again \u2026 Oh what trembling\").\nAccompanied by a chorus of Janissaries (\"\" \u2013 \"Sing to the mighty Pasha Selim\"), Pasha Selim appears with Konstanze, for whose love he strives in vain (Aria of Konstanze: \"\" \u2013 \"How I loved him\"). Pedrillo tricks the Pasha into hiring Belmonte as an architect. When Belmonte and Pedrillo try to enter the palace, Osmin bars their way, but they hurry past him anyway (Terzett: \"\" \u2013 \"March! March! March! Clear off!\").\nAct 2.\nThe Pasha has given Blonde to Osmin, to be his slave; however, she defiantly rebuffs her new master's rough lovemaking attempts (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"With smiles and kind caresses\"), threatens to scratch out his eyes, and chases him out of the room (Duet: \"\" \u2013 \"I'm going, but mark what I say\"). Konstanze enters in distress (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"Oh what sorrow overwhelms my spirit \u2026 Endless grief tortures my spirit\"). The Pasha enters, demands Konstanze's love, and threatens to use force, but she resolutely rejects him (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"Tortures unrelenting\"). Left alone, he muses on her determination to remain chaste, which increases his desire for her.\nPedrillo informs Blonde that Belmonte has come and is planning to rescue them, filling Blonde with joy (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"Oh, the happy, happy day\"). After singing a short ditty to boost his courage (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"Now Pedrillo, now for battle!\"), Pedrillo invites Osmin to drink (Duet: \"\" \u2013 \"Here's to Bacchus, long live Bacchus\"). Despite his religious prohibition against alcoholic beverages, Osmin drinks heavily and falls asleep. Konstanze joins Belmonte who declares his love (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"When tears of joy flow\"). The two couples reunite (Quartet, Belmonte, Konstanze, Pedrillo, Blonde: \"\" \u2013 \"Ah, Belmonte, ah my dear one!\"). After their initial expressions of love and joy, Belmonte and Pedrillo both question anxiously whether their respective fiancees have remained faithful during their forced separation; to their delight, the women respond with indignation and dismay, and Blonde slaps Pedrillo's face. The two men apologize for their lack of confidence; the women forgive them for their offensive questions.\nAct 3.\nKlaas and Pedrillo come to the garden with ladders (Aria, Belmonte: \"\" \u2013 \"Love, only love, can now direct me\"). Pedrillo attracts the attention of the women by singing a ballad about a rescue similar to the one he is planning (Romanze, Pedrillo: \"\" \u2013 \"In Moorish lands a maiden fair\"). However, Osmin enters, sees the ladders, and rouses the castle. Osmin exults in the prospect of seeing them all hanged (Aria: \"\" \u2013 \"My triumphant hour's approaching\"). Belmonte pleads for their lives and tells Pasha Selim that his father is a Spanish Grandee and Governor of Oran, named Lostados, and will pay a generous ransom. Unfortunately, Pasha Selim and Lostados are long-standing enemies. The Pasha rejoices in the opportunity to subject his enemy's son to a horrible death. He leaves Belmonte and Konstanze to bid each other a last farewell; they lovingly assure each other that being tortured to death will be a pleasure, so long as they get tortured to death together (Duet: \"\" \u2013 \"What dreadful fate conspires against us... Woe, you will die because of me\"). However, the Pasha then decides that he can make a better point against Lostados by showing mercy and releasing Belmonte and his friends. All are set at liberty \u2013 much to the dismay of Osmin (Finale: \"\" \u2013 \"Your noble mercy passes measure\").\nAdaptations.\nThe Australian Broadcasting Commission made a TV production in 1961 as the English-language \"The Abduction from the Seraglio\", using outdoor filming in addition to the stage setting.\nThe American post-modernist writer Donald Barthelme wrote a surreal comic short story entitled \"The Abduction from the Seraglio\" (published in \"The New Yorker\" in January 1978, collected in \"Great Days\", Farrar, Strous &amp; Giroux 1979, and in \"Sixty Stories\", 1981) in which Belmonte, as narrator, is reconfigured into a cowboy sculptor (whose arias are Country &amp; Western songs), Constanze into his ex-lover, a counter-culture free spirit seduced by the Pasha, who in turn is a Plymouth automobile dealer worth five million dollars a year. Belmonte's rescue attempt fails as Constanze decides to stay with the Pasha, and he is left bereft.\nMusic professor, composer, and humorist Peter Schickele claims to have \"discovered\" the fictitive composer P. D. Q. Bach's \"The Abduction of Figaro\" (1984), a pastiche of the and Mozart's \"The Marriage of Figaro\".\nThe Finnish composer Aulis Sallinen wrote an opera called \"The Palace\" (first performed 1995); it contains characters whose names are adapted from \"Abduction\" and loosely uses elements of the plot of Mozart's opera as the starting point of a satirical fantasy.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;"}
{"id": "38067", "revid": "30", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38067", "title": "SHIRBRIG", "text": ""}
{"id": "38068", "revid": "14383484", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38068", "title": "Standby High-Readiness Brigade", "text": "Military unit\nThe Standby High-Readiness Brigade (SHIRBRIG) was a Danish-led initiative associated with the United Nations that aimed to create a standby force ready for peacekeeping. It was formed largely as a result of the genocide in Rwanda and other atrocities. Its permanent headquarters were in Garderkasernen (Garder barracks), H\u00f8velte 30 kilometres north of Copenhagen in Denmark. It was declared ready for operations on January 1, 2000, and deployed to the Horn of Africa in November 2000 to form the core of the UN Mission in Ethiopia and Eritrea (UNMEE) under the command of Royal Netherlands Marine Corps Major General Patrick Cammaert. The Brigade returned from that mission six months later and began a training cycle. It announced that it would again be ready for action as of January 1, 2002. Cammaert's appointment expired in November, 2002, but was extended at least once. Later commanders included Brig. Gen. Sten Edholm (Sweden), and Brig Gen Greg Mitchell (Canada).\nThe Brigade comprised a number of troops varying between four and five thousand, drawn from units pledged by eleven countries: Argentina, Austria, Canada, Denmark, Finland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Romania, Spain and Sweden.\nThe nations that contributed to SHIRBRIG had the right to opt out of any operation. For example, when the UNMEE was formed, Argentina and Romania opted out for financial reasons.\nThe Brigade expected to operate independently at a considerable distance from support for up to 60 days. It stood ready for deployment from point of embarkation at 15 to 30 days' notice. Its deployment will be limited to six months duration, after which the mission will either be terminated or other forces will replace the Brigade.\nOther operations the Brigade took part in were planning ECOWAS's operation in C\u00f4te d'Ivoire, and forming the Interim Headquarters of the United Nations Mission in Liberia.\nThe Brigade ceased all operational activities on June 30, 2009 and closed down the organization.\nThe Brigade's files were given to the U.S. Army's Peacekeeping &amp; Stability Operations Institute (PKSOI) at Carlisle Barracks, PA and are located at the adjacent Army Heritage Education Center in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, USA. \nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38070", "revid": "44127043", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38070", "title": "Matthew of Krak\u00f3w", "text": "German-Polish scholar and priest\nMatthew of Krak\u00f3w (c. 1335 \u2013 5 March 1410) was a German-Polish scholar and priest of the fourteenth century.\nEarly life.\nHe was born in Krak\u00f3w, the son of a German immigrant town-clerk, but the view, once generally held, that he was descended from the Pomeranian noble family of Krak\u00f3w, is now discredited (cf. Sommerfeld, \"Matth\u00e4us von Krakow\", 1891). His father was probably a German notary in Krak\u00f3w. Entering the University of Prague, Matthew graduated bachelor of arts in 1355 and master in 1357, and later filled for several terms the office of dean in the same faculty.\nTheologian and diplomat.\nA source from 1387 refers to Matthew as professor of theology, and one manuscript speaks of him as \"city preacher of Prague\". About 1382 he headed an embassy from his university to Urban VI, before whom he delivered a dissertation in favour of reform. Accepting an invitation from the University of Heidelberg, he joined its professorial staff in 1395, and a year later was appointed rector. In 1395 he was named councillor to Rupert II, and the raising of Rupert III, Elector Palatine to the dignity of King of the Romans in 1400 marks the beginning of Matthew's career as a statesman.\nFrequently employed by the king both at court and on embassies, he appeared at Rome in 1403 to solicit Boniface IX's confirmation of Rupert's claims. On the elevation of Innocent VII to the papal throne in 1404, Matthew greeted him on behalf of Rupert. During the same year Matthew was appointed Bishop of Worms, and settled a dispute between the people and clergy of that city.\nGregory XII wished to name him Cardinal Priest of St. Cyriac in Thermis, but Matthew declined the honour. As ambassador of Rupert to the Council of Pisa, he displayed the greatest zeal on behalf of Gregory XII, whom he regarded as the legitimate occupant of the papal throne. He died at Pisa.\nWorks.\nMatthew was a very prolific theological writer. Apart from Biblical commentaries, sermons, and works on current topics, the most important of his writings are: \nThat he wrote \u2013 to be distinguished from a similar work by Cardinal Capran \u2013 cannot be maintained with certainty.\nThe work \"De praxi curiae Romanae\" or \"De squaloribus curiae Romanae\" from around 1405 is attributed to him, though this has been disputed."}
{"id": "38071", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38071", "title": "Ruprecht III Wttelsbach", "text": ""}
{"id": "38074", "revid": "45901660", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38074", "title": "Kidney stone disease", "text": "Formation of mineral deposits in the kidneys\nMedical condition&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Infobox/styles-images.css\" /&gt;\nKidney stone disease or urinary stone disease is a crystallopathy that occurs when there are too many minerals in the urine and not enough liquid or hydration. This imbalance causes tiny pieces of crystal to aggregate and form hard masses, or calculi (stones) in the upper urinary tract. Because renal calculi typically form in the kidney, if small enough, they are able to leave the urinary tract via the urine stream. A small calculus may pass without causing symptoms. However, if a stone grows to more than , it can cause a blockage of the ureter, resulting in extremely sharp and severe pain (renal colic) in the lower back that often radiates downward to the groin. A calculus may also result in blood in the urine, vomiting (due to severe pain), swelling of the kidney, or painful urination. About half of all people who have had a kidney stone are likely to develop another within ten years.\n\"Renal\" is Latin for \"kidney\", while \"nephro\" is the Greek equivalent. \"Lithiasis\" (Gr.) and \"calculus\" (Lat.- pl. calculi) both mean stone.\nMost calculi form by a combination of genetics and environmental factors. Risk factors include high urine calcium levels, obesity, certain foods, some medications, calcium supplements, gout, hyperparathyroidism, and not drinking enough fluids. Calculi form in the kidney when minerals in urine are at high concentrations. The diagnosis is usually based on symptoms, urine testing, and medical imaging. Blood tests may also be useful. Calculi are typically classified by their location, being referred to medically as nephrolithiasis (in the kidney), ureterolithiasis (in the ureter), or cystolithiasis (in the bladder). Calculi are also classified by what they are made of, such as from calcium oxalate, uric acid, struvite, or cystine.\nIn those who have had renal calculi, drinking fluids, especially water, is a way to prevent them. Drinking fluids such that more than two liters of urine are produced per day is recommended. If fluid intake alone is not effective to prevent renal calculi, the medications thiazide diuretic, citrate, or allopurinol may be suggested. Soft drinks containing phosphoric acid (typically colas) should be avoided. When a calculus causes no symptoms, no treatment is needed. For those with symptoms, pain control is usually the first measure, using medications such as nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs or opioids. Larger calculi may be helped to pass with the medication tamsulosin, or may require procedures for removal such as extracorporeal shockwave therapy (ESWT), laser lithotripsy (LL), or a percutaneous nephrolithotomy (PCNL).\nRenal calculi have affected humans throughout history with a description of surgery to remove them dating from as early as 600 BC in ancient India by Sushruta. Between 1% and 15% of people globally are affected by renal calculi at some point in their lives. In 2015, 22.1 million cases occurred, resulting in about 16,100 deaths. They have become more common in the Western world since the 1970s. Generally, more men are affected than women, mainly between the ages of 40 and 60.The prevalence and incidence of the disease rises worldwide and continues to be challenging for patients, physicians, and healthcare systems alike. In this context, epidemiological studies are striving to elucidate the worldwide changes in the patterns and the burden of the disease and identify modifiable risk factors that contribute to the development of renal calculi.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSigns and symptoms.\nThe hallmark of a stone that obstructs the ureter or renal pelvis is excruciating, intermittent pain that radiates from the flank to the groin or to the inner thigh. This is due to the transfer of referred pain signals from the lower thoracic splanchnic nerves to the lumbar splanchnic nerves as the stone passes down from the kidney or proximal ureter to the distal ureter. This pain, known as renal colic, is often described as one of the strongest pain sensations known. Renal colic caused by kidney stones is commonly accompanied by urinary urgency, restlessness, frequent urination, blood in the urine, sweating, nausea, and vomiting. It typically comes in waves lasting 20 to 60 minutes caused by peristaltic contractions of the ureter as it attempts to expel the stone.\nThe embryological link between the urinary tract, the genital system, and the gastrointestinal tract is the basis of the radiation of pain to the gonads, as well as the nausea and vomiting that are also common in urolithiasis. Postrenal azotemia and hydronephrosis can be observed following the obstruction of urine flow through one or both ureters.\nPain in the lower-left quadrant can sometimes be confused with diverticulitis because the sigmoid colon overlaps the ureter, and the exact location of the pain may be difficult to isolate due to the proximity of these two structures.\nRisk factors.\nDehydration from low fluid intake is a factor in stone formation. Individuals living in warm climates are at higher risk due to increased fluid loss. Obesity, immobility, and sedentary lifestyles are other leading risk factors.\nHigh dietary intake of animal protein, sodium, sugars including honey, refined sugars, fructose and high fructose corn syrup, and excessive consumption of fruit juices may increase the risk of kidney stone formation due to increased uric acid excretion and elevated urinary oxalate levels (whereas tea, coffee, wine and beer may decrease the risk).\nKidney stones can result from an underlying metabolic condition, such as distal renal tubular acidosis, Dent's disease, hyperparathyroidism, primary hyperoxaluria, or medullary sponge kidney. 3\u201320% of people who form kidney stones have medullary sponge kidney.\nKidney stones are more common in people with Crohn's disease; Crohn's disease is associated with hyperoxaluria and malabsorption of magnesium.\nUreteropelvic junction obstruction (UPJO), a congenital or acquired condition characterized by a narrowing of the junction between the renal pelvis and the ureter, impeding the flow of urine to the bladder, is a contributing factor in the formation of kidney stones.\nTwin studies conducted in 2005 estimated the heritability of kidney stone development at . Similarly, up to two-thirds of individuals with hypercalciuric stone formation have a family history of nephrolithiasis.\nA person with recurrent kidney stones may be screened for such disorders. This is typically done with a 24-hour urine collection. The urine is analyzed for features that promote stone formation.\nCalcium oxalate.\nCalcium is one component of the most common type of human kidney stones, calcium oxalate. Some studies suggest that people who take calcium or vitamin D as a dietary supplement have a higher risk of developing kidney stones. In the United States, kidney stone formation was used as an indicator of excess calcium intake by the Reference Daily Intake committee for calcium in adults.\nIn the early 1990s, a study conducted for the Women's Health Initiative in the US found that postmenopausal women who consumed\u00a01000\u00a0mg of supplemental calcium and 400\u00a0international units of vitamin D per day for seven years had a 17% higher risk of developing kidney stones than subjects taking a placebo. The Nurses' Health Study also showed an association between supplemental calcium intake and kidney stone formation.\nUnlike supplemental calcium, high intakes of dietary calcium do not appear to cause kidney stones and may actually protect against their development. This is perhaps related to the role of calcium in binding ingested oxalate in the gastrointestinal tract. As the amount of calcium intake decreases, the amount of oxalate available for absorption into the bloodstream increases; this oxalate is then excreted in greater amounts into the urine by the kidneys. In the urine, oxalate is a very strong promoter of calcium oxalate precipitation\u2014about 15 times stronger than calcium.\nA 2004 study found that diets low in calcium are associated with a higher overall risk for kidney stone formation. For most individuals, other risk factors for kidney stones, such as high intakes of dietary oxalates and low fluid intake, play a greater role than calcium intake.\nOther electrolytes.\nCalcium is not the only electrolyte that influences the formation of kidney stones. For example, by increasing urinary calcium excretion, high dietary sodium may increase the risk of stone formation.\nDrinking fluoridated tap water may increase the risk of kidney stone formation by a similar mechanism, though further epidemiologic studies are warranted to determine whether fluoride in drinking water is associated with an increased incidence of kidney stones. High dietary intake of potassium appears to reduce the risk of stone formation because potassium promotes the urinary excretion of citrate, an inhibitor of calcium crystal formation.\nKidney stones are more likely to develop, and to grow larger, if a person has low dietary magnesium. Magnesium inhibits stone formation.\nAnimal protein.\nDiets in Western nations typically contain a large proportion of animal protein. Eating animal protein creates an acid load that increases urinary excretion of calcium and uric acid and reduced citrate. Urinary excretion of excess sulfurous amino acids (e.g., cysteine and methionine), uric acid, and other acidic metabolites from animal protein acidifies the urine, which promotes the formation of kidney stones. Low urinary-citrate excretion is also commonly found in those with a high dietary intake of animal protein, whereas vegetarians tend to have higher levels of citrate excretion. Low urinary citrate, too, promotes stone formation.\nVitamins.\nThe evidence linking vitamin C supplements with an increased rate of kidney stones is inconclusive. The excess dietary intake of vitamin C might increase the risk of calcium-oxalate stone formation. The link between vitamin D intake and kidney stones is also tenuous.\nExcessive vitamin D supplementation may increase the risk of stone formation by increasing the intestinal absorption of calcium; correction of a deficiency does not.\nPathophysiology.\nSupersaturation of urine.\nKidney stones are primarily composed of calcium salts, with the most common being calcium oxalate (70-80%), followed by calcium phosphate and uric acid. When urine contains high concentrations of these ions, they can form crystals and eventually stones.\nThe formation of kidney stones occurs in three main phases:\nWhen the urine becomes supersaturated (when the urine solvent contains more solutes than it can hold in solution) with one or more calculogenic (crystal-forming) substances, initial seed crystals may form through the process of nucleation. Heterogeneous nucleation (where there is a solid surface present on which a crystal can grow) proceeds more rapidly than homogeneous nucleation (where a crystal must grow in a liquid medium with no such surface), because it requires less energy. Adhering to cells on the surface of a renal papilla, a seed crystal can grow and aggregate into an organized mass. Depending on the chemical composition of the crystal, the stone-forming process may proceed more rapidly when the urine pH is unusually high or low.\nSupersaturation of the urine with respect to a calculogenic compound is pH-dependent. For example, at a pH of 7.0, the solubility of uric acid in urine is 158\u00a0mg/100\u00a0mL. Reducing the pH to 5.0 decreases the solubility of uric acid to less than 8\u00a0mg/100\u00a0mL. The formation of uric-acid stones requires a combination of hyperuricosuria (high urine uric-acid levels) and low urine pH; hyperuricosuria alone is not associated with uric-acid stone formation if the urine pH is alkaline. Supersaturation of the urine is a necessary, but not a sufficient, condition for the development of any urinary calculus. Supersaturation is likely the underlying cause of uric acid and cystine stones, but calcium-based stones (especially calcium oxalate stones) may have a more complex cause.\nRandall's plaque.\nWhile supersaturation of urine may lead to crystalluria, it does not necessarily promote the formation of a kidney stone because the particle may not reach the sufficient size needed for renal attachment. On the other hand, Randall's plaques, which were first identified by Alexander Randall in 1937, are calcium phosphate deposits that form in the papillary interstitium and are thought to be the nidus required for stone development. In addition to Randall's plugs, which form in the Duct of Bellini, these structures can generate reactive oxygen species that further enhance stone formation.\nPathogenic bacteria.\nSome bacteria have roles in promoting stone formation. Specifically, urease-positive bacteria, such as \"Proteus mirabilis\" can produce the enzyme urease, which converts urea to ammonia and carbon dioxide. This increases the urinary pH and promotes struvite stone formation. Additionally, non-urease producing bacteria can provide bacterial components that promote calcium oxalate crystallization, though this mechanism is poorly understood.\nInhibitors of stone formation.\nNormal urine contains chelating agents, such as citrate, that inhibit the nucleation, growth, and aggregation of calcium-containing crystals. Other endogenous inhibitors include calgranulin (an S-100 calcium-binding protein), Tamm\u2013Horsfall protein, glycosaminoglycans, uropontin (a form of osteopontin), nephrocalcin (an acidic glycoprotein), prothrombin F1 peptide, and bikunin (uronic acid-rich protein). The biochemical mechanisms of action of these substances have not yet been thoroughly elucidated. However, when these substances fall below their normal proportions, stones can form from an aggregation of crystals.\nSufficient dietary intake of magnesium and citrate inhibits the formation of calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate stones; in addition, magnesium and citrate operate synergistically to inhibit kidney stones. The efficacy of magnesium in subduing stone formation and growth is dose-dependent.\nHypocitraturia.\nHypocitraturia or low urinary-citrate excretion (variably defined as less than 320\u00a0mg/day) can be a contributing cause of kidney stones in up to 2/3 of cases. The protective role of citrate is linked to several mechanisms; citrate reduces urinary supersaturation of calcium salts by forming soluble complexes with calcium ions and by inhibiting crystal growth and aggregation. Therapy with potassium citrate is commonly prescribed in clinical practice to increase urinary citrate and to reduce stone formation rates. Alkali citrate is also used to increase urine citrate levels. It can be prescribed or found over-the-counter in pill, liquid or powder form.\nDiagnosis.\nDiagnosis of kidney stones is made on the basis of information obtained from the history, physical examination, urinalysis, and radiographic studies. Clinical diagnosis is usually made on the basis of the location and severity of the pain, which is typically colicky in nature (comes and goes in spasmodic waves). Pain in the back occurs when calculi produce an obstruction in the kidney. Physical examination may reveal fever and tenderness at the costovertebral angle on the affected side.\nImaging studies.\nCalcium-containing stones are relatively radiodense (opaque to X-rays), and they can often be detected by traditional radiography of the abdomen that includes the kidneys, ureters, and bladder (known as a \"KUB\" film for the first letter of the three organs visualized on the radiograph). KUB radiography, although useful in monitoring size of stone or passage of stone in stone formers, might not be useful in the acute setting due to low sensitivity. Some 60% of all renal stones are radiopaque. In general, calcium phosphate stones have the greatest density, followed by calcium oxalate and magnesium ammonium phosphate stones. Cystine calculi are only faintly radiodense, while uric acid stones are usually entirely radiolucent.\nIn people with a history of stones, those who are less than 50 years of age and are presenting with the symptoms of stones without any concerning signs do not require helical CT scan imaging. A computed tomography (CT) scan is also not typically recommended in children.\nOtherwise a noncontrast helical CT scan with sections is the diagnostic method to use to detect kidney stones and confirm the diagnosis of kidney stone disease. Near all stones are detectable on CT scans with the exception of those composed of certain drug residues in the urine, such as from indinavir.\nWhere a CT scan is unavailable, an intravenous pyelogram may be performed to help confirm the diagnosis of urolithiasis. This involves intravenous injection of a contrast agent followed by a KUB film. Uroliths present in the kidneys, ureters, or bladder may be better defined by the use of this contrast agent. Stones can also be detected by a retrograde pyelogram, where a similar contrast agent is injected directly into the distal ostium of the ureter (where the ureter terminates as it enters the bladder).\nRenal ultrasonography can sometimes be useful, because it gives details about the presence of hydronephrosis, suggesting that the stone is blocking the outflow of urine. Radiolucent stones, which do not appear on KUB, may show up on ultrasound imaging studies. Other advantages of renal ultrasonography include its low cost and absence of radiation exposure. Ultrasound imaging is useful for detecting stones in situations where X-rays or CT scans are discouraged, such as in children or pregnant women. Despite these advantages, renal ultrasonography in 2009 was not considered a substitute for noncontrast helical CT scan in the initial diagnostic evaluation of urolithiasis. The main reason for this is that, compared with CT, renal ultrasonography more often fails to detect small stones (especially ureteral stones) and other serious disorders that could be causing the symptoms.\nOn the contrary, a 2014 study suggested that ultrasonography should be used as the initial diagnostic imaging test, with further imaging studies be performed at the discretion of the physician on the basis of clinical judgment, and using ultrasonography rather than CT as an initial diagnostic test results in less radiation exposure and equally good outcome.\nLaboratory examination.\nLaboratory investigations typically carried out include:\nComposition.\nCalcium-containing stones.\nBy far, the most common type of kidney stones worldwide contains calcium. For example, calcium-containing stones represent about 80% of all cases in the United States; these typically contain calcium oxalate either alone or in combination with calcium phosphate in the form of apatite or brushite. Factors that promote the precipitation of oxalate crystals in the urine, such as primary hyperoxaluria, are associated with the development of calcium oxalate stones. The formation of calcium phosphate stones is associated with conditions such as hyperparathyroidism and renal tubular acidosis.\nOxaluria is increased in patients with certain gastrointestinal disorders including inflammatory bowel disease such as Crohn's disease or in patients who have undergone resection of the small bowel or small-bowel bypass procedures. Oxaluria is also increased in patients who consume increased amounts of oxalate (found in vegetables and nuts). Primary hyperoxaluria is a rare autosomal recessive condition that usually presents in childhood.\nCalcium oxalate crystals can come in two varieties. Calcium oxalate monohydrate can appear as 'dumbbells' or as long ovals that resemble the individual posts in a picket fence. Calcium oxalate dihydrate have a tetragonal \"envelope\" appearance.\nStruvite stones.\nAbout 10\u201315% of urinary calculi are composed of struvite (hexa-hydrated ammonium magnesium phosphate, NH4MgPO4\u00b76H2O). Struvite stones (also known as \"infection stones,\" urease, or triple-phosphate stones) form most often in the presence of infection by urea-splitting bacteria. Using the enzyme urease, these organisms metabolize urea into ammonia and carbon dioxide. This alkalinizes the urine, resulting in favorable conditions for the formation of struvite stones. \"Proteus mirabilis\", \"Proteus vulgaris\", and \"Morganella morganii\" are the most common organisms isolated; less common organisms include \"Ureaplasma urealyticum\" and some species of \"Providencia\", \"Klebsiella\", \"Serratia\", and \"Enterobacter\". These infection stones are commonly observed in people who have factors that predispose them to urinary tract infections, such as those with spinal cord injury and other forms of neurogenic bladder, ileal conduit urinary diversion, vesicoureteral reflux, and obstructive uropathies. They are also commonly seen in people with underlying metabolic disorders, such as idiopathic hypercalciuria, hyperparathyroidism, and gout. Infection stones can grow rapidly, forming large calyceal staghorn (antler-shaped) calculi requiring invasive surgery such as percutaneous nephrolithotomy for definitive treatment.\nStruvite stones (triple-phosphate/magnesium ammonium phosphate) have a 'coffin lid' morphology by microscopy.\nUric acid stones.\nAbout 5\u201310% of all stones are formed from uric acid. People with certain metabolic abnormalities, including obesity, may produce uric acid stones. They also may form in association with conditions that cause hyperuricosuria (an excessive amount of uric acid in the urine) with or without hyperuricemia (an excessive amount of uric acid in the serum). They may also form in association with disorders of acid/base metabolism where the urine is excessively acidic (low pH), resulting in precipitation of uric acid crystals. A diagnosis of uric acid urolithiasis is supported by the presence of a radiolucent stone in the face of persistent urine acidity, in conjunction with the finding of uric acid crystals in fresh urine samples.\nAs noted above (section on calcium oxalate stones), people with inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis) tend to have hyperoxaluria and form oxalate stones. They also have a tendency to form urate stones. Urate stones are especially common after colon resection.\nUric acid stones appear as pleomorphic crystals, usually diamond-shaped. They may also look like squares or rods which are polarizable.\nOther types.\nPeople with certain rare inborn errors of metabolism have a propensity to accumulate crystal-forming substances in their urine. For example, those with cystinuria, cystinosis, and Fanconi syndrome may form stones composed of cystine. Cystine stone formation can be treated with urine alkalinization and dietary protein restriction. People affected by xanthinuria often produce stones composed of xanthine. People affected by adenine phosphoribosyltransferase deficiency may produce 2,8-dihydroxyadenine stones, alkaptonurics produce homogentisic acid stones, and iminoglycinurics produce stones of glycine, proline, and hydroxyproline. Urolithiasis has also been noted to occur in the setting of therapeutic drug use, with crystals of drug forming within the renal tract in some people currently being treated with agents such as indinavir, sulfadiazine, and triamterene.\nLocation.\nUrolithiasis refers to stones originating anywhere in the urinary system, including the kidneys and bladder. Nephrolithiasis refers to the presence of such stones in the kidneys. Calyceal calculi are aggregations in either the minor or major calyx, parts of the kidney that pass urine into the ureter (the tube connecting the kidneys to the urinary bladder). The condition is called ureterolithiasis when a calculus is located in the ureter. Stones may also form or pass into the bladder, a condition referred to as bladder stones.\nSize.\nStones less than in diameter pass spontaneously in up to 98% of cases, while those measuring in diameter pass spontaneously in less than 53% of cases.\nStones that are large enough to fill out the renal calyces are called \"staghorn stones\" and are composed of struvite in a vast majority of cases, which forms only in the presence of urease-forming bacteria. Other forms that can possibly grow to become staghorn stones are those composed of cystine, calcium oxalate monohydrate, and uric acid.\nPrevention.\nPreventative measures depend on the type of stones. In those with calcium stones, drinking plenty of fluids, thiazide diuretics and citrate are effective as is allopurinol in those with high uric acid levels in urine.\nDietary measures.\nSpecific therapy should be tailored to the type of stones involved. Diet can have an effect on the development of kidney stones. Preventive strategies include some combination of dietary modifications and medications with the goal of reducing the excretory load of calculogenic compounds on the kidneys. Dietary recommendations to minimize the formation of kidney stones include:\nMaintenance of dilute urine by means of vigorous fluid therapy is beneficial in all forms of kidney stones, so increasing urine volume is a key principle for the prevention of kidney stones. Fluid intake should be sufficient to maintain a urine output of at least per day. A high fluid intake may reduce the likelihood of kidney stone recurrence or may increase the time between stone development without unwanted effects.\nCalcium binds with available oxalate in the gastrointestinal tract, thereby preventing its absorption into the bloodstream. Reducing oxalate absorption decreases kidney stone risk in susceptible people. Because of this, some doctors recommend increasing dairy intake so that its calcium content will serve as an oxalate binder. Taking calcium citrate tablets during or after meals containing high oxalate foods may be useful if dietary calcium cannot be increased by other means as in those with lactose intolerance. The preferred calcium supplement for people at risk of stone formation is calcium citrate, as opposed to calcium carbonate, because it helps to increase urinary citrate excretion.\nAside from vigorous oral hydration and eating more dietary calcium, other prevention strategies include avoidance of higher doses of supplemental vitamin C (since ascorbate is metabolized to oxalate) and restriction of oxalate-rich foods such as leaf vegetables, rhubarb, soy products and chocolate. However, no randomized, controlled trial of oxalate restriction has been performed to test the hypothesis that oxalate restriction reduces stone formation. Some evidence indicates magnesium intake decreases the risk of symptomatic kidney stones.\nUrine alkalinization.\nThe mainstay for medical management of uric acid stones is alkalinization (increasing the pH) of the urine. Uric acid stones are among the few types amenable to dissolution therapy, referred to as chemolysis. Chemolysis is usually achieved through the use of oral medications, although in some cases, intravenous agents or even instillation of certain irrigating agents directly onto the stone can be performed, using antegrade nephrostomy or retrograde ureteral catheters. Acetazolamide is a medication that alkalinizes the urine. In addition to acetazolamide or as an alternative, certain dietary supplements are available that produce a similar alkalinization of the urine. These include alkali citrate, sodium bicarbonate, potassium citrate, magnesium citrate, and bicitrate (a combination of citric acid monohydrate and sodium citrate dihydrate). Aside from alkalinization of the urine, these supplements have the added advantage of increasing the urinary citrate level, which helps to reduce the aggregation of calcium oxalate stones.\nIncreasing the urine pH to around 6.5 provides optimal conditions for dissolution of uric acid stones. Increasing the urine pH to a value higher than 7.0 may increase the risk of calcium phosphate stone formation, though this concept is controversial since citrate does inhibit calcium phosphate crystallization. Testing the urine periodically with nitrazine paper can help to ensure the urine pH remains in this optimal range. Using this approach, stone dissolution rate can be expected to be around of stone radius per month.\nSlaked lime.\nCalcium hydroxide decreases urinary calcium when combined with food rich in oxalic acid such as green leafy vegetables.\nDiuretics.\nOne of the recognized medical therapies for prevention of stones is the thiazide and thiazide-like diuretics, such as chlorthalidone or indapamide. These drugs inhibit the formation of calcium-containing stones by reducing urinary calcium excretion. Sodium restriction is necessary for clinical effect of thiazides, as sodium excess promotes calcium excretion. Thiazides work best for renal leak hypercalciuria (high urine calcium levels), a condition in which high urinary calcium levels are caused by a primary kidney defect. Thiazides are useful for treating absorptive hypercalciuria, a condition in which high urinary calcium is a result of excess absorption from the gastrointestinal tract.\nAllopurinol.\nFor people with hyperuricosuria and calcium stones, allopurinol is one of the few treatments that have been shown to reduce kidney stone recurrences. Allopurinol interferes with the production of uric acid in the liver. The drug is also used in people with gout or hyperuricemia (high serum uric acid levels). Dosage is adjusted to maintain a reduced urinary excretion of uric acid. Serum uric acid level at or below 6\u00a0mg/100\u00a0mL is often a therapeutic goal. Hyperuricemia is not necessary for the formation of uric acid stones; hyperuricosuria can occur in the presence of normal or even low serum uric acid. Some practitioners advocate adding allopurinol only in people in whom hyperuricosuria and hyperuricemia persist, despite the use of a urine-alkalinizing agent such as sodium bicarbonate or potassium citrate.\nTreatment.\nStone size influences the rate of spontaneous stone passage. For example, up to 98% of small stones (less than in diameter) may pass spontaneously through urination within four weeks of the onset of symptoms, but for larger stones ( in diameter), the rate of spontaneous passage decreases to less than 53%. Initial stone location also influences the likelihood of spontaneous stone passage. Rates increase from 48% for stones located in the proximal ureter to 79% for stones located at the vesicoureteric junction, regardless of stone size. Assuming no high-grade obstruction or associated infection is found in the urinary tract, and symptoms are relatively mild, various nonsurgical measures can be used to encourage the passage of a stone. Repeat stone formers benefit from more intense management, including proper fluid intake and use of certain medications, as well as careful monitoring.\nPain management.\nManagement of pain often requires intravenous administration of NSAIDs or opioids. NSAIDs appear somewhat better than opioids or paracetamol in those with normal kidney function. Medications by mouth are often effective for less severe discomfort. The use of antispasmodics does not have further benefit.\nMedical expulsive therapy.\nThe use of medications to speed the spontaneous passage of stones in the ureter is referred to as medical expulsive therapy. Several agents, including alpha adrenergic blockers (such as tamsulosin) and calcium channel blockers (such as nifedipine), may be effective. Alpha-blockers likely result in more people passing their stones, and they may pass their stones in a shorter time. People taking alpha-blockers may also use less pain medication and may not need to visit the hospital. Alpha-blockers appear to be more effective for larger stones (over 5\u00a0mm in size) than smaller stones. However, use of alpha-blockers may be associated with a slight increase in serious, unwanted effects from this medication. A combination of tamsulosin and a corticosteroid may be better than tamsulosin alone. These treatments also appear to be useful in addition to lithotripsy.\nLithotripsy.\nExtracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy (ESWL) is a noninvasive technique for the removal of kidney stones. Most ESWL is carried out when the stone is present near the renal pelvis. ESWL involves the use of a lithotriptor machine to deliver externally applied, focused, high-intensity pulses of ultrasonic energy to cause fragmentation of a stone over a period of around 30\u201360\u00a0minutes. Following its introduction in the United States in February 1984, ESWL was rapidly and widely accepted as a treatment alternative for renal and ureteral stones. It is currently used in the treatment of uncomplicated stones located in the kidney and upper ureter, provided the aggregate stone burden (stone size and number) is less than and the anatomy of the involved kidney is normal.\nFor a stone greater than , ESWL may not help break the stone in one treatment; instead, two or three treatments may be needed. Some 80-85% of simple renal calculi can be effectively treated with ESWL. A number of factors can influence its efficacy, including chemical composition of the stone, presence of anomalous renal anatomy and the specific location of the stone within the kidney, presence of hydronephrosis, body mass index, and distance of the stone from the surface of the skin.\nCommon adverse effects of ESWL include acute trauma, such as bruising at the site of shock administration, and damage to blood vessels of the kidney. In fact, the vast majority of people who are treated with a typical dose of shock waves using currently accepted treatment settings are likely to experience some degree of acute kidney injury. ESWL-induced acute kidney injury is dose-dependent (increases with the total number of shock waves administered and with the power setting of the lithotriptor) and can be severe, including internal bleeding and subcapsular hematomas. On rare occasions, such cases may require blood transfusion and even lead to acute kidney failure. Hematoma rates may be related to the type of lithotriptor used; hematoma rates of less than 1% and up to 13% have been reported for different lithotriptor machines. Recent studies show reduced acute tissue injury when the treatment protocol includes a brief pause following the initiation of treatment, and both improved stone breakage and a reduction in injury when ESWL is carried out at slow shock wave rate.\nIn addition to the aforementioned potential for acute kidney injury, animal studies suggest these acute injuries may progress to scar formation, resulting in loss of functional renal volume. Recent prospective studies also indicate elderly people are at increased risk of developing new-onset hypertension following ESWL. In addition, a retrospective case-control study published by researchers from the Mayo Clinic in 2006 has found an increased risk of developing diabetes mellitus and hypertension in people who had undergone ESWL, compared with age and gender-matched people who had undergone nonsurgical treatment. Whether or not acute trauma progresses to long-term effects probably depends on multiple factors that include the shock wave dose (i.e., the number of shock waves delivered, rate of delivery, power setting, acoustic characteristics of the particular lithotriptor, and frequency of retreatment), as well as certain intrinsic predisposing pathophysiologic risk factors.\nTo address these concerns, the American Urological Association established the Shock Wave Lithotripsy Task Force to provide an expert opinion on the safety and risk-benefit ratio of ESWL. The task force published a white paper outlining their conclusions in 2009. They concluded the risk-benefit ratio remains favorable for many people. The advantages of ESWL include its noninvasive nature, the fact that it is technically easy to treat most upper urinary tract calculi, and that, at least acutely, it is a well-tolerated, low-morbidity treatment for the vast majority of people. However, they recommended slowing the shock wave firing rate from 120\u00a0pulses per minute to 60\u00a0pulses per minute to reduce the risk of renal injury and increase the degree of stone fragmentation.\nAlpha-blockers are sometimes prescribed after shock wave lithotripsy to help the pieces of the stone leave the person's body. By relaxing muscles and helping to keep blood vessels open, alpha blockers may relax the ureter muscles to allow the kidney stone fragments to pass. When compared to usual care or placebo treatment, alpha blockers may lead to faster clearing of stones, a reduced need for extra treatment and fewer unwanted effects. They may also clear kidney stones in more adults than the standard shock wave lithotripsy procedure. The unwanted effects associated with alpha blockers are hospital emergency visits and return to hospital for stone-related issues, but these effects were more common in adults who did not receive alpha-blockers as a part of their treatment.\nSurgery.\nMost stones under pass spontaneously. Prompt surgery may, nonetheless, be required in persons with only one working kidney, bilateral obstructing stones, a urinary tract infection and thus, it is presumed, an infected kidney, or intractable pain. Beginning in the mid-1980s, less invasive treatments such as extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, ureteroscopy, and percutaneous nephrolithotomy began to replace open surgery as the modalities of choice for the surgical management of urolithiasis. More recently, flexible ureteroscopy has been adapted to facilitate retrograde nephrostomy creation for percutaneous nephrolithotomy. This approach is still under investigation, though early results are favorable. Percutaneous nephrolithotomy or, rarely, anatrophic nephrolithotomy, is the treatment of choice for large or complicated stones (such as calyceal staghorn calculi) or stones that cannot be extracted using less invasive procedures.\nUreteroscopic surgery.\nUreteroscopy has become increasingly popular as flexible and rigid fiberoptic ureteroscopes have become smaller. One ureteroscopic technique involves the placement of a ureteral stent (a small tube extending from the bladder, up the ureter and into the kidney) to provide immediate relief of an obstructed kidney. Stent placement can be useful for saving a kidney at risk for postrenal acute kidney failure due to the increased hydrostatic pressure, swelling and infection (pyelonephritis and pyonephrosis) caused by an obstructing stone. Ureteral stents vary in length from and most have a shape commonly referred to as a \"double-J\" or \"double pigtail\", because of the curl at both ends. They are designed to allow urine to flow past an obstruction in the ureter. They may be retained in the ureter for days to weeks as infections resolve and as stones are dissolved or fragmented by ESWL or by some other treatment. The stents dilate the ureters, which can facilitate instrumentation, and they also provide a clear landmark to aid in the visualization of the ureters and any associated stones on radiographic examinations. The presence of indwelling ureteral stents may cause minimal to moderate discomfort, frequency or urgency incontinence, and infection, which in general resolves on removal. Most ureteral stents can be removed cystoscopically during an office visit under topical anesthesia after resolution of urolithiasis. Research is currently uncertain if placing a temporary stent during ureteroscopy leads to different outcomes than not placing a stent in terms of number of hospital visits for post operative problems, short or long term pain, need for narcotic pain medication, risk of UTI, need for a repeat procedure or narrowing of the ureter from scarring.\nMore definitive ureteroscopic techniques for stone extraction (rather than simply bypassing the obstruction) include basket extraction and ultrasound ureterolithotripsy. Laser lithotripsy is another technique, which involves the use of a holmium:yttrium aluminium garnet (Ho:YAG) laser to fragment stones in the bladder, ureters, and kidneys.\nUreteroscopic techniques are generally more effective than ESWL for treating stones located in the lower ureter, with success rates of 93\u2013100% using Ho:YAG laser lithotripsy.\n Although ESWL has been traditionally preferred by many practitioners for treating stones located in the upper ureter, more recent experience suggests ureteroscopic techniques offer distinct advantages in the treatment of upper ureteral stones. Specifically, the overall success rate is higher, fewer repeat interventions and postoperative visits are needed, and treatment costs are lower after ureteroscopic treatment when compared with ESWL. These advantages are especially apparent with stones greater than in diameter. However, because ureteroscopy of the upper ureter is much more challenging than ESWL, many urologists still prefer to use ESWL as a first-line treatment for stones of less than 10\u00a0mm, and ureteroscopy for those greater than 10\u00a0mm in diameter. Ureteroscopy is the preferred treatment in pregnant and morbidly obese people, as well as those with bleeding disorders.\nEpidemiology.\nKidney stones affect all geographical, cultural, and racial groups. The lifetime risk is about 10-15% in the developed world, but can be as high as 20-25% in the Middle East. The increased risk of dehydration in hot climates, coupled with a diet 50% lower in calcium and 250% higher in oxalates compared to Western diets, accounts for the higher net risk in the Middle East. In the Middle East, uric acid stones are more common than calcium-containing stones. The number of deaths due to kidney stones is estimated at 19,000 per year being fairly consistent between 1990 and 2010.\nIn North America and Europe, the annual number of new cases per year of kidney stones is roughly 0.5%. In the United States, the frequency in the population of urolithiasis increased from 3.2% to 5.2% from the mid-1970s to the mid-1990s. In the United States, about 9% of the population has had a kidney stone.\nThe total cost for treating urolithiasis was US$2\u00a0billion in 2003. About 65\u201380% of those with kidney stones are men; most stones in women are due to either metabolic defects (such as cystinuria) or infections in the case of struvite stones. Urinary tract calculi disorders are more common in men than in women. Men most commonly experience their first episode between 30 and 40 years of age, whereas for women, the age at first presentation is somewhat later. The age of onset shows a bimodal distribution in women, with episodes peaking at 35 and 55 years. Recurrence rates are estimated at 50% over a 10-year and 75% over 20-year period, with some people experiencing ten or more episodes over the course of a lifetime.\nA 2010 review concluded that rates of disease are increasing.\nHistory.\nThe existence of kidney stones was first recorded thousands of years ago, with various explanations given; Joseph Glanville's \"Saducismus Triumphatus,\" for example, gives a detailed description of Abraham Mechelburg's voiding of small stones through his penis' virga, attributing the issue to witchcraft.\nIn 1901, a stone discovered in the pelvis of an ancient Egyptian mummy was dated to 4,800\u00a0BC.\nMedical texts from ancient Mesopotamia, India, China, Persia, Greece, and Rome all mentioned calculous disease. Part of the Hippocratic Oath suggests there were practicing surgeons in ancient Greece to whom physicians were to defer for lithotomies, or the surgical removal of stones. The Roman medical treatise \"De Medicina\" by Aulus Cornelius Celsus contained a description of lithotomy, and this work served as the basis for this procedure until the 18th century.\nExamples of people who had kidney stone disease include Napoleon I, Epicurus, Napoleon III, Peter the Great, Louis XIV, George IV, Oliver Cromwell, Lyndon B. Johnson, Benjamin Franklin, Michel de Montaigne, Francis Bacon, Isaac Newton, Samuel Pepys, William Harvey, Herman Boerhaave, Roger Moore, and Antonio Scarpa.\nNew techniques in lithotomy began to emerge starting in 1520, but the operation remained risky. After Henry Jacob Bigelow popularized the technique of litholapaxy in 1878, the mortality rate dropped from about 24% to 2.4%. However, other treatment techniques continued to produce a high level of mortality, especially among inexperienced urologists. In 1980, Dornier MedTech introduced extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy for breaking up stones via acoustical pulses, and this technique has since come into widespread use.\nEtymology.\nThe term \"renal calculus\" is from the Latin \"r\u0113n\u0113s\", meaning \"kidneys\", and \"calculus\", meaning \"pebble\". Lithiasis (stone formation) in the kidneys is called nephrolithiasis (), from \"nephro-\", meaning kidney, + \"-lith\", meaning stone, and \"-iasis\", meaning disorder. A distinction between nephrolithiasis and urolithiasis can be made because not all urinary stones (uroliths) form in the kidney; they can also form in the bladder. But the distinction is often clinically irrelevant (with similar disease process and treatment either way) and the words are thus often used loosely as synonyms.\nChildren.\nAlthough kidney stones rarely occur in children and adolescents under the age of 20, the incidence is increasing. These stones are in the kidney in two thirds of reported cases, and in the ureter in the remaining cases. Older children are at greater risk independent of whether or not they are male or female.\nAs with adults, most pediatric kidney stones are predominantly composed of calcium oxalate; struvite and calcium phosphate stones are less common. Calcium oxalate stones in children are associated with high amounts of calcium, oxalate, and magnesium in acidic urine.\nTreatment of kidney stones in children is similar to treatments for adults, including shock wave lithotripsy, medication, and treatment using scope through the bladder, kidney or skin. Of these treatments, research is uncertain if shock waves are more effective than medication or a scope through the bladder, but it is likely less successful than a scope through skin into the kidney. When going in with a scope through the kidney, a regular and a mini-sized scope likely have similar success rates of stone removal. Alpha-blockers, a type of medication, may increase the successful removal of kidney stones when compared with a placebo and without ibuprofen.\nResearch.\nMetabolic syndrome and its associated diseases of obesity and diabetes as general risk factors for kidney stone disease are under research to determine if urinary excretion of calcium, oxalate and urate are higher than in people with normal weight or underweight, and if diet and physical activity have roles. Dietary, fluid intake, and lifestyle factors remain major topics for research on prevention of kidney stones, as of 2017.\nGut microbiota.\nThe gut microbiota has been explored as a contributing factor for stone disease, indicating that some bacteria may be different in people forming kidney stones. One bacterium, \"Oxalobacter formigenes\", is potentially beneficial for mitigating calcium oxalate stones because of its ability to metabolize oxalate as its sole carbon source, but 2018 research suggests that it is instead part of a network of oxalate degrading bacteria. Additionally, one study found that oral antibiotic use, which alters the gut microbiota, can increase the odds of a person developing a kidney stone.\nIn other animals.\nAmong ruminants, uroliths more commonly cause problems in males than in females; the sigmoid flexure of the ruminant male urinary tract is more likely to obstruct passage. Early-castrated males are at greater risk, because of lesser urethral diameter.\nLow Ca:P intake ratio is conducive to phosphatic (e.g. struvite) urolith formation. Incidence among wether lambs can be minimized by maintaining a dietary Ca:P intake ratio of 2:1.\nAlkaline (higher) pH favors formation of carbonate and phosphate calculi. For domestic ruminants, dietary cation: anion balance is sometimes adjusted to assure a slightly acidic urine pH, for prevention of calculus formation.\nDiffering generalizations regarding effects of pH on formation of silicate uroliths may be found. In this connection, it may be noted that under some circumstances, calcium carbonate accompanies silica in siliceous uroliths.\nPelleted feeds may be conducive to formation of phosphate uroliths, because of increased urinary phosphorus excretion. This is attributable to lower saliva production where pelleted rations containing finely ground constituents are fed. With less blood phosphate partitioned into saliva, more tends to be excreted in urine. (Most saliva phosphate is fecally excreted.)\nOxalate uroliths can occur in ruminants, although such problems from oxalate ingestion may be relatively uncommon. Ruminant urolithiasis associated with oxalate ingestion has been reported. However, no renal tubular damage or visible deposition of calcium oxalate crystals in kidneys was found in yearling wether sheep fed diets containing soluble oxalate at 6.5 percent of dietary dry matter for about 100 days.\nConditions limiting water intake can result in stone formation.\nVarious surgical interventions, e.g. amputation of the urethral process at its base near the glans penis in male ruminants, perineal urethrostomy, or tube cystostomy may be considered for relief of obstructive urolithiasis.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38076", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38076", "title": "Gender", "text": "Sociological constructs related to sex\nGender is the range of social, psychological, cultural, and behavioral aspects of being a man (or boy), woman (or girl), or third gender. Although gender often corresponds to sex, a transgender person may identify with a gender other than their sex assigned at birth. Most cultures use a gender binary, in which gender is divided into two categories, and people are considered part of one or the other; those who are outside these groups may fall under the umbrella term \"non-binary\". Some societies have \"third genders\" (and \"fourth genders\", etc.) such as the hijras of South Asia and two-spirit persons native to North America. Most scholars agree that gender is a central characteristic for social organization; this may include social constructs (i.e. gender roles) as well as gender expression.\nThe word has been used as a synonym for sex, and the balance between these usages has shifted over time. In the mid-20th century, a terminological distinction in modern English (known as the sex and gender distinction) between biological \"sex\" and \"gender\" began to develop in the academic areas of psychology, sociology, sexology, and feminism. Before the mid-20th century, it was uncommon to use the word \"gender\" to refer to anything but grammatical categories. In the West, in the 1970s, feminist theory embraced the concept of a distinction between biological sex and the social construct of gender. The distinction between gender and sex is made by most contemporary social scientists in Western countries, behavioral scientists and biologists, many legal systems and government bodies, and intergovernmental agencies such as the WHO. The experiences of intersex people also testify to the complexity of sex and gender; female, male, and other gender identities are experienced across the many divergences of sexual difference.\nThe social sciences have a branch devoted to gender studies. Other sciences, such as psychology, sociology, sexology, and neuroscience, are interested in the subject. The social sciences sometimes approach gender as a social construct, and gender studies particularly does, while research in the natural sciences investigates whether biological differences in females and males influence the development of gender in humans; both inform the debate about how far biological differences influence the formation of gender identity and gendered behavior. Biopsychosocial approaches to gender include biological, psychological, and social/cultural aspects.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC limit/styles.css\" /&gt;\nEtymology and usage.\nDerivation.\nThe modern English word \"gender\" comes from the Middle English \"gender\", \"gendre\", a loanword from Anglo-Norman and Middle French \"gendre\". This, in turn, came from Latin \"genus\". Both words mean \"kind\", \"type\", or \"sort\". They derive ultimately from a Proto-Indo-European (PIE) root *\"\u01f5\u00e9nh\u2081-\" 'to beget', which is also the source of \"kin\", \"kind\", \"king\", and many other English words, with cognates widely attested in many Indo-European languages. It appears in Modern French in the word \"genre\" (type, kind, also \"\") and is related to the Greek root \"gen-\" (to produce), appearing in \"gene\", \"genesis\", and \"oxygen\". The \"Oxford Etymological Dictionary of the English Language\" of 1882 defined \"gender\" as \"kind, breed, sex\", derived from the Latin ablative case of \"genus\", like \"genere natus\", which refers to birth. The first edition of the \"Oxford English Dictionary\" (OED1, Volume 4, 1900) notes the original meaning of \"gender\" as \"kind\" had already become obsolete.\nHistory of the concept.\nThe concept of gender, in the modern social science sense, is a recent invention in human history. The ancient world had no basis of understanding gender as it has been understood in the humanities and social sciences for the past few decades. The term \"gender\" had been associated with grammar for most of history and only started to move towards it being a malleable cultural construct in the 1950s and 1960s.\nBefore the terminological distinction between biological sex and gender as a role developed, it was uncommon to use the word \"gender\" to refer to anything but grammatical categories. For example, in a bibliography of 12,000 references on marriage and family from 1900 to 1964, the term \"gender\" does not even emerge once. Analysis of more than 30 million academic article titles from 1945 to 2001 showed that the uses of the term \"gender\", were much rarer than uses of \"sex\", was often used as a grammatical category early in this period. By the end of this period, uses of \"gender\" outnumbered uses of \"sex\" in the social sciences, arts, and humanities. It was in the 1970s that feminist scholars adopted the term \"gender\" as way of distinguishing \"socially constructed\" aspects of male\u2013female differences (gender) from \"biologically determined\" aspects (sex).\nAs of 2024, many dictionaries list \"synonym for 'sex'\" as one of \"gender\"'s meanings, alongside its sociocultural meaning. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, \"gender\" came into use as a synonym for \"sex\" during the twentieth century, initially as a euphemism, as \"sex\" was undergoing its own usage shift toward referring to sexual intercourse rather than male/female categories. During the last two decades of the 20th century, \"gender\" was often used as a synonym for \"sex\" in its non-copulatory senses, especially outside the social sciences. David Haig, writing in 2003, said \"the sex/gender distinction is now only fitfully observed.\" Within the social sciences, however, use of \"gender\" in academia increased greatly, outnumbering uses of \"sex\" during that same period. In the natural sciences, \"gender\" was more often used as a synonym for \"sex\". This can be attributed to the influence of feminism. Haig stated, \"Among the reasons that working [natural] scientists have given me for choosing gender rather than sex in biological contexts are desires to signal sympathy with feminist goals, to use a more academic term, or to avoid the connotation of copulation.\" Haig also notes that \"gender\" became the preferred term when discussing phenomena for which the social versus biological cause was unknown, disputed, or actually an interaction between the two. In 1993, the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) started to use \"gender\" instead of \"sex\" to avoid confusion with sexual intercourse. Later, in 2011, the FDA reversed its position and began using \"sex \"as the biological classification and \"gender\" as \"a person's self-representation as male or female, or how that person is responded to by social institutions based on the individual's gender presentation.\"\nIn legal cases alleging discrimination, a 2006 law review article by Meredith Render notes \"as notions of gender and sexuality have evolved over the last few decades, legal theories concerning what it means to discriminate \"because of sex\" under Title VII have experienced a similar evolution\". In a 1999 law review article proposing a legal definition of \"sex\" that \"emphasizes gender self-identification,\" Julie Greenberg writes, \"Most legislation utilizes the word 'sex,' yet courts, legislators, and administrative agencies often substitute the word 'gender' for 'sex' when they interpret these statutes.\" In \"J.E.B. v. Alabama ex rel. T.B.\", a 1994 United States Supreme Court case addressing \"whether the Equal Protection Clause forbids intentional discrimination on the basis of gender\", the majority opinion noted that with regard to gender, \"It is necessary only to acknowledge that 'our Nation has had a long and unfortunate history of sex discrimination,' \"id.\", at 684, 93 S.Ct., at 1769, a history which warrants the heightened scrutiny we afford all gender-based classifications today\", and stated \"When state actors exercise peremptory challenges in reliance on gender stereotypes, they ratify and reinforce prejudicial views of the relative abilities of men and women.\"\nAs a grammatical category.\nThe word was still widely used, however, in the specific sense of grammatical gender (the assignment of nouns to categories such as \"masculine\", \"feminine\" and \"neuter\"). According to Aristotle, this concept was introduced by the Greek philosopher Protagoras.\nIn 1926, Henry Watson Fowler stated that the definition of the word pertained to this grammar-related meaning: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"Gender...is a grammatical term only. To talk of persons...of the masculine or feminine g[ender], meaning of the male or female sex, is either a jocularity (permissible or not according to context) or a blunder.\"\nAs distinct from sex.\nIn 1945, Madison Bentley defined \"gender\" as the \"socialized obverse of sex\". Simone de Beauvoir's 1949 book \"The Second Sex\" has been interpreted as the beginning of the distinction between sex and gender in feminist theory, although this interpretation is contested by many feminist theorists, including Sara Hein\u00e4maa.\nControversial sexologist John Money coined the term \"gender role\", and was the first to use it in print in a scientific trade journal in 1955. In the seminal 1955 paper, he defined it as \"all those things that a person says or does to disclose himself or herself as having the status of boy or man, girl or woman.\"\nThe modern academic sense of the word, in the context of social roles of men and women, dates at least back to 1945, and was popularized and developed by the feminist movement from the 1970s onwards (see feminist theory and gender studies below), which theorizes that human nature is essentially epicene and social distinctions based on sex are arbitrarily constructed. In this context, matters pertaining to this theoretical process of social construction were labelled matters of \"gender\".\nThe popular use of \"gender\" simply as an alternative to \"sex\" (as a biological category) is also widespread, although attempts are still made to preserve the distinction. The \"American Heritage Dictionary\" (2000) uses the following two sentences to illustrate the difference, noting that the distinction \"is useful in principle, but it is by no means widely observed, and considerable variation in usage occurs at all levels.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The effectiveness of the medication appears to depend on the sex (not gender) of the patient.In peasant societies, gender (not sex) roles are likely to be more clearly defined.\nBiological factors and views.\nSome gendered behavior is influenced by prenatal and early life androgen exposure. This includes, for example, gender normative play, self-identification with a gender, and tendency to engage in aggressive behavior. Males of most mammals, including humans, exhibit more rough and tumble play behavior, which is influenced by maternal testosterone levels. These levels may also influence sexuality, with non-heterosexual persons exhibiting sex atypical behavior in childhood.\nSome research pertaining to the biological causes of gender incongruence has been done. Transgender and cisgender gender identity is influenced by genetic factors and it has been hypothesised that it may be influenced by the prenatal hormonal environment or sexual dimorphism in the brain.\nThere are studies concerning women who have a condition called congenital adrenal hyperplasia, which leads to the overproduction of the masculine sex hormone, androgen. These women usually have ordinary female appearances (though nearly all girls with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) have corrective surgery performed on their genitals). However, despite taking hormone-balancing medication given to them at birth, these females are statistically more likely to be interested in activities traditionally linked to males than female activities. Psychology professor and CAH researcher Dr. Sheri Berenbaum attributes these differences to an exposure of higher levels of male sex hormones in utero.\nNon-human animals.\nIn non-human animal research, \"gender\" is commonly used to refer to the biological sex of the animals. According to biologist Michael J. Ryan, gender identity is a concept exclusively applied to humans. Also, in a letter Ellen Ketterson writes, \"[w]hen asked, my colleagues in the Department of Gender Studies agreed that the term gender could be properly applied only to humans, because it involves one's self-concept as man or woman. Sex is a biological concept; gender is a human social and cultural concept.\" However, notes that the question of whether behavioural similarities across species can be associated with gender identity or not is \"an issue of no easy resolution\", and suggests that mental states, such as gender identity, are more accessible in humans than other species due to their capacity for language. Poiani suggests that the potential number of species with members possessing a gender identity must be limited due to the requirement for self-consciousness.\nJacques Balthazart suggests that \"there is no animal model for studying sexual identity. It is impossible to ask an animal, whatever its species, to what sex it belongs.\" He notes that \"this would imply that the animal is aware of its own body and sex, which is far from proved\", despite recent research demonstrating sophisticated cognitive skills among non-human primates and other species. has also stated that whether or not non-human animals consider themselves to be feminine or masculine is a \"difficult, if not impossible, question to answer\", as this would require \"judgements about what constitutes femininity or masculinity in any given species\". Nonetheless, she asserts that \"non-human animals do experience femininity and masculinity to the extent that any given species' behaviour is gender segregated.\"\nDespite this, Poiani and Dixson emphasise the applicability of the concept of gender \"role\" to non-human animals such as rodents throughout their book. The concept of gender role has also been applied to non-human primates such as rhesus monkeys.\nIn 2023, an investigation by Neves et al showed small but important details in communication, such as grammatical genders, in the construction of stereotypes and inherent emotions associated with four non-human animals (Giant panda; giraffe; polar bear; cheetah).\nFeminist theory.\nBiologist and feminist academic Anne Fausto-Sterling rejects the discourse of biological versus social determinism and advocates a deeper analysis of how interactions between the biological being and the social environment influence individuals' capacities.\nThe philosopher and feminist Simone de Beauvoir applied existentialism to women's experience of life: \"One is not born a woman, one becomes one.\" In context, this is a philosophical statement. However, it may be analyzed in terms of biology\u2014a girl must pass puberty to become a woman\u2014and sociology, as a great deal of mature relating in social contexts is learned rather than instinctive.\nWithin feminist theory, terminology for gender issues developed over the 1970s. In the 1974 edition of \"Masculine/Feminine or Human\", the author uses \"innate gender\" and \"learned sex roles\", but in the 1978 edition, the use of \"sex\" and \"gender\" is reversed.\nBy 1980, most feminist writings had agreed on using \"gender\" only for socioculturally adapted traits.\nAndrea Dworkin stated her \"commitment to destroying male dominance and gender itself\" while stating her belief in radical feminism.\nPolitical scientist Mary Hawkesworth addresses gender and feminist theory, stating that since the 1970s the concept of gender has transformed and been used in significantly different ways within feminist scholarship. She notes that a transition occurred when several feminist scholars, such as Sandra Harding and Joan Scott, began to conceive of gender \"as an analytic category within which humans think about and organize their social activity\". Feminist scholars in Political Science began employing gender as an analytical category, which highlighted \"social and political relations neglected by mainstream accounts\". However, Hawkesworth states \"feminist political science has not become a dominant paradigm within the discipline\".\nGender studies.\nGender studies is a field of interdisciplinary study and academic field devoted to gender, gender identity and gendered representation as central categories of analysis. This field includes Women's studies (concerning women, feminity, their gender roles and politics, and feminism), Men's studies (concerning men, masculinity, their gender roles, and politics), and LGBTQ studies.\nSometimes Gender studies is offered together with Study of Sexuality.\nThese disciplines study gender and sexuality in the fields of literature and language, history, political science, sociology, anthropology, cinema and media studies, human development, law, and medicine.\nIt also analyses race, ethnicity, location, nationality, and disability.\nIn gender studies, the term \"gender\" refers to proposed social and cultural constructions of masculinities and femininities. In this context, \"gender\" explicitly excludes reference to biological differences, to focus on cultural differences. This emerged from a number of different areas: in sociology during the 1950s; from the theories of the psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan; and in the work of French psychoanalysts like Julia Kristeva, Luce Irigaray, and American feminists such as Judith Butler. Those who followed Butler came to regard gender roles as a practice, sometimes referred to as \"performative\".\nCharles E. Hurst states that some people think sex will, \"...automatically determine one's gender demeanor and role (social) as well as one's sexual orientation\" (sexual attractions and behavior). Gender sociologists believe that people have cultural origins and habits for dealing with gender. For example, Michael Schwalbe believes that humans must be taught how to act appropriately in their designated gender to fill the role properly, and that the way people behave as masculine or feminine interacts with social expectations. Schwalbe comments that humans \"are the results of many people embracing and acting on similar ideas\". People do this through everything from clothing and hairstyle to relationship and employment choices. Schwalbe believes that these distinctions are important, because society wants to identify and categorize people as soon as we see them. They need to place people into distinct categories to know how we should feel about them.\nHurst comments that in a society where we present our genders so distinctly, there can often be severe consequences for breaking these cultural norms. Many of these consequences are rooted in discrimination based on sexual orientation. Gays and lesbians are often discriminated against in our legal system because of societal prejudices. Hurst describes how this discrimination works against people for breaking gender norms, no matter what their sexual orientation is. He says that \"courts often confuse sex, gender, and sexual orientation, and confuse them in a way that results in denying the rights not only of gays and lesbians, but also of those who do not present themselves or act in a manner traditionally expected of their sex\". This prejudice plays out in our legal system when a person is judged differently because they do not present themselves as the \"correct\" gender.\nAmerican political scientist Karen Beckwith addresses the concept of gender within political science arguing that a \"common language of gender\" exists and that it must be explicitly articulated in order to build upon it within the political science discipline. Beckwith describes two ways in which the political scientist may employ 'gender' when conducting empirical research: \"gender as a category and as a process.\" Employing gender as a category allows for political scientists \"to delineate specific contexts where behaviours, actions, attitudes and preferences considered masculine or feminine result in particular political outcomes\". It may also demonstrate how gender differences, not necessarily corresponding precisely with sex, may \"constrain or facilitate political\" actors. Gender as a process has two central manifestations in political science research, firstly in determining \"the differential effects of structures and policies upon men and women,\" and secondly, the ways in which masculine and feminine political actors \"actively work to produce favorable gendered outcomes\".\nWith regard to gender studies, Jacquetta Newman states that although sex is determined biologically, the ways in which people express gender is not. Gendering is a socially constructed process based on culture, though often cultural expectations around women and men have a direct relationship to their biology. Because of this, Newman argues, many privilege sex as being a cause of oppression and ignore other issues like race, ability, poverty, etc. Current gender studies classes seek to move away from that and examine the intersectionality of these factors in determining people's lives. She also points out that other non-Western cultures do not necessarily have the same views of gender and gender roles. Newman also debates the meaning of equality, which is often considered the goal of feminism; she believes that \"equality\" is a problematic term because it can mean many different things, such as people being treated identically, differently, or fairly based on their gender. Newman believes this is problematic because there is no unified definition as to what equality means or looks like, and that this can be significantly important in areas like public policy.\nGender identity and gender roles.\n\"Gender identity\" refers to a personal identification with a particular gender and gender role in society. The term \"woman\" has historically been used interchangeably with reference to the female body, though more recently this usage has been viewed as controversial by some feminists.\nThere are qualitative analyses that explore and present the representations of gender; however, feminists challenge these dominant ideologies concerning gender roles and biological sex. One's biological sex is oftentimes tied to specific social roles and expectations. Judith Butler considers the concept of being a woman to have more challenges, owing not only to society's viewing women as a social category but also as a felt sense of self, a culturally conditioned or constructed subjective identity. \"Social identity\" refers to the common identification with a collectivity or social category that creates a common culture among participants concerned. According to social identity theory, an important component of the self-concept is derived from memberships in social groups and categories; this is demonstrated by group processes and how inter-group relationships impact significantly on individuals' self perception and behaviors. The groups people belong to therefore provide members with the definition of who they are and how they should behave within their social sphere.\nCategorizing males and females into social roles creates a problem for some individuals who feel they have to be at one end of a linear spectrum and must identify themselves as man or woman, rather than being allowed to choose a section in between. Globally, communities interpret biological differences between men and women to create a set of social expectations that define the behaviors that are \"appropriate\" for men and women and determine their different access to rights, resources, power in society and health behaviors. Although the specific nature and degree of these differences vary from one society to the next, they still tend to typically favor men, creating an imbalance in power and gender inequalities within most societies. Many cultures have different systems of norms and beliefs based on gender, but there is no universal standard to a masculine or feminine role across all cultures. Social roles of men and women in relation to each other is based on the cultural norms of that society, which lead to the creation of gender systems. The gender system is the basis of social patterns in many societies, which include the separation of sexes, and the primacy of masculine norms.\nPhilosopher Michel Foucault said that as sexual subjects, humans are the object of power, which is not an institution or structure, rather it is a signifier or name attributed to \"complex strategical situation\". Because of this, \"power\" is what determines individual attributes, behaviors, etc. and people are a part of an ontologically and epistemologically constructed set of names and labels. For example, being female characterizes one as a woman, and being a woman signifies one as weak, emotional, and irrational, and incapable of actions attributed to a \"man\". Butler said that gender and sex are more like verbs than nouns. She reasoned that her actions are limited because she is female. \"I am not permitted to construct my gender and sex willy-nilly,\" she said. \"[This] is so because gender is politically and therefore socially controlled. Rather than 'woman' being something one is, it is something one does.\" Some analyses of Judith Butler's theories critique her writing for reinforcing the very conventional dichotomies of gender.\nSocial assignment and gender fluidity.\nAccording to gender theorist Kate Bornstein, gender can have ambiguity and fluidity. There are two contrasting ideas regarding the definition of gender, and the intersection of both of them is definable as below:\nThe World Health Organization defines gender as \"the characteristics of women, men, girls and boys that are socially constructed\". The beliefs, values and attitude taken up and exhibited by them is as per the agreed upon norms of the society and the personal opinion of the person is not taken into the primary consideration of assignment of gender and imposition of gender roles as per the assigned gender.\nThe assignment of gender involves taking into account the physiological and biological attributes assigned by nature followed by the imposition of the socially constructed conduct. \"Gender\" is a term used to exemplify the attributes that a society or culture constitutes as \"masculine\" or \"feminine\". Although a person's sex as male or female stands as a biological fact that is identical in any culture, what that specific sex means in reference to a person's gender role as a man or a woman in society varies cross-culturally according to what things are considered to be masculine or feminine. These roles are learned from various, intersecting sources such as parental influences, the socialization a child receives in school, and what is portrayed in the local media. Learning gender roles starts from birth and includes seemingly simple things like what color outfits a baby is clothed in or what toys they are given to play with. However, a person's gender does not always align with what has been assigned at birth. Factors other than learned behaviors play a role in the development of gender.\nThe article \"Adolescent Gender-Role Identity and Mental Health: Gender Intensification Revisited\" focuses on the work of Heather A. Priess, Sara M. Lindberg, and Janet Shibley Hyde on whether or not girls and boys diverge in their gender identities during adolescent years. The researchers based their work on ideas previously mentioned by Hill and Lynch in their gender intensification hypothesis in that signals and messages from parents determine and affect their children's gender role identities. This hypothesis argues that parents affect their children's gender role identities and that different interactions spent with either parents will affect gender intensification. Priess and among other's study did not support the hypothesis of Hill and Lynch which stated \"that as adolescents experience these and other socializing influences, they will become more stereotypical in their gender-role identities and gendered attitudes and behaviors.\" However, the researchers did state that perhaps the hypothesis Hill and Lynch proposed was true in the past but is not true now due to changes in the population of teens in respect to their gender-role identities.\nAuthors of \"Unpacking the Gender System: A Theoretical Perspective on Gender Beliefs and Social Relations\", Cecilia Ridgeway and Shelley Correll, argue that gender is more than an identity or role but is something that is institutionalized through \"social relational contexts.\" Ridgeway and Correll define \"social relational contexts\" as \"any situation in which individuals define themselves in relation to others in order to act.\" They also point out that in addition to social relational contexts, cultural beliefs plays a role in the gender system. The coauthors argue that daily people are forced to acknowledge and interact with others in ways that are related to gender. Every day, individuals are interacting with each other and comply with society's set standard of hegemonic beliefs, which includes gender roles. They state that society's hegemonic cultural beliefs sets the rules which in turn create the setting for which social relational contexts are to take place. Ridgeway and Correll then shift their topic towards sex categorization. The authors define sex categorization as \"the sociocognitive process by which we label another as male or female.\"\nThe failure of an attempt to raise David Reimer from infancy through adolescence as a girl after his genitals were accidentally mutilated is cited as disproving the theory that gender identity is determined solely by parenting. Reimer's case is used by organizations such as the Intersex Society of North America to caution against needlessly modifying the genitals of unconsenting minors. Between the 1960s and 2000, many other male newborns and infants were surgically and socially reassigned as females if they were born with malformed penises, or if they lost their penises in accidents. At the time, surgical reconstruction of the vagina was more advanced than reconstruction of the penis, leading many doctors and psychologists, including John Money who oversaw Reimer's case, to recommend sex reassignment based on the idea that these patients would be happiest living as women with functioning genitalia. Available evidence indicates that in such instances, parents were deeply committed to raising these children as girls and in as gender-typical a manner as possible. A 2005 review of these cases found that about half of natal males reassigned female lived as women in adulthood, including those who knew their medical history, suggesting that gender assignment and related social factors has a major, though not determinative, influence on eventual gender identity.\nIn 2015, the American Academy of Pediatrics released a webinar series on gender, gender identity, gender expression, transgender, etc. In the first lecture Sherer explains that parents' influence (through punishment and reward of behavior) can influence gender \"expression\" but not gender \"identity\". Sherer argued that kids will modify their gender expression to seek reward from their parents and society, but this will not affect their gender identity (their internal sense of self).\nSocietal categories.\nSexologist John Money coined the term \"gender role\" in 1955. The term \"gender role\" is defined as the actions or responses that may reveal their status as boy, man, girl or woman, respectively. Elements surrounding gender roles include clothing, speech patterns, movement, occupations, and other factors not limited to biological sex. In contrast to taxonomic approaches, some feminist philosophers have argued that gender \"is a vast orchestration of subtle mediations between oneself and others\", rather than a \"private cause behind manifest behaviours\".\nNon-binary and third genders.\nHistorically, most societies have recognized only two distinct, broad classes of gender roles, a binary of masculine and feminine, largely corresponding to the biological sexes of male and female. When a baby is born, society allocates the child to one gender or the other, on the basis of what their genitals resemble.\nHowever, some societies have historically acknowledged and even honored people who fulfill a gender role that exists more in the middle of the continuum between the feminine and masculine polarity. For example, the Hawaiian m\u0101h\u016b, who occupy \"a place in the middle\" between male and female, or the Ojibwe \"ikwekaazo\", \"men who choose to function as women\", or \"ininiikaazo\", \"women who function as men\". In the language of the sociology of gender, some of these people may be considered third gender, especially by those in gender studies or anthropology. Contemporary Native American and FNIM people who fulfill these traditional roles in their communities may also participate in the modern, two-spirit community, however, these umbrella terms, neologisms, and ways of viewing gender are not necessarily the type of cultural constructs that more traditional members of these communities agree with.\nThe hijras of India and Pakistan are often cited as third gender. Another example may be the muxe (pronounced ), found in the state of Oaxaca, in southern Mexico. The Bugis people of Sulawesi, Indonesia have a tradition that incorporates all the features above.\nIn addition to these traditionally recognized third genders, many cultures now recognize, to differing degrees, various non-binary gender identities. People who are non-binary (or genderqueer) have gender identities that are not exclusively masculine or feminine. They may identify as having an overlap of gender identities, having two or more genders, having no gender, having a fluctuating gender identity, or being third gender or other-gendered. Recognition of non-binary genders is still somewhat new to mainstream Western culture, and non-binary people may face increased risk of assault, harassment, and discrimination.\nMeasurement of gender identity.\nTwo instruments incorporating the multidimensional nature of masculinity and femininity have dominated gender identity research: The Bem Sex Role Inventory (BSRI) and the Personal Attributes Questionnaire (PAQ). Both instruments categorize individuals as either being sex typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits), cross sex-typed (males report themselves as identifying primarily with feminine traits, females report themselves as identifying primarily with masculine traits), androgynous (either males or females who report themselves as high on both masculine and feminine traits) or undifferentiated (either males or females who report themselves as low on both masculine and feminine traits). Twenge (1997) noted that men are generally more masculine than women and women generally more feminine than men, but the association between biological sex and masculinity/femininity is waning.\nSocial construction of sex hypotheses.\nThe World Health Organization states \"As a social construct, gender varies from society to society and can change over time.\" Sociologists generally regard gender as a social construct. For instance, Ann Oakley, a professor of sociology and social policy, says \"the constancy of sex must be admitted, but so also must the variability of gender.\" Lynda Birke, a feminist biologist, maintains \"'biology' is not seen as something which might change.\"\nHowever, there are scholars who argue that sex is also socially constructed. For example, gender studies writer Judith Butler states that \"perhaps this construct called 'sex' is as culturally constructed as gender; indeed, perhaps it was always already gender, with the consequence that the distinction between sex and gender turns out to be no distinction at all.\"\nThey continue:It would make no sense, then, to define gender as the cultural interpretation of sex, if sex is itself a gender-centered category. Gender should not be conceived merely as the cultural inscription of meaning based on a given sex (a juridical conception); gender must also designate the very apparatus of production whereby the sexes themselves are established. [...] This production of sex as the pre-discursive should be understood as the effect of the apparatus of cultural construction designated by gender.\nButler argues that \"bodies only appear, only endure, only live within the productive constraints of certain highly gendered regulatory schemas,\" and sex is \"no longer as a bodily given on which the construct of gender is artificially imposed, but as a cultural norm which governs the materialization of bodies.\"\nWith regard to history, Linda Nicholson, a professor of history and women's studies, argues that the understanding of human bodies as sexually dimorphic was historically not recognised. She states that male and female genitals were considered inherently the same in Western society until the 18th century. At that time, female genitals were regarded as incomplete male genitals, and the difference between the two was conceived as a matter of degree. In other words, there was a belief in a gradation of physical forms, or a spectrum. Scholars such as Helen King, Joan Cadden, and Michael Stolberg have criticized this interpretation of history. Cadden notes that the \"one-sex\" model was disputed even in ancient and medieval medicine, and Stolberg points out that already in the sixteenth century, medicine had begun to move towards a two-sex model.\nIn addition, drawing from the empirical research of intersex children, Anne Fausto-Sterling, a professor of biology and gender studies, describes how the doctors address the issues of intersexuality. She starts her argument with an example of the birth of an intersexual individual and maintains \"our conceptions of the nature of gender difference shape, even as they reflect, the ways we structure our social system and polity; they also shape and reflect our understanding of our physical bodies.\" Then she adds how gender assumptions affects the scientific study of sex by presenting the research of intersexuals by John Money et al., and she concludes that \"they never questioned the fundamental assumption that there are only two sexes, because their goal in studying intersexuals was to find out more about 'normal' development.\" She also mentions the language the doctors use when they talk with the parents of the intersexuals. After describing how the doctors inform parents about the intersexuality, she asserts that because the doctors believe that the intersexuals are actually male or female, they tell the parents of the intersexuals that it will take a little bit more time for the doctors to determine whether the infant is a boy or a girl. That is to say, the doctors' behavior is formulated by the cultural gender assumption that there are only two sexes. Lastly, she maintains that the differences in the ways in which the medical professionals in different regions treat intersexual people also give us a good example of how sex is socially constructed. In her \"Sexing the Body: gender politics and the construction of sexuality\", she introduces the following example: A group of physicians from Saudi Arabia recently reported on several cases of XX intersex children with congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), a genetically inherited malfunction of the enzymes that aid in making steroid hormones. [...] In the United States and Europe, such children, because they have the potential to bear children later in life, are usually raised as girls. Saudi doctors trained in this European tradition recommended such a course of action to the Saudi parents of CAH XX children. A number of parents, however, refused to accept the recommendation that their child, initially identified as a son, be raised instead as a daughter. Nor would they accept feminizing surgery for their child. [...] This was essentially an expression of local community attitudes with [...] the preference for male offspring.\nThus it is evident that culture can play a part in assigning gender, particularly in relation to intersex children.\nPsychology and sociology.\nMany of the more complicated human behaviors are influenced by both innate factors and by environmental ones, which include everything from genes, gene expression, and body chemistry, through diet and social pressures. A large area of research in behavioral psychology collates evidence in an effort to discover correlations between behavior and various possible antecedents such as genetics, gene regulation, access to food and vitamins, culture, gender, hormones, physical and social development, and physical and social environments.\nA core research area within sociology is the way human behavior operates on \"itself\", in other words, how the behavior of one group or individual influences the behavior of other groups or individuals. Starting in the late 20th century, the feminist movement has contributed extensive study of gender and theories about it, notably within sociology but not restricted to it.\nSocial theorists have sought to determine the specific nature of gender in relation to biological sex and sexuality, with the result being that culturally established gender and sex have become interchangeable identifications that signify the allocation of a specific 'biological' sex within a categorical gender. The second wave feminist view that gender is socially constructed and hegemonic in all societies, remains current in some literary theoretical circles, Kira Hall and Mary Bucholtz publishing new perspectives as recently as 2008.\nAs the child grows, \"...society provides a string of prescriptions, templates, or models of behaviors appropriate to the one sex or the other,\" which socialises the child into belonging to a culturally specific gender. There is huge incentive for a child to concede to their socialisation with gender shaping the individual's opportunities for education, work, family, sexuality, reproduction, authority, and to make an impact on the production of culture and knowledge. Adults who do not perform these ascribed roles are perceived from this perspective as deviant and improperly socialized.\nSome believe society is constructed in a way that splits gender into a dichotomy via social organisations that constantly invent and reproduce cultural images of gender. Joan Acker believed gendering occurs in at least five different interacting social processes:\nLooking at gender through a Foucauldian lens, gender is transfigured into a vehicle for the social division of power. Gender difference is merely a construct of society used to enforce the distinctions made between what is assumed to be female and male, and allow for the domination of masculinity over femininity through the attribution of specific gender-related characteristics. \"The idea that men and women are more different from one another than either is from anything else, must come from something other than nature... far from being an expression of natural differences, exclusive gender identity is the suppression of natural similarities.\"\nGender conventions play a large role in attributing masculine and feminine characteristics to a fundamental biological sex. Socio-cultural codes and conventions, the rules by which society functions, and which are both a creation of society as well as a constituting element of it, determine the allocation of these specific traits to the sexes. These traits provide the foundations for the creation of hegemonic gender difference. It follows then, that gender can be assumed as the acquisition and internalisation of social norms. Individuals are therefore socialized through their receipt of society's expectations of 'acceptable' gender attributes that are flaunted within institutions such as the family, the state and the media. Such a notion of 'gender' then becomes naturalized into a person's sense of self or identity, effectively imposing a gendered social category upon a sexed body.\nThe conception that people are gendered rather than sexed also coincides with Judith Butler's theories of gender performativity. Butler argues that gender is not an expression of what one is, but rather something that one does. It follows then, that if gender is acted out in a repetitive manner it is in fact re-creating and effectively embedding itself within the social consciousness. Contemporary sociological reference to male and female gender roles typically uses \"masculinities\" and \"femininities\" in the plural rather than singular, suggesting diversity both within cultures as well as across them.\nThe difference between the sociological and popular definitions of gender involve a different dichotomy and focus. For example, the sociological approach to \"gender\" (social roles: female versus male) focuses on the difference in (economic/power) position between a male CEO (disregarding the fact that he is heterosexual or homosexual) to female workers in his employ (disregarding whether they are straight or gay). However the popular sexual self-conception approach (self-conception: gay versus straight) focuses on the different self-conceptions and social conceptions of those who are gay/straight, in comparison with those who are straight (disregarding what might be vastly differing economic and power positions between female and male groups in each category). There is then, in relation to definition of and approaches to \"gender\", a tension between historic feminist sociology and contemporary homosexual sociology.\nGender as biopsychosocial.\nAccording to Alex Iantaffi, Meg-John Barker, and others, gender is biopsychosocial. This is because it is derived from biological, psychological, and social factors, with all three factors feeding back into each other to form a person's gender.\nBiological factors such as sex chromosomes, hormones, and anatomy play a significant role in the development of gender. Hormones such as testosterone and estrogen also play a crucial role in shaping gender identity and expression. Anatomy, including genitalia and reproductive organs, can also influence one's gender identity and expression.\nPsychological factors such as cognition, personality, and self-concept also contribute to gender development. Gender identity emerges around the age of two to three years. Gender expression, which refers to the outward manifestation of gender, is influenced by cultural norms, personal preferences, and individual differences in personality.\nSocial factors such as culture, socialization, and institutional practices shape gender identity and expression.\nIn some English literature, there is also a trichotomy between biological sex, psychological gender, and social gender role. This framework first appeared in a feminist paper on transsexualism in 1978.\nGender and society.\nLegal status.\nA person's gender can have legal significance. In some countries and jurisdictions there are same-sex marriage laws.\nTransgender people.\nThe legal status of transgender people varies greatly around the world. Some countries have enacted laws protecting the rights of transgender individuals, but others have criminalized their gender identity or expression. Many countries now legally recognize sex reassignments by permitting a change of legal gender on an individual's birth certificate.\nIntersex people.\nFor intersex people, who according to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, \"do not fit typical binary notions of male or female bodies\", access to any form of identification document with a gender marker may be an issue. For other intersex people, there may be issues in securing the same rights as other individuals assigned male or female; other intersex people may seek non-binary gender recognition.\nNon-binary and third genders.\nSome countries now legally recognize non-binary or third genders, including Canada, Germany, Australia, New Zealand, India and Pakistan. In the United States, Oregon was the first state to legally recognize non-binary gender in 2017, and was followed by California and the District of Columbia.\nScience.\nHistorically, science has been portrayed as a masculine pursuit in which women have faced significant barriers to participate. Even after universities began admitting women in the 19th century, women were still largely relegated to certain scientific fields, such as home science, nursing, and child psychology. Women were also typically given tedious, low-paying jobs and denied opportunities for career advancement. This was often justified by the stereotype that women were naturally more suited to jobs that required concentration, patience, and dexterity, rather than creativity, leadership, or intellect. Although these stereotypes have been dispelled in modern times, women are still underrepresented in prestigious \"hard science\" fields such as physics, and are less likely to hold high-ranking positions, a situation global initiatives such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 are trying to rectify.\nReligion.\nThis topic includes internal and external religious issues such as gender of God and deities creation myths about human gender, roles and rights (for instance, leadership roles especially ordination of women, sex segregation, gender equality, marriage, abortion, homosexuality).\nIn Taoism, yin and yang are considered feminine and masculine, respectively. The Taijitu and concept of the Zhou period reach into family and gender relations. Yin is female and yang is male. They fit together as two parts of a whole. The male principle was equated with the sun: active, bright, and shining; the female principle corresponds to the moon: passive, shaded, and reflective. Thus \"male toughness was balanced by female gentleness, male action and initiative by female endurance and need for completion, and male leadership by female supportiveness.\"\nIn Judaism, God is traditionally described in the masculine, but in the mystical tradition of the Kabbalah, the Shekhinah represents the feminine aspect of God's essence. However, Judaism traditionally holds that God is completely non-corporeal, and thus neither male nor female. Conceptions of the gender of God notwithstanding, traditional Judaism places a strong emphasis on individuals following Judaism's traditional gender roles, though many modern denominations of Judaism strive for greater egalitarianism. Moreover, traditional Jewish culture recognizes at least six genders.\nIn Christianity, God is traditionally described in masculine terms and the Church has historically been described in feminine terms. On the other hand, Christian theology in many churches distinguishes between the masculine images used of God (Father, King, God the Son) and the reality they signify, which transcends gender, embodies all the virtues of both men and women perfectly, which may be seen through the doctrine of Imago Dei. In the New Testament, Jesus at several times mentions the Holy Spirit with the masculine pronoun i.e. John 15:26 among other verses. Hence, the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit (i.e. Trinity) are all mentioned with the masculine pronoun; though the exact meaning of the masculinity of the Christian triune God is contested.\nIn Hinduism, one of the several forms of the Hindu god Shiva is Ardhanarishvara (literally half-female god). In this composite form, the left half of the body represents shakti (energy, power) in the form of the goddess Parvati (otherwise his consort) while the right half represents Shiva. Whereas Parvati is regarded to be the cause of arousal of kama (desire), Shiva is the destroyer of the concept. Symbolically, Shiva is pervaded by the power of Parvati and Parvati is pervaded by the power of Shiva.\nThis myth projects an inherent view in ancient Hinduism, that each human carries within himself both female and male components, which are forces rather than sexes, and it is the harmony between the creative and the annihilative, the strong and the soft, the proactive and the passive, that makes a true person. Evidence of homosexuality, bisexuality, androgyny, multiple sex partners, and open representation of sexual pleasures are found in artworks like the Khajuraho temples, believed to have been accepted within prevalent social frameworks.\nPoverty.\nGender inequality is most common in women dealing with poverty. Many women must shoulder all the responsibility of the household because they must take care of the family. Oftentimes this may include tasks such as tilling land, grinding grain, carrying water and cooking. Also, women are more likely to earn low incomes because of gender discrimination, as men are more likely to receive higher pay, have more opportunities, and have overall more political and social capital then women. Approximately 75% of world's women are unable to obtain bank loans because they have unstable jobs. It shows that there are many women in the world's population but only a few represent world's wealth. In many countries, the financial sector largely neglects women even though they play an important role in the economy, as Nena Stoiljkovic pointed out in \"D+C Development and Cooperation\". In 1978 Diana M. Pearce coined the term feminization of poverty to describe the problem of women having higher rates of poverty. Women are more vulnerable to chronic poverty because of gender inequalities in the distribution of income, property ownership, credit, and control over earned income. Resource allocation is typically gender-biased within households, and continue on a higher level regarding state institutions.\nGender and Development (GAD) is a holistic approach to give aid to countries where gender inequality has a great effect of not improving the social and economic development. It is a program focused on the gender development of women to empower them and decrease the level of inequality between men and women.\nThe largest discrimination study of the transgender community, conducted in 2013, found that the transgender community is four times more likely to live in extreme poverty (income of less than $10,000 a year) than people who are cisgender.\nGeneral strain theory.\nAccording to general strain theory, studies suggest that gender differences between individuals can lead to externalized anger that may result in violent outbursts. These violent actions related to gender inequality can be measured by comparing violent neighborhoods to non-violent neighborhoods. By noticing the independent variables (neighborhood violence) and the dependent variable (individual violence), it is possible to analyze gender roles. The strain in the general strain theory is the removal of a positive stimulus and or the introduction of a negative stimulus, which would create a negative effect (strain) within individual, which is either inner-directed (depression/guilt) or outer-directed (anger/frustration), which depends on whether the individual blames themselves or their environment. Studies reveal that even though males and females are equally likely to react to a strain with anger, the origin of the anger and their means of coping with it can vary drastically.\nMales are likely to put the blame on others for adversity and therefore externalize feelings of anger. Females typically internalize their angers and tend to blame themselves instead. Female internalized anger is accompanied by feelings of guilt, fear, anxiety and depression. Women view anger as a sign that they've somehow lost control, and thus worry that this anger may lead them to harm others and/or damage relationships. On the other end of the spectrum, men are less concerned with damaging relationships and more focused on using anger as a means of affirming their masculinity. According to the general strain theory, men would more likely engage in aggressive behavior directed towards others due to externalized anger whereas women would direct their anger towards themselves rather than others.\nEconomic development.\nGender, and particularly the role of women is widely recognized as vitally important to international development issues. This often means a focus on gender-equality, ensuring participation, but includes an understanding of the different roles and expectation of the genders within the community.\nClimate change.\nGender is a topic of increasing concern within climate change policy and science. Generally, gender approaches to climate change address gender-differentiated consequences of climate change, as well as unequal adaptation capacities and gendered contribution to climate change. Furthermore, the intersection of climate change and gender raises questions regarding the complex and intersecting power relations arising from it. These differences, however, are mostly not due to biological or physical differences, but are formed by the social, institutional and legal context. Subsequently, vulnerability is less an intrinsic feature of women and girls but rather a product of their marginalization.\nRoehr notes that, while the United Nations officially committed to gender mainstreaming, in practice gender equality is not reached in the context of climate change policies. This is reflected in the fact that discourses of and negotiations over climate change are mostly dominated by men.\nSome feminist scholars hold that the debate on climate change is not only dominated by men but also primarily shaped in 'masculine' principles, which limits discussions about climate change to a perspective that focuses on technical solutions. This perception of climate change hides subjectivity and power relations that actually condition climate-change policy and science, leading to a phenomenon that Tuana terms 'epistemic injustice'.\nSimilarly, MacGregor attests that by framing climate change as an issue of 'hard' natural scientific conduct and natural security, it is kept within the traditional domains of hegemonic masculinity.\nSocial media.\nForbes published an article in 2010 that reported 57% of Facebook users are women, which was attributed to the fact that women are more active on social media. On average, women have 8% more friends and account for 62% of posts that are shared via Facebook. Another study in 2010 found that in most Western cultures, women spend more time sending text messages compared to men as well as spending more time on social networking sites as a way to communicate with friends and family.\nResearch conducted in 2013 found that over 57% of pictures posted on social networking sites were sexual and were created to gain attention. Moreover, 58% of women and 45% of men do not look into the camera, which creates an illusion of withdrawal. Other factors to be considered are the poses in pictures such as women lying down in subordinate positions or even touching themselves in childlike ways.\nAdolescent girls generally use social networking sites as a tool to communicate with peers and reinforce existing relationships; boys on the other hand tend to use social networking sites as a tool to meet new friends and acquaintances. Furthermore, social networking sites have allowed individuals to truly express themselves, as they are able to create an identity and socialize with other individuals that can relate. Social networking sites have also given individuals access to create a space where they feel more comfortable about their sexuality. Recent research has indicated that social media is becoming a stronger part of younger individuals' media culture, as more intimate stories are being told via social media and are being intertwined with gender, sexuality, and relationships.\nResearch has found that almost all U.S. teens (95%) aged 12 through 17 are online, compared to only 78% of adults. Of these teens, 80% have profiles on social media sites, as compared to only 64% of the online population aged 30 and older. According to a study conducted by the Kaiser Family Foundation, 11-to-18-year-olds spend on average over one and a half hours a day using a computer and 27 minutes per day visiting social network sites, i.e. the latter accounts for about one fourth of their daily computer use.\nStudies have shown that female users tend to post more \"cute\" pictures, while male participants were more likely to post pictures of themselves in activities. Women in the U.S. also tend to post more pictures of friends, while men tend to post more about sports and humorous links. The study also found that males would post more alcohol and sexual references. The roles were reversed however, when looking at a teenage dating site: women made sexual references significantly more often than males. Boys share more personal information, while girls are more conservative about the personal information they post. Boys, meanwhile, are more likely to orient towards technology, sports, and humor in the information they post to their profile.\nResearch in the 1990s suggested that different genders display certain traits, such as being active, attractive, dependent, dominant, independent, sentimental, sexy, and submissive, in online interaction. Even though these traits continue to be displayed through gender stereotypes, recent studies show that this is not necessarily the case any more.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38077", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38077", "title": "Gender changers", "text": ""}
{"id": "38078", "revid": "50579190", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38078", "title": "Jagiellonian University", "text": "Academic institution in Krak\u00f3w, Poland\nThe Jagiellonian University (, UJ) is a public research university in Krak\u00f3w, Poland. Founded in 1364 by King Casimir III the Great, it is the oldest university in Poland and one of the oldest universities in continuous operation in the world. The university grounds form part of the Krak\u00f3w Old Town, a UNESCO World Heritage Site. The university has been viewed as a vanguard of Polish culture as well as a significant contributor to the intellectual heritage of Europe.\nThe campus of the Jagiellonian University is centrally located within the city of Krak\u00f3w. The university consists of thirteen main faculties, in addition to three faculties composing the Collegium Medicum. It employs roughly 4,000 academics and provides education to more than 35,000 students who study in 166 fields. The main language of instruction is Polish, although around 30 degrees are offered in English and some in German. The university library and Collegium Novium house a significant number of medieval and Renaissance art pieces and manuscripts, including the landmark \"De revolutionibus orbium coelestium\" by the university alumnus Nicolaus Copernicus.\nIn addition to Copernicus, the university's notable alumni include heads of state King John III Sobieski, Pope John Paul II, and Andrzej Duda; Polish prime ministers Beata Szyd\u0142o and J\u00f3zef Cyrankiewicz; renowned cultural figures Jan Kochanowski, Stanis\u0142aw Lem, and Krzysztof Penderecki; and leading intellectuals and researchers such as Hugo Ko\u0142\u0142\u0105taj, Bronis\u0142aw Malinowski, Carl Menger, Leo Sternbach, and Norman Davies. Four Nobel laureates have been affiliated with the university, all in literature: Ivo Andri\u0107 and Wis\u0142awa Szymborska, who studied there, and Czes\u0142aw Mi\u0142osz and Olga Tokarczuk, who taught there. Faculty and graduates of the university have been elected to the Polish Academy of Arts and Sciences, the Royal Society, the British Academy, the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, and other honorary societies.\nHistory.\nFounding the university.\nIn the mid-14th century, King Casimir III the Great realised that the nation needed a class of educated people, especially lawyers, who could arrange a better set of the country's laws and administer the courts and offices. His efforts to found an institution of higher learning in Poland were rewarded when Pope Urban V granted him permission to set up a university in Krak\u00f3w. A royal charter of foundation was issued on 12 May 1364, and a simultaneous document was issued by the city council granting privileges to the \"Studium Generale\".\nDevelopment of the University of Krak\u00f3w stalled upon the death of Casimir III, and lectures were held in various places across the city, including, amongst others, in professors' houses, churches and in the cathedral school on the Wawel Hill. It is believed that the construction of a building to house the \"Studium Generale\" began on Plac Wolnica in what is today the district of Kazimierz.\nAfter a period of low interest and lack of funds, the institution was restored in the 1390s by Jadwiga, king of Poland, the daughter of Louis the Great. The royal couple, Jadwiga and her husband W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o decided that, instead of building new premises for the university, it would be better to buy an existing edifice; it was thus that a building on \u017bydowska Street, which had previously been the property of the P\u0119cherz family, was acquired in 1399. The Queen donated all of her personal jewellery to the university, allowing it to enroll 203 students.\nFollowing Jadwiga's death in 1399, her husband of Lithuanian origin W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o became the sole monarch of the Kingdom of Poland who on 26 July 1400 had reformed the university based on the model of the Sorbonne University and the Faculty of Theology was established. In ~1400, a of Lithuanian students (a shared accommodation, maintenance and education institution) was established and in the 15th-16th centuries more than 300 Lithuanian students studied in the university, including one of the creators of the Lithuanian language writing Abraomas Kulvietis and Stanislovas Rapalionis. In 1401, the Lithuanian duke Jonas Vaidutis, a grandson of the former Lithuanian monarch K\u0119stutis and a relative of W\u0142adys\u0142aw II Jagie\u0142\u0142o from the Gediminids dynasty, was elected as the second rector of the university.\nThe faculties of astronomy, law and theology attracted eminent scholars: for example, John Cantius, Stanis\u0142aw of Skarbimierz, Pawe\u0142 W\u0142odkowic, Jan of G\u0142og\u00f3w, Sandivogius of Czechel and Albert Brudzewski, who from 1491 to 1495 was one of Nicolaus Copernicus' teachers. The university was the first university in Europe to establish independent chairs in Mathematics and Astronomy. This rapid expansion in the university's faculty necessitated the purchase of larger premises in which to house them; it was thus that the building known today as the \"Collegium Maius\", with its quadrangle and beautiful arcade, came into being towards the beginning of the 15th century. The \"Collegium Maius\"' qualities, many of which directly contributed to the sheltered, academic atmosphere at the university, became widely respected, helping the university establish its reputation as a place of learning in Central Europe.\nGolden age of the Renaissance.\nFor several centuries, almost the entire intellectual elite of Poland was educated at the university, where they enjoyed particular royal favors. While it was, and largely remains, Polish students who make up the majority of the university's students, it has, over its long history, educated thousands of foreign students from countries such as Lithuania, Russia, Hungary, Bohemia, Germany, and Spain. During the second half of the 15th century, over 40 percent of students came from the outside of the Kingdom of Poland.\nThe first chancellor of the university was Piotr Wysz, and the first professors were Czechs, Germans and Poles, most of them trained at the Charles University in Prague. By 1520 Greek philology was introduced by Constanzo Claretti and Wenzel von Hirschberg; Hebrew was also taught. At this time, the \"Collegium Maius\" consisted of seven reading rooms, six of which were named for the great ancient scholars: Aristotle, Socrates, Plato, Galen, Ptolemy, and Pythagoras. Furthermore, it was during this period that the faculties of Law, Medicine, Theology, and Philosophy were established in their own premises; two of these buildings, the \"Collegium Iuridicum\" and \"Collegium Minus\", survive to this day. The golden era of the University of Krak\u00f3w took place during the Polish Renaissance, between 1500 and 1535, when it was attended by 3,215 students in the first decade of the 16th century, and it was in these years that the foundations for the Jagiellonian Library were set, which allowed for the addition of a library floor to the \"Collegium Maius\". The library's original rooms in which all books were chained to their cases in order to prevent theft are no longer used as such. However, they are still occasionally open to hosting visiting lecturers' talks.\nAs the university's popularity, along with that of the ever more provincial Krak\u00f3w's, declined in later centuries, the number of students attending the university also fell and, as such, the attendance record set in the early 16th-century wasn't surpassed until the late 18th century. This phenomenon was recorded as part of a more general economic and political decline seen in the Polish\u2013Lithuanian Commonwealth, which was suffering from the effects of poor governance and the policies of hostile neighbors at the time. In fact, despite a number of expansion projects during the late 18th century, many of the university's buildings had fallen into disrepair and were being used for a range of other purposes; in the university's archives, there is one entry which reads: 'Nobody lives in the building, nothing happens there. If the lecture halls underwent refurbishment they could be rented out to accommodate a laundry'. This period thus represents one of the darkest periods in the university's history and is almost certainly the one during which the closure of the institution seemed most imminent.\nTurmoil and near closure after the partitions.\nAfter the third partition of Poland in 1795 and the ensuing Napoleonic Wars, Krak\u00f3w became a free city under the protection of the Austrian Empire; this, however, was not to last long. In 1846, after the Krak\u00f3w Uprising, the city and its university became part of the Austrian Empire. The Austrians were in many ways hostile to the institution and, soon after their arrival, removed many of the furnishings from the \"Collegium Maius\"' \"Auditorium Maximum\" in order to convert it into a grain store. However, the threat of closure of the University was ultimately dissipated by Ferdinand I of Austria's decree to maintain it. By the 1870s the fortunes of the university had improved so greatly that many scholars had returned. The liquefaction of nitrogen and oxygen was successfully demonstrated by professors Zygmunt Wr\u00f3blewski and Karol Olszewski in 1883. Thereafter the Austrian authorities took on a new role in the development of the university and provided funds for the construction of a number of new buildings, including the neo-gothic \"Collegium Novum\", which opened in 1887. It was, conversely, from this building that in 1918 a large painting of \"Kaiser\" Franz Joseph was removed and destroyed by Polish students advocating the reestablishment of an independent Polish state.\nFor the 500th anniversary of the university's foundation, a monument to Copernicus was placed in the quadrangle of the \"Collegium Maius\"; this statue is now to be found in the direct vicinity of the \"Collegium Novum\", outside the \"Collegium Witkowskiego\", to where it was moved in 1953. Nevertheless, it was in the Grzeg\u00f3rzecka and the Kopernika areas that much of the university's expansion took place up to 1918; during this time the \"Collegium Medicum\" was relocated to a site just east of the centre, and was expanded with the addition of a number of modern teaching hospitals \u2013 this 'medical campus' remains to this day. By the late 1930s, the number of students at the university had increased dramatically to almost 6,000. Now a major centre for education in the independent Republic of Poland, the university attained government support for the purchase of building plots for new premises, as a result of which a number of residencies were built for students and professors alike. However, of all the projects begun during this era, the most important would have to be the creation of the Jagiellonian Library. The library's monumental building, construction of which began in 1931, was finally completed towards the end of the interwar period, which allowed the university's many varied literary collections to be relocated to their new home by the outbreak of war in 1939.\nModern era and renovation.\nOn 6 November 1939, following the German invasion of Poland, 184 professors were arrested and deported to Sachsenhausen concentration camp during an operation codenamed \"Sonderaktion Krakau\" (Special Operation Krakow). The university, along with the rest of Poland's higher and secondary education, was closed for the remainder of World War II. Despite the university's reopening after the cessation of hostilities in 1945, the new government of Poland was hostile to the teachings of the pre-war university and the faculty was suppressed by the Communists in 1954. By 1957 the Polish government decided that it would invest in the establishment of new facilities near Jordan Park and expansion of other smaller existing facilities. Construction work proved slow and many of the stated goals were never achieved; it was this poor management that eventually led a number of scholars to openly criticise the government for its apparent lack of interest in educational development and disregard for the university's future. A number of new buildings, such as the \"Collegium Paderevianum\", were built with funds from the legacy of Ignacy Paderewski.\nBy 1989, Poland had overthrown its Communist government. In that same year, the Jagiellonian University successfully completed the purchase of its first building plot in Pychowice, Krak\u00f3w, where, from 2000, construction began of a new complex of university buildings, the so-called Third Campus. The new campus, officially named the '600th Anniversary Campus', was developed in conjunction with the new LifeScience Park, which is managed by the Jagiellonian Centre for Innovation, the university's research consortium. Public funds earmarked for the project amounted to 946.5\u00a0million zlotys, or 240\u00a0million euros. Poland's entry into the European Union in 2004 has proved instrumental in improving the fortunes of the Jagiellonian University, which has seen huge increases in funding from both central government and European authorities, allowing it to develop new departments, research centres, and better support the work of its students and academics.\nInternational partnerships.\nThe university's academic advancement in both Poland and abroad is illustrated by its widely recognized research achievements. The scientists and physicians from the Collegium Medicum carry out pioneer studies, e.g. in cardiac surgery, urology and neurology, often leading to the development of novel treatment methods. Their findings have been published in international journals such as European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Medicine, New England Journal of Medicine, and The Lancet. UJ archaeologists lead explorations of ancient sites in various parts of the world, including Egypt, Cyprus, Central America, South Asia and Altay. The astronomers take part in major international projects, including H.E.S.S. and VIPERS. The work of UJ bio-technologists has been published in journals, such as Bioorganic &amp; Medicinal Chemistry, Molecular Ecology Resources, and European Journal of Human Genetics.\nIn the English-speaking world, the Jagiellonian University has international partnerships with the University of Cambridge, University of Melbourne, University of Chicago, University of California, Los Angeles, London School of Economics, University of Rochester, University of California, Irvine, Case Western Reserve University. In the French-speaking world, partner universities include the Sorbonne, University of Montpellier. UJ also maintains strong academic partnership with Heidelberg University, Germany's oldest university. The Jagiellonian University offers specializations in German law, in conjunction with Heidelberg University and Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz.\nOther cooperation agreements exist with Charles University Prague, University of Vienna, University of Tokyo, Saint Petersburg State University, Technical University of Munich, and Free University of Berlin.\nLibraries.\nThe university's main library, the Jagiellonian Library (), is one of Poland's largest, with almost 6.5\u00a0million volumes; it is a constituent of the Polish National Libraries system. It is home to a world-renowned collection of medieval manuscripts, which includes Copernicus' \"De Revolutionibus\", the \"Balthasar Behem Codex\" and the \"Berlinka.\" The library also has an extensive collection of underground political literature (so-called \"drugi obieg\" or \"samizdat\") from Poland's period of Communist rule between 1945 and 1989.\nThe beginning of the Jagiellonian Library is traditionally considered the same as that of the entire university \u2013 in 1364; however, instead of having one central library it had several smaller branches at buildings of various departments (the largest collection was in \"Collegium Maius\", where works related to theology and liberal arts were kept). After 1775, during the reforms of Komisja Edukacji Narodowej, which established the first Ministry of Education in the world, various small libraries of the university were formally centralised into one public collection in \"Collegium Maius\". During the partitions of Poland, the library continued to grow thanks to the support of such people as Karol J\u00f3zef Teofil Estreicher and Karol Estreicher. Its collections were made public in 1812. Since 1932, it has been recognised as a legal deposit library, comparable to the Bodleian Library at the University of Oxford or Cambridge University Library or Trinity College Library in Dublin, and thus has the right to receive a copy of any book issued by Polish publishers within Poland. In 1940, the library finally obtained a new building of its own, which has subsequently been expanded on two occasions, most recently in 1995\u20132001. During the Second World War, library workers cooperated with underground universities. Since the 1990s, the library's collection has become increasingly digitised.\nIn addition to the Jagiellonian Library, the university maintains a large medical library (\"Biblioteka Medyczna\") and many other subject specialised libraries in its various faculties and institutes. Finally, the collections of the university libraries' collections are enriched by the presence of the university's archives, which date back to the university's own foundation and record the entire history of its development up to the present day.\nFaculties and departments.\nThe university is divided into the following faculties, which have different organisational sub-structures partly reflecting their history and partly their operational needs. Teaching and research at UJ are organised by these faculties, including a number of additional institutes:\nJagiellonian University Collegium Medicum is affiliated with the following hospitals and clinics:\nThe new seat of the University Hospital has been recently opened at Prokocim in 2019, as a result of more than 1.2 billion zloty investment projects. As 2022 the University Hospital in Krakow is the biggest supra-regional public hospital in Poland and comprises: 37 clinical departments, 12 diagnostic and research institutes, and 71 out-patient units.\nStudent associations.\nIn 1851, the university's first student scientific association was founded. In 2021, over 70 student scientific associations exist at the Jagiellonian University, most of them affiliated with Collegium Medicum. Usually, their purpose is to promote students' scientific achievements by organizing lecture sessions, science excursions, and international student conferences, such as the International Workshop for Young Mathematicians, which is organized by the Zaremba Association of Mathematicians.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38079", "revid": "50934673", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38079", "title": "Narcotic", "text": "Chemical substance with psycho-active properties\nThe term narcotic (, from ancient Greek \u03bd\u03b1\u03c1\u03ba\u1ff6 \"nark\u014d\", \"I make numb\") originally referred medically to any psychoactive compound with numbing or paralyzing properties. In the United States, it has since become associated with opiates and opioids, commonly morphine and heroin, as well as derivatives of many of the compounds found within raw opium latex. The primary three are morphine, codeine, and thebaine (while thebaine itself is only very mildly psychoactive, it is a crucial precursor in the vast majority of semi-synthetic opioids, such as oxycodone or hydrocodone).\nLegally speaking, the term \"narcotic\" may be imprecisely defined and typically has negative connotations. When used in a legal context in the U.S., a narcotic drug is totally prohibited, such as heroin, or one that is used in violation of legal regulation (in this word sense, equal to any controlled substance or illicit drug). \nIn the medical community, the term is more precisely defined as a synonym of opioids and generally does not carry the same negative connotations.\nStatutory classification of a drug as a narcotic often increases the penalties for violation of drug control statutes. For example, although U.S. federal law classifies both cocaine and amphetamines as \"Schedule II\" drugs, the penalty for possession of cocaine is greater than the penalty for possession of amphetamines because cocaine, unlike amphetamines, is classified as a narcotic.\nResearch acknowledges that alcohol can have similar effects to narcotics in head or trunk trauma situations.\nUnited Nations.\nSingle Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961.\nThe adoption of this convention is regarded as a milestone in the history of the international drug ban. The Single Convention codified all existing multilateral treaties on drug control and extended the existing control systems to include the cultivation of plants that were grown as the raw material of narcotic drugs. The principal objectives of the convention are to limit the possession, use, trade, distribution, import, export, manufacture, and production of drugs exclusively for medical and scientific purposes, and to address drug trafficking through international cooperation to deter and discourage drug traffickers. The convention also established the International Narcotics Control Board, merging the Permanent Central Board and the Drug Supervisory Board.\nThe 1961 Convention seeks to control over 116 drugs that it classifies as narcotic. These include:\nThe Convention divides drugs into four groups, or schedules, to enforce a greater or lesser degree of control for the various substances and compounds. Opium smoking and eating, coca leaf chewing, cannabis resin smoking, and the non-medical use of cannabis are prohibited. The 1972 Protocol to this Convention calls for increased efforts to prevent illicit production of, traffic in, and use of narcotics as defined by the convention, while highlighting the need to provide treatment and rehabilitation services to drug abusers.\nINCB Yellow List.\nThis document contains the current list of narcotic drugs under international control and additional\ninformation to assist governments in filling in the International Narcotics Control Board questionnaires\nrelated to narcotic drugs, namely, form A, form B and form C.\nIn medicine, a chemical agent that induces stupor, coma, or insensibility to pain\n(also called narcotic analgesic).\nIn the context of international drug control, \"narcotic drug\" means any drug\ndefined as such under the 1961 Convention.\nWorld Health Organization.\nLexicon of alcohol and drug terms published by the World Health Organization.\nThe term usually refers to opiates or opioids, which are called narcotic analgesics. In common parlance and legal usage, it is often used imprecisely to mean illicit drugs, irrespective of their pharmacology. For example, narcotics control legislation in Canada, the US, and certain other countries includes cocaine and cannabis as well as opioids (see also conventions, international drug). Because of this variation in usage, the term is best replaced by one with a more specific meaning (e.g. opioid).\nUnited States.\nSection 1300.01 Definitions relating to controlled substances:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nA 1984 amendment to 21 USC (Controlled Substances Act), Section 802\nexpanded and revised definition of \"narcotic drug\", including within term poppy straw, cocaine, and ecgonine.\n\"U.S. v. Stieren\".\n608 F.2d 1135\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;United States Court of Appeals, Eighth Circuit. Decided Oct. 31, 1979. LAY, Circuit Judge.\nJohn Arthur Stieren appeals from the judgment of conviction for possession of cocaine with intent to distribute and dispense under 21 U.S.C. \u00a7 841(a)(1). Stieren contends that the statute is unconstitutional because \"cocaine is classified as a narcotic under Schedule II of 21 U.S.C. \u00a7 812(c) when as a matter of scientific and medical fact cocaine is not a narcotic but is a non-narcotic stimulant.\"\nThe sufficiency of the evidence is not disputed. Stieren was convicted after special agents testified that he had and attempted to sell them a large quantity of cocaine. Defendant urges that the testimony and reports by physicians and scientists demonstrate that cocaine is not a narcotic. He also cites cases that hold that cocaine is not a narcotic under the pharmacological definition of the term. \"State v. Erickson\", 574 P.2d 1 (Alaska 1978).\nIt is within the legislative prerogative to classify cocaine, which is a non-narcotic central nervous system stimulant, as a narcotic for penalty and regulatory purposes. 21 U.S.C. \u00a7 802(16)(A). The use of cocaine poses serious problems for the community and has a high potential for abuse. Congress's choice of penalty reflects a societal policy that must be adhered to by the courts.2 Congress has the power to reclassify cocaine. This power has been delegated to the Attorney General. 21 U.S.C. \u00a7 811(a)(1). If cocaine is to be reclassified, the defendant's arguments should be made to the legislative branch, not the courts.\nWe hold that Congress had a rational legislative purpose when it classified cocaine as a Schedule II narcotic drug to impose penalties.\nJUDGMENT AFFIRMED.\nHistory.\nThe term \"narcotic\" is believed to have been coined by the Greek physician Galen to refer to agents that numb or deaden, causing paralysis or loss of feeling. It is based on the Greek word \"\u03bd\u03b1\u03c1\u03ba\u03c9\u03c3\u03b9\u03c2\" (narcosis)\",\" the term used by Hippocrates for the process of numbing or the numbed state. Galen listed mandrake root, altercus (eclata), seeds, and poppy juice (opium) as the chief examples. It originally referred to any substance that relieved pain, dulled the senses, or induced sleep. Now, the term is used in many ways. Some people might define narcotics as substances that bind at opioid receptors (cellular membrane proteins activated by substances like heroin or morphine), while others refer to any \"illicit\" substance as a narcotic. From a U.S. \"legal\" perspective, narcotics refer to opium, opium derivatives, and their semi-synthetic substitutes, though in U.S. law, due to its numbing properties, cocaine is also considered a narcotic.\nThe definition encompassing \"any illegal drug\" was first recorded in 1926. Its first use as an adjective is first attested to c.\u20091600. There are many different types of narcotics. The two most common forms of narcotic drugs are morphine and codeine. Both are synthesized from opium for medicinal use. The most commonly used drug for recreational purposes created from opium is heroin. Synthesized drugs created with an opium base for use in pain management are fentanyl, oxycodone, tramadol, pethidine (Demerol), hydrocodone, methadone, and hydromorphone.\nNew forms of existing pain medications are being created regularly. The newest formulation to come out was in 2014 when zohydro, an increased dosage formula of hydrocodone, was released; this is so far the strongest hydrocodone formulation created for pain management, on par with a moderate dose of oxycodone .\nAnalgesics.\nAnalgesics are drugs that relieve pain. There are two main types: non-narcotic analgesics for mild pain, and narcotic analgesics for severe pain.\nNarcotic analgesics.\nNarcotic analgesics tend to be opioids. They bind to opioid receptors which are G protein-coupled receptors distributed in brain, spinal cord, digestive tract, peripheral neurons.\nMechanism.\nThere are three types of opioid receptors: mu (\u03bc-opioid receptors), delta, and kappa (\u03ba-opioid receptor). Endogenous opioids (enkephalins, dynorphin, endorphin) do not bind specifically to any particular opioid receptor. Receptor binding of the opioid causes a cascade leading to the channel opening and hyperpolarization of the neuron. The opioid receptors have the following channel types: mu, K+ channel; l delta, K+ channel; kappa, Ca2+ channel. Hyperpolarization can lead to post-synaptic neural inhibition and presynaptic inhibition of neurotransmitter release. Post-synaptic neural inhibition can reduce analgesia and central hyperactivity may reduce its efficacy. The mechanism of kappa receptors is slightly different from mu and delta, in that Ca2+ channels close instead of K+ channels, and K+ channels open in mu and delta.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38082", "revid": "48617681", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38082", "title": "Viking program", "text": "Pair of NASA landers and orbiters sent to Mars in 1976\nThe \"Viking\" program consisted of a pair of identical American space probes, \"Viking 1\" and \"Viking 2\" both launched in 1975, and landed on Mars in 1976. The mission effort began in 1968 and was managed by the NASA Langley Research Center. Each spacecraft was composed of two main parts: an orbiter spacecraft which photographed the surface of Mars from orbit, and a lander which studied the planet from the surface. The orbiters also served as communication relays for the landers once they touched down.\nThe Viking program grew from NASA's earlier, even more ambitious, Voyager Mars program, which was not related to the successful Voyager deep space probes of the late 1970s. \"Viking 1\" was launched on August 20, 1975, and the second craft, \"Viking 2\", was launched on September 9, 1975, both riding atop Titan IIIE rockets with Centaur upper stages. \"Viking 1\" entered Mars orbit on June 19, 1976, with \"Viking 2\" following on August 7.\nAfter orbiting Mars for more than a month and returning images used for landing site selection, the orbiters and landers detached; the landers then entered the Martian atmosphere and soft-landed at the sites that had been chosen. The \"Viking 1\" lander touched down on the surface of Mars on July 20, 1976, more than two weeks before \"Viking 2\"'s arrival in orbit. \"Viking 2\" then successfully soft-landed on September 3. The orbiters continued imaging and performing other scientific operations from orbit while the landers deployed instruments on the surface. The program terminated in 1982.\nThe project cost was roughly US$1\u00a0billion at the time of launch, equivalent to about $\u00a0billion in 2024 dollars. The mission was considered successful and formed most of the body of knowledge about Mars through the late 1990s and early 2000s.\nViking orbiters.\nThe primary objectives of the two Viking orbiters were to transport the landers to Mars, perform reconnaissance to locate and certify landing sites, act as communications relays for the landers, and to perform their own scientific investigations. Each orbiter, based on the earlier Mariner 9 spacecraft, was an octagon approximately across. The fully fueled orbiter-lander pair had a mass of . After separation and landing, the lander had a mass of about and the orbiter . The total launch mass was , of which were propellant and attitude control gas. The eight faces of the ring-like structure were high and were alternately wide. The overall height was from the lander attachment points on the bottom to the launch vehicle attachment points on top. There were 16 modular compartments, 3 on each of the 4 long faces and one on each short face. Four solar panel wings extended from the axis of the orbiter, the distance from tip to tip of two oppositely extended solar panels was .\nPropulsion.\nThe main propulsion unit was mounted above the orbiter bus. Propulsion was furnished by a bipropellant (monomethylhydrazine and nitrogen tetroxide) liquid-fueled rocket engine which could be gimballed up to 9\u00a0degrees. The engine was capable of thrust, providing a change in velocity of . Attitude control was achieved by 12 small compressed-nitrogen jets.\nNavigation and communication.\nAn acquisition Sun sensor, a cruise Sun sensor, a Canopus star tracker and an inertial reference unit consisting of six gyroscopes allowed three-axis stabilization. Two accelerometers were also on board.\nCommunications were accomplished through a 20 W S-band (2.3 GHz) transmitter and two 20 W TWTAs. An X band (8.4\u00a0GHz) downlink was also added specifically for radio science and to conduct communications experiments. Uplink was via S band (2.1\u00a0GHz). A two-axis steerable parabolic dish antenna with a diameter of approximately 1.5 m was attached at one edge of the orbiter base, and a fixed low-gain antenna extended from the top of the bus. Two tape recorders were each capable of storing 1280 megabits. A 381-MHz relay radio was also available.\nPower.\nThe power to the two orbiter craft was provided by eight solar panels, two on each wing. The solar panels comprised a total of 34,800 solar cells and produced 620\u00a0W of power at Mars. Power was also stored in two nickel-cadmium 30-A\u00b7h batteries.\nThe combined area of the four panels was , and they provided both regulated and unregulated direct current power; unregulated power was provided to the radio transmitter and the lander.\nTwo 30-amp\u00b7hour, nickel-cadmium, rechargeable batteries provided power when the spacecraft was not facing the Sun, during launch, while performing correction maneuvers and also during Mars occultation.\nMain findings.\nBy discovering many geological forms that are typically formed from large amounts of water, the images from the orbiters caused a revolution in our ideas about water on Mars. Huge river valleys were found in many areas. They showed that floods of water broke through dams, carved deep valleys, eroded grooves into bedrock, and travelled thousands of kilometers. Large areas in the southern hemisphere contained branched stream networks, suggesting that rain once fell. The flanks of some volcanoes are believed to have been exposed to rainfall because they resemble those caused on Hawaiian volcanoes. Many craters look as if the impactor fell into mud. When they were formed, ice in the soil may have melted, turned the ground into mud, then flowed across the surface. Normally, material from an impact goes up, then down. It does not flow across the surface, going around obstacles, as it does on some Martian craters. Regions, called \"Chaotic Terrain,\" seemed to have quickly lost great volumes of water, causing large channels to be formed. The amount of water involved was estimated to ten thousand times the flow of the Mississippi River. Underground volcanism may have melted frozen ice; the water then flowed away and the ground collapsed to leave chaotic terrain.\nViking landers.\nEach lander comprised a six-sided aluminium base with alternate long sides, supported on three extended legs attached to the shorter sides. The leg footpads formed the vertices of an equilateral triangle with sides when viewed from above, with the long sides of the base forming a straight line with the two adjoining footpads. Instrumentation was attached inside and on top of the base, elevated above the surface by the extended legs.\nEach lander was enclosed in an aeroshell heat shield designed to slow the lander down during the entry phase. To prevent contamination of Mars by Earth organisms, each lander, upon assembly and enclosure within the aeroshell, was enclosed in a pressurized \"bioshield\" and then sterilized at a temperature of for 40 hours. For thermal reasons, the cap of the bioshield was jettisoned after the Centaur upper stage powered the Viking orbiter/lander combination out of Earth orbit.\nAstronomer Carl Sagan helped to choose landing sites for both \"Viking\" probes.\nEntry, Descent and Landing (EDL).\nEach lander arrived at Mars attached to the orbiter. The assembly orbited Mars many times before the lander was released and separated from the orbiter for descent to the surface. Descent comprised four distinct phases, starting with a deorbit burn. The lander then experienced atmospheric entry with peak heating occurring a few seconds after the start of frictional heating with the Martian atmosphere. At an altitude of about and traveling at a velocity of 900 kilometers per hour (600\u00a0mph), the parachute deployed, the aeroshell released and the lander's legs unfolded. At an altitude of about 1.5 kilometers (5,000 feet), the lander activated its three retro-engines and was released from the parachute. The lander then immediately used retrorockets to slow and control its descent, with a soft landing on the surface of Mars.\n At landing (after using rocket propellant) the landers had a mass of about 600\u00a0kg.\nPropulsion.\nPropulsion for deorbit was provided by the monopropellant hydrazine (N2H4), through a rocket with 12 nozzles arranged in four clusters of three that provided thrust, translating to a change in velocity of . These nozzles also acted as the control thrusters for translation and rotation of the lander.\nTerminal descent (after use of a parachute) and landing used three (one affixed on each long side of the base, separated by 120\u00a0degrees) monopropellant hydrazine engines. The engines had 18 https:// to disperse the exhaust and minimize effects on the ground, and were throttleable from . The hydrazine was purified in order to prevent contamination of the Martian surface with Earth microbes. The lander carried of propellant at launch, contained in two spherical titanium tanks mounted on opposite sides of the lander beneath the RTG windscreens, giving a total launch mass of . Control was achieved through the use of an inertial reference unit, four gyros, a radar altimeter, a terminal descent and landing radar, and the control thrusters.\nPower.\nPower was provided by two radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG) units containing plutonium-238 affixed to opposite sides of the lander base and covered by wind screens. Each Viking RTG was tall, in diameter, had a mass of and provided 30\u00a0watts of continuous power at 4.4\u00a0volts. Four wet cell sealed nickel-cadmium 8 Ah (28,800\u00a0coulombs), 28\u00a0volt rechargeable batteries were also on board to handle peak power loads.\nPayload.\nCommunications.\nCommunications were accomplished through a 20-watt S-band transmitter using two traveling-wave tubes. A two-axis steerable high-gain parabolic antenna was mounted on a boom near one edge of the lander base. An omnidirectional low-gain S-band antenna also extended from the base. Both these antennae allowed for communication directly with the Earth, permitting Viking 1 to continue to work long after both orbiters had failed. A UHF (381 MHz) antenna provided a one-way relay to the orbiter using a 30\u00a0watt relay radio. Data storage was on a 40-Mbit tape recorder, and the lander computer had a 6000-word memory for command instructions.\nInstruments.\nThe lander carried instruments to achieve the primary scientific objectives of the lander mission: to study the biology, chemical composition (organic and inorganic), meteorology, seismology, magnetic properties, appearance, and physical properties of the Martian surface and atmosphere. Two 360-degree cylindrical scan cameras were mounted near one long side of the base. From the center of this side extended the sampler arm, with a collector head, temperature sensor, and magnet on the end. A meteorology boom, holding temperature, wind direction, and wind velocity sensors extended out and up from the top of one of the lander legs. A seismometer, magnet and camera test targets, and magnifying mirror are mounted opposite the cameras, near the high-gain antenna. An interior environmentally controlled compartment held the biology experiment and the gas chromatograph mass spectrometer. The X-ray fluorescence spectrometer was also mounted within the structure. A pressure sensor was attached under the lander body. The scientific payload had a total mass of approximately .\nBiological experiments.\nThe Viking landers conducted biological experiments designed to detect life in the Martian soil (if it existed) with experiments designed by three separate teams, under the direction of chief scientist Gerald Soffen of NASA. One experiment turned positive for the detection of metabolism (current life), but based on the results of the other two experiments that failed to reveal any organic molecules in the soil, most scientists became convinced that the positive results were likely caused by non-biological chemical reactions from highly oxidizing soil conditions.\nAlthough there was a pronouncement by NASA during the mission saying that the Viking lander results did not demonstrate conclusive biosignatures in soils at the two landing sites, the test results and their limitations are still under assessment. The validity of the positive 'Labeled Release' (LR) results hinged entirely on the absence of an oxidative agent in the Martian soil, but one was later discovered by the \"Phoenix\" lander in the form of perchlorate salts. It has been proposed that organic compounds could have been present in the soil analyzed by both \"Viking 1\" and \"Viking 2\", but remained unnoticed due to the presence of perchlorate, as detected by Phoenix in 2008. Researchers found that perchlorate will destroy organics when heated and will produce chloromethane and dichloromethane, the identical chlorine compounds discovered by both Viking landers when they performed the same tests on Mars.\nThe question of microbial life on Mars remains unresolved. Nonetheless, on April 12, 2012, an international team of scientists reported studies, based on mathematical speculation through complexity analysis of the Labeled Release experiments of the 1976 Viking Mission, that may suggest the detection of \"extant microbial life on Mars.\" In addition, new findings from re-examination of the Gas Chromatograph Mass Spectrometer (GCMS) results were published in 2018.\nCamera/imaging system.\nThe leader of the imaging team was Thomas A. Mutch, a geologist at Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island. The camera uses a movable mirror to illuminate 12 photodiodes. Each of the 12 silicon diodes are designed to be sensitive to different frequencies of light.\nSeveral broad band diodes (designated BB1, BB2, BB3, and BB4) are placed to focus accurately at distances between six and 43 feet away from the lander.\u00a0A low resolution broad band diode was named SURVEY.\u00a0 There are also three narrow band low resolution diodes (named BLUE, GREEN and RED) for obtaining color images, and another three (IR1, IR2, and IR3) for infrared imagery.\nThe cameras scanned at a rate of five vertical scan lines per second, each composed of 512 pixels. The 300 degree panorama images were composed of 9150 lines. The cameras' scan was slow enough that in a crew shot taken during development of the imaging system several members show up several times in the shot as they moved themselves as the camera scanned.\nControl systems.\nThe Viking landers used a Guidance, Control and Sequencing Computer (GCSC) consisting of two Honeywell HDC 402 24-bit computers with 18K of plated-wire memory, while the Viking orbiters used a Command Computer Subsystem (CCS) using two custom-designed 18-bit serial processors.\nFinancial cost of the Viking program.\nThe two orbiters cost US$217\u00a0million at the time, which is about $\u00a0billion in 2024 dollars. The most expensive single part of the program was the lander's life-detection unit, which cost about $60 million then or $\u00a0million in 2024 dollars. Development of the Viking lander design cost $357\u00a0million. This was decades before NASA's \"faster, better, cheaper\" approach, and Viking needed to pioneer unprecedented technologies under national pressure brought on by the Cold War and the aftermath of the Space Race, all under the prospect of possibly discovering extraterrestrial life for the first time. The experiments had to adhere to a special 1971 directive that mandated that no single failure shall stop the return of more than one experiment\u2014a difficult and expensive task for a device with over 40,000 parts.\nThe Viking camera system cost $27.3\u00a0million to develop, or about $\u00a0million in 2024 dollars. When the Imaging system design was completed, it was difficult to find anyone who could manufacture its advanced design. The program managers were later praised for fending off pressure to go with a simpler, less advanced imaging system, especially when the views rolled in. The program did however save some money by cutting out a third lander and reducing the number of experiments on the lander.\nOverall NASA says that $1\u00a0billion in 1970s dollars was spent on the program, which when inflation-adjusted to 2024 dollars is about $\u00a0billion.\nMission end.\nThe Viking program ended on May 21, 1983. To prevent an imminent impact with Mars the orbit of \"Viking 1\" orbiter was raised on August 7, 1980, before it was shut down 10 days later. Impact and potential contamination on the planet's surface is possible from 2019 onwards.\nThe \"Viking 1\" lander was found to be about 6 kilometers from its planned landing site by the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter in December 2006.\nMessage artifact.\nEach \"Viking\" lander carried a tiny dot of microfilm containing the names of several thousand people who had worked on the mission. Several earlier and later space probes had carried message artifacts, such as the Pioneer plaque and the Voyager Golden Record. Later probes also carried memorials or lists of names, such as the \"Perseverance\" rover which recognizes the almost 11 million people who signed up to include their names on the mission.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n "}
{"id": "38083", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38083", "title": "Around the World in 80 Days (novel)", "text": ""}
{"id": "38085", "revid": "36767729", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38085", "title": "Simpsons/Waylon Smithers", "text": ""}
{"id": "38087", "revid": "40192293", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38087", "title": "Soren Kierkegaard", "text": ""}
{"id": "38088", "revid": "686510", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38088", "title": "Powaqqatsi", "text": "1988 film by Godfrey Reggio\nPowaqqatsi is a 1988 American non-narrative film directed by Godfrey Reggio and the sequel to Reggio's experimental 1982 film, \"Koyaanisqatsi\". It is the second film in \"Qatsi\" trilogy, which was followed by \"Naqoyqatsi\" (2002).\nThe film's title is a Hopi neologism coined by Reggio meaning \"parasitic way of life\" or \"life in transition\". While \"Koyaanisqatsi\" focused on modern life in industrial countries, \"Powaqqatsi\", which similarly has no dialogue, focuses more on the conflict in Third World countries between traditional ways of life and the new ways of life introduced with industrialization. As with \"Koyaanisqatsi\" and the third and final part of the \"Qatsi\" trilogy, \"Naqoyqatsi\", the film is strongly related to its soundtrack, written by Philip Glass.\nSynopsis.\nIn the beginning chapter, \"Serra Pelada\", men from Serra Pelada (a gold mine in Brazil) are seen carrying bags of dirt up to a destination. In the middle of the chapter, various shots outside of Serra Pelada are shown. Near the end of the chapter, a few men are carrying another man who was struck by a falling rock (mentioned in the \"Impact of Progress\" feature on the DVD/Blu-ray) uphill along a procession of workers who are carrying dirt-filled sacks. After that, several discordant layered exposures of the dirt carriers are shown. The scene cross fades to show the image of a head, with multiple exposures of the same head rapidly rotating and layered upon to give a manifold appearance. This is an apparent allusion to Janus, the god of beginnings, endings and transitions, keeping with the film's central themes of progress and change.\nIn \"Anthem: Part 1\", the sun rises up above an African village. Later, a man raises a sail for a boat. The next chapter, \"That Place\", starts zooming out from a waterfall. Children can be heard laughing. Villages are shown as well as children and upside down water reflections. \"Anthem: Part 2\" has various shots of villages and islands shown.\n\"Mosque and Temple\" shows various natural shots as well as religious scenes. Some of these scenes are a transparent inside a church with someone walking by, a man praying, a monk sitting while a bird flies off his stick, the same monk walking by the river, a bird flying by a sunset, more children, crows flying above a river, two men rowing their boat in that river, a woman praying in the Ganges river, two men practicing yoga, another monk, and a temple in Nepal.\n\"Anthem: Part 3\" shows masses of people in motion, working together and celebrating traditional rituals, in Africa and South America, all in slow-motion.\n\"Video Dream\" blends together colorful television advertisements and news programs from the US, Western Europe, the Soviet Union and Japan.\n\"New Cities In Ancient Lands\" has views of people on the move, and traffic in three parts: China, Africa and India.\n\"The Unutterable/Caught!\" People in large groups in the developing world, moving together, at work; views of traffic from above.\n\"Mr. Suso / From Egypt\" Sometimes-unfocused people in motion, to the muezzin's call, ghostly double-images of traffic, close-ups of faces, reflections in water.\nMusic.\nA soundtrack was produced in 1988 that was composed by Philip Glass.\nReception.\nRotten Tomatoes reported that 56% out of 9 reviews were positive with the average score of 6.5 out of 10 and said it \"wasn't as eagerly embraced by viewers and critics as its popular predecessor.\"\n\"The New York Times\" said \"There are two kinds of dirt to be found in \"Powaqqatsi\": good dirt and bad. ... [the director] magnifies this distinction until it achieves mountainous proportions, yet still he manages to see it in starkly one-dimensional terms.\" Roger Ebert said \"There are images of astonishing beauty in Godfrey Reggio's \"\"Powaqqatsi\",\" sequences when we marvel at the sights of the Earth, and yet when the film is over there is the feeling that we are still waiting for it to begin. ... Reggio seemed to think that man himself is some kind of virus infecting the planet - that we would enjoy Earth more, in other words, if we weren't here.\" On \"Siskel and Ebert at the Movies\" with he and Gene Siskel each agreed to give the film a thumbs down, he also called it a \"New Age music video\".\n\"Time Out\" said that it is \"visually stunning, but undermined by a fairly serious flaw. ... At best the message is a fairly obvious criticism of First World domination of the Third, and at worst a hippy celebration of the Dignity of Labour.\" Greg Klymkiw said \"... the trilogy, [of which \"Powaqqatsi\" is the second part] while a stoner experience of the first order, can be equally appreciated by those who remain straight. Much of it is mind-blowingly mind-fucking without mind-altering substances.\"\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38089", "revid": "27199084", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38089", "title": "Gender changer", "text": "Hardware device\nA gender changer is a hardware device placed between two cable connectors of the same type and gender.\nAn example is a cable connector shell with either two female or two male connectors on it (male-to-male or female-to-female), used to correct the mismatches that result when interconnecting two devices or cables with the same gender of connector.\nGender changers are used for RS-232C ports in either the original DB-25 or the IBM AT DE-9 format. They are also used when extending any sort of cable that normally has plugs on both ends (rather than a socket on one and plug on the other), however in this case it is usually called just an \"extender\", such as with F connectors, BNC connectors, and various RJ connectors used in telephony and computer networking.\nGender changers are used in professional audio to adapt XLR connectors, RCA connectors, Speakon connectors and TRS phone connectors.\nThe null modem is a computer communications adapter which may appear to be a gender changer, but it reroutes the wiring. The \"transmit\" pair from each side is routed into the \"receive\" pair of the other side, in the manner of a crossover cable.\nMany different types of small hardware can be considered gender changers. For instance, there are a variety of small adapters sold for quarter-inch audiovisual cables that serve the role of connecting gendered cables. Other kinds of gender changers are available for coaxial cable, Ethernet cabling or any other type of modern data or audiovisual cables.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38090", "revid": "800198", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38090", "title": "Cos\u00ec fan tutte", "text": "Italian-language opera buffa by W. A. Mozart\n (\"Women are like that, or The School for Lovers\"), K. 588, is an opera buffa in two acts by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. It was first performed on 26 January 1790 at the Burgtheater in Vienna, Austria. The libretto was written by Lorenzo Da Ponte who also wrote \"Le nozze di Figaro\" and \"Don Giovanni\".\nAlthough it is commonly held that was written and composed at the suggestion of the Emperor Joseph II, recent research does not support this idea. There is evidence that Mozart's contemporary Antonio Salieri tried to set the libretto but left it unfinished. In 1994, John Rice uncovered two terzetti by Salieri in the Austrian National Library.\nThe short title, \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\", literally means \"So do they all\", using the feminine plural (\"tutte\") to indicate women. It is sometimes translated into English as \"Women are like that\". The words are sung by the three men in act 2, scene 3, just before the finale; this melodic phrase is also quoted in the overture to the opera. Da Ponte had used the line \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte le belle\" earlier in \"Le nozze di Figaro\" (in act 1, scene 7).\nPerformance history.\nThe first performance of Mozart's setting took place at the Burgtheater in Vienna on 26 January 1790. It was given only five times before the run was stopped by the death of the Emperor Joseph II and the resulting period of court mourning. It was performed twice in June 1790 with the composer conducting the second performance, and again in July (twice) and August (once). After that it was not performed in Vienna during Mozart's lifetime. The first British performance was in May 1811 at the King's Theatre, London. \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\" was not performed in the United States until 1922, when it was given at the Metropolitan Opera.\nAccording to William Mann, Mozart disliked prima donna Adriana Ferrarese del Bene, da Ponte's arrogant mistress for whom the role of Fiordiligi had been created. Knowing her idiosyncratic tendency to drop her chin on low notes and throw back her head on high ones, Mozart filled her showpiece aria \"Come scoglio\" with constant leaps from low to high and high to low in order to make Ferrarese's head \"bob like a chicken\" onstage.\nThe subject matter (see synopsis below) did not offend Viennese sensibilities of the time, but in the 19th and early 20th centuries was considered risqu\u00e9, vulgar, and even immoral. The opera was rarely performed, and when it did appear it was presented in one of several bowdlerised versions.\nAfter World War II it regained a place in the standard operatic repertoire and is now frequently performed.\nA comedic adaptation, \"Covid fan tutte\", (also using other music by Mozart) depicting life during the first several months of the COVID-19 pandemic was produced by the Finnish National Opera in 2020.\nRoles.\nWhile the use of modern fach titles and voice categories for these roles has become customary, Mozart was far more general in his own descriptions of the voice types, as shown above. Occasionally these voice types are varied in performance practice. Don Alfonso is sometimes performed by baritones such as Thomas Allen, Bo Skovhus, and Thomas Hampson, and Dorabella is almost always performed by a mezzo-soprano. Despina is occasionally performed by a mezzo-soprano, such as Cecilia Bartoli, Frederica von Stade, Agnes Baltsa, Ann Murray and Ginger Costa-Jackson. Ferrando and Fiordiligi, however, can only be sung by a tenor and a soprano because of the high tessitura of their roles.\nInstrumentation.\nThe instrumentation is as follows:\nSynopsis.\nMozart and Da Ponte use the theme of \"fianc\u00e9e swapping\", which dates back to the 13th century; notable earlier versions are found in Boccaccio's \"Decameron\" and Shakespeare's play \"Cymbeline\". Elements from Shakespeare's \"The Merchant of Venice\" and \"The Taming of the Shrew\" are also present. Furthermore, it incorporates elements of the myth of Procris as found in Ovid's \"Metamorphoses\", vii.\nPlace: Naples\nTime: the 18th century\nAct 1.\nScene 1: A coffeehouse.\nIn a cafe, Ferrando and Guglielmo (two officers) express certainty that their fianc\u00e9es (Dorabella and Fiordiligi, respectively) will be eternally faithful; Don Alfonso expresses skepticism and claims that there is no such thing as a faithful woman (trios: \"La mia Dorabella capace non \u00e8\" and \"\u00c8 la fede delle femmine\"). He lays a wager with the two officers, claiming he can prove in a day's time that those two, like all women, are fickle. The wager is accepted: the two officers will pretend to have been called off to war; soon thereafter they will return in disguise and each attempt to seduce the other's lover (trio: \"Una bella serenata\"). The scene shifts to the two women, who are praising their men (duet: \"Ah guarda, sorella\"\u2014\"Ah look sister\"). Alfonso arrives to announce the bad news: the officers have been called off to war. Ferrando and Guglielmo arrive, brokenhearted, and bid farewell (quintet: \"Sento, o Dio, che questo piede \u00e8 restio\"\u2014\"I feel, oh God, that my foot is reluctant\"). As the boat with the men sails off to sea, Alfonso and the sisters wish them safe travel (trio: \"Soave sia il vento\"\u2014\"May the wind be gentle\"). Alfonso, left alone, gloatingly predicts that the women (like all women) will prove unfaithful (arioso: \"Oh, poverini, per femmina giocare cento zecchini?\"\u2014\"Oh, poor little ones, to wager 100 sequins on a woman\").\nScene 2: A room in the sisters' home.\nDespina, the maid, arrives and asks what is wrong. Dorabella bemoans the torment of having been left alone (aria: \"Smanie implacabili\"\u2014\"Torments implacable\"). Despina mocks the sisters, advising them to take new lovers while their betrotheds are away (aria: \"In uomini, in soldati, sperare fedelt\u00e0?\"\u2014\"In men, in soldiers, you hope for faithfulness?\"). After they leave, Alfonso arrives. He fears Despina will recognize the men through their disguises, so he bribes her into helping him to win the bet. The two men then arrive, dressed as mustachioed Albanians (sextet: \"Alla bella Despinetta\"\u2014\"Meet the pretty Despinetta\"). The sisters enter and are alarmed by the presence of strange men in their home. The \"Albanians\" tell the sisters that they were led by love to them (the sisters). However, the sisters refuse to give in. Fiordiligi asks the \"Albanians\" to leave and pledges to remain faithful (aria: \"Come scoglio\"\u2014\"Like a rock\"). The \"Albanians\" continue the attempt to win over the sisters' hearts, Guglielmo going so far as to point out all of his manly attributes (aria: \"Non siate ritrosi\"\u2014\"Don't be shy\"), but to no avail. Ferrando, left alone and sensing victory, praises his love (aria: \"Un'aura amorosa\"\u2014\"A loving breath\").\nScene 3: A garden.\nThe sisters are still pining. Despina has asked Don Alfonso to let her take over the seduction plan. Suddenly, the \"Albanians\" burst in the scene and threaten to poison themselves if they are not allowed the chance to woo the sisters. As Alfonso tries to calm them, they drink the \"poison\" and pretend to pass out. Soon thereafter, a \"doctor\" (Despina in disguise) arrives on the scene and, using magnet therapy, is able to revive the \"Albanians\". The men, pretending to hallucinate, demand a kiss from Dorabella and Fiordiligi (whom the \"Albanians\" call goddesses) who stand before them. The sisters refuse, even as Alfonso and the doctor (Despina) urge them to acquiesce.\nAct 2.\nScene 1: The sisters' bedroom.\nDespina urges them to succumb to the \"Albanians'\" overtures (aria: \"Una donna a quindici anni\"\u2014\"A fifteen year old woman\"). After she leaves, Dorabella confesses to Fiordiligi that she is tempted, and the two agree that a mere flirtation will do no harm and will help them pass the time while they wait for their lovers to return (duet: \"Prender\u00f2 quel brunettino\"\u2014\"I will take the dark haired one\").\nScene 2: The garden.\nDorabella and the disguised Guglielmo pair off, as do Ferrando and Fiordiligi. The conversation is halting and uncomfortable, and Ferrando departs with Fiordiligi. Now alone with Dorabella, Guglielmo attempts to woo her. She puts up a token resistance, and soon she has given him a medallion (with Ferrando's portrait inside) in exchange for a heart-shaped locket (duet: \"Il core vi dono\"\u2014\"I give you my heart\"). Ferrando is less successful with Fiordiligi (Ferrando's aria: \"Ah, lo veggio\"\u2014\"Ah, I see it\" and Fiordiligi's aria: \"Per piet\u00e0, ben mio, perdona\"\u2014\"Please, my beloved, forgive\"), so he is enraged when he later finds out from Guglielmo that the medallion with his portrait has been so quickly given away to a new lover. Guglielmo at first sympathises with Ferrando (aria: \"Donne mie, la fate a tanti\"\u2014\"My ladies, you do it to so many\"), but then gloats, because his betrothed is faithful.\nScene 3: The sisters' room.\nDorabella admits her indiscretion to Fiordiligi (\"\u00c8 amore un ladroncello\"\u2014\"Love is a little thief\"). Fiordiligi, upset by this development, decides to go to the army and find her betrothed. Before she can leave, though, Ferrando arrives and continues his attempted seduction. Fiordiligi finally succumbs and falls into his arms (duet: \"Fra gli amplessi\"\u2014\"In the embraces\"). Guglielmo is distraught while Ferrando turns Guglielmo's earlier gloating back on him. Alfonso, winner of the wager, tells the men to forgive their fianc\u00e9es. After all: \"Cos\u00ec fan tutte\"\u2014\"All women are like that\".\nScene 4.\nThe scene begins as a double wedding for the sisters and their \"Albanian\" grooms. Despina, in disguise as a notary, presents the marriage contract, which only the ladies sign. (The men, of course, realise that this wedding is a sham, and are only playing along with it in order to teach their unfaithful lovers a lesson.) Directly thereafter, military music is heard in the distance, indicating the return of the officers. Alfonso confirms the sisters' fears: Ferrando and Guglielmo are on their way to the house. The \"Albanians\" hurry off to hide (actually, to change out of their disguises). They return as the officers, professing their love. Alfonso drops the marriage contract in front of the officers, and, when they read it, they become enraged. They then depart and return moments later, half in Albanian disguise, half as officers. Despina has been revealed to be the notary, and the sisters realize they have been duped. All is ultimately forgiven, as the entire group praises the ability to accept life's unavoidable good times and bad times.\nReferences.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources\nFurther reading"}
{"id": "38091", "revid": "47965501", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38091", "title": "Charles University", "text": "Oldest and largest university in the Czech Republic\nCharles University (CUNI; , UK; ; ), or historically as the University of Prague (), is the largest university in the Czech Republic. It is one of the oldest universities in the world in continuous operation, the oldest university north of the Alps and east of Paris. Today, the university consists of 17 faculties located in Prague, Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9, and Plze\u0148.\nHistory.\nMedieval university (1349\u20131419).\nThe establishment of a medieval university in Prague was inspired by Holy Roman Emperor Charles IV. He requested his friend and ally, Pope Clement VI, to create the university. On 26 January 1347, the pope issued the bull establishing a university in Prague, modeled on the University of Paris, with all four faculties, including theology. On 7 April 1348 Charles, the king of Bohemia, gave to the established university privileges and immunities from the secular power in a Golden Bull and on 14 January 1349 he repeated that as the King of the Romans. Most Czech sources since the 19th century\u2014encyclopedias, general histories, materials of the university itself\u2014prefer to give 1348 as the year of the founding of the university, rather than 1347 or 1349. That was caused by an anticlerical shift in the 19th century, shared by both Czechs and Germans.\nThe university was opened in 1349. The university was sectioned into parts called \"nations\": the Bohemian, Bavarian, Polish and Saxon. The Bohemian \"natio\" included Bohemians, Moravians, southern Slavs, and Hungarians; the Bavarian included Austrians, Swabians, natives of Franconia and of the Rhine provinces; the Polish included Silesians, Poles, Ruthenians; the Saxon included inhabitants of the Margravate of Meissen, Thuringia, Upper and Lower Saxony, Denmark, and Sweden. Ethnically Czech students made 16\u201320% of all students. Archbishop Arno\u0161t of Pardubice took an active part in the foundation by obliging the clergy to contribute and became a chancellor of the university (i.e., director or manager).\nThe first graduate was promoted in 1359. The lectures were held in the colleges, of which the oldest was named for the king the \"Carolinum\", established in 1366. In 1372 the Faculty of Law became an independent university.\nIn 1402 Jerome of Prague in Oxford copied out the \"Dialogus\" and \"Trialogus\" of John Wycliffe. The dean of the philosophical faculty, Jan Hus, translated \"Trialogus\" into the Czech language. In 1403 the university forbade its members to follow the teachings of Wycliffe, but his doctrine continued to gain in popularity.\nIn the Western Schism, the Bohemian \"nation\" took the side of king Wenceslaus and supported the Council of Pisa (1409). The other \"nations\" of the university declared their support for the side of Pope Gregory XII, thus the vote was 1:3 against the Bohemians. Hus and other Bohemians, though, took advantage of Wenceslaus' opposition to Gregory. By the Decree of Kutn\u00e1 Hora () on 18 January 1409, the king subverted the university constitution by granting the Bohemian masters three votes. Only a single vote was left for all other three \"nations\" combined, compared to one vote per each \"nation\" before. The result of this \"coup\" was the emigration of foreign (mostly German) professors and students, founding the University of Leipzig in May 1409. Before that, in 1408, the university had about 200 doctors and Masters, 500 bachelors, and 30,000 students ; it now lost a large part of this number, accounts of the loss varying from 5000 to 20,000 including 46 professors.\nIn the autumn of 1409, Hus was elected rector of the now Czech-dominated rump university. The university became a bastion of the Hussite movement and mostly a regional institution. Soon, in 1419, the faculties of theology and law disappeared, and only the faculty of arts remained in existence.\nProtestant academy (1419\u20131622).\nThe faculty of arts became a centre of the Hussite movement, and the chief doctrinal authority of the Utraquists. No degrees were given in the years 1417\u201330; at times there were only eight or nine professors. Emperor Sigismund, son of Charles IV, took what was left into his personal property and some progress was made. The emperor Ferdinand I called the Jesuits to Prague and in 1562 they opened an academy\u2014the \"Clementinum\". From 1541 till 1558 the Czech humanist Mattheus Collinus (1516\u20131566) was a professor of Greek language. Some progress was made again when the emperor Rudolph II took up residence in Prague. In 1609 the obligatory celibacy of the professors was abolished. In 1616 the Jesuit Academy became a university. (It could award academic degrees.)\nJesuits were expelled 1618\u20131621 during the early stages of the Thirty Years' War, which was started in Prague by anti-Catholic and anti-Imperial Bohemians. By 1622, the Jesuits had a predominant influence over the emperor. An Imperial decree of 19 September 1622 gave the Jesuits supreme control over the entire school system of Bohemia, Moravia, and Silesia. The last four professors at the Carolinum resigned, and all of the Carolinum and nine colleges went to the Jesuits. The right of handing out degrees, of holding chancellorships, and of appointing the secular professors was also granted to the Jesuits.\nCharles-Ferdinand University (1622\u20131882).\nCardinal Ernst Adalbert of Harrach actively opposed the union of the university with another institution, the withdrawal of the archiepiscopal right to the chancellorship, and prevented the drawing up of the Golden Bull for the confirmation of the grant to Jesuits. Cardinal Ernst funded the \"Collegium Adalbertinum\", and in 1638, Emperor Ferdinand III limited the teaching monopoly enjoyed by the Jesuits. He took from them the rights, properties and archives of the Carolinum making the university once more independent under an imperial protector. During the last years of the Thirty Years' War the Charles Bridge in Prague was courageously defended by students of the Carolinum and Clementinum. Since 1650, those who received any degrees took an oath to maintain the \"Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin\", which has been renewed annually.\nOn 23 February 1654, emperor Ferdinand III merged \"Carolinum\" and \"Clementinum\" and created a single university with four faculties:Charles-Ferdinand University (). \"Carolinum\" had at that time only the faculty of arts, as the only faculty surviving the period of the Hussite Wars. The dilapidated Carolinum was rebuilt in 1718 at the expense of the state.\nThe rebuilding and the bureaucratic reforms of universities in the Habsburg monarchy in 1752 and 1754 deprived the university of many of its former privileges. In 1757 a Dominican and an Augustinian were appointed to give theological instruction. However, there was a gradual introduction of enlightened reforms, and this process culminated at the end of the century when even non-Catholics were granted the right to study. On 29 July 1784, German replaced Latin as the language of instruction. For the first time Protestants were allowed, and soon after Jews. The university acknowledged the need for a Czech language and literature chair. Emperor Leopold II established it by a courtly decree on 28 October 1791. On 15 May 1792, scholar and historian Franz Martin Pelzel was named the professor of the chair. He started his lectures on 13 March 1793.\nIn the revolution of 1848, German and Czech students fought for the addition of the Czech language at the Charles-Ferdinand University as a language of lectures. Due to the demographic changes of the 19th century, Prague ceased to have a German-language majority around 1860. By 1863, 22 lecture courses were held in Czech, the remainder (out of 187) in German. In 1864, Germans suggested the creation of a separate Czech university. Czech professors rejected this because they did not wish to lose the continuity of university traditions.\nSplit into Czech and German universities.\nIt soon became clear that neither the German-speaking Bohemians nor the Czechs were satisfied with the bilingual arrangement that the university had established after the revolutions of 1848. The Czechs also refused to support the idea of the reinstitution of the 1349 student nations, instead declaring their support for the idea of keeping the university together, but dividing it into separate colleges, one German and one Czech. This would allow both Germans and Czechs to retain the collective traditions of the university. German-speakers, however, quickly vetoed this proposal, preferring a pure German university: they proposed to split Charles-Ferdinand University into two separate institutions.\nAfter long negotiations, Charles-Ferdinand was divided into German Charles-Ferdinand University () and Czech Charles-Ferdinand University () by an act of the Cisleithanian Imperial Council, which Emperor Franz Joseph sanctioned on 28 February 1882. Each section was entirely independent of the other, and enjoyed equal status. The two universities shared medical and scientific institutes, the old insignia, aula, library, and botanical garden, but common facilities were administered by the German University. The first rector of the Czech University became V\u00e1clav Vladivoj Tomek.\nIn 1890, the Royal and Imperial Czech Charles-Ferdinand University had 112 teachers and 2,191 students and the Royal and Imperial German Charles-Ferdinand University had 146 teachers and 1,483 students. Both universities had three faculties; the Theological Faculty remained the common until 1891, when it was divided as well. In the winter semester of 1909\u201310 the German Charles-Ferdinand University had 1,778 students; these were divided into: 58 theological students, for both the secular priesthood and religious orders; 755 law students; 376 medical; 589 philosophical. Among the students were about 80 women. The professors were divided as follows: theology, 7 regular professors, 1 assistant professor, 1 docent; law, 12 regular professors, 2 assistant professors, 4 docents; medicine, 15 regular professors, 19 assistant, 30 docents; philosophy, 30 regular professors, 8 assistant, 19 docents, 7 lecturers. The Czech Charles-Ferdinand University in the winter semester of 1909\u201310 included 4,319 students; of these 131 were theological students belonging both to the secular and regular clergy; 1,962 law students; 687 medical; 1,539 philosophical; 256 students were women. The professors were divided as follows: theological faculty, 8 regular professors, 2 docents; law, 12 regular, 7 assistant professors, 12 docents; medicine, 16 regular professors, 22 assistant, 24 docents; philosophy, 29 regular, 16 assistant, 35 docents, 11 lecturers.\nThe high point of the German University was the era preceding the First World War, when it was home to world-renowned scientists such as physicist and philosopher Ernst Mach, Moritz Winternitz and Albert Einstein. In addition, the German-language students included prominent individuals such as future writers Max Brod, Franz Kafka, and Johannes Urzidil. The \"Lese- und Redehalle der deutschen Studenten in Prag\" (\"Reading and Lecture Hall of the German students in Prague\"), founded in 1848, was an important social and scientific centre. Their library contained in 1885 more than 23,519 books and offered 248 scientific journals, 19 daily newspapers, 49 periodicals and 34 papers of entertainment. Regular lectures were held to scientific and political themes.\nEven before the Austro-Hungarian Empire was abolished in late 1918, to be succeeded by Czechoslovakia, Czech politicians demanded that the insignia of 1348 were exclusively to be kept by the Czech university. The \"Act No. 197/1919 Sb. z. a n.\" established the Protestant Theological Faculty, but not as a part of the Charles University. (That changed on 10 May 1990, when it finally became a faculty of the university.)\nIn 1920, the so-called ' (No. 135/1920 Sb. z. a n.) was issued, named for its initiator, professor of physiology Franti\u0161ek Mare\u0161, which determined that the Czech university was to be the successor to the original university. Dropping the Habsburg name \"Ferdinand\", it designated itself Charles University, while the German university was not named in the document, and then became officially called the German University in Prague ().\nIn 1921, the German-speaking Bohemians considered moving their university to Liberec (), in northern Bohemia. In 1930, about 42,000 inhabitants of Prague spoke German as their native language, while millions lived in northern, southern and western Bohemia, in Czech Silesia and parts of Moravia near the borders with Austria and Germany.\nIn October 1932, after Naegle's death, the Czechs started again a controversy over the insignia. Ethnic tensions intensified, although some professors of the German University were members of the Czechoslovak government. Any agreement to use the insignia for both the universities was rejected. On 21 November 1934, the German University had to hand over the \"insigniae\" to the Czechs. The German University senate sent a delegation to Minister of Education Kr\u010dm\u00e1\u0159 to protest the writ. At noon on 24 November 1934, several thousand students of the Czech University protested in front of the German university building. The Czech rector Karel Domin gave a speech urging the crowd to attack, while the outnumbered German students tried to resist. Under the threat of violence, on 25 November 1934 rector Otto Grosser (1873\u20131951) handed over the \"insigniae\". These troubles of 1934 harmed relations between the two universities and nationalities.\nThe tide turned in 1938 when, following the Munich Agreement, German troops entered the border areas of Czechoslovakia (the so-called Sudetenland), as did Polish and Hungarian troops elsewhere. On 15 March 1939 Germans forced Czecho-Slovakia to split apart and the Czech lands were occupied by Nazis as the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. \"Reichsprotektor\" Konstantin von Neurath handed the historical \"insigniae\" to the German University, which was officially renamed \"Deutsche Karls-Universit\u00e4t in Prag\". On 1 September 1939 the German University was subordinated to the Reich Ministry of Education in Berlin and on 4 November 1939 it was proclaimed to be \"Reichsuniversit\u00e4t\".\nOn 28 October 1939, during a demonstration, Jan Opletal was shot. His burial on 15 November 1939 became another demonstration. On 17 November 1939 (now marked as International Students' Day) the Czech University and all other Czech institutions of higher learning were closed, remaining closed until the end of the War. Nine student leaders were executed and about 1,200 Czech students were interned in Sachsenhausen and not released until 1943. About 20 or 35 interned students died in the camp. On 8 May 1940 the Czech University was officially renamed Czech Charles University () by government regulation 188/1940 Coll.\nWorld War II marks the end of the coexistence of the two universities in Prague. In 1945 the insignia of the university (the rector's chain, the scepters of the individual faculties, the university seal and also the founding documents and other historical documents) were stolen by the Nazis. None of these historical objects have been found to this day.\nPresent-day university (since 1945).\nAlthough the university began to recover rapidly after 1945, it did not enjoy academic freedom for long. After the communist coup in 1948, the new regime started to arrange purges and repress all forms of disagreement with the official ideology, and continued to do so for the next four decades, with the second wave of purges during the normalization period in the beginning of the 1970s.\nOnly in the late 1980s did the situation start to improve; students organized various activities and several peaceful demonstrations in the wake of the Revolutions of 1989 abroad. This initiated the Velvet Revolution in 1989, in which both students and faculty of the university played a large role. V\u00e1clav Havel, a writer, dramatist and philosopher, was recruited from the independent academic community and appointed president of the republic in December 1989.\nSince 26 January 2022, Prof. Milena Kr\u00e1l\u00ed\u010dkov\u00e1 is the first woman rector of the Charles University.\nOn 21 December 2023, a mass shooting occurred at the university. 14 people were killed, and 25 others were wounded. The 24-year-old perpetrator then killed himself. Before the shooting at the university, the perpetrator killed his father at their home in Hostou\u0148. He was also identified as the person responsible for the murders of a man and his two-month-old daughter in Kl\u00e1novice Forest six days earlier on 15 December.\nLocation.\nCharles University does not have one joint campus. The University's faculties are located in Prague, Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9, Plze\u0148 and Brand\u00fds nad Labem. The Institute for Language and Preparatory Studies has teaching centres in Dobru\u0161ka, Mari\u00e1nsk\u00e9 L\u00e1zn\u011b, Pod\u011bbrady and Zahr\u00e1dky (near \u010cesk\u00e1 L\u00edpa). The Charles University Archive and Depository are located in Le\u0161etice.\nUniversity buildings and compounds are scattered throughout Prague \u2013 in the Old Town (Faculty of Arts, Faculty of Humanities), the New Town (First Faculty of Medicine, Faculty of Science, Faculty of Mathematics and Physics), B\u0159evnov (halls of residence), Veleslav\u00edn (Faculty of Physical Education and Sport), Libe\u0148 (Faculty of Mathematics and Physics, halls of residence), and Hostiva\u0159 (halls of residence, sports centre).\nThe oldest building at Charles University \"Karolinum\" is situated in the Old Town of Prague and constitutes the university's center. It is the seat of the rector and of the Academic Senate of Charles university. Carolinum is also the venue for official academic ceremonies such as matriculations or graduations. It was dedicated to the University by the Czech King Wenceslas IV in 1386 and has been serving the University ever since.\nIts academic publishing house is Karolinum Press and the university also operates several museums. The Botanical Garden of Charles University, maintained by its Faculty of Science, is located in the New Town.\nOrganisation.\nFaculties.\nAmong the four original faculties of Charles University were: the faculty of law, medicine, art (philosophy) and theology (now catholic theology). Today, Charles University consists of 17 faculties, based primarily in Prague, two houses in Hradec Kr\u00e1lov\u00e9 and one in Plze\u0148.\nRankings.\nCharles University ranks 1st in Eastern Europe in the QS World University Rankings and 246 globally. It was ranked in 2013 as 201\u2013300 best in the World among 500 universities evaluated by Academic Ranking of World Universities, 351\u2013400 among 400 universities in Times Higher Education World University Rankings and 485th in CWTS Leiden Ranking of 500 universities. Earlier rankings are presented in following table.\nAccording to Academic Ranking of World Universities, Charles University ranked in the upper 1.5 percent of the world's best universities in 2011. It came 201st to 300th out of 17,000 universities worldwide. It is the best university in the Czech Republic and one of the best universities in Central and Eastern Europe only overtaken by Russian Lomonosov Moscow State University at 74th place. It was placed 31st in Times \"BRICS &amp; Emerging Economies Rankings 2014\" (after 23rd University of Warsaw).\nRector of the University V\u00e1clav Hampl said in 2008: \"I am very pleased that Charles University achieved such a great success and I would like to thank to all who have contributed to it. An overwhelming majority of schools with a similar placement like Charles University have incomparably better financing and therefore this success is not only a reflection of professional qualities of our academics but also their personal efforts and dedication.\"\nSubject rankings.\nAccording to the QS Subject Ranking, Charles University is among the 150 best universities in the world in geography and linguistics.\nInternational cooperation.\nCharles University is a founding member of the 4EU+European University Alliance along with the University of Heidelberg, Sorbonne University and the University of Warsaw and a member of the Coimbra Group, the International Association of Universities and the International Forum of Public Universities. It participates on Erasmus Programme and has numerous inter-university agreements with the universities around the world. In Germany, Charles University cooperates, among others, with the Goethe University Frankfurt. Both cities are linked by a long-lasting partnership agreement.\nFootnotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38092", "revid": "18953656", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38092", "title": "Don Giovanni", "text": "1787 opera by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart\nDon Giovanni (; K. 527; full title: , literally \"The Rake Punished, or Don Giovanni\") is an opera in two acts with music by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart to an Italian libretto by Lorenzo Da Ponte. Its subject is a centuries-old Spanish legend about a libertine as told by playwright Tirso de Molina in his 1630 play \"El burlador de Sevilla y convidado de piedra\". It is a \"dramma giocoso\" blending comedy, melodrama and supernatural elements (although the composer entered it into his catalogue simply as \"opera buffa\"). It was premiered by the Prague Italian opera at the National Theatre (of Bohemia), now called the Estates Theatre, on 29 October 1787. \"Don Giovanni\" is regarded as one of the greatest operas of all time and has proved a fruitful subject for commentary in its own right; critic Fiona Maddocks has described it as one of Mozart's \"trio of masterpieces with librettos by Da Ponte\".\nComposition and premiere.\nThe opera was commissioned after the success of Mozart's trip to Prague in January and February 1787. The subject may have been chosen because the sub-genre of Don Juan opera originated in that city. Lorenzo Da Ponte's libretto is based on Giovanni Bertati's for the opera \"Don Giovanni Tenorio\", which premiered in Venice early in 1787. In two aspects he copied Bertati: by opening with the Commendatore's murder and by avoiding mention of Seville (for Bertati the setting was Villena, Spain; Da Ponte simply writes \"city in Spain\").\nThe opera was supposed to premiere on 14 October 1787 for Archduchess Maria Theresa of Austria's visit, but it was not ready in time and \"Le nozze di Figaro\" was substituted. Mozart recorded its completion, finally, on 28 October, the night before the premiere (29 October).\nThe opera was rapturously received, as was often true of Mozart's work in Prague. The \"Prager Oberpostamtzeitung\" reported, \"Connoisseurs and musicians say that Prague has never heard the like\", and \"the opera ... is extremely difficult to perform.\" The \"Provincialnachrichten\" of Vienna reported, \"Herr Mozart conducted in person and was welcomed joyously and jubilantly by the numerous gathering.\"\nScoring.\nThe score calls for double woodwinds, two horns, two trumpets, three trombones (at the end of Act II only, alto, tenor, bass), timpani, basso continuo for the recitatives, and the usual string section. The composer also specified occasional special musical effects. For the ballroom scene at the end of the first act, Mozart calls for two onstage ensembles to play separate dance music in synchronization with the pit orchestra, each of the three groups playing in its own metre (a 3/4 minuet, a 2/4 contradanse and a fast 3/8 peasant dance), accompanying the dancing of the principal characters. In act 2, Giovanni is seen to play the mandolin, accompanied by pizzicato strings. In the same act, two of the Commendatore's interventions (\" and \") are accompanied by a wind chorale of oboes, clarinets, bassoons, and trombones (with cellos and basses playing from the string section).\nRevision for Vienna.\nMozart also supervised the Vienna premiere of the work, which took place on 7 May 1788. For this production, he wrote two new arias with corresponding recitatives \u2013 Don Ottavio's aria \" (K.\u00a0540a, composed on 24 April for the tenor Francesco Morella), Elvira's aria \" (K.\u00a0540c, composed on 30 April for the soprano Caterina Cavalieri) \u2013 and the duet between Leporello and Zerlina \" (K.\u00a0540b, composed on 28 April). He also made some cuts in the Finale in order to make it shorter and more incisive, the most important of which is the section where Anna and Ottavio, Elvira, Zerlina and Masetto, Leporello reveal their plans for the future (\"). In order to connect \"\" (\"It must have been the ghost she met\") directly to the moral of the story \"\" (\"This is the end which befalls to evildoers\"), Mozart composed a different version of \"\" (\"So the wretch can stay down there with Proserpina and Pluto!\"). These cuts are very seldom performed in theatres or recordings.\nLater performance traditions.\nThe opera's final ensemble was generally omitted until the early 20th century, a tradition that apparently began very early on. According to the 19th-century Bohemian memoirist Wilhelm Kuhe, the final ensemble was only presented at the first performance in Prague, then never heard again during the original run. It does not appear in the Viennese libretto of 1788; thus the ending of the first performance in Vienna without the ensemble as depicted in the film \"Amadeus\" may be an accurate portrayal. Nonetheless, the final ensemble is almost invariably performed in full today.\nModern productions sometimes include both the original aria for Don Ottavio, \", and its replacement from the first production in Vienna that was crafted to suit the capabilities of the tenor Francesco Morella, \". Elvira's \" is usually retained as well. The duet \" and the whole accompanying scene involving Zerlina and Leporello from the Viennese version is almost never included.\nAlthough the same singer played both Masetto and the Commendatore roles in both the Prague and Vienna premieres, in modern-day productions, the roles are typically taken by different singers (unless limited by such things as finance or rehearsal time and space). The final scene's chorus of demons after the Commendatore's exit gives the singer time for a costume change before entering as Masetto for the sextet, though not much time.\nInstrumentation.\nThe instrumentation is:\nSynopsis.\nDon Giovanni, a young, arrogant, and sexually promiscuous nobleman, abuses and outrages everyone else in the cast until he encounters something he cannot kill, beat up, dodge, or outwit.\nAct 1.\nThe overture begins with a thundering D minor cadence, followed by a short sequence which leads into a light-hearted D major allegro.\n\"The garden of the Commendatore\"\nLeporello, Don Giovanni's servant, grumbles about his demanding master and daydreams about being free of him (\"\" \u2013 \"Night and day I slave away\"). He is keeping watch while Don Giovanni is in the Commendatore's house attempting to seduce the Commendatore's daughter, Donna Anna. Don Giovanni enters the garden from inside the house, pursued by Donna Anna. Don Giovanni is masked and Donna Anna tries to hold him and to unmask him, shouting for help. (Trio: \"\" \u2013 \"Do not hope, unless you kill me, that I shall ever let you run away!\"). He breaks free and she runs off as the Commendatore enters the garden. The Commendatore blocks Don Giovanni's path and forces him to fight a duel. Don Giovanni kills the Commendatore with his sword and escapes with Leporello. Donna Anna, returning with her fianc\u00e9, Don Ottavio, is horrified to see her father lying dead in a pool of his own blood. She makes Don Ottavio swear vengeance against the unknown murderer. (Duet: \"\" \u2013 \"Ah, swear to avenge that blood if you can!\")\n\"A public square outside Don Giovanni's palace\"\nLeporello tells Don Giovanni that he (Giovanni) is leading a rotten life; Don Giovanni reacts angrily. They hear a woman (Donna Elvira) singing of having been abandoned by her lover, on whom she is seeking revenge (\"\" \u2013 \"Ah, who could ever tell me\"). Don Giovanni starts to flirt with her, but it turns out he is the former lover she is seeking. The two recognise each other and she reproaches him bitterly. He shoves Leporello forward, ordering him to tell Donna Elvira the truth about him, and then hurries away.\nLeporello tells Donna Elvira that Don Giovanni is not worth her feelings for him. He is unfaithful to everyone; his conquests include 640 women and girls in Italy, 231 in Germany, 100 in France, 91 in Turkey, but in Spain, 1,003 (\"Madamina, il catalogo \u00e8 questo\" \u2013 \"My dear lady, this is the catalogue\"). In a frequently cut recitative, Donna Elvira vows vengeance.\n\"The open country\"\nA marriage procession with Masetto and Zerlina enters. Don Giovanni and Leporello arrive soon after. Don Giovanni is immediately attracted to Zerlina, and he attempts to remove the jealous Masetto by offering to host a wedding celebration at his castle. On realising that Don Giovanni means to remain behind with Zerlina, Masetto becomes angry (\"\" \u2013 \"I understand! Yes, my lord!\") but is forced to leave. Don Giovanni and Zerlina are soon alone and he immediately begins his seductive arts (Duet: \"L\u00e0 ci darem la mano\" \u2013 \"There we will entwine our hands\").\nDonna Elvira arrives and thwarts the seduction (\"\" \u2013 \"Flee from the traitor!\"). She leaves with Zerlina. Don Ottavio and Donna Anna enter, plotting vengeance on the still unknown murderer of Donna Anna's father. Donna Anna, unaware that she is speaking to her attacker, pleads for Don Giovanni's help. Don Giovanni, relieved that he is unrecognised, readily promises it, and asks who has disturbed her peace. Before she can answer, Donna Elvira returns and tells Donna Anna and Don Ottavio that Don Giovanni is a false-hearted seducer. Don Giovanni tries to convince Don Ottavio and Donna Anna that Donna Elvira is insane (Quartet: \"\" \u2013 \"Don't trust him, oh sad one\"). As Don Giovanni leaves, Donna Anna suddenly recognises him as her father's murderer and tells Don Ottavio the story of his intrusion, claiming that she was deceived at first because she was expecting a night visit from Don Ottavio himself, but managed to fight Don Giovanni off after discovering the impostor (long recitative exchange between Donna Anna and Don Ottavio). She repeats her demand that he avenge her and points out that he will be avenging himself as well (aria: \"Or sai chi l'onore Rapire a me volse\" \u2013 \"Now you know who wanted to rob me of my honour\"). In the Vienna version, Don Ottavio, not yet convinced (Donna Anna having only recognised Don Giovanni's voice, not seen his face), resolves to keep an eye on his friend (\"\" \u2013 \"On her peace my peace depends\").\nLeporello informs Don Giovanni that all the guests of the peasant wedding are in Don Giovanni's house and that he distracted Masetto from his jealousy, but that Zerlina, returning with Donna Elvira, made a scene and spoiled everything. However, Don Giovanni remains cheerful and tells Leporello to organise a party and invite every girl he can find. (Don Giovanni's \"Champagne Aria\": \"\" \u2013 \"Till they are tipsy\"). They hasten to his palace.\n\"A garden outside Don Giovanni's palace\"\nZerlina follows the jealous Masetto and tries to pacify him (\"\" \u2013 \"Beat, O beat me, handsome Masetto\"), but just as she manages to persuade him of her innocence, Don Giovanni's voice from offstage startles and frightens her. Masetto hides, resolving to see for himself what Zerlina will do when Don Giovanni arrives. Zerlina tries to hide from Don Giovanni, but he finds her and attempts to continue the seduction, until he stumbles upon Masetto's hiding place. Confused but quickly recovering, Don Giovanni reproaches Masetto for leaving Zerlina alone, and returns her temporarily to him. Don Giovanni then leads both offstage to his ballroom. Three masked guests \u2013 the disguised Don Ottavio, Donna Anna, and Donna Elvira \u2013 enter the garden. From a balcony, Leporello invites them to his master's party. They accept the invitation and Leporello leaves the balcony. Alone, Don Ottavio and Donna Anna pray for protection, Donna Elvira for vengeance (Trio: \"\" \u2013 \"May the just heavens protect us\").\n\"Don Giovanni's ballroom\"\nAs the merriment, featuring three separate chamber orchestras on stage, proceeds, Leporello distracts Masetto by dancing with him, while Don Giovanni leads Zerlina offstage to a private room and tries to assault her. When Zerlina screams for help, Don Giovanni drags Leporello onstage from the room, accuses Leporello of assaulting Zerlina himself, and threatens to kill him. The others are not fooled. Don Ottavio produces a pistol and points it at Don Giovanni, and the three guests unmask and declare that they know all. But despite being denounced and menaced from all sides, Don Giovanni remains calm and escapes \u2013 for the moment.\n\"Outside Donna Elvira's house\"\nAct 2.\nLeporello threatens to leave Don Giovanni, but his master calms him with a peace offering of money (Duet: \"Eh via buffone\" \u2013 \"Go on, fool\"). Wanting to seduce Donna Elvira's maid, and believing that she will trust him better if he appears in lower-class clothes, Don Giovanni orders Leporello to exchange cloak and hat with him. Donna Elvira comes to her window (Trio: \"Ah taci, ingiusto core\" \u2013 \"Ah, be quiet unjust heart\"). Seeing an opportunity for a game, Don Giovanni hides and sends Leporello out in the open wearing Don Giovanni's cloak and hat. From his hiding place Don Giovanni sings a promise of repentance, expressing a desire to return to her and threatening to kill himself if she does not take him back, while Leporello poses as Don Giovanni and tries to keep from laughing. Donna Elvira, convinced, descends to the street. Leporello, continuing to pose as Don Giovanni, leads her away to keep her occupied while Don Giovanni serenades her maid with his mandolin. (\"Deh, vieni alla finestra\" \u2013 \"Ah, come to the window\").\nBefore Don Giovanni can complete his seduction of the maid, Masetto and his friends arrive, looking for Don Giovanni in order to kill him. Don Giovanni poses as Leporello (whose clothes he is still wearing) and joins the posse, pretending that he also hates Don Giovanni. After cunningly dispersing Masetto's friends (Don Giovanni aria: \"Met\u00e0 di voi qua vadano\" \u2013 \"Half of you go this way. the others, go that way\"), Don Giovanni takes Masetto's weapons away, beats him up, and runs off, laughing. Zerlina arrives and consoles the bruised and battered Masetto (\"Vedrai carino\" \u2013 \"You'll see, dear one\").\n\"A dark courtyard\"\nLeporello abandons Donna Elvira. (Sextet: \"Sola, sola in buio loco\" \u2013 \"All alone in this dark place\"). As he tries to escape, he bumps into Don Ottavio and Donna Anna. Zerlina and Masetto also enter the scene. Everyone mistakes Leporello for Don Giovanni, whose clothes he is still wearing. They surround Leporello and threaten to kill him. Donna Elvira tries to protect the man who she thinks is Don Giovanni, claiming him as her husband and begging the others to spare him. Leporello takes off Don Giovanni's cloak and reveals his true identity. He begs for mercy and, seeing an opportunity, runs off (Leporello aria: \"Ah piet\u00e0 signori miei\" \u2013 \"Ah, have mercy, my lords\"). Don Ottavio is now convinced that Don Giovanni murdered Donna Anna's father (the deceased Commendatore). He swears vengeance (\"Il mio tesoro\" \u2013 \"My treasure\" \u2013 though in the Vienna version this was cut).\nIn the Vienna production of the opera, Zerlina follows Leporello and recaptures him. Threatening him with a razor, she ties him to a stool. He attempts to sweet-talk her out of hurting him. (Duet: \"Per queste tue manine\" \u2013 \"For these hands of yours\"). Zerlina goes to find Masetto and the others; Leporello escapes again before she returns. This scene, marked by low comedy, is rarely performed today. Also in the Vienna production, Donna Elvira is still furious at Don Giovanni for betraying her, but she also feels sorry for him. (\"Mi trad\u00ec quell'alma ingrata\" \u2013 \"That ungrateful wretch betrayed me\").\n\"A graveyard with the statue of the Commendatore\"\nDon Giovanni wanders into a graveyard. Leporello arrives and the two reunite. Leporello tells Don Giovanni of his brush with danger, and Don Giovanni laughingly taunts him, saying that he took advantage of his disguise as Leporello by trying to seduce one of Leporello's girlfriends. The voice of the statue interrupts and warns Don Giovanni that his laughter will not last beyond sunrise. At the command of his master, Leporello reads the inscription upon the statue's base: \"Here am I waiting for revenge against the scoundrel who killed me\" (\"Dell'empio che mi trasse al passo estremo qui attendo la vendetta\"). The servant trembles, but Don Giovanni scornfully orders him to invite the statue to dinner, and threatens to kill him if he does not. Leporello makes several attempts to invite the statue to dinner, but is too frightened to complete the invitation (Duet: \"O, statua gentilissima\" \u2013 \"Oh most noble statue\"). Don Giovanni invites the statue to dinner himself. Much to his surprise, the statue nods its head and responds affirmatively.\n\"Donna Anna's room\"\nDon Ottavio pressures Donna Anna to marry him, but she thinks it is inappropriate so soon after her father's death. He accuses her of being cruel, and she assures him that she loves him, and is faithful (\"Non mi dir\" \u2013 \"Tell me not\").\n\"Don Giovanni's chambers\"\nDon Giovanni revels in the luxury of a great meal, served by Leporello, and musical entertainment during which the orchestra plays music from popular (at the time) late-18th-century operas: \"O quanto un s\u00ec bel giubilo\" from Vicente Mart\u00edn y Soler's \"Una cosa rara\" (1786), \"Come un agnello\" from Giuseppe Sarti's \"Fra i due litiganti il terzo gode\" (1782), and finally \"Non pi\u00f9 andrai\" from Mozart's own \"The Marriage of Figaro\" (1786). Leporello comments that he is all too familiar with the final tune () \u2013 likely a joke understandable for the original audience, as Felice Ponziani, who sang Leporello's part at the premiere, also sang Figaro's part (including \"Non pi\u00f9 andrai\") earlier in Prague. (Finale \"Gi\u00e0 la mensa \u00e8 preparata\" \u2013 \"Already the table is prepared\"). Donna Elvira enters, saying that she no longer feels resentment against Don Giovanni, only pity for him. (\"L'ultima prova dell'amor mio\" \u2013 \"The final proof of my love\"). Don Giovanni, surprised, asks what she wants, and she begs him to change his life. Don Giovanni taunts her and then turns away, praising wine and women as the \"support and glory of humankind\" (). Hurt and angry, Donna Elvira gives up and leaves. Offstage, she screams in sudden terror. Don Giovanni orders Leporello to see what has upset her; when he does, he also cries out, and runs back into the room, stammering that the statue has appeared as promised. An ominous knocking sounds at the door. Leporello, paralyzed by fear, cannot answer it, so Don Giovanni opens it himself, revealing the statue of the Commendatore. With the rhythmic chords of the overture, now reharmonized with diabolic diminished sevenths accompanying the Commendatore (\"Don Giovanni! A cenar teco m'invitasti\" \u2013 \"Don Giovanni! You invited me to dine with you\"), the statue asks if Don Giovanni will now accept his invitation to dinner. Don Giovanni brazenly accepts, and shakes the statue's proffered hand, only to collapse as he is overcome by sudden chills. The statue offers him a final chance to repent as death draws near, but Don Giovanni adamantly refuses. The statue disappears and Don Giovanni cries out in pain and terror as he is surrounded by a chorus of demons, who carry him down to Hell. Leporello, watching from under the table, also cries out in fear.\nDonna Anna, Don Ottavio, Donna Elvira, Zerlina, and Masetto arrive, searching for the villain. They find instead Leporello hiding under the table, shaken by the supernatural horror he has witnessed. He assures them that no one will ever see Don Giovanni again. The remaining characters announce their plans for the future: Donna Anna and Don Ottavio will marry when Donna Anna's year of mourning is over; Donna Elvira will withdraw from society for the rest of her life; Zerlina and Masetto will finally go home for dinner; and Leporello will go to the tavern to find a better master.\nThe concluding ensemble delivers the moral of the opera \u2013 \"Such is the end of the evildoer: the death of a sinner always reflects his life\" (\"Questo \u00e8 il fin di chi fa mal, e de' perfidi la morte alla vita \u00e8 sempre ugual\"). As mentioned above, productions for over a century \u2013 beginning with the original run in Prague \u2013 customarily omitted the final ensemble, but it frequently reappeared in the 20th century and productions of the opera now usually include it. The return to D major and the innocent simplicity of the last few bars conclude the opera.\nRecordings.\nPaul Czinner directed a filming of the Salzburg Festival presentation in 1954.\nA screen adaptation was directed by Joseph Losey in 1979 with Ruggero Raimondi in the leading part.\nCultural influence.\nThe Danish philosopher S\u00f8ren Kierkegaard wrote a long essay in his book \"Enten \u2013 Eller\" in which he argues, writing under the pseudonym of his character \"A\", that \"among all classic works \"Don Giovanni\" stands highest.\" Charles Gounod wrote that Mozart's \"Don Giovanni\" is \"a work without blemish, of uninterrupted perfection.\" The finale, in which Don Giovanni refuses to repent, has been a captivating philosophical and artistic topic for many writers including George Bernard Shaw, who in \"Man and Superman\" parodied the opera (with explicit mention of the Mozart score for the finale scene between the Commendatore and Don Giovanni). Gustave Flaubert called \"Don Giovanni\", along with \"Hamlet\" and the sea, \"the three finest things God ever made.\" E. T. A. Hoffmann also wrote a short story derived from the opera, \"Don Juan\", in which the narrator meets Donna Anna and describes Don Juan as an aesthetic hero rebelling against God and society.\nIn some Germanic and other languages, Leporello's \"Catalogue Aria\" provided the name \"Leporello list\" for pamphlets, as used for brochures, photo albums, computer printouts and other continuous stationery.\nPlaywright Peter Shaffer used \"Don Giovanni\" for a pivotal plot point in his play \"Amadeus\", a fictional biography of its composer. In it, Antonio Salieri notices how Mozart composed the opera while tortured by the memory of his imposing, deceased father Leopold, and uses the information to psychologically torture Mozart even further.\n\"Don Giovanni\" and other composers.\nThe sustained popularity of \"Don Giovanni\" has resulted in extensive borrowings and arrangements of the original. The most famous and probably the most musically substantial is the operatic fantasy, \"R\u00e9miniscences de Don Juan\" by Franz Liszt. The minuet from the finale of act 1 (\"Signor, guardate un poco\"), transcribed by Moritz Moszkowski, also makes an incongruous appearance in the manuscript of Liszt's Fantasy on Themes from Mozart's \"Figaro\" and \"Don Giovanni\", and Sigismond Thalberg uses the same minuet, along with \"\", in his , Op.\u00a042. Thalberg also included a piano arrangement of \"Il mio tesoro\" in his \", Op. 70. This minuet was also used for sets of variations for piano by Franz Xaver Wolfgang Mozart (Op. 2), Fanny H\u00fcnerwadel and J\u00e1nos Fusz (Op. 10, the latter for four hands). \"\" also makes an appearance in the Klavier\u00fcbung of Ferruccio Busoni, under the title (Variation study after Mozart). Schumann included a piano arrangement of \"Vedrai carino\" in his , which was originally intended for his \"Album for the Young\", whereas Muzio Clementi wrote piano variations on Zerlina's other aria, \"Batti, batti\". Johann Wilhelm Wilms took a theme from the duet \"O, statua gentilissima\" for his set of piano variations. Chopin wrote Variations on \"L\u00e0 ci darem la mano\" (the duet between Don Giovanni and Zerlina) for piano and orchestra. Beethoven and Danzi also wrote variations on the same theme. And Beethoven, in his \"Diabelli Variations\", cites the beginning of the opera \"\" in variation 22. Cipriani Potter wrote piano variations on \"Fin ch'han dal vino\", Op. 2 (1816). The turkeys in Chabrier's \"Ballade des gros dindons\" (1889) finish each verse imitating the mandolin accompaniment of the Serenade.\nPyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky always regarded \"Don Giovanni\" \u2013 and its composer \u2013 with awe. In 1855, Mozart's original manuscript had been purchased in London by the mezzo-soprano Pauline Viardot, who was the teacher of Tchaikovsky's one-time unofficial fianc\u00e9e D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Art\u00f4t (whom Viardot may have persuaded not to go through with her plan to marry the composer). Viardot kept the manuscript in a shrine in her Paris home, where it was visited by many people. Tchaikovsky visited her when he was in Paris in June 1886, and said that when looking at the manuscript, he was \"in the presence of divinity\". So it is not surprising that the centenary of the opera in 1887 would inspire him to write something honouring Mozart. Instead of taking any themes from \"Don Giovanni\", however, he took four lesser known works by Mozart and arranged them into his fourth orchestral suite, which he called \"Mozartiana\". The baritone who sang the title role in the centenary performance of \"Don Giovanni\" in Prague that year was Mariano Padilla y Ramos, the man D\u00e9sir\u00e9e Art\u00f4t married instead of Tchaikovsky.\nMichael Nyman's popular, short band piece \"In Re Don Giovanni\" (1981, with later adaptations and revisions) is constructed on a prominent 15-bar phrase in the accompaniment to Leporello's catalogue aria.\nIn addition to instrumental works, allusions to \"Don Giovanni\" also appear in a number of operas: Nicklausse of Offenbach's \"The Tales of Hoffmann\" sings a snatch of Leporello's \"\", and Rossini quotes from the same aria in the duettino between Selim and Fiorilla following the former's \"cavatina\" in act 1 of \"Il turco in Italia\".\nRam\u00f3n Carnicer's opera \"Don Giovanni Tenorio\" (1822) is a peculiar reworking of Mozart's opera to adapt it to Rossinian fashion. It comprises new music by Carnicer on a new text (e.g. the first half of act 1), new music on Da Ponte's text (e.g. Leporello's aria) or on a mixture of both (e.g. the new trio for the scene in the cemetery); the whole collated with extensive quotations or entire sections borrowed directly from Mozart (e.g. Finale 1 and Finale 2, and even some music from \"Le nozze di Figaro\"), though usually slightly reworked and re-orchestrated.\nNotes and references.\nNotes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources"}
{"id": "38093", "revid": "47312632", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38093", "title": "Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas", "text": "1870 novel by Jules Verne\nTwenty Thousand Leagues Under the Seas () is a science fiction adventure novel by the French writer Jules Verne. It is considered a classic within its genres and world literature. It was originally serialised from March 1869 to June 1870 in Pierre-Jules Hetzel's French fortnightly periodical, the . A deluxe octavo edition, published by Hetzel in November 1871, included 111 illustrations by Alphonse de Neuville and \u00c9douard Riou. \nIt was widely acclaimed on its release, and remains so; it is regarded as one of the premier adventure novels and one of Verne's greatest works, along with \"Around the World in Eighty Days\", \"Journey to the Center of the Earth\" and \"Michael Strogoff\". Its depiction of Captain Nemo's submarine, \"Nautilus\", is regarded as ahead of its time, as it accurately describes many features of modern submarines, which in the 1860s were comparatively primitive vessels. Verne was inspired by a model of the French submarine \"Plongeur\", which he saw at the in 1867.\nTitle.\nThe title refers to the distance travelled under the various seas, not the depth: 20,000 metric leagues (80,000\u00a0km, over 40,000 nautical miles), nearly twice the circumference of the Earth.\nPlot.\nIn 1866 ships of various nationalities sight a mysterious sea monster, which is speculated to be a gigantic narwhal. The United States federal government assembles an expedition in New York City to find and destroy the monster. Professor Pierre Aronnax, a French marine biologist and the story's narrator, is in town at the time and receives a last-minute invitation from the U.S. Government to join their expedition to find said monster. A Canadian whaler and master harpooner named Ned Land and Aronnax's faithful manservant, Conseil, are also among the participants.\nThe expedition leaves Brooklyn aboard the United States Navy frigate \"Abraham Lincoln,\" captained by Admiral Farragut. The ship travels south around Cape Horn into the Pacific Ocean. After a five-month search ending off Japan, the frigate locates and attacks the monster, which damages the ship's rudder. Aronnax and Land are hurled into the sea, and Conseil jumps in after them. They survive by climbing onto the \"monster\", which, they are startled to find, is a futuristic submarine. They wait on the deck until morning, when they are captured and introduced to its mysterious constructor and commander, Captain Nemo.\nThe rest of the novel describes the protagonists' adventures aboard the submarine \"Nautilus\", which was built in secrecy and now roams the seas, beyond the reach of governments. In self-imposed exile, Captain Nemo seems to have a dual motivation \u2014 a quest for scientific knowledge and a desire to escape terrestrial civilisation. Nemo explains that his submarine is electrically powered and can conduct advanced marine research; he also tells his new passengers that his secret existence means he cannot let them leave \u2014 they must remain on board permanently.\nThey visit many oceanic regions, some real and others fictional. The travellers view coral formations, sunken vessels from the Battle of Vigo Bay, the Antarctic ice barrier, the transatlantic telegraph cable and the legendary underwater realm of Atlantis. They even travel to the South Pole and are trapped in an upheaval of an iceberg on the way back, caught in a narrow gallery of ice from which they are forced to dig themselves out. The passengers also put on diving suits, hunt sharks and other marine fauna with air guns in the underwater forests of Crespo Island and attend an undersea funeral for a crewman who died during a mysterious collision experienced by \"Nautilus\". When the submarine returns to the Atlantic Ocean, a school of giant squid (\"devilfish\") attack it and kills another crewman.\nThe later pages suggest Captain Nemo went into undersea exile after his homeland was conquered and his family were slaughtered by a powerful imperialist nation. Following the episode of the devilfish, Nemo largely avoids Aronnax, who begins to side with Ned Land. Ultimately, \"Nautilus\" is attacked by a warship from the mysterious nation that has caused Nemo such suffering. Carrying out his quest for revenge, Nemo \u2014 whom Aronnax dubs an \"archangel of hatred\" \u2014 rams the ship below its waterline and sends it to the bottom, much to the professor's horror. Afterwards, Nemo kneels before a portrait of his deceased wife and children, then sinks into a deep depression.\nCircumstances aboard the submarine change drastically: watches are no longer kept, and the vessel wanders about aimlessly. Ned becomes so reclusive that Conseil fears for his wellbeing. One morning, he announces that they are in sight of land and have a chance to escape. Aronnax is more than ready to leave Captain Nemo, who now horrifies him, yet he is still drawn to the man. Fearing that Nemo's very presence could weaken his resolve, he avoids contact with him. Before their departure, the professor eavesdrops on Nemo and overhears him calling out in anguish, \"O almighty God! Enough! Enough!\" Aronnax immediately joins his companions as they carry out their escape plans, but as they board the submarine's skiff they realise \"Nautilus\" has seemingly blundered into the ocean's deadliest whirlpool, the Moskstraumen (more commonly known as the Maelstrom). They escape and find refuge on an island off the coast of Norway. The submarine's ultimate fate remained unknown until the events of \"The Mysterious Island\" (1875).\nThemes and subtext.\nCaptain Nemo's assumed name recalls Homer's epic poem the \"Odyssey\", when Odysseus encounters the monstrous Cyclops Polyphemus in the course of his wanderings. Polyphemus asks Odysseus his name, and Odysseus replies that it is Outis () 'no one', translated into Latin as \"Nemo\". Like Captain Nemo, Odysseus wanders the seas in exile (though only for ten years) and similarly grieves the tragic deaths of his crewmen.\nThe novel repeatedly mentions the U.S. Naval Commander Matthew Fontaine Maury, an oceanographer who investigated the winds, seas and currents, collected samples from the depths and charted the world's oceans. Maury was internationally famous, and Verne may have known of his French ancestry.\nThe novel alludes to other Frenchmen, including Jean-Fran\u00e7ois de Galaup, comte de Lap\u00e9rouse, the celebrated explorer whose two sloops of war vanished during a circumnavigational voyage; Jules Dumont d'Urville, a later explorer who found the remains of one of Lap\u00e9rouse's ships; and Ferdinand de Lesseps, builder of the Suez Canal and nephew of the sole survivor of Lap\u00e9rouse's ill-fated expedition. \"Nautilus\" follows in the footsteps of these men: it visits the waters where Lap\u00e9rouse's vessels disappeared; it enters Torres Strait and becomes stranded there, as did d'Urville's ship, the \"Astrolabe\"; and it passes beneath the Suez Canal via a fictional underwater passage connecting the Red Sea and the Mediterranean Sea.\nIn possibly its most famous episode, the battle with a school of giant squid, one of the monsters captures a crew-member. Reflecting on the battle in the next chapter, Aronnax writes: \"To convey such sights, it would take the pen of our most renowned poet, Victor Hugo, author of \"The Toilers of the Sea\".\" A bestselling novel in Verne's day, \"The Toilers of the Sea\" also features a threatening cephalopod: a labourer battles with an octopus, believed by critics to be symbolic of the Industrial Revolution. Certainly, Verne was influenced by Hugo's novel, and, in creating this variation on its octopus encounter, he may have intended the symbol to also take in the Revolutions of 1848.\nOther symbols and themes pique modern critics. Margaret Drabble argues that Verne's masterwork also anticipated the ecology movement and influenced French avant-garde imagery. As for additional motifs, Captain Nemo repeatedly champions the world's persecuted and downtrodden. While in Mediterranean waters, he provides financial support to rebels resisting rule by the Ottoman Empire during the Cretan Revolt of 1866\u20131869, proving to Aronnax that he had not severed all relations with terrestrial mankind. In another episode, Nemo rescues an Indian pearl-hunter from a shark attack, then gives him a pouch full of pearls, more than the man could have gathered after years of his hazardous work. When asked why he would help a \"representative of that race from which he'd fled under the seas\", Nemo responds that the diver, as an \"East Indian\", \"lives in the land of the oppressed\".\nIndeed, the novel has an under-the-counter political vision, hinted at in the character and background of Captain Nemo himself. In the book's final form, Nemo says to professor Aronnax, \"That Indian, sir, is an inhabitant of an oppressed country; and I am still, and shall be, to my last breath, one of them!\" In the novel's initial drafts, the mysterious captain was a Polish nobleman, whose family and homeland were slaughtered by Russian forces during the Polish January Uprising of 1863. These specifics were suppressed during the editing stages at the insistence of Verne's publisher Pierre-Jules Hetzel, believed responsible by today's scholars for many modifications of Verne's original manuscripts. At the time France was a putative ally of the Russian Empire, hence Hetzel demanded Verne to suppress the identity of Nemo's enemy war, not only to avoid political complications but also to avert lower sales should the novel appear in Russian translation. Hence Professor Aronnax never discovers Nemo's origins.\nEven so, a trace remains of the novel's initial concept, a detail that may have eluded Hetzel: its allusion to an unsuccessful rebellion under a Polish hero, Tadeusz Ko\u015bciuszko, leader of the uprising against Russian and Prussian control in 1794; Ko\u015bciuszko mourned his country's prior defeat with the Latin exclamation \"Finis Poloniae!\" (\"Poland is no more!\").\nFive years later, and again at Hetzel's insistence, Captain Nemo was revived and revamped for another Verne novel, \"The Mysterious Island\". The novel changes the captain's nationality from Polish to Indian; in the book's final chapters, Nemo reveals that he is an Indian prince named Dakkar who was a descendant of Tipu Sultan, a prominent ruler of the Kingdom of Mysore, and participated in the Indian Rebellion of 1857, an ultimately unsuccessful uprising against Company rule in India. After the rebellion, which led to the death of his family, Nemo fled beneath the seas, then made a final reappearance in the later novel's concluding pages.\nVerne took the name \"Nautilus\" from one of the earliest successful submarines, built in 1800 by Robert Fulton, who also invented the first commercially successful steamboat. Fulton named his submarine after a marine mollusk, the chambered nautilus. As noted above, Verne also studied a model of the newly developed French Navy submarine \"Plongeur\" at the 1867 , which guided him in his development of the novel's \"Nautilus\".\nThe diving gear used by passengers on the \"Nautilus\" is presented as a combination of two existing systems: 1) the surface-supplied hardhat suit, which was fed oxygen from the shore through tubes; 2) a later, self-contained apparatus designed by Benoit Rouquayrol and Auguste Denayrouze in 1865. Their invention featured tanks fastened to the back, which supplied air to a facial mask via the first-known demand regulator. The diver didn't swim but walked upright across the seafloor. This device was called an \"a\u00e9rophore\" (Greek for \"air-carrier\"). Its air tanks could hold only thirty atmospheres, but Nemo claims that his futuristic adaptation could do far better: \"The \"Nautilus\"'s pumps allow me to store air under considerable pressure ... my diving equipment can supply breathable air for nine or ten hours.\"\nEnglish translations.\nIt was first translated into English in 1872 by Reverend Lewis Page Mercier. Mercier cut nearly a quarter of Verne's French text and committed hundreds of translating errors, sometimes drastically distorting Verne's original (including uniformly mistranslating the French \"scaphandre\"\u00a0\u2014 properly \"diving suit\"\u00a0\u2014 as \"cork-jacket\", following a long-obsolete usage as \"a type of lifejacket\"). Some of these distortions may have been perpetrated for political reasons, such as Mercier's omitting the portraits of freedom fighters on the wall of Nemo's stateroom, a collection originally including Daniel O'Connell amongst other international figures. Mercier's text became the standard English translation, and some later retranslations continued to recycle its mistakes, including mistranslating the title as \"...\u00a0\"under the Sea\"\", rather than \"...\u00a0\"under the Seas\"\".\nIn 1962 Anthony Bonner published a translation of it with Bantam Classics. This edition included an introduction by the American writer Ray Bradbury, comparing Captain Nemo to Captain Ahab of \"Moby-Dick\".\nA significant modern revision of Mercier's translation appeared in 1966, prepared by Walter James Miller and published by Washington Square Press. Miller addressed many of Mercier's errors in the volume's preface and restored a number of his deletions in the text. In 1976 Miller published \"The Annotated Jules Verne, Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Sea\" at the suggestion of the Thomas Y. Crowel Company editorial staff. The cover declared it \"The only completely restored and annotated edition\". In 1993, Miller collaborated with his fellow Vernian Frederick Paul Walter to produce \"The Completely Restored and Annotated Edition\", published in 1993 by the Naval Institute Press. Its text took advantage of Walter's unpublished translation, which Project Gutenberg later made available online.\nIn 1998 William Butcher issued a new, annotated translation with the title \"Twenty Thousand Leagues under the Seas\", published by Oxford University Press (). Butcher includes detailed notes, a comprehensive bibliography, appendices and a wide-ranging introduction studying the novel from a literary perspective. In particular, his original research on the two manuscripts studies the radical changes to the plot and to the character of Nemo urged on Verne by Hetzel, his publisher.\nIn 2010, Frederick Paul Walter issued a fully revised, newly researched translation, \"20,000 Leagues Under the Seas: A World Tour Underwater\". Complete with an extensive introduction, textual notes, and bibliography, it appeared in an omnibus of five of Walter's Verne translations titled \"Amazing Journeys: Five Visionary Classics\" and published by State University of New York Press ().\nIn 2017, David Coward issued a new translation published by Penguin Classics () with the title \"Twenty Thousand Leagues Under the Sea\", including a new introduction, notes, and a note on the text, using the 1871 Christian Chelebourg edition of the text as the basis for his translation. Coward also included 42 illustrations, which were published for the first time in the 'Collection Hetzel' in 1901.\nReception.\nThe science fiction writer Theodore L. Thomas criticized the novel in 1961, claiming that \"there is not a single bit of valid speculation\" in the book and that \"none of its predictions has come true\". He described its depictions of Nemo's diving gear, underwater activities, and the \"Nautilus\" as \"pretty bad, behind the times even for 1869 ... In none of these technical situations did Verne take advantage of knowledge readily available to him at the time.\" The notes to the 1993 translation point out that the errors Thomas notes were in Mercier's translation, not the original. Despite his criticisms, Thomas conceded: \"Put them all together with the magic of Verne's story-telling ability, and something flames up. A story emerges that sweeps incredulity before it\".\nIn 2023 Malaurie Guillaume presented Nemo as the first eco-terrorist or the first figure of ecological radicalism.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38094", "revid": "34209721", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38094", "title": "M551 Sheridan", "text": "American light tank\nThe M551 \"Sheridan\" AR/AAV (Armored Reconnaissance/Airborne Assault Vehicle) was a light tank developed by the United States and named after General Philip Sheridan, of American Civil War fame. It was designed to be landed by parachute and to swim across rivers. It was armed with the technically advanced but troublesome M81/M81 Modified/M81E1 152\u00a0mm gun/launcher, which fired both conventional ammunition and the MGM-51 Shillelagh guided anti-tank missile.\nThe M551 Sheridan entered service with the United States Army in 1967. At the urging of General Creighton Abrams, the U.S. Commander, Military Assistance Command Vietnam, at the time, the M551 was rushed into combat service in South Vietnam in January 1969. Later that year, M551s were deployed to units in Europe and South Korea. The Sheridan saw extensive combat in the Vietnam War from 1969 to 1973. However, problems with the platform became evident, particularly its poor survivability and reliability.\nBased on its experiences in Vietnam, the Army realized the shortcomings of the Sheridan, and after the war in 1975 began to eliminate the vehicle from its units in 1979. A modest fleet of vehicles remained in the 82nd Airborne Division and the National Guard. Various improvement programs were successfully undertaken to improve the Sheridan's reliability. Problems persisted with the 152\u00a0mm gun/launcher, and various efforts explored to replace it with a more conventional model. The Sheridan went on to serve in the invasion of Panama and the Gulf War. The Army sought to replace the Sheridan with the M8 Armored Gun System, but this was canceled in 1996, late in its development. The Sheridan was retired without a designated replacement in 1996. The Army acquired the M1128 mobile gun system to fulfill a similar requirement, but this was retired in 2022 due to operational issues and rising maintenance costs. The Army's last known light tank acquisition program was the Mobile Protected Firepower (MPF) also known as the M10 Booker, which have been canceled in 2025.\nA large number of Sheridans were retained in service at the National Training Center (NTC) at Fort Irwin, California and as Armor Officer Basic training at Armor Training Center, then located at Fort Knox, Kentucky. They worked as simulated Soviet armored opposition force (OPFOR) to train U.S. military units on simulated tank on tank armored combat to test on combat effectiveness in a desert environment. They were retired from the NTC in 2003.\nDevelopment.\nIn the immediate post-World War II era, the U.S. Army introduced the M41 Walker Bulldog into service to fill the role of a light tank. The lifespan of the M41 was fairly short. At 25 tons it was considered too heavy to be a true light tank, and had a rather short cruising range. Plans were started to build an even lighter replacement mounting the same gun, the T71 and T92. The T92 appeared to be the more promising of the two. As the prototypes were entering testing, information about the new Soviet PT-76 light tank became available. The PT-76 was amphibious, and soon there were demands that any U.S. light tank should be able to swim as well. The T92 could not be easily refitted for this role, so the Army canceled the program in 1958.\nIn January 1959, the first concept studies were initiated for the armored reconnaissance/airborne assault vehicle that would replace both the M41 and M56 Scorpion self-propelled gun. By October 1959, 12 proposals had been received by the Ordnance Tank Automotive Command. Two proposals were downselected in December: One from Cadillac Motor Car Division of General Motors Corporation, and a joint venture of AAI Corporation and Allis-Chalmers Manufacturing Company. Mockups of both proposals were evaluated in May 1960.\nThe AAI candidate had three crewmen, and weighed the closest to the 10-ton weight limit specified in the requirements. The Cadillac design was only slightly heavier, with four crew. The four-man turret of the Cadillac proposal was considered more effective than the three-man turret proposed by AAI. The weight limit was reset at 15 tons. In June 1960, Cadillac Motor Car Division signed a contract to develop their concept further, which was designated as the AR/AAV XM551. In August 1961, the Secretary of the Army approved the name \"Sheridan,\" after Major General Philip Sheridan.\nA test bed underwent operations at Cleveland Tank Plant in December 1961. The decision to use the 152\u00a0mm caliber XM81 gun-launcher instead of a more conventional gun was driven by the desire to save weight. The XM81 weighed about half as much as the 105\u00a0mm caliber M68, and could fire both conventional and missile rounds. Testing of the XM81 began at Erie Army Depot in late 1961.\nBy 1962, the Army realized that the MGM-51 Shillelagh missile system would not immediately be ready for the Sheridan, and so considered several alternative gun systems. These including conventional 76\u00a0mm, 90\u00a0mm and 105\u00a0mm options, as well as missile systems such as ENTAC and TOW. In March 1967, a 105\u00a0mm howitzer XM103E7 and then a 76\u00a0mm gun was installed in the turret of an M551 at Rock Island Arsenal. Neither configuration was adopted. The Army ultimately decided to arm the Sheridan with just 152\u00a0mm conventional rounds until the Shillelagh was more mature.\nThe first of 12 pilots was delivered in June 1962. Pilots 1\u20133 comprised the first generation. With the second-generation pilots 4\u20136, the band track was replaced with single-pin, link type tracks. An XM551 test bed turret with gun-launcher was mated to an M41 chassis, which began firing tests in August 1962 at Aberdeen Proving Ground. The third generation of pilots, starting with pilot 7, eliminated the water jet propulsion. Pilots 9\u201311 were delivered in 1964, and pilot 12 was delivered in February 1965.\nIn the 1960s the Army was also developing the MBT-70 main battle tank with West Germany. The U.S. Army no longer used the heavy, medium, and light tank classifications. In 1960, with the deactivation of its last heavy tank battalion (which used the M103 heavy tank), and the fielding of the new M60 series tank, the U.S. Army had adopted a main battle tank (MBT) doctrine; a single tank filling all combat roles. The U.S. Army still retained the M41 Walker Bulldog light tank in the Army National Guard, but other than the units undergoing the transitional process, the regular army consisted of MBTs. Fearing Congress would balk at funding two developmental tank programs, the Army chose to designate the Sheridan as an armored reconnaissance vehicle rather than a light tank. The Army also believed \"tank\" too much evoked the main battle tank, a different role altogether, so the new project was instead officially classified as an \"Armored Reconnaissance/Airborne Assault Vehicle.\"\nProduction.\nIn April 1965 the Army awarded a four-year $114.5 million contract to the Allison division of General Motors (GM) for the production of the M109 howitzer and the XM551 General Sheridan. Limited production was approved in May, and then classified as \"Standard A\" in May 1966. Production took place at the Cleveland Army Tank Automotive Plant. The first two production units were delivered to the Army in July. During development, the Marine Corps evaluated the Sheridan as a possible replacement for the M50 Ontos. The Corps determined that the Sheridan would be too costly.\nThe Sheridan entered service in June 1967 with 1st Battalion, 63rd Armor Regiment at Fort Riley. 2,426 Sheridans were planned. In the end, 1,662 Sheridans were built between 1966 and November 1970. The total cost of the M551 program was $1.3 billion. \nThe M81 gun had problems with cracks developing near the breech after repeated firing, a problem that was later tracked to the \"key\" on the missiles that ran in a slot cut into the barrel. Most field units were modified to help address the problem, but later the modified M81E1 was introduced with a shallower slot, along with a matching modification to the missile, that cured the problem. \nIn March 1969, after the Army invoked secrecy in declining to disclose program costs, a Government Accounting Office (GAO) official said that development costs had reached $1.3 billion. Congressman Samuel S. Stratton criticized Army officials for the program's high costs, and accused officials of concealing cost figures to cover up for their own \"bumbling ineptness\". A GAO report leaked in May 1969 revealed the Army had fast-tracked the program to avoid budgetary scrutiny, despite indications by May 1966 that the tank's caseless ammunition was prone to cooking off. The problem had since then been resolved by a compressed-air system that forced hot ammunition residue from the breech, the Army told Congress. The Army said the Sheridan had performed well enough that it was planning to send hundreds more. A Congressional report in July 1969 identified $1.2 billion wasted on the M60 and Sheridan. The report attributed several Vietnam War casualties to Sheridan design faults, and said that the tank had been wholly unready for combat there \"without extensive and costly retrofits.\"\nIn 1971, Frankford Arsenal awarded Hughes Aircraft Corporation a contract to begin producing the AN/VVG-1 laser rangefinder for the M551A1 upgrade.\nService history.\nVietnam War.\nThe U.S. Army staff in Washington had been recommending since 1966 to the commander of U.S. forces in South Vietnam, General Westmoreland, that the Sheridan should be deployed there. Since the main gun ammunition was not available, he argued that it was simply a $300,000 machine gun platform. By 1968, the new, or soon to be, U.S. commander in South Vietnam, General Creighton Abrams, had been notified that the 152\u00a0mm rounds were now available for the Sheridan. However, as General Abrams began to make preparations for the equipping of U.S. cavalry squadrons for the vehicle, the affected squadrons expressed their concerns that the new aluminum tanks were not only highly vulnerable to mines and anti-tank rocket fire, but they would not be as capable of \"jungle busting\" as the M48A3 medium tanks.\nIn late 1968, General Abrams met with Colonel George S. Patton IV \u2013 the son of World War II General Patton \u2013 commander of the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment (11th ACR), the only full regiment of cavalry in South Vietnam. When Abrams mentioned the cavalry's concerns over the new vehicle, Patton recommended that the Sheridans be combat tested by a divisional cavalry squadron as well as a squadron from his own regiment, as the squadrons had completely different missions.\nFirst deployment.\nThe first Sheridans arrived in South Vietnam in January 1969 and were accompanied by their factory representatives, instructors and evaluators as the new vehicles were issued to the 3rd Squadron, 4th Cavalry Regiment, and the 1st Squadron of the 11th ACR. By the end of 1970, there were more than 200 Sheridans in South Vietnam. They stayed in the field until the last U.S. armored cavalry unit, the 1st Squadron, 1st Cavalry Regiment prepared for re-deployment back to the United States in April 1972. By the end of its combat debut in 1972, the Sheridan had seen extensive action in the Vietnam War, being assigned to nearly all armored cavalry squadrons involved in that conflict.\nIn 1969, armored cavalry units (minus the 11th ACR, which retained its M48 tank companies) began replacing their M48 Patton tanks, which were normally transferred to the Army of South Vietnam. The opinions of crews on Vietnam-era M551s were mixed at best and assessments from senior commanders were often negative. This was due largely to the high loss rate of Sheridans and casualty rates among crews. Landmines and RPGs that would damage an M48 Patton tank, tended to destroy a Sheridan and either kill or wound most of its crew.\nA 1969 evaluation of the vehicles found that the M551 was employed in reconnaissance, night patrol and road clearing, accumulating 39,455 road miles and 520 combat missions, with a ready rate of 81.3 percent. Despite vulnerability to rockets and mines, it was judged worthy of applying modifications and equipping all cavalry squadrons with the Sheridan.\nFirst combat/first losses.\nIn addition to the problems presented by aluminum construction, the Sheridan had a defect that no other common armored vehicle possessed: it fired combustible-cased 152\u00a0mm main gun rounds. These rounds were \"fixed\", meaning that the projectile was firmly attached to the combustible-cased propellant charge, and if the projectile separated from the combustible-case during loading, which was not uncommon, the crewmen were instructed not to load the round. Sometimes, the combustible-cases and their charges remained on the turret floor due to the emergencies at the time, and additionally, all of the remaining serviceable 152\u00a0mm rounds were combustible-cased, and sleeved into a re-usable white nine-ply nylon bag, which was form-fitted to hold the combustible-case portion of the round. The white/silver-colored bag had a strap attached to the bottom, which the loader would grab and pull off prior to gently inserting the round into the breech. Once a mine or RPG-type weapon created an ignition source, smoke and fire became imminent, and it became a matter of Standing Operating Procedure to abandon the tank immediately. On 15 February 1969, just one month after the Sheridan's arrival in South Vietnam, an M551 from the 3/4th Cavalry detonated a 25-pound pressure-activated land mine, which ruptured its hull and ignited the combustible-case charges of the 152\u00a0mm rounds, resulting in a secondary explosion that destroyed the tank. In late 1969, nine Sheridans from the 4th Squadron, 12th Cavalry Regiment were fording a river near the DMZ, when three of the M551s triggered mines, completely destroying them. In March 1971, five Sheridans from the 11th ACR were lost in one day to RPG fire; all five vehicles burst into flames and were totally destroyed.\nPerformance.\nOver 200 Sheridans were shipped to Vietnam. The Sheridan was unpopular with American soldiers in Vietnam, mainly because of its perceived vulnerability. While the Sheridan brought superior firepower where it was used in lieu of the M113 ACAV, the Sheridan was a poor substitute for the better armored M48 Patton.\nThe Sheridan had several advantages: it did not get stuck in the mud as often as the 52-ton M48 did, nor did it throw its track off as often. The reliability of the engine system and gun of the tank was, however, not fully up to the task. Of 74 M551 sent to Vietnam in February 1969, by May there were recorded 16 serious mechanical faults, 41 failed shots, 140 defective ammunitions and 25 burned engines; the turret itself had 125 electric faults, several recoil system faults and instances of blown up guns. An additional problem was that much of the carried machine-gun ammunition had to be stored outside the turret as the internal space was extremely limited.\nAlthough an average M48 crew could fire as many as seventeen 90\u00a0mm rounds during a \"mad minute\" (60 seconds with all guns firing on command), the Sheridan was known to put out only two 152\u00a0mm rounds during the same time frame. The caseless rounds needed air vents to clear the gun tube and breech prior to loading another round, while the M48 breech block opened as the used case was ejected and closed as the new round was shoved in. The faster the loader, the faster the Patton's gun could be fired. For the Sheridan, the loader had to wait for the mechanism. After firing, the loader would have to wait, as the breech slowly opened rearward then turned downward. After another instrument indicated that all turret systems were still operational, the loader would gently push the 152\u00a0mm fixed round into the breech and watch the breech block slowly rotate upward, then forward into the breech, then again, wait for the lights.\nCombat field modifications.\nA common field modification was to mount a large steel shield, from the M113 Armored Cavalry Assault Vehicle, around the commander's 50-cal. (12.7\u00a0mm) gun, allowing it to be fired with some level of protection. This evolved into an \"armored birdcage\". Anti-mine armor kits composed of spaced aluminum and steel plates were applied to the hull bottom, although only covering from the front to halfway to the end. Later, steel plates were applied to hull sides above the front road wheels. \nChain-link fencing was applied over the front of the hull in Vietnam to counter rocket-propelled grenades.\nPost\u2013Vietnam War service.\nThe Army began to phase out the Sheridan in 1978, although at the time there was no real replacement. Nevertheless, the 82nd Airborne Division was able to keep them until 1996. The Sheridan was the only \"rapidly\" air-deployable tank in the inventory. Their units were later upgraded to the M551A1 TTS model, including a thermal sighting system for the commander and gunner.\nIn the early 1980s, the M551A1 was fitted with a visual modification kit to resemble Warsaw Pact vehicles from Soviet BMP-1, ZSU-23, T-55 to T-80s, at the National Training Center at Fort Irwin, California. These modified vehicles were used in part of the U.S. Army's Soviet opposition forces (OPFOR) by providing realistic ground training to U.S. military units about Soviet combat doctrine in a desert environment. Until their retirement in 2004, these OPFOR vehicles were deployed with the \"60th Guards Motor Rifle Division of the Krasnovian Army\".\nPanama.\nThe Sheridan's only air drop in combat occurred during the United States invasion of Panama (Operation Just Cause) in 1989, when 14 M551s were deployed with C Company, 3/73rd Armor, 82nd Airborne Division. Four M551s were secretly delivered to Howard Air Force Base in Panama aboard a C-5 Galaxy in November 1989, days before the invasion. They were attached to TF Bayonet (193rd Infantry Brigade), and attached down further to TF Gator. These Sheridans took part in the attack on the Comandancia, initially supported by fire from Quarry Heights, and later displacing forward into the city. As part of Team Armor, these Sheridans later provided support to JSOC elements as they secured high-value targets throughout Panama City. The remaining 10 Sheridans were delivered via C-141 low-velocity airdrop (LVAD) to Torrijos-Tocumen Airport some hours after H-hour. One of these was destroyed after its parachutes failed to deploy, while another was damaged. As of 2009, this marked the first and only combat air-drop of tanks in history.\nThe Sheridan was praised for its performance in Panama. A U.S. after-action report noted the Sheridan's \"extreme psychological effect on enemy forces\", who were apparently deterred from firing at U.S. forces reinforced by tanks.\nGulf War.\nIn the early days of Desert Shield, Sheridans were airlanded in Saudi Arabia before coalition heavy armor arrived by ship. The first Sheridans sent were the M551A1 model. The Army hastily sent 60 M551A1 TTS models with the thermal sight upgrade to replace the older models. The 3/73rd used the Sheridan as part of a flanking force in Operation Desert Storm, and saw tank-on-tank combat. Their role was limited to reconnaissance due to their age and light armor. It is likely that no more than six Shillelagh missiles were fired at Iraqi anti-tank guns or T-55s; this was the only occasion in which Shillelagh missiles were fired in anger, from the inventory of 88,000 missiles produced. Other than some overheating problems in the summer months of the buildup, the Sheridan suffered no mechanical breakdowns in combat and performed extremely well.\nAustralian trials.\nDuring 1967 and 1968 the Australian Army trialed two Sheridans to determine if the type met a requirement for light armored fighting vehicles to serve with the Royal Australian Armoured Corps newly formed cavalry regiments. The main trials took place in the tropical Innisfail area of north Queensland between January and June 1968. In January 1969 the Minister for the Army announced that Australia would not purchase any Sheridans as the tanks did not meet the Army's requirements. The main shortcoming revealed in the trials concerned the safety of the combustible case. The two Sheridans were returned to the U.S. Army in early 1969, and the Australian Army met its requirement by fitting turrets from Alvis Saladin armored cars to M113 armored personnel carriers.\nReplacement.\nIn 1977, TRADOC commander General Donn A. Starry met with Army Chief of Staff General Edward C. Meyer to convince him that the service should retire the Sheridan. Starry had commanded the 11th ACR in Vietnam, and knew the vehicle's shortcomings. Starry's arguments prevailed over those of Army Material Command commander General John R. Guthrie, a Sheridan defender, and Meyer agreed the Sheridan would be retired. The Army decided on the M60A1 as the service's interim successor until the M3 Bradley was ready. At the time, 567 Sheridans existed in USAREUR, 535 in the continental U.S., and 41 in the Pacific. The Army began converting units in Europe in 1978, and in the rest of the service by 1980. The Army sustained 140 Sheridans in the 82nd Airborne Division and the National Guard. Some Sheridans were kept in pre-positioned reserve.\nSeveral attempts to improve or replace the Sheridan have been made over the years since it was introduced. In 1976, DARPA (followed by TACOM) initiated the High Mobility/Agility (HIMAG) program. Several concepts were pursued, including the High Survivability Test Vehicle (Lightweight) and the Elevated Kinetic Energy (ELKE) gun system. The latter was trialed on a Sheridan hull in 1982. Following the Iran hostage crisis, the Rapid Deployment Force concept was pursued by both the Army and the Marine Corps. The Marine Corps initiated the Mobile Protected Weapon System (MPWS) program. In 1983, the Naval Surface Weapons Research Center Laboratory mounted a 105 mm caliber gun onto a Sheridan chassis. The Army initiated the Mobile Protected Gun program, and announced plans to modify Sheridans with 105\u00a0mm or 120\u00a0mm caliber guns. Neither program was pursued further; The Army project was canceled in 1985.\nFrom 1978 to 1980, under the joint Army\u2013Marine Corps Advanced Antiarmor Vehicle Evaluation (ARMVAL), TACOM rebuilt 10 Sheridans with the General Motors 8V53T diesel engine and improved suspension. The vehicle's armament and some armor was removed. The uprated engine and improved suspension improved the power-to-weight ratio and cross-country mobility. The Army also evaluated a fully stabilized Staget sighting system.\nIn 1987, the Army tested a version of the LAV-25, classified as the M1047. The Army determined that these were unsuitable for LAPES, and could not match the firepower of the Sheridan. Congress did not favor the M1047, though a few were deployed with the 3/73rd Armor in the Gulf War. The Marine Corps also developed the LAV-105 to meet its requirements, but later canceled that project as well. In 1992, the Army selected FMC Corporation to produce the Armored Gun System (AGS), later type classified as the M8 Armored Gun System. The AGS was canceled in 1996 by the Pentagon before it could enter production. United Defense proposed the AGS as its mobile gun system variant in the Interim Armored Vehicle program. In 2000, the Army instead selected a variant of the General Dynamics LAV III, later type-classified as the M1128 mobile gun system. The Mobile Gun System's problematic service history led to the vehicle's planned retirement in 2022.\nThe Army initiated development of a light tank acquisition program called Mobile Protected Firepower, selecting the General Dynamics Land Systems Griffin II in June 2022.. The U.S. Army took delivery of the first production vehicle in February 2024, and the vehicle has been type classified as the M10 Booker. In May of 2025 the acquisition of the M10 Booker was cancelled.\nDesign.\nArmament.\nThe 152\u00a0mm M81 gun-launcher that came to be used in the Sheridan was developed by Ford-Aeronutronic under a contract awarded by the Army in 1959. The gun's primary purpose was to fire the Shillelagh missile, but it could also fire more conventional combustible case ammunition. Two factors contributed to the selection of such a large-caliber gun. The Army desired a gun that would be capable of penetrating 150\u00a0mm of armor at 60 degrees, more than the 76\u00a0mm guns of the M41 or T92 were capable of. Secondly, the Shillelagh missile housed complicated electronics in addition to its warhead. As a consequence of the pairing of a large caliber gun and relatively lightweight vehicle, only low-velocity rounds would be compatible with the gun.\nA number of existing vehicles already mounted only ATGMs, or alternately recoilless rifles like the M50 Ontos, but these typically had limited utility in the infantry support role, or in the case of Ontos could not be reloaded from within the vehicle. The XM551 appeared to offer a superior balance between anti-tank and infantry support. The gun was ideal for infantry support. The large, low velocity gun could fire a large high explosive projectile or canister shot. In comparison, high-velocity anti-tank guns over-penetrated soft targets, while smaller caliber weapons could not carry as great a payload.\nThe Shillelagh missile system experienced problems with its missile guidance system early in its development. Two problems were identified. First, smoke from the rocket motor disrupted the infrared signal, necessary for guidance, between the tank and missile. A similar issue was identified during conditions where the sun was behind the turret. The first issue was resolved by changing the propellant to a composition that produced less smoke. This and other fixes were successful in resolving the problems with the missile guidance. In a year-long test that concluded in 1964, 58 out of 63 launches were successful.\nThe M81 fired combustible case conventional ammunition in addition to the Shillelagh missile. This solution was chosen rather than a conventional metal case because the Army desired that the Sheridan use the same ammunition as the MBT-70. In theory the combustible nitrocellulose case would be completely consumed during the firing of the ammunition. In practice, as often as 39 percent of the time, the case could absorb moisture from the air and only be partially consumed. This was dangerous to the crew as the smoldering case could prematurely detonate the next loaded round, as happened three times during five months of testing from November 1966 to March 1967. The cases could also break open, or swell so much with moisture that they could not be chambered. The Army started packaging the rounds in Neoprene bags to reduce the impact of moisture on the combustible case rounds. These were removed by the loader before the round was used. The combustible case was made more durable, and less likely to break, in subsequent generations of ammunition. An open-breech scavenging system using compressed air to blow any debris out of the gun was installed to resolve the issue of smoldering debris in the breech. This created problems of its own as the system could blow smoldering debris into the crew compartment. Recognizing the danger, the Army canceled production of this system. A closed breech system that solved the problem was put into production in 1968. Vehicles without this system, the first 700 off the production line were waylayed in storage pending the installation of this system. The gun with this new system installed was called the M81E1. Sheridans with this system installed carried 29 rounds of ammunition instead of 30 due to space constraints.\nThe second and even third road wheels could clear off the ground when the main gun fired high-explosive anti-tank rounds. The recoil was so violent that components such as the commander's birdcage armor and the searchlight were liable to come off. In the Vietnam War, firing the gun often adversely affected the delicate electronics, which were at the early stages of the transition to solid state devices, so the missile and its guidance system was omitted from vehicles deployed to South Vietnam. The expensive missile was fired in anger only in the Persian Gulf War's Operation Desert Storm, despite a production run of 88,000 units.\nAmmunition:\nThe commander's cupola was armed with a .50 caliber M2HB in a flexible anti-aircraft mount on the turret. Stowage capacity was for 1000 rounds\nEarly production Sheridans were armed with the 7.62\u00a0mm M73 coaxial machine gun. These were soon replaced with the M73E1 model and then the 7.62\u00a0mm M219 variant. The M73 and M219 were problematic designs and were replaced by the 7.62\u00a0mm M240 machine gun. Stowage capacity was for 3,000 rounds.\nEarly XM551 pilots had a .50 caliber spotting rifle, and pilot #7 had a 15mm XM122 spotting rifle. Development of spotting rifles was ended when it was decided to eventually install laser rangefinders on the production vehicle.\nArmor.\nThe vehicle had a steel turret and aluminum hull. Although the hull could deflect heavy machine gun fire of up to 12.7\u00a0mm AP, it was easily penetrated by rocket-propelled grenades (RPGs), which could destroy the vehicle if the spalling contacted the caseless main gun rounds. Like the M113 armored personnel carrier, it was vulnerable to mines.\nMobility.\nTactical mobility.\nThe Sheridan was powered by a large 300-hp (224\u00a0kW) Detroit Diesel 6V53T diesel engine, and a \"flat track\" (no support rollers). The XM551 thus had an excellent power-to-weight ratio and mobility, able to run at speeds up to 72\u00a0km/h (45\u00a0mph). However, the vehicle proved to be very noisy and early Sheridans were unreliable under combat conditions.\nSwimming capability was provided by a flotation screen. The front armor was overlain by folding \"surfboard\". This could be opened up into a sloping vertical surface in front of the driver, providing a bow of a boat hull, about level with the top of the turret. Fabric formed the rest of the water barrier, folding up from compartments lining the upper corner where the side met the top of the hull, and held up at the back with poles. The front of the \"hull\" was provided with a plastic window, but in practice it was found that water splashing onto it made it almost useless, and the driver instead usually had to take steering directions from the vehicle commander. The M2 Bradley adopted a similar solution, but dropped it with upgraded armor. The Sheridan could swim across a river that was about 46 m (50 yards) wide. Tanks in the Patton series (M46, M47, M48), as well as the M60 tank could not perform these operations; they would have to crawl along the river bottoms using snorkels. Not by design, it was found that the swimming hardware acted to reduce the effectiveness of RPG hits. Although it was rarely used in Vietnam, fording was frequently used during Reforger exercises in Europe.\nThe Sheridan was capable of being lifted by the Sikorsky CH-54 Tarhe heavy-lift helicopter.\nStrategic mobility.\nThe Sheridan could be rigged for low-velocity airdrop from C-130 (19,000\u00a0kg, 42,000\u00a0lb max load), C-141 aircraft (17,460\u00a0kg, 38,500\u00a0lb max load), and the C-5. Many films exist showing the Sheridan being pulled out of a C-130 Hercules transport by brake chutes and skidding to a stop. The Low Altitude Parachute Extraction System (LAPES) is a somewhat risky maneuver that allowed accurate delivery onto a field when landing is not possible, and the practice was stopped in the late 1990s. The tank was strapped down to a special pallet which absorbed most of the landing impact. The crew did not ride in the tank during extraction, but parachuted from another plane. On landing, they would go to their tank, release the lines, and drive it away.\nUsers.\nConsidered but rejected to replace the M50 Ontos under the Light Armored Combat Vehicleprogram. \nA Sheridan was evaluated from 1967 to 1968, but was rejected due to belief that it would fare poorly in \"Vietnam-type\" conflicts.\nDisplay vehicles.\nOn static display at the \nChaumont American legion post #243 in South Plainfield NJ.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38095", "revid": "50722049", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38095", "title": "MGM-51 Shillelagh", "text": "The Ford MGM-51 Shillelagh was an American anti-tank guided missile designed to be launched from a conventional gun (cannon). It was originally intended to be the medium-range portion of a short, medium, and long-range system for armored fighting vehicles in the 1960s and '70s to defeat future armor without an excessively large gun. Developing a system that could fire both shells and missiles reliably proved complex and largely unworkable for the United States.\nIt was originally developed for the experimental but never produced MBT-70 tank and served most notably as a primary weapon of the M551 Sheridan light tank, but the missile system was not issued to units serving in South Vietnam and was retired in 1996. It was also used on the M60A2 \"Starship\", which was phased out by 1981. Ultimately, very few of the 88,000 rounds produced were ever fired in combat, and the system was largely succeeded by the later BGM-71 TOW wire-guided missile, which was fielded in 1970. Western forces largely gave up on the gun-launched missile concept, although it remains in use on former Soviet Union designs.\nThe name of the system is that of a traditional wooden club from Ireland.\nBackground.\nWith the rapid increase in armor thickness during World War II, tanks were becoming increasingly able to survive rounds fired from even the largest of World War II-era anti-tank guns. A new generation of guns, notably the British 105\u00a0mm Royal Ordnance L7, were able to cope with newer tanks, but it appeared that in another generation the guns needed would be too large to be practical.\nTo overcome this potential difficulty, the US Army began to favor high-explosive anti-tank (HEAT), or shaped charge rounds in the 1950s. A shaped charge's penetration is not strongly dependent on the speed of the round, allowing rounds to be fired at much lower velocities, and thus from much lighter guns. They also work better at larger diameters, and a large-diameter low-velocity gun makes for an excellent assault gun that can be mounted on light or medium-weight vehicles. However, the low speed of the round makes it hard to aim over longer distances. The US Army sought to overcome this problem by developing guided missiles that had shaped charge warheads and were accurate beyond a few hundred yards.\nDevelopment.\nIn 1958, the Army thought that existing knowledge was sufficient to begin work on a guided missile with a HEAT warhead, and in June 1959 Sperry and Ford Aeronutronic were asked for designs to fill the shorter range role. Ford won the contract and started work on the XM13. The first test shots were fired in 1960, and limited production started in 1964. The missile was then known as the MGM-51A.\nThe basic system was quite advanced for its day. The missile body consisted of a long tube with fold-out fins at the extreme rear, which was propelled from the new M81 gun with a small charge strapped on the rear. Once clear of the gun, the fins popped open and the engine ignited. To keep the missile from spinning while in the gun due to the rifling, a small \"key\" fitted into a straight groove in the rifled gun. Aiming the missile was simple; the gunner simply kept his gunsight on the target, while electronics in the sighting system tracked the missile optically and sent corrections through an IR link, similarly to a TV remote control. In general the gunners were able to achieve excellent hit rates.\nThe main problem with the system is firing the main gun with a projectile vs. a missile. The recoil from the gun throws all the missile optics off, limiting the use of the M551 to either anti-tank or bunker buster.\nBecause the system was so advanced, the development of the Shillelagh was fraught with problems. Ford Aeronutronic underestimated the complexity of the task of designing a missile as advanced as this, and there were major problems with the propellant, igniter, tracker and infrared command link of the missile.\nUsers.\nSheridan.\nThe M81/MGM-51 was first installed on the M551 Sheridan. The Sheridan was a light aluminum-armored AFV designed to be air transportable and provide anti-tank support for airborne forces. In 1966, the US Army began pressing General Westmoreland to field the tank in South Vietnam, but he declined, stating that with no main gun ammunition, the \"Sheridan\" was basically nothing more than a $300,000 machine gun platform. In 1968, 152 mm main gun ammo became available, and the Sheridan was deployed to South Vietnam for combat operations in January 1969. Shillelagh missiles did not prove to be a problem in the Vietnam War: they were not used.\nThe Sheridans' 152 mm main guns were used in combat operations in Vietnam but proved troublesome. The combustible casings of the 152 mm caseless ammunition rounds did not burn completely, requiring a complicated and slow gas-driven scavenging system. They were also liable to detonate if the vehicle was hit. Firing the gun caused such a large recoil as to result in failures in the delicate missile firing electronics on the tank. These problems, in combination with the lack of suitable targets, resulted in their deployment without the complex missile system.\nThe Shillelagh was considerably larger than a conventional round, so only a small number could be carried. Typical loads consisted of only nine missiles and twenty M409 HEAT rounds for short-range use. In addition, the missile proved to have a very long \"minimum\" range. Due to the layout of the vehicle, the missile did not come into the sight of the gun/tracker system until it was from the vehicle, at which point it could start to be guided. Because of its maximum range of about , the system was only effective within a fairly narrow span of combat distances.\nWhile the maximum range of was acceptable, the Army thought that it could and should be improved. Ford received a contract to develop a longer range version in 1963, and returned a slightly larger design the next year. Test firing of the new MGM-51B started the next May, and production began in October 1966. Besides the changes to the missile, the gun was modified. In testing it was found that the key slot in the gun led to cracking after firing only a few shells. After further study, a version with a shallower slot and new barrel was selected, creating the M81E1/MGM-51C.\nThe new missile was about long, about in diameter, and weighed . It remained in production until 1971, by which time 88,000 had been produced, probably in anticipation of use by main battle tanks (below). Although the U.S. Army denied its usage, it is likely that six Shillelaghs were fired against Iraqi anti-tank guns and targets during Operation Desert Storm, the only usage of the weapon in anger.\nM60A2 \"Starship\".\nEven with its problems, the system had shown that it could be used by an airborne tank to destroy a main battle tank. The question of whether or not it could fill its original role as the main armament of all tanks was still open. The Army had originally started development of a low-profile turret with a short barrel for their existing M60 tanks in the 1960s, but did not place an order for delivery until 1971, when the main problems with the system had been resolved. The Shillelagh-equipped M60A2s entered service in 1974, but were hampered by reliability problems, and were phased out in 1980. The final revision of the M60A3 used the same 105 mm gun and turret as the M60A1.\nMBT-70.\nThe most ambitious project based on the Shillelagh was the MBT-70, an advanced US\u2013German tank. Design work on the MBT-70 began in 1963. The tank mounted a huge auto-loader turret on top of a very short chassis, so short that there was no room for a driver in the front hull. Instead of being located in the conventional position, the driver was seated in the turret with the other crew members, in a rotating cupola that kept him facing forward. The gun was a new longer-barreled design, the XM-150, which extended range and performance to the point where it was useful for sabot type rounds as well. However, the project dragged on, and in 1969 the estimated unit cost had risen fivefold. Germany pulled out of the project. The Army proposed a \"cut-down\" version of the system, the XM-803, but Congress cancelled it in November 1971. It initiated and issued funds to the M1 Abrams project the next month. The M1 design incorporated a conventional gun.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38099", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38099", "title": "Giovanni Battista Pergolesi", "text": "Italian composer, violinist and organist (1710\u20131736)\nGiovanni Battista Draghi (; 4 January 1710 \u2013 16 or 17 March 1736), usually referred to as Giovanni Battista Pergolesi (), was an Italian Baroque composer, violinist, and organist, leading exponent of the Baroque; he is considered one of the greatest Italian musicians of the first half of the 18th century and one of the most important representatives of the Neapolitan school.\nDespite his short life and few years of activity (he died of tuberculosis at the age of 26), he managed to create works of high artistic value and historical importance, such as \"La serva padrona\" (\"The Maid Turned Mistress\"), which played an important role in the development and diffusion of the opera buffa in Europe, \"L'Olimpiade\", considered \"one of the finest opere serie of the early eighteenth century\", and \"Stabat Mater\", which is among the most important works of sacred music of all time.\nBiography.\nBorn in Jesi in what is now the Province of Ancona (but was then part of the Papal States), he was commonly given the nickname \"Pergolesi\", a demonym indicating in Italian the residents of nearby Pergola, which was the birthplace of his ancestors. He studied music in Jesi under a local musician, Francesco Santi, before going to Naples in 1725, where he studied under Gaetano Greco and Francesco Feo among others. On leaving the conservatory in 1731, he won some renown by performing the oratorio in two parts \"La fenice sul rogo, o vero La morte di San Giuseppe\" (\"The Phoenix on the Pyre, or The Death of Saint Joseph\"), and the \"dramma sacro\" in three acts, \"Li prodigi della divina grazia nella conversione e morte di san Guglielmo duca d\u2019Aquitania\" (\"The Miracles of Divine Grace in the Conversion and Death of Saint William, Duke of Aquitaine\"). He spent most of his brief life working for aristocratic patrons such as Ferdinando Colonna, Prince of Stigliano, and Domenico Marzio Carafa, Duke of Maddaloni.\nPergolesi was one of the most important early composers of \"opera buffa\" (comic opera). His \"opera seria\", \"Il prigionier superbo\", contained the two-act \"buffa\" intermezzo, \"La serva padrona\" (\"The Servant Mistress\", 28 August 1733), which became a very popular work in its own right. When it was performed in Paris in 1752, it prompted the so-called Querelle des Bouffons (\"quarrel of the comic actors\") between supporters of serious French opera by the likes of Jean-Baptiste Lully and Jean-Philippe Rameau and supporters of new Italian comic opera. Pergolesi was held up as a model of the Italian style during this quarrel, which divided Paris's musical community for two years.\nAmong Pergolesi's other operatic works are his first opera seria \"La Salustia\" (1732), \"Lo frate 'nnamorato\" (\"The brother in love\", 1732, to a text in the Neapolitan language), \"L'Olimpiade\" (January 1735) and \"Il Flaminio\" (1735, to a text in the Neapolitan language). All his operas were premiered in Naples, apart from \"L'Olimpiade\", which was first given in Rome.\nPergolesi also wrote sacred music, including a Mass in F and three \"Salve Regina\" settings. The Lenten Hymn 'God of Mercy and Compassion' by Redemptorist priest Edmund Vaughan is most commonly set to a tune adapted by Pergolesi. It is his \"Stabat Mater\" (1736), however, for soprano, alto, string orchestra and basso continuo, which is his best-known sacred work. It was commissioned by the Confraternita dei Cavalieri di San Luigi di Palazzo, which presented an annual Good Friday meditation in honour of the Virgin Mary. Pergolesi's work replaced the one composed by Alessandro Scarlatti in 1724, but which was already perceived as \"old-fashioned,\" so rapidly had public tastes changed. While classical in scope, the opening section of the setting demonstrates Pergolesi's mastery of the Italian baroque \"durezze e ligature\" style, characterized by numerous suspensions over a faster, conjunct bassline. The work remained popular, becoming the most frequently printed musical work of the 18th century, and being arranged by a number of other composers, including Johann Sebastian Bach, who reorchestrated and adapted it for a non-Marian text in his cantata \"Tilge, H\u00f6chster, meine S\u00fcnden\" (\"Root out my sins, Highest One\"), BWV 1083.\nPergolesi wrote a number of secular instrumental works, including a violin sonata and a violin concerto. A considerable number of instrumental and sacred works once attributed to Pergolesi have since been shown to be misattributed. Many colourful anecdotes related by Pergolesi's 19th-century biographer Francesco Florimo were later revealed as hoaxes.\nPergolesi died on 16 or 17 March 1736 at the age of 26 in Pozzuoli from tuberculosis and was buried at the Franciscan monastery one day later.\nPergolesi was the subject of a 1932 Italian film biopic \"Pergolesi\". It was directed by Guido Brignone with Elio Steiner playing the role of the composer.\nLegend and posthumous fame.\nIn life, despite numerous awards, Pergolesi's fame was almost exclusively limited to the Neapolitan and Roman musical milieu. Nonetheless, he has influenced poets and artists who, during the 19th century, reinterpreted the composer in a romantic light.\nAs the historian and traveler Charles Burney wrote: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\u2026from the moment his death became known, all Italy manifested a keen desire to hear and possess his works. \nIndeed, the myth that was born throughout Europe around his life and work after his death represents an exceptional phenomenon in the history of music. Mozart will experience a similar phenomenon after his death. Thus, more than three hundred works have been attributed to him, of which only about thirty have been recognized by modern critics as true Pergolesi's compositions, a phenomenon which testifies the reputation of the composer.\nHowever, already in the middle of the 18th century Pergolesi was immensely better known than he had been in life: as mentioned, the numerous prints of his compositions began to spread throughout Europe. Several years after Pergolesi's death, the performance in Paris, in 1752, of \"La Serva padrona\" by an Italian comic opera troupe, triggered the famous Querelle des Bouffons between the defenders of French music and the supporters of the opera buffa. For Jean-Jacques Rousseau, in particular, the freshness and the grace of his music was the dazzling demonstration of the superiority of Italian opera over French lyric tragedy. The French composer Andr\u00e9 Gr\u00e9try said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Pergolesi was born, and the truth was known! Above all, the scarcity of tangible information about his life and works was fertile ground for the flourishing of imaginative anecdotes of all kinds. The doubt crept in that his tragic end was due not to natural causes but to poisoning by musicians envious of his talent. Apollonian beauty and numerous tragic loves were attributed to him.\nBecause of this extraordinary posthumous fame, the catalog of his works had an unpredictable destiny: during the 18th century and 19th century spread in Europe the practice of publishing under his name, for the purpose of speculation, any score having the musical style of the Neapolitan school. By the end of the 19th century, this led to over five hundred compositions in the \"informal\" catalog of his works. Contemporary studies have reduced Pergolesi's compositions to less than fifty, and of these only twenty-eight are the works whose paternity is considered sure.\nThere are still serious doubts about the attribution of various works, even among the best known, such as the \"Salve Regina in F minor\". Several music and record editions perpetuate these uncertainties about the authorship of various compositions, publishing in his name compositions certainly produced by other authors, such as the arias \"Se tu m'ami\" (certainly composed by the musicologist Alessandro Parisotti in the second half of the 19th century and included in one of his collections of baroque arias under the name of Pergolesi) and \"Tre giorni son che Nina\" (attributed to Vincenzo Legrenzio Ciampi) or the \"Magnificat\" in D major, composed by his teacher Francesco Durante.\nThe situation of extreme uncertainty that distinguishes the catalog of Pergolesi's works can be easily described with the case of \"Pulcinella\" by Igor Stravinsky: composed in 1920 as a tribute to the style of the composer from Jesi, the most recent music critics have established that of the 21 pieces used for this composition, as many as 11 are to be attributed to other authors (mainly Domenico Gallo), two are of dubious attribution and only eight (mostly taken from his operas) can be attributed to Pergolesi.\nPergolesi's works on screen.\nPergolesi's \"Salve Regina\" is a highlighted performance in the movie \"Farinelli\" (1994), in which Farinelli also performs \"Stabat Mater Dolorosa\" in the only duet. The first and last parts of Pergolesi's \"Stabat Mater\" were used in the soundtrack of the movie \"Jesus of Montreal (J\u00e9sus de Montr\u00e9al)\" (1989); the fifth part (\"Quis est homo\") was used in the soundtrack of the movie \"Smilla's Sense of Snow\" (1997); the last part was also used in the movie \"Amadeus\" (1984) and in the movie \"The Mirror\" (1975) by Andrei Tarkovsky. The film \"Cactus\" (1986) by the Australian director Paul Cox also features Pergolesi's \"Stabat Mater\" on the soundtrack. \"Nothing Left Unsaid\", a 2016 documentary on Gloria Vanderbilt and Anderson Cooper, used the last movement (\"Quando Corpus / Amen\") of Pergolesi's \"Stabat Mater\".\nWorks.\nThe standard catalogue of Pergolesi's works was produced by Marvin Paymer in 1977, ascribing a unique P number to each item so that \u2013 for example \u2013 the well-known \"Stabat Mater\" is P.77.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38102", "revid": "48442598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38102", "title": "Gender mender", "text": ""}
{"id": "38103", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38103", "title": "BMX", "text": "Cycle sport\nBMX, an abbreviation for bicycle motocross or bike motocross, is a cycle sport performed on BMX bikes, either in competitive BMX racing or freestyle BMX, or else in general street or off-road recreation.\nHistory.\nBMX began during the early 1970s in the United States when children began racing their bicycles on dirt tracks in southern California, inspired by the motocross stars of the time. The size and availability of the Schwinn Sting-Ray and other wheelie bikes made them the natural bike of choice for these races, since they were easily customized for better handling and performance. BMX racing was a phenomenon by the mid-1970s. Children were racing standard road bikes off-road around purpose-built tracks in California.\nThe motorcycle racing documentary \"On Any Sunday\" (1971) is generally credited with inspiring the movement nationally in the United States; its opening scene shows kids riding their Sting-Rays off-road. By the middle of that decade, the sport achieved critical mass, and manufacturers began creating bicycles designed especially for the sport.\nAmerican timeline.\nIn 1974, George E. Esser founded the National Bicycle League as a non-profit bicycle motocross sanctioning organization. Before they set up the NBL, Esser and his wife, Mary, sanctioned motorcycle races with the American Motocross Association (AMA). Their two sons, Greg and Brian, raced motorcycles, but also enjoyed riding and racing BMX with their friends. It was their sons' interest, and the lack of BMX organizations in the East, which prompted Esser to start the NBL in Florida.\nBy 1977, the American Bicycle Association (ABA) was organized as a national sanctioning body for the growing sport.\nFreestyle BMX is now one of the staple events at the annual Summer X Games Extreme Sports competition and the Etnies Backyard Jam, held primarily on the East and West coasts of the United States. The popularity of the sport has increased due to its relative ease and availability of places to ride and do tricks.\nBritish BMX explosion.\nIn the UK, BMX was a craze which took off in the early 1980s, specifically 1982 and 1983, when the BMX bike became the must-have bicycle for children and teenagers. The 1983 cult movie \"BMX Bandits\" helped establish the sport further worldwide. Previously a small niche area, BMX exploded at this time into the dominant bicycle for the younger rider, with older teenagers and even adults becoming known names through publications like \"BMX Bi-Weekly\", featuring big names like Tim March and Andy Ruffell. The shift to freestyle from racing came in 1985 with popular styling moving from chrome frames and contrasting components in black blue or red being the norm, to brightly coloured bikes in one colour only, including their magnesium alloy wheels and even matching tyres. Because BMX exploded into Britain's streets so suddenly, it was perhaps inevitable that it would implode with similar speed, when the children who rode the bikes left school and went to work. By 1986\u20131987, sales in the UK had dropped off dramatically, with the new all-terrain bike or mountain bike (another trend from mid-1970s California) taking off, soon to become the most popular adult bicycle.\nIn 1980, the first BMX track in the UK was founded in Landseer Park, Ipswich, by the Ipswich BMX Club, which still provides coaching and races on a regular basis.\nInternational development.\nIn April 1981, the International BMX Federation was founded, and the first world championships were held in 1982. Since January 1993, BMX has been integrated into the Union Cycliste Internationale.\nIn 2003, the International Olympic Committee made BMX a medal Olympic sport for the 2008 Summer Olympic Games in Beijing, China, and M\u0101ris \u0160trombergs (male, for Latvia) and Anne-Caroline Chausson (female, for France) became the first Olympic champions.\nMany talented BMX riders go on to other cycling sports like downhill, including Australian Olympian Jared Graves, Eric Carter and youth BMX racer Aaron Gwin. Multiple world and Olympic champion track sprinter Chris Hoy also began as a BMX rider.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38104", "revid": "9784415", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38104", "title": "LARP", "text": ""}
{"id": "38105", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38105", "title": "Potential infinity", "text": ""}
{"id": "38106", "revid": "1317509042", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38106", "title": "Actual and potential infinity", "text": "Concept in the philosophy of mathematics\nIn the philosophy of mathematics, the abstraction of actual infinity, also called completed infinity, involves infinite entities as given, actual and completed objects. Actual infinity is to be contrasted with potential infinity, in which an endless process (such as \"add 1 to the previous number\") produces a sequence with no last element, and where each individual result is finite and is achieved in a finite number of steps. This type of process occurs in mathematics, for instance, in standard formalizations of the notions of mathematical induction, infinite series, infinite products, and limits. \nThe concept of actual infinity was introduced into mathematics near the end of the 19th century by Georg Cantor with his theory of infinite sets, and was later formalized into Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory. This theory, which is presently commonly accepted as a foundation of mathematics, contains the axiom of infinity, which means that the natural numbers form a set (necessarily infinite). A great discovery of Cantor is that, if one accepts infinite sets, then there are different sizes (cardinalities) of infinite sets, and, in particular, the cardinal of the continuum of the real numbers is strictly larger than the cardinal of the natural numbers.\nAnaximander.\nThe ancient Greek term for the potential or improper infinite was \"apeiron\" (unlimited or indefinite), in contrast to the actual or proper infinite \"aphorismenon\". \"Apeiron\" stands opposed to that which has a \"peras\" (limit). These notions are today denoted by \"potentially infinite\" and \"actually infinite\", respectively.\nAnaximander (610\u2013546\u00a0BC) held that the\" apeiron\" was the principle or main element composing all things. Clearly, the 'apeiron' was some sort of basic substance. Plato's notion of the \"apeiron\" is more abstract, having to do with indefinite variability. The main dialogues where Plato discusses the 'apeiron' are the late dialogues \"Parmenides\" and the \"Philebus\".\nAristotle.\nAristotle sums up the views of his predecessors on infinity as follows:\n\"Only the Pythagoreans place the infinite among the objects of sense (they do not regard number as separable from these), and assert that what is outside the heaven is infinite. Plato, on the other hand, holds that there is no body outside (the Forms are not outside because they are nowhere), yet that the infinite is present not only in the objects of sense but in the Forms also.\" (Aristotle)\nThe theme was brought forward by Aristotle's consideration of the apeiron\u2014in the context of mathematics and physics (the study of nature):\n\"Infinity turns out to be the opposite of what people say it is. It is not 'that which has nothing beyond itself' that is infinite, but 'that which always has something beyond itself'.\" (Aristotle)Belief in the existence of the infinite comes mainly from five considerations:\nAristotle postulated that an actual infinity was impossible, because if it were possible, then something would have attained infinite magnitude, and would be \"bigger than the heavens.\" However, he said, mathematics relating to infinity was not deprived of its applicability by this impossibility, because mathematicians did not need the infinite for their theorems, just a finite, arbitrarily large magnitude.\nAristotle's potential\u2013actual distinction.\nAristotle handled the topic of infinity in \"Physics\" and in \"Metaphysics\". He distinguished between \"actual\" and \"potential\" infinity. \"Actual infinity\" is completed and definite, and consists of infinitely many elements. \"Potential infinity\" is never complete: elements can be always added, but never infinitely many.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"For generally the infinite has this mode of existence: one thing is always being taken after another, and each thing that is taken is always finite, but always different.\"\u2014\u200a\nAristotle distinguished between infinity with respect to addition and division.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But Plato has two infinities, the Great and the Small.\u2014\u200a\"As an example of a potentially infinite series in respect to increase, one number can always be added after another in the series that starts 1,2,3... but the process of adding more and more numbers cannot be exhausted or completed.\"With respect to division, a potentially infinite sequence of divisions might start, for example, 1, 1/2, 1/4, 1/8, 1/16, but the process of division cannot be exhausted or completed.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"For the fact that the process of dividing never comes to an end ensures that this activity exists potentially, but not that the infinite exists separately.\"\u2014\u200a\nAristotle also argued that Greek mathematicians knew the difference among the actual infinite and a potential one, but they \"do not need the [actual] infinite and do not use it\" (\"Phys.\" III 2079 29).\nScholastic, Renaissance and Enlightenment thinkers.\nThe overwhelming majority of scholastic philosophers adhered to the motto \"Infinitum actu non datur\". This means there is only a (developing, improper, \"syncategorematic\") \"potential infinity\" but not a (fixed, proper, \"categorematic\") \"actual infinity\". There were exceptions, however, for example in England.\nIt is well known that in the Middle Ages all scholastic philosophers advocate Aristotle's \"infinitum actu non datur\" as an irrefutable principle. (G. Cantor)\nActual infinity exists in number, time and quantity. (J. Baconthorpe [9, p.\u00a096])\nDuring the Renaissance and by early modern times the voices in favor of actual infinity were rather rare.\nThe continuum actually consists of infinitely many indivisibles (G. Galilei [9, p.\u00a097])\nI am so in favour of actual infinity. (G.W. Leibniz [9, p.\u00a097])\nHowever, the majority of pre-modern thinkers agreed with the well-known quote of Gauss:\nI protest against the use of infinite magnitude as something completed, which is never permissible in mathematics. Infinity is merely a way of speaking, the true meaning being a limit which certain ratios approach indefinitely close, while others are permitted to increase without restriction. (C.F. Gauss [in a letter to Schumacher, 12 July 1831])\nModern era.\nActual infinity is now commonly accepted in mathematics, although the term is no longer in use, being replaced by the concept of infinite sets. This drastic change was initialized by Bolzano and Cantor in the 19th century, and was one of the origins of the foundational crisis of mathematics.\nBernard Bolzano, who introduced the notion of \"set\" (in German: \"Menge\"), and Georg Cantor, who introduced set theory, opposed the general attitude. Cantor distinguished three realms of infinity: (1) the infinity of God (which he called the \"absolutum\"), (2) the infinity of reality (which he called \"nature\") and (3) the transfinite numbers and sets of mathematics.\nA multitude which is larger than any finite multitude, i.e., a multitude with the property that every finite set [of members of the kind in question] is only a part of it, I will call an infinite multitude. (B. Bolzano [2, p.\u00a06])\nAccordingly I distinguish an eternal uncreated infinity or absolutum, which is due to God and his attributes, and a created infinity or transfinitum, which has to be used wherever in the created nature an actual infinity has to be noticed, for example, with respect to, according to my firm conviction, the actually infinite number of created individuals, in the universe as well as on our earth and, most probably, even in every arbitrarily small extended piece of space. (Georg Cantor) (G. Cantor [8, p.\u00a0252])\nThe numbers are a free creation of human mind. (R. Dedekind [3a, p.\u00a0III])\nOne proof is based on the notion of God. First, from the highest perfection of God, we infer the possibility of the creation of the transfinite, then, from his all-grace and splendor, we infer the necessity that the creation of the transfinite in fact has happened. (G. Cantor [3, p.\u00a0400])\nCantor distinguished two types of actual infinity, the transfinite and the absolute, about which he affirmed:\nThese concepts are to be strictly differentiated, insofar the former is, to be sure, \"infinite\", yet capable of \"increase\", whereas the latter is \"incapable of increase\" and is therefore \"indeterminable\" as a mathematical concept. This mistake we find, for example, in \"Pantheism\". (G. Cantor, \"\u00dcber verschiedene Standpunkte in bezug auf das aktuelle Unendliche\", in \"Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen Inhalts\", pp. 375, 378)\nCurrent mathematical practice.\nActual infinity is now commonly accepted in mathematics under the name \"infinite sets\". Indeed, set theory has been formalized, for example, as the Zermelo\u2013Fraenkel set theory (ZF). One of the axioms of ZF is the axiom of infinity, that essentially says that the natural numbers form a set. \nAll mathematics has been rewritten in terms of ZF. In particular, lines, curves, all sort of spaces are commonly defined as the sets of their points. Infinite sets are so common that when one considers finite sets, this is generally explicitly stated, for example in finite geometry or finite fields.\nFermat's Last Theorem is a theorem that was stated in terms of elementary arithmetic, which has been proved only more than 350 years later. The original Wiles's proof of Fermat's Last Theorem, used not only the full power of ZF with the axiom of choice, but used implicitly a further axiom that implies the existence of very large sets. The requirement of this further axiom has been later dismissed, but infinite sets remain used in a fundamental way. This was not an obstacle for the recognition of the correctness of the proof by the community of mathematicians.\nOpposition from the Intuitionist school.\nThe mathematical meaning of the term \"actual\" in actual infinity is synonymous with definite, completed, extended or existential,&lt;ref name=\"Kleene 1952/1971:48.\"&gt;Kleene 1952/1971:48.&lt;/ref&gt; but not to be mistaken for \"physically existing\". The question of whether natural or real numbers form definite sets is therefore independent of the question of whether infinite things exist physically in nature.\nProponents of intuitionism, from Kronecker onwards, reject the claim that there are actually infinite mathematical objects or sets. Consequently, they reconstruct the foundations of mathematics in a way that does not assume the existence of actual infinities. On the other hand, constructive analysis does accept the existence of the completed infinity of the integers.\nFor intuitionists, infinity is described as \"potential\"; terms synonymous with this notion are \"becoming\" or \"constructive\". For example, Stephen Kleene describes the notion of a Turing machine tape as \"a linear 'tape', (potentially) infinite in both directions.\" To access memory on the tape, a Turing machine moves a \"read head\" along it in finitely many steps: the tape is therefore only \"potentially\" infinite, since\u200a\u2014\u200awhile there is always the ability to take another step\u200a\u2014\u200ainfinity itself is never actually reached.\nMathematicians generally accept actual infinities. Georg Cantor is the most significant mathematician who defended actual infinities. He decided that it is possible for natural and real numbers to be definite sets, and that if one rejects the axiom of Euclidean finiteness (that states that actualities, singly and in aggregates, are necessarily finite), then one is not involved in any contradiction.\nThe present-day conventional finitist interpretation of ordinal and cardinal numbers is that they consist of a collection of special symbols, and an associated formal language, within which statements may be made. All such statements are necessarily finite in length. The soundness of the manipulations is founded only on the basic principles of a formal language: term algebras, term rewriting, and so on. More abstractly, both (finite) model theory and proof theory offer the needed tools to work with infinities. One does not have to \"believe\" in infinity in order to write down algebraically valid expressions employing symbols for infinity.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38111", "revid": "33949980", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38111", "title": "Prophet Muhammad", "text": ""}
{"id": "38114", "revid": "7423183", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38114", "title": "Keep the Aspidistra Flying", "text": "1936 novel by George Orwell\nKeep the Aspidistra Flying, first published in 1936, is a socially critical novel by George Orwell. It is Orwell's third novel and fourth book. The novel is set in 1930s London. The main theme is Gordon Comstock's romantic ambition to defy worship of the money-god and status, and the dismal life that results.\nBackground.\nOrwell wrote the book in 1934 and 1935 while he was living at various locations near Hampstead in London, and drew on his experiences in these and the preceding few years. At the beginning of 1928 he lived in lodgings in Portobello Road from where he started his tramping expeditions, sleeping rough and roaming the poorer parts of London. At this time he wrote a fragment of a play in which the protagonist Stone needs money for a life-saving operation for his child. Stone would prefer to prostitute his wife rather than prostitute his artistic integrity by writing advertising copy.\nOrwell's early writings appeared in \"The Adelphi\", a left-wing literary journal edited by Sir Richard Rees, a wealthy and idealistic baronet who made Orwell one of his prot\u00e9g\u00e9s. The character of Ravelston, the wealthy publisher in \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\", has a lot in common with Rees. Ravelston is acutely self-conscious about his upper-class status and defensive about his unearned income. Comstock speculates that Ravelston receives nearly two thousand pounds a year after tax \u2014 a very comfortable sum in those days \u2014 and Rees, in a volume of autobiography published in 1963, wrote: \"I have never had the spending of much less than \u00a31,000 a year of unearned income, and sometimes considerably more. ... Before the war, this was wealth, especially for an unmarried man. Many of my socialist and intellectual friends were paupers compared to me ...\" In quoting this, Orwell's biographer Michael Shelden comments that \"One of these 'paupers' \u2014 at least in 1935 \u2014 was Orwell, who was lucky if he made \u00a3200 that year. ... He appreciated Rees's editorial support at the \"Adelphi\" and sincerely enjoyed having him as a friend, but he could not have avoided feeling some degree of resentment toward a man who had no real job but who enjoyed an income four or five times greater than his.\"\nIn 1932 Orwell took a job as a teacher in a small school in West London. From there he visited Burnham Beeches and other places in the countryside. There are allusions to Burnham Beeches and walks in the country in Orwell's correspondence with Brenda Salkeld and Eleanor Jacques at this time.\nIn October 1934, after Orwell had spent nine months at his parents' home in Southwold, his aunt Nellie Limouzin found him a job as a part-time assistant at Booklovers' Corner, a second-hand bookshop in Hampstead run by Francis and Myfanwy Westrope. The Westropes, who were friends of Nellie in the Esperanto movement, had an easygoing outlook and provided Orwell with comfortable accommodation at Warwick Mansions, Pond Street. He was job sharing with Jon Kimche, who also lived with the Westropes. Orwell worked at the shop in the afternoons, having the mornings free to write and the evenings to socialise. He was at Booklovers' Corner for fifteen months. In his essay \"Bookshop Memories\", published in November 1936, he recalled aspects of his time at the bookshop, and in \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\" \"he described it, or revenged himself upon it, with acerbity and wit and spleen\". \nIn their study of Orwell the writers Stansky and Abrahams remark upon the improvement on the \"stumbling attempts at female portraiture in his first two novels: the stereotyped Elizabeth Lackersteen in \"Burmese Days\" and the hapless Dorothy in \"A Clergyman's Daughter\",\" and contend that, in contrast, \"Rosemary is a credible female portrait\". Through his work in the bookshop Orwell was in a position to become acquainted with women, \"first as a clerk, then as a friend\", and found that, \"if circumstances were favourable, he might eventually embark upon a 'relationship' ... This, for Orwell the author and Blair the man, was the chief reward of working at Booklovers' Corner.\" In particular, Orwell met Sally Jerome, who was then working for an advertising agency (like Rosemary in \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\"), and Kay Ekevall, who ran a small typing and secretarial service that worked for the \"Adelphi\".\nBy the end of February 1935 Orwell had moved into a flat in Parliament Hill; his landlady, Rosalind Obermeyer, was studying at the University of London. It was through a joint party with his landlady that Orwell met his future wife, Eileen O'Shaughnessy. In August, Orwell moved into a flat in Kentish Town, which he shared with Michael Sayers and Rayner Heppenstall. Over this period he was working on \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\", and had two novels, \"Burmese Days\" and \"A Clergyman's Daughter\", published. At the beginning of 1936 Orwell was dealing with pre-publication issues for \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\" while he was touring the North of England collecting material for \"The Road to Wigan Pier\". The novel was published by Victor Gollancz Ltd on 20 April 1936.\nTitle.\nThe aspidistra is a hardy, long-living plant that has been used as a house plant in England, and which can grow to an impressive, even unwieldy size. It was especially popular in the Victorian era, in large part because it could tolerate not only weak sunlight but also the poor indoor air quality that resulted from the use of oil lamps and, later, coal gas lamps. Aspidistras had fallen out of favour by the 20th century, following the advent of electric lighting, but their use had been so widespread among the middle class that they had become a music hall joke, appearing in songs such as \"Biggest Aspidistra in the World\", of which Gracie Fields made a recording.\nIn the titular phrase Orwell uses the aspidistra, a symbol of the stuffiness of middle-class society, in conjunction with the locution \"to keep the flag (or colours) flying.\" The title can thus be interpreted as a sarcastic exhortation in the sense of \"Hooray for the middle class!\"\nOrwell also used the phrase in his previous novel \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" (1935), where a character sings the words to the tune of the German national anthem.\nIn subsequent adaptations and translations the original title has frequently been altered; in German, to the equivalent of \"The Joys of the Aspidistra\", in Spanish to \"Don't Let the Aspidistra Die\", in Italian to \"May the Aspidistra Bloom\", in Dutch to \"Keep the Sanseveria High\". The 1997 film adaptation was released in the United States as \"A Merry War\".\n\"Keep the aspidistra flying!\" is the final line of \"Nexus\" by Henry Miller, published in 1959. Orwell owned some of Miller's works while he was working at Booklovers' Corner. The books were banned in the UK at the time.\nPlot summary.\nGordon Comstock has \"declared war\" on what he sees as an \"overarching dependence\" on money by leaving a promising job as a copywriter for an advertising company called New Albion \u2014 at which he shows great dexterity \u2014 and taking a low-paying job instead, ostensibly so that he can write poetry. Coming from a respectable family background in which the inherited wealth has been dissipated, Gordon resents having to work for a living. The \"war\" and the poetry are not going well and, under the stress of his \"self-imposed exile\" from affluence, Gordon has become absurd, pettyminded and deeply neurotic.\nComstock lives without luxuries in a bedsit in London, which he affords by working in a small bookshop owned by a Scot, McKechnie. He works intermittently on a \"magnum opus\", a long poem that he plans to call \"London Pleasures\"; meanwhile, copies of his only published work, a slim volume of poetry entitled \"Mice\", collect dust on the remainder shelf. He is simultaneously content with his meagre existence and disdainful of it. He lives without financial ambition or the need for a \"good job\", but his living conditions are uncomfortable and his job is boring.\nComstock is \"obsessed\" by what he sees as the pervasiveness of money (the \"Money God\", as he calls it) behind social relationships, feeling sure that women would find him more attractive if he were better off. At the beginning of the novel he senses that his girlfriend, Rosemary Waterlow, whom he met at New Albion and who continues to work there, is dissatisfied with him because of his poverty. An example of his financial embarrassment occurs when he is desperate for a pint of beer at his local pub, but has run out of money and is ashamed to cadge a drink off his fellow lodger, Flaxman.\nOne of Comstock's last remaining friends, Philip Ravelston, a Marxist who publishes a magazine called \"Anti-Christ\", agrees with Comstock in principle, but is comfortably well-off himself. This causes strains when the practical miseries of Comstock's life become apparent. Ravelston does, however, endeavour to publish some of Comstock's work and his efforts, unbeknown to Comstock, resulted in \"Mice\" being published via one of his publisher contacts.\nGordon and Rosemary have little time together \u2014 she works late and lives in a hostel, and his \"bitch of a landlady\" forbids female visitors to her tenants. Then, one evening, having headed southward and having been thinking about \"this women business\" in general and Rosemary in particular, Gordon happens to see Rosemary in a street market. Rosemary refuses to have sex with him, but she wants to spend a Sunday with him, right out in the country, near Burnham Beeches. At their parting, as he takes the tram from Tottenham Court Road back to his bedsit, he is happy and feels that somehow it is agreed between them that Rosemary is going to be his mistress. However, what was intended as a pleasant day out away from London's grime turns into a disaster when, though they are hungry, they opt to pass by a \"rather low-looking\" pub, and then, not able to find another pub, are forced to eat an unappetising lunch at an overpriced fancy hotel. Gordon has to pay the bill with all the money he had set aside for their jaunt and worries about having to borrow money from Rosemary. Out in the countryside again, they are about to have sex for the first time when she violently pushes him back because he was not going to use contraception. He rails at her: \"Money again, you see! ... You say you 'can't' have a baby. ... You mean you daren't; because you'd lose your job and I've got no money and all of us would starve.\"\nHaving sent a poem to an American publication, Gordon suddenly receives from them a cheque worth ten pounds, a considerable sum for him at the time (\u00a310 in 1934 equates to \u00a3592.20 in 2023.). He intends to set aside half for his sister Julia, who has always given him money and support. He treats Rosemary and Ravelston to dinner: it begins well, but deteriorates as Gordon, drunk, tries to force himself on Rosemary. She angrily rebukes him and leaves. Gordon continues drinking, drags Ravelston with him to visit a pair of prostitutes, and ends up broke and in a police cell the next morning. He is guilt-ridden over the thought of being unable to pay his sister back the money he owes her, because his five-pound note has been given to, or stolen by, one of the prostitutes.\nAfter Gordon makes a brief appearance before the magistrate Ravelston pays Gordon's fine, but a reporter writes about the case in the local paper. The ensuing publicity results in Gordon losing his job at the bookshop. As he searches for another job, his life and his poetry stagnate. After living with his friend Ravelston, Gordon ends up working, this time in Lambeth, at another bookshop and lending library owned by the sinister Mr Cheeseman, where he is paid thirty shillings a week, ten shillings less than he was earning before. Yet Gordon is satisfied: \"The job would do. There was no \"trouble\" about a job like this; no room for ambition, no effort, no hope.\" Determined to sink to the lowest level of society, Gordon takes a furnished bed-sitting-room in a filthy alley parallel to Lambeth Cut. Both Julia and Rosemary, \"in feminine league against him\", seek to get Gordon to go back to his \"good\" job at the New Albion advertising agency.\nRosemary, having avoided Gordon for some time, suddenly comes to visit him one day at his dismal lodgings. Despite his terrible poverty and shabbiness, they have sex, but it is without any emotion or passion. Later, Rosemary drops in one day unexpectedly at the library, having not been in touch with Gordon for some time, and tells him that she is pregnant. Since she and Gordon reject the idea of an abortion (which would have been both illegal and dangerous at that time), Gordon is presented with the choice between leaving Rosemary to a life of social shame at the hands of her family or marrying her and returning to a life of respectability by taking back the job at the New Albion agency that he once so deplored.\nGordon chooses Rosemary and respectability, and experiences relief at having abandoned his anti-money principles with such comparative ease. After two years of abject failure and poverty, he throws his poetic work \"London Pleasures\" down a drain, marries Rosemary, resumes his advertising career and plunges into a campaign to promote a new product to prevent foot odour. In his lonely walks around mean streets, aspidistras seem to appear in every lower-middle class window. As the book closes, Gordon wins an argument with Rosemary to install an aspidistra in their new small but comfortable flat off the Edgware Road.\nLiterary significance and criticism.\nCyril Connolly wrote two reviews at the time of the novel's publication. In the \"Daily Telegraph\" he described it as a \"savage and bitter book\", and wrote that \"the truths which the author propounds are so disagreeable that one ends by dreading their mention\". In the \"New Statesman\" he wrote that it gave \"a harrowing and stark account of poverty\", and referred to its \"clear and violent language, at times making the reader feel he is in a dentist's chair with the drill whirring\".\nOrwell wrote in a letter to George Woodcock dated 28 September 1946 that \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\" was one of the two or three of his books that he was ashamed of because it \"was written simply as an exercise and I oughtn't to have published it, but I was desperate for money. At that time I simply hadn't a book in me, but I was half starved and had to turn out something to bring in \u00a3100 or so.\" Orwell did not want either this book or \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" reprinted during his lifetime. \nFor an edition of the BBC Television show \"Omnibus\" (\"The Road to the Left\", broadcast 10 January 1971), Melvyn Bragg interviewed Norman Mailer. Bragg said that he \"just assumed Mailer had read Orwell. In fact he's mad on him.\" Of \"Keep the Aspidistra Flying\" Mailer said: \"It is perfect from the first page to the last.\"\nThe novel has won other admirers besides Mailer, notably Lionel Trilling, who called it \"a \"summa\" of all the criticisms of a commercial civilization that have ever been made\".\nOrwell's biographer Jeffrey Meyers finds the novel flawed by weaknesses in plot, style and characterisation, but praises \"a poignant and moving quality that comes from Orwell's perceptive portrayal of the alienation and loneliness of poverty, and from Rosemary's tender response to Gordon's mean misery\". \nTosco Fyvel, literary editor of \"Tribune\" from 1945 to 1949, and a friend and colleague of Orwell's during the last ten years of Orwell's life, found it interesting that \"through Gordon Comstock Orwell expressed violent dislike of London's crowded life and mass advertising\u2014 a foretaste here of \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". Orwell has Gordon reacting to a poster saying \"Corner Table Enjoys His Meal With Bovex\" in a manner already suggesting that of the later novel:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Gordon examined the thing with the intimacy of hatred... Corner Table grins at you, seemingly optimistic, with a flash of false teeth. But what is behind the grin? Desolation, emptiness, prophecies of doom. \u2014For can you not see [\u2014] Behind that slick self-satisfaction, that tittering fat-bellied triviality, there's nothing but a frightful emptiness, a secret despair? And the reverberations of future wars.\nCatherine Blount points to the theme of a London couple needing to go into the countryside in order to find a private place to have sex, which has a significant place in the plot of \"Aspidistra\" and which is taken up prominently in \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\". \nOrwell's biographer D. J. Taylor writes of Gordon Comstock that, \"Like Dorothy in \"A Clergyman's Daughter\" and like Winston Smith in \"Nineteen Eighty-Four\", he rebels against the system and is ultimately swallowed up by it ... Like Winston Smith, he rebels, the rebellion fails, and he has to reach an accommodation with a world he'd previously disparaged.\"\nFilm adaptation.\nA film adaptation of the same title was released in 1997. It was directed by Robert Bierman and stars Richard E. Grant and Helena Bonham Carter. The film was released in North America and New Zealand under the alternative title \"A Merry War\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38115", "revid": "10202399", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38115", "title": "Crucifixion", "text": "Inflicting death by nailing or tying a victim to a wooden cross\nCrucifixion is a method of capital punishment in which the condemned is tied or nailed to a large wooden cross, beam or stake and left to hang until eventual death, which could take minutes to days. It was first used as a punishment by the Achaemenids, Carthaginians, and Romans, among others. Crucifixion has been used in some countries as recently as the 21st century.\nThe crucifixion of Jesus is central to Christianity and the cross (in Roman Catholicism usually depicted with Jesus nailed to it) is Christianity's preeminent religious symbol. His death is the most prominent example of crucifixion in history, which in turn has led many cultures in the modern world to associate the execution method closely with Jesus and with Christian spirituality. Other figures in Christianity are traditionally believed to have undergone crucifixion as well, including Saint Peter, who Church tradition says was crucified upside-down, and Saint Andrew, who Church tradition says was crucified on an X-shaped cross. Today, limited numbers of Christians voluntarily undergo non-lethal crucifixions as a devotional practice.\nTerminology.\nAncient Greek has two verbs for crucify: (), from (which in modern Greek only means \"cross\" but which in antiquity was used for any kind of wooden pole, pointed or blunt, bare or with attachments) and () \"crucify on a plank\", together with ( \"impale\"). In earlier pre-Roman Greek texts usually means \"impale\".\nThe Greek used in the Christian New Testament uses four verbs, three of them based upon (), usually translated \"cross\". The most common term is (), \"to crucify\", occurring 46 times; (), \"to crucify with\" or \"alongside\" occurs five times, while (), \"to crucify again\" occurs only once at the Epistle to the Hebrews . (), \"to fix or fasten to, impale, crucify\" occurs only once, at the Acts of the Apostles .\nThe English term \"cross\" derives from the Latin word , which classically referred to a tree or any construction of wood used to hang criminals as a form of execution. The term later came to refer specifically to a cross. The related term \"crucifix\" derives from the Latin or , past participle passive of or , meaning \"to crucify\" or \"to fasten to a cross\".\nDetail.\nCross shape.\nIn the Roman Empire, the gibbet (instrument of execution) for crucifixions took on many shapes. Seneca the Younger (c.\u20094 BC\u201365 AD) states: \"I see crosses there, not just of one kind but made in many different ways: some have their victims with head down to the ground; some impale their private parts; others stretch out their arms on the gibbet.\" According to Josephus, during Emperor Titus's Siege of Jerusalem (70 AD), Roman soldiers nailed innumerable Jewish captives to crosses in various ways.\nAt times the gibbet was a simple vertical stake, called in Latin \"crux simplex\". Frequently, however, there was a cross-piece attached either at the top to give the shape of a T (\"crux commissa\") or just below the top, as in the form most familiar in Christian symbolism (\"crux immissa\"). The most ancient image of a Roman crucifixion depicts an individual on a T-shaped cross. It is a graffito found in a taberna (hostel for wayfarers) in Puteoli, dating to the time of Trajan or Hadrian (late 1st century to early 2nd century AD).\nWriters in the 2nd century who speak of the execution cross describe the crucified person's arms as outstretched, not attached to a single stake: Lucian speaks of Prometheus as crucified \"above the ravine with his hands outstretched\". He also says that the shape of the letter \u03a4 (the Greek letter tau) was that of the wooden instrument used for crucifying. Artemidorus, another writer of the same period, says that a cross is made of posts (plural) and nails and that the arms of the crucified are outstretched. Speaking of the generic execution cross, Irenaeus (c.\u2009130\u2013202), a Christian writer, describes it as composed of an upright and a transverse beam, sometimes with a small projection in the upright.\nNew Testament writings about the crucifixion of Jesus do not specify the shape of that cross, but subsequent early writings liken it to the letter T. According to William Barclay, because tau is shaped exactly like the \"crux commissa\" and represented the number 300, \"wherever the fathers came across the number 300 in the Old Testament they took it to be a mystical prefiguring of the cross of Christ\". The earliest example, written around the late 1st century, is the \"Epistle of Barnabas\", with another example being Clement of Alexandria (c.\u2009150\u00a0\u2013 c.\u00a0215).\nJustin Martyr (c.\u2009100\u00a0\u2013 c.\u2009165) sees the cross of Christ represented in the crossed spits used to roast the Passover lamb.\nNail placement.\nIn popular depictions of the crucifixion of Jesus (possibly because in translations of the wounds are described as being \"in his hands\"), Jesus is shown with nails in his hands. But in Greek the word \"\u03c7\u03b5\u03af\u03c1\", usually translated as \"hand\", could refer to the entire portion of the arm below the elbow, and to denote the \"hand\" as distinct from the \"arm\" some other word could be added, as \"\u1f04\u03ba\u03c1\u03b7\u03bd \u03bf\u1f54\u03c4\u03b1\u03c3\u03b5 \u03c7\u03b5\u1fd6\u03c1\u03b1\" (he wounded the end of the \u03c7\u03b5\u03af\u03c1, i.e., \"he wounded him in the hand\".\nA possibility that does not require tying is that the nails were inserted just above the wrist, through the soft tissue, between the two bones of the forearm (the radius and the ulna).\nA foot-rest (\"suppedaneum\") attached to the cross, perhaps for the purpose of taking the person's weight off the wrists, is sometimes included in representations of the crucifixion of Jesus but is not discussed in ancient sources. Some scholars interpret the Alexamenos graffito (c.\u2009200), the earliest surviving depiction of the crucifixion, as including such a foot-rest. Ancient sources also mention the \"sedile\", a small seat attached to the front of the cross, about halfway down, which could have served a similar purpose.\nIn 1968, archaeologists discovered at Giv'at ha-Mivtar in northeast Jerusalem the remains of one Jehohanan, who was crucified in the 1st century AD. The remains included a heel bone with a nail driven through it from the side. The tip of the nail was bent, perhaps because of striking a knot in the upright beam, which prevented it being extracted from the foot. A first inaccurate account of the length of the nail led some to believe that it had been driven through both heels, suggesting that the man had been placed in a sort of sidesaddle position, but the true length of the nail, , suggests instead that in this case of crucifixion the heels were nailed to opposite sides of the upright beam. As of 2011, the skeleton from Giv'at ha-Mivtar was the only confirmed example of ancient crucifixion in the archaeological record. A second set of skeletal remains with holes transverse through the calcaneum heel bones, found in 2007, could be a second archaeological record of crucifixion. The find in Cambridgeshire (United Kingdom) in November 2017 of the remains of the heel bone of a (probably enslaved) man with an iron nail through it, is believed by the archeologists to confirm the use of this method in ancient Rome.\nCause of death.\nThe length of time required to reach death could range from hours to days depending on method, the victim's health, and the environment. If a nail severed an artery, death could occur within minutes. Some Roman crucifiers are reported to have taken bribes to sever an artery for a quick death.\nA theory attributed to Pierre Barbet held that, when the whole body weight was supported by the stretched arms, the typical cause of death was asphyxiation. He wrote that the condemned would have severe difficulty inhaling, due to hyper-expansion of the chest muscles and lungs. The condemned would therefore have to draw himself up by the arms, leading to exhaustion, or have his feet supported by tying or by a wood block. When no longer able to lift himself, the condemned would die within a few minutes. This theory has been supported by multiple scholars. Other scholars, including Frederick Zugibe, posit other causes of death. Zugibe suspended test subjects with their arms at 60\u00b0 to 70\u00b0 from the vertical. The test subjects had no difficulty breathing during experiments, but did suffer rapidly increasing pain, which is consistent with the Roman use of crucifixion to achieve a prolonged, agonizing death. However, Zugibe's positioning of the test subjects necessarily did not precisely replicate the conditions of historical crucifixion. In 2023, an analysis of medical literature concluded that asphyxiation is discredited as the primary cause of death from crucifixion.\nThere is scholarly support for several possible non-asphyxiation causes of death: heart failure or arrhythmia, hypovolemic shock, acidosis, dehydration, and pulmonary embolism. Death could result from any combination of those factors, or from other causes, including sepsis following infection due to the wounds caused by the nails or by the scourging that often preceded crucifixion, or from stabbing by the guards.\nSurvival.\nSince death does not follow immediately on crucifixion, survival after a short period of crucifixion is possible, as in the case of those who choose each year as a devotional practice to be non-lethally crucified.\nThere is an ancient record of one person who survived a crucifixion that was intended to be lethal, but was interrupted. Josephus recounts:I saw many captives crucified, and remembered three of them as my former acquaintances. I was very sorry at this in my mind, and went with tears in my eyes to Titus, and told him of them; so he immediately commanded them to be taken down, and to have the greatest care taken of them, in order to their recovery; yet two of them died under the physician's hands, while the third recovered.Josephus gives no details of the method or duration of the crucifixion of his three friends.\nHistory.\nPre-Roman states.\nThe earliest section of the Book of Deuteronomy is widely believed to have been composed in Jerusalem in the 7th century BCE. Beginning with Paul the Apostle (writing in ), some authors have interpreted the text in Deuteronomy as an allusion to crucifixion. This reference is to hanging the corpse of an executed criminal on a tree, possibly as a form of deterrence.\nThe earliest clear reference to crucifixion may be a post-mortem one mentioned by Herodotus in the third book of his \"Histories\". Polycrates, the tyrant of Samos, was executed in 522 BCE by Oroetus (satrap of Lydia), and his dead body was then crucified.\nIn his \"Histories\", Herodotus describes the execution of a Persian general at the hands of the Athenians during the second Persian invasion of Greece in about 479 BC: \"They nailed him to a plank and hung him up\u00a0... this Artayctes who suffered death by crucifixion.\" The \"Commentary on Herodotus\" by How and Wells remarks: \"They crucified him with hands and feet stretched out and nailed to cross-pieces; cf. vii.33. This act, supposedly unusual on the part of Greeks, may be explained by the enormity of the outrage or by Athenian deference to local feeling.\"\nIn 332 BCE, Alexander the Great is reputed to have crucified 2,000 survivors from his siege of the Phoenician city of Tyre, as well as the doctor who unsuccessfully treated Alexander's lifelong friend Hephaestion. Some historians have also conjectured that Alexander crucified Callisthenes, his official historian and biographer, for objecting to Alexander's adoption of the Persian ceremony of royal adoration.\nIn Ancient Carthage, crucifixion was known to be imposed on generals for suffering a major defeat. In 238 BCE, during the Battle of the Saw, rebel leaders (including Spendius and Hannibal) were crucified by the Carthaginians. In 202 BCE, the Carthaginian general Hannibal who had suffered defeat in several battles of the Second Punic War disembarked at the Roman-controlled city of Leptis Parva in hopes of avoiding crucifixion.\nIn 87 BCE, after the Judean Civil War, Alexander Jannaeus was reported to have crucified 800 rebels in Jerusalem.\nAncient Rome.\nThe Greek and Latin words corresponding to \"crucifixion\" applied to many different forms of painful execution, including being impaled on a stake, or affixed to a tree, upright pole (a crux simplex), or to a combination of an upright (in Latin, \"stipes\") and a crossbeam (in Latin, \"patibulum\"). Seneca the Younger wrote: \"I see crosses there, not just of one kind but made in many different ways: some have their victims with head down to the ground; some impale their private parts; others stretch out their arms on the gibbet\".\nCrucifixion was generally performed within Ancient Rome as a means to dissuade others from perpetrating similar crimes, with victims sometimes left on display after death as a warning. Crucifixion was intended to provide a death that was particularly slow, painful (hence the term \"excruciating\", literally \"out of crucifying\"), gruesome, humiliating, and public, using whatever means were most expedient for that goal. Crucifixion methods varied considerably with location and period.\nOne hypothesis suggested that the Ancient Roman custom of crucifixion may have developed out of a primitive custom of \"arbori suspendere\"\u2014hanging on an \"arbor infelix\" (\"inauspicious tree\") dedicated to the gods of the nether world. This hypothesis is rejected by William A. Oldfather, who shows that this form of execution (the \"supplicium more maiorum\", punishment in accordance with the custom of our ancestors) consisted of suspending someone from a tree, not dedicated to any particular gods, and flogging him to death. Tertullian mentions a 1st-century AD case in which trees were used for crucifixion, but Seneca the Younger earlier used the phrase \"infelix lignum\" (unfortunate wood) for the transom (\"patibulum\") or the whole cross. Plautus and Plutarch are the two main sources for accounts of criminals carrying their own patibula to the upright \"stipes\".\nMass crucifixions followed the Third Servile War in 73\u201371 BC (the slave rebellion led by Spartacus), and other Roman civil wars in the 2nd and 1st centuries BC. Crassus ordered the crucifixion of 6,000 of Spartacus' followers who had been hunted down and captured after the slaves were defeated in battle. Josephus says that in the siege that led to the destruction of Jerusalem in AD 70, the Roman soldiers crucified Jewish captives before the walls of Jerusalem and out of anger and hatred amused themselves by nailing them in different positions.\nIn some cases, the condemned were forced to carry the crossbeam to the place of execution. A whole cross would weigh well over 135\u00a0kg (300\u00a0lb), but the crossbeam would not be as burdensome, weighing around 45\u00a0kg (100\u00a0lb). The Roman historian Tacitus records that the city of Rome had a specific place for carrying out executions, situated outside the Esquiline Gate, and had a specific area reserved for the execution of slaves by crucifixion. Upright posts would presumably be fixed permanently in that place, and the crossbeam, with the condemned person perhaps already nailed to it, would then be attached to the post.\nThe person executed may have been attached to the cross by rope, though nails and other sharp materials are mentioned in a passage by Josephus, where he states that at the Siege of Jerusalem (70 AD), \"the soldiers out of rage and hatred, \"nailed\" those they caught, one after one way, and another after another, to the crosses, by way of jest\". Objects used in the crucifixion of criminals, such as nails, were sought as amulets with perceived medicinal qualities.\nWhile a crucifixion was an execution, it was also a humiliation, by making the condemned as vulnerable as possible. Although artists have traditionally depicted the figure on a cross with a loin cloth or a covering of the genitals, the person being crucified was usually stripped naked. Writings by Seneca the Younger state some victims suffered a stick forced upwards through their groin. Despite its frequent use by the Romans, the horrors of crucifixion did not escape criticism by some eminent Roman orators. Cicero, for example, described crucifixion as \"a most cruel and disgusting punishment\", and suggested that \"the very mention of the cross should be far removed not only from a Roman citizen's body, but from his mind, his eyes, his ears\". Elsewhere he says, \"It is a crime to bind a Roman citizen; to scourge him is a wickedness; to put him to death is almost parricide. What shall I say of crucifying him? So guilty an action cannot by any possibility be adequately expressed by any name bad enough for it.\"\nFrequently, the legs of the person executed were broken or shattered with an iron club, an act called \"crurifragium\", which was also frequently applied without crucifixion to slaves. This act hastened the death of the person but was also meant to deter those who observed the crucifixion from committing offenses.\nConstantine the Great, the first Christian emperor, abolished crucifixion in the Roman Empire in 337 out of veneration for Jesus Christ, its most famous victim.\nCrucifixion was intended to be a gruesome spectacle: the most painful and humiliating death imaginable. It was used to punish slaves, pirates, and enemies of the state. It was originally reserved for slaves (hence still called \"supplicium servile\" by Seneca), and later extended to citizens of the lower classes (\"humiliores\"). The victims of crucifixion were stripped naked and put on public display while they were slowly tortured to death so that they would serve as a spectacle and an example.\nAccording to Roman law, if a slave killed his or her owner, all of the owner's slaves would be crucified as punishment. Both men and women were crucified. Tacitus writes in his \"Annals\" that when Lucius Pedanius Secundus was murdered by a slave, some in the Senate tried to prevent the mass crucifixion of four hundred of his slaves because there were so many women and children, but in the end tradition prevailed and they were all executed. Although not conclusive evidence for female crucifixion by itself, the most ancient image of a Roman crucifixion may depict a crucified woman, whether real or imaginary. Crucifixion was such a gruesome and humiliating way to die that the subject was somewhat of a taboo in Roman culture, and few crucifixions were specifically documented. One of the only specific female crucifixions that are documented is that of Ida, a freedwoman (former slave) who was crucified by order of Tiberius.\nCrucifixion was typically carried out by specialized teams, consisting of a commanding centurion and his soldiers. First, the condemned would be stripped naked and scourged. This would cause the person to lose a large amount of blood, and approach a state of shock. The convict then usually had to carry the horizontal beam (\"patibulum\" in Latin) to the place of execution, but not necessarily the whole cross.\nDuring the death march, the prisoner, probably still nude after the scourging, would be led through the most crowded streets bearing a \"titulus\" \u2013 a sign board proclaiming the prisoner's name and crime. Upon arrival at the place of execution, selected to be especially public, the convict would be stripped of any remaining clothing, then nailed to the cross naked. If the crucifixion took place in an established place of execution, the vertical beam (\"stipes\") might be permanently embedded in the ground. In this case, the condemned person's wrists would first be nailed to the \"patibulum\", and then he or she would be hoisted off the ground with ropes to hang from the elevated \"patibulum\" while it was fastened to the \"stipes\". Next the feet or ankles would be nailed to the upright stake. The 'nails' were tapered iron spikes approximately long, with a square shaft across. The \"titulus\" would also be fastened to the cross to notify onlookers of the person's name and crime as they hung on the cross, further maximizing the public impact.\nThere may have been considerable variation in the position in which prisoners were nailed to their crosses and how their bodies were supported while they died. Seneca the Younger recounts: \"I see crosses there, not just of one kind but made in many different ways: some have their victims with head down to the ground; some impale their private parts; others stretch out their arms on the gibbet.\" One source claims that for Jews (apparently not for others), a man would be crucified with his back to the cross as is traditionally depicted, while a woman would be nailed facing her cross, probably with her back to onlookers, or at least with the \"stipes\" providing some semblance of modesty if viewed from the front. Such concessions were \"unique\" and not made outside a Jewish context. Several sources mention some sort of seat fastened to the \"stipes\" to help support the person's body, thereby prolonging the person's suffering and humiliation. Justin Martyr calls the seat a \"cornu\", or \"horn,\" leading some scholars to believe it may have had a pointed shape designed to torment the crucified person. This would be consistent with Seneca's observation of victims with their private parts impaled.\nIn Roman-style crucifixion, the condemned could take up to a few days to die, but death was sometimes hastened by human action. \"The attending Roman guards could leave the site only after the victim had died, and were known to precipitate death by means of deliberate fracturing of the tibia and/or fibula, spear stab wounds into the heart, sharp blows to the front of the chest, or a smoking fire built at the foot of the cross to asphyxiate the victim.\" The Romans sometimes broke the prisoner's legs to hasten death and usually forbade burial. On the other hand, the person was often deliberately kept alive as long as possible to prolong their suffering and humiliation, so as to provide the maximum deterrent effect. Corpses of the crucified were typically left on the crosses to decompose and be eaten by animals.\nIn Islam.\nIslam spread in a region where many societies, including the Persian and Roman empires, had used crucifixion to punish traitors, rebels, robbers and criminal slaves. The Qur'an refers to crucifixion in six passages, of which the most significant for later legal developments is verse 5:33:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The punishment of those who wage war against Allah and His Apostle, and strive with might and main for mischief through the land is: execution, or crucifixion, or the cutting off of hands and feet from opposite sides, or exile from the land: that is their disgrace in this world, and a heavy punishment is theirs in the Hereafter.\nThe corpus of hadith provides contradictory statements about the first use of crucifixion under Islamic rule, attributing it variously to Muhammad himself (for murder and robbery of a shepherd) or to the second caliph Umar (applied to two slaves who murdered their mistress). Classical Islamic jurisprudence applies the verse 5:33 chiefly to highway robbers, as a \"hadd\" (scripturally prescribed) punishment. The preference for crucifixion over the other punishments mentioned in the verse or for their combination (which Sadakat Kadri has called \"Islam's equivalent of the hanging, drawing and quartering that medieval Europeans inflicted on traitors\") is subject to \"complex and contested rules\" in classical jurisprudence. Most scholars required crucifixion for highway robbery combined with murder, while others allowed execution by other methods for this scenario. The main methods of crucifixion are:\nMost classical jurists limit the period of crucifixion to three days. Crucifixion involves affixing or impaling the body to a beam or a tree trunk. Various minority opinions also prescribed crucifixion as punishment for a number of other crimes. Cases of crucifixion under most of the legally prescribed categories have been recorded in the history of Islam, and prolonged exposure of crucified bodies was especially common for political and religious opponents.\nJapan.\nCrucifixion was introduced into Japan during the Sengoku period (1467\u20131573), after a 350-year period with no capital punishment. It is believed to have been suggested to the Japanese by the introduction of Christianity into the region, although similar types of punishment had been used as early as the Kamakura period. Known in Japanese as , crucifixion was used in Japan before and during the Tokugawa Shogunate. Several related crucifixion techniques were used. Petra Schmidt, in \"Capital Punishment in Japan\", writes:&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Execution by crucifixion included, first of all, \"hikimawashi\" (i.e, being paraded about town on horseback); then the unfortunate was tied to a cross made from one vertical and two horizontal poles. The cross was raised, the convict speared several times from two sides, and eventually killed with a final thrust through the throat. The corpse was left on the cross for three days. If one condemned to crucifixion died in prison, his body was pickled and the punishment executed on the dead body. Under Toyotomi Hideyoshi, one of the great 16th-century unifiers, crucifixion upside down (i.e, \"sakasaharitsuke\") was frequently used. Water crucifixion (\"mizuharitsuke\") awaited mostly Christians: a cross was raised at low tide; when the high tide came, the convict was submerged under water up to the head, prolonging death for many days\nIn 1597, 26 Christian Martyrs were nailed to crosses at Nagasaki, Japan. Among those executed were Saints Paulo Miki, Philip of Jesus and Pedro Bautista, a Spanish Franciscan. The executions marked the beginning of a long history of persecution of Christianity in Japan, which continued until its decriminalization in 1871.\nCrucifixion was used as a punishment for prisoners of war during World War II. Ringer Edwards, an Australian prisoner of war, was crucified for killing cattle, along with two others. He survived 63 hours before being let down.\nBurma.\nIn Burma, crucifixion was a central element in several execution rituals. Felix Carey, a missionary in Burma from 1806 to 1812, wrote the following:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Four or five persons, after being nailed through their hands and feet to a scaffold, had first their tongues cut out, then their mouths slit open from ear to ear, then their ears cut off, and finally their bellies ripped open.\nSix people were crucified in the following manner: their hands and feet nailed to a scaffold; then their eyes were extracted with a blunt hook; and in this condition they were left to expire; two died in the course of four days; the rest were liberated, but died of mortification on the sixth or seventh day.\nFour persons were crucified, viz. not nailed but tied with their hands and feet stretched out at full length, in an erect posture. In this posture they were to remain till death; every thing they wished to eat was ordered them with a view to prolong their lives and misery. In cases like this, the legs and feet of the criminals begin to swell and mortify at the expiration of three or four days; some are said to live in this state for a fortnight, and expire at last from fatigue and mortification. Those which I saw, were liberated at the end of three or four days.\nArchaeological evidence.\nAlthough the Roman historians Josephus and Appian refer to the crucifixion of thousands during the Roman-Jewish wars in Judaea by the Romans, there are few actual archaeological remains. A prominent example is the crucified body found in a Jewish tomb dating back to the 1st century which was discovered at Givat HaMivtar, Jerusalem in 1968. The remains were accidentally found in an ossuary with the crucified man's name on it, \"Jehohanan, the son of Hagakol.\" Nicu Haas, from the Hebrew University Medical School, examined the ossuary and discovered that it contained a heel bone with a nail driven through its side, indicating that the man had been crucified. The position of the nail relative to the bone suggests the feet had been nailed to the cross from their side, not from their front; various opinions have been proposed as to whether they were both nailed together to the front of the cross or one on the left side, one on the right side. The point of the nail had olive wood fragments on it indicating that he was crucified on a cross made of olive wood or on an olive tree.\nAdditionally, a piece of acacia wood was located between the bones and the head of the nail, presumably to keep the condemned from freeing his foot by sliding it over the nail. His legs were found broken, possibly to hasten his death. It is thought that because iron was valuable in earlier Roman times, the nails were removed from the dead body to reduce costs. According to Haas, this could help to explain why only one nail has been found, as the tip of the nail in question was bent in such a way that it could not be removed. Haas had also identified a scratch on the inner surface of the right radius bone of the forearm, close to the wrist. He deduced from the form of the scratch, as well as from the intact wrist bones, that a nail had been driven into the forearm at that position.\nHowever, many of Haas' findings have been challenged. For instance, it was subsequently determined that the scratches on the wrist area were non-traumatic \u2013 therefore, there was no evidence of crucifixion \u2013 while reexamination of the heel bone revealed that the two heels were not nailed together, instead, they were nailed separately to either side of the upright post of the cross.\nIn 2007, a possible case of a crucified body, with a round hole in a heel bone, possibly caused by a nail, was discovered in the Po Valley near Rovigo, in northern Italy.\nIn 2017 part of a crucified body, with a nail in the heel, was additionally discovered at Fenstanton in the United Kingdom. Further studies suggested that the remains may be those of a slave, because at that time crucifixion was banned in Roman law for citizens, although not necessarily for slaves.\nModern use.\nEurope.\nDuring World War I, there were persistent rumors that German soldiers had crucified a Canadian soldier on a tree or barn door with bayonets or combat knives. The event was initially reported in 1915 by Private George Barrie of the 1st Canadian Division. Two investigations, one a post-war official investigation, and the other an independent investigation by the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, concluded that there was no evidence to support the story. However, British documentary maker Iain Overton in 2001 published an article claiming that the story was true, identifying the soldier as Harry Band. Overton's article was the basis for a 2002 episode of the Channel 4 documentary show \"Secret History\".\nIt has been reported that crucifixion was used in several cases against the German civil population of East Prussia when it was occupied by Soviet forces at the end of World War II.\nIn 2005, a priest and four nuns in Romania were convicted of crucifying Maricica Irina Cornici, a 25 year old nun with schizophrenia, who they believed was possessed by the devil.\nSouth Sudan.\nIn 2017, the Standard News Channel reported on a series of crimes against civilians, including women being hung up trees.\nLegal execution in Islamic states.\nCrucifixion is still used as a rare method of execution in Saudi Arabia. The punishment of crucifixion (\"\u0219alb\"), imposed in accordance with Islamic law, is variously interpreted as exposure of the body after execution, crucifixion followed by stabbing in the chest, or crucifixion for three days, survivors of which are allowed to live.\nSeveral people were subjected to crucifixion in Saudi Arabia in the 2010s, but on occasion, they were beheaded and then, their bodies were crucified. In March 2013, a robber was set to be executed by being crucified for three days. However, the method was changed to death by firing squad. The Saudi Press Agency reported that the body of another individual was crucified after his execution in April 2019 as part of a crackdown on charges of terrorism.\nAli Mohammed Baqir al-Nimr was arrested in 2012 when he was 17 years old for taking part in an anti-government protest in Saudi Arabia during the Arab Spring. In May 2014, Ali al-Nimr was sentenced to be publicly beheaded and crucified.\nTheoretically, crucifixion is still one of the Hadd punishments in Iran. If a crucified person were to survive three days of crucifixion, that person would be allowed to live. Execution by hanging is described as follows: \"In execution by hanging, the prisoner will be hung on a hanging truss which should look like a cross, while his (her) back is toward the cross, and (s)he faces the direction of Mecca [in Saudi Arabia], and his (her) legs are vertical and distant from the ground.\"\nSudan's penal code, based upon the government's interpretation of shari'a, includes execution followed by crucifixion as a penalty. When, in 2002, 88 people were sentenced to death for crimes relating to murder, armed robbery, and participating in ethnic clashes, Amnesty International wrote that they could be executed by either hanging or crucifixion.\nJihadism.\nOn 5 February 2015, the United Nations Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) reported that the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) had committed \"several cases of mass executions of boys, as well as reports of beheadings, crucifixions of children and burying children alive\".\nOn 30 April 2014, a total of seven public executions were carried out in Raqqa, northern Syria. The pictures, originally posted on Twitter by a student at Oxford University, were retweeted on a Twitter account which was owned by a known member of ISIL, causing major media outlets to incorrectly attribute the origin of the post to the militant group. In most of these cases of crucifixion, the victims are shot, then their bodies are displayed but there have also been reports of crucifixion preceding shootings or decapitations as well as a case where a man was said to have been \"crucified alive for eight hours\" with no indication of whether he died.\nOther incidents.\nThe human rights group Karen Women Organization documented a case in which Tatmadaw forces crucified several Karen villagers in 2000 in the Dooplaya District in Burma's Kayin State.\nOn 22 January 2014, Dmytro Bulatov, a Ukrainian anti-government activist and a member of AutoMaidan, claimed that he was kidnapped by unknown persons who were \"speaking in Russian accents\" and tortured for a week. His captors kept him in the dark, beat him, cut off a piece of his ear, and nailed him to a cross. His captors ultimately left him in a forest outside Kyiv after forcing him to confess to being an American spy and accepting money from the US Embassy in Ukraine to organize protests against then-President Viktor Yanukovych. Bulatov said he believed Russian secret services were responsible.\nIn 1997, the Ministry of Justice in the United Arab Emirates issued a statement which read that a court had sentenced two murderers to be crucified, followed by their executions the next day. A Ministry of Justice official later stated that the crucifixion sentence should be considered cancelled. The crucifixions were not carried out, and the convicts were instead executed by firing squad.\nDuring the Russian Invasion of Ukraine, Captain Vladyslav Pastukh of the Ukrainian 211th Pontoon Bridge Brigade crucified another member of the brigade by tying the soldier's hands to a wooden cross and tying the soldier's helmet to his left arm. He then took a picture of himself squatting in front of the cross with the soldier's body hanging from it. On 16 December 2024, Ukrainian defense minister Rustem Umerov ordered an immediate investigation into the incident as well as an investigation into other alleged abuse, extortion, and humiliation of soldiers of the 211th Pontoon Bridge Brigade by their commanding officers.\nAs a devotional practice.\nIn July 1805, a man named Mattio Lovat attempted to crucify himself at a public street in Venice, Italy. The attempt was unsuccessful, and he was sent to an asylum, where he died a year later.\nIn some cases, a crucifixion is simulated within a passion play, as in the ceremonial re-enactment that has been performed yearly in the town of Iztapalapa, on the outskirts of Mexico City, since 1833, and in the famous Oberammergau Passion Play. Also, since at least the mid-19th century, a group of flagellants in New Mexico, called \"Hermanos de Luz\" (\"Brothers of Light\"), have annually conducted reenactments of Christ's crucifixion during Holy Week, in which a penitent is tied\u2014but not nailed\u2014to a cross. This tradition is sometimes practiced in other regions of the United States, such as Appalachia, where members of Protestant churches stage mock crucifixions in which worshippers hang from straps on the crosses during Good Friday re-enactments. \nThe Catholic Church frowns upon self-crucifixion as a form of devotion: \"Penitential practices leading to self-crucifixion with nails are not to be encouraged.\" Despite this, the practice persists in the Philippines, where some Catholics are voluntarily, non-lethally crucified for a limited time on Good Friday to imitate the sufferings of Christ. Pre-sterilised nails are driven through the palm of the hand between the bones, while there is a footrest to which the feet are nailed. Rolando del Campo, a carpenter in Pampanga, vowed to be crucified every Good Friday for 15 years if God would carry his wife through a difficult childbirth, while in San Pedro Cutud, Ruben Enaje has been crucified 35 times. The Filipino Catholic Church has repeatedly voiced disapproval of crucifixions and self-flagellation, while the government has noted that it cannot deter devotees. The Department of Health recommends that participants in the rites should have tetanus shots and that the nails used should be sterilized.\nIn 2011, a South Korean taxi driver named Kim Jun-bong committed suicide by crucifixion in imitation of the death of Jesus. An investigation by the National Forensic Service (NFS) determined that he had acted alone, and it also determined that the method by which he crucified himself was technically possible, but it was very difficult and painful.\nNotable crucifixions.\nThis list includes stories from religious scripture and other stories that are told differently by different cultures or religions.\nReferences.\nInformational notes\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "38117", "revid": "34646063", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38117", "title": "Gerry Adams", "text": "Irish republican politician (born 1948)\nGerard Adams (; born 6 October 1948) is a retired Irish Republican politician who was the president of Sinn F\u00e9in between 13 November 1983 and 10 February 2018, and served as a Teachta D\u00e1la (TD) for Louth from 2011 to 2020. From 1983 to 1992 and from 1997 to 2011, he won election as a Member of Parliament (MP) of the UK Parliament for the Belfast West constituency, but followed the Sinn F\u00e9in policy of abstentionism.\nAdams first became involved in Irish republicanism in the late 1960s, and was an established figure in Irish activism for more than a decade before his 1983 election to Parliament. In 1984, Adams was seriously wounded in an assassination attempt by the Ulster Defence Association (UDA). From the late 1980s onwards, he was an important figure in the Northern Ireland peace process, entering into talks initially with Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) leader John Hume and then subsequently with the Irish and British governments. In 1986, he convinced Sinn F\u00e9in to change its traditional policy of abstentionism towards the Oireachtas, the parliament of the Republic of Ireland. In 1998, it also took seats in the power-sharing Northern Ireland Assembly. In 2005, the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA) stated that its armed campaign was over and that it was exclusively committed to peaceful politics.\nAdams has often been accused of being a member of the IRA leadership in the 1970s and 1980s, though he consistently denied any involvement in the organisation. In 2014, he was held for four days by the Police Service of Northern Ireland for questioning in connection with the 1972 abduction and murder of Jean McConville. He was released without charge and a file was sent to the Public Prosecution Service for Northern Ireland, which later stated there was insufficient evidence to charge him. Adams announced in November 2017 that he would step down as leader of Sinn F\u00e9in in 2018, and that he would not stand for re-election to his seat in D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann in 2020. He was succeeded by Mary Lou McDonald at a special \"ardfheis\" (party conference) on 10 February 2018.\nEarly life.\nAdams was born in the Ballymurphy district of Belfast on 6 October 1948 to a \"strongly republican family\". His parents, Anne (n\u00e9e Hannaway) and Gerry Adams Sr., came from republican backgrounds. His grandfather, also named Gerry Adams, was a member of the Irish Republican Brotherhood (IRB) during the Irish War of Independence. Two of his uncles, Dominic and Patrick Adams, had been interned by the governments in Belfast and Dublin. In J. Bowyer Bell's book \"The Secret Army\", Bell states that Dominic was a senior figure in the Irish Republican Army (IRA) of the mid-1940s. Gerry Adams Sr. joined the IRA at age 16. In 1942, he participated in an IRA ambush on a Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC) patrol but was shot, arrested and sentenced to eight years' imprisonment. Adams's maternal great-grandfather, Michael Hannaway, was also a member of the IRB during its bombing campaign in England in the 1860s and 1870s. Michael's son, Billy, was election agent for \u00c9amon de Valera at the 1918 general election in West Belfast.\nAdams attended St Finian's Primary School on Falls Road, where he was taught by La Salle brothers. Having passed the eleven-plus exam in 1960, he attended St Mary's Christian Brothers Grammar School. He left St Mary's with six O-levels and worked in bars.\nEarly political career.\nIn the late 1960s, a civil rights campaign developed in Northern Ireland. After being radicalised by the Divis Street riots during the 1964 United Kingdom general election campaign, Adams joined Sinn F\u00e9in and Fianna \u00c9ireann. Adams was an active supporter and joined the Northern Ireland Civil Rights Association in 1967. The civil rights movement was met with violence from loyalist counter-demonstrations and the RUC, and British troops were called in at the request of the Government of Northern Ireland.\nIn August 1971, internment was reintroduced to Northern Ireland under the Special Powers Act 1922. Adams was captured by British soldiers in March 1972. Adams was interned on , but on the Provisional IRA's insistence was released in June to take part in secret, but abortive talks in London. The IRA negotiated a short-lived truce with the British government and an IRA delegation met with British Home Secretary William Whitelaw at Cheyne Walk in Chelsea. The delegation included Adams, Martin McGuinness, Sean Mac Stiofain (IRA Chief of Staff), Daithi O'Conaill, Seamus Twomey, Ivor Bell and Dublin solicitor Myles Shevlin.\nAdams was re-arrested in July 1973 and interned at the HM Prison Maze. After taking part in an IRA-organised escape attempt, he was sentenced to a period of imprisonment. During this time, he wrote articles in the paper \"An Phoblacht\" under the by-line \"Brownie\", where he criticised the strategy and policy of Sinn F\u00e9in president Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh and Billy McKee, the IRA's officer commanding in Belfast. He was also highly critical of a decision taken by McKee to assassinate members of the rival Official IRA, who had been on ceasefire since 1972. In 2020, the UK Supreme Court quashed Adams's convictions for attempting to escape on Christmas Eve in 1973 and again in July 1974.\nIn 1977, Ballymurphy priest Des Wilson (who had officiated at Adams's wedding) assisted with an early attempt by Adams to open channels to dissident unionists. He helped set up meeting with Desmond Boal QC, a unionist barrister who had been first chairman of Ian Paisley's Democratic Unionist Party. At the time, Boal was co-operating with Se\u00e1n MacBride as joint mediator in confidential negotiations between the Provisional IRA and the Ulster Volunteer Force about a federal settlement for Ireland. A short time later, Wilson drove Adams to a meeting with John McKeague, founding member of the Red Hand Commando, then flirting with the idea of an independent Ulster. Inasmuch as they were \"frank\", Adams found the meetings \"constructive\", but could find no common political ground. Wilson was of the view that Adams was \"one of the very few people who could actually bring a military campaign into a political campaign\".\nProvisional Irish Republican Army.\nAdams has consistently denied ever being a member of the Provisional Irish Republican Army (IRA).\nHowever, journalists such as Ed Moloney, Peter Taylor, and Mark Urban, and historians, such as Richard English and John Bowyer Bell, have all named Adams as part of the IRA leadership since the 1970s. Furthermore, several former IRA members, including Brendan Hughes, Ivor Bell, and Se\u00e1n Mac St\u00edof\u00e1in, have said Adams was also a member of the organisation. Practically all academics agree that Adams joined , was the Officer commanding (OC) of the 2nd battalion of the Belfast Brigade from 1971 to 1972, became the adjutant for the brigade in 1972, and had become the OC of the brigade by 1973.\nMoloney and Taylor state that Adams became the IRA's Chief of Staff following the arrest of Seamus Twomey in early December 1977, remaining in the position until 18 February 1978 when he, along with twenty other republican suspects, was arrested following the La Mon restaurant bombing. He was charged with IRA membership and remanded to Crumlin Road Gaol. He was released seven months later when the Lord Chief Justice of Northern Ireland Robert Lowry ruled there was insufficient evidence to proceed with the prosecution. Moloney and English state Adams had been a member of the IRA Army Council since 1977, remaining a member until 2005, according to former Irish Minister for Justice, Equality and Law Reform Michael McDowell.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Rightly or wrongly, I am an IRA Volunteer and, rightly or wrongly, I take a course of action as a means to bringing about a situation in which I believe the people of my country will prosper.\nRise in Sinn F\u00e9in.\nIn 1978, Adams became joint vice-president of Sinn F\u00e9in and a key figure in directing a challenge to the Sinn F\u00e9in leadership of president Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh and joint vice-president D\u00e1ith\u00ed \u00d3 Conaill. The 1975 IRA\u2013British truce is often viewed as the event that began the challenge to the original Provisional Sinn F\u00e9in leadership, which was dominated by southerners like \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh and \u00d3 Conaill.\nOne of the reasons that the Provisional IRA and Provisional Sinn F\u00e9in were founded, in December 1969 and January 1970, respectively, was that people like \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh, \u00d3 Conaill and McKee opposed participation in constitutional politics. The other reason was the failure of the Cathal Goulding leadership to provide for the defence of Irish nationalist areas during the 1969 Northern Ireland riots. When, at the December 1969 IRA convention and the January 1970 Sinn F\u00e9in Ard Fheis, the delegates voted to participate in the Dublin (Leinster House), Belfast (Stormont) and London (Westminster) parliaments, the organisations split. Adams, who had joined the republican movement in the early 1960s, sided with the Provisionals.\nIn the Maze prison in the mid-1970s, writing under the pseudonym \"Brownie\" in \"Republican News\", Adams called for increased political activity among republicans, especially at local level. The call resonated with younger Northern people, some of whom had been active in the Provisional IRA but few of whom had been active in Sinn F\u00e9in. In 1977, Adams and Danny Morrison drafted the address of Jimmy Drumm at the annual Wolfe Tone commemoration at Bodenstown. The address was viewed as watershed in that Drumm acknowledged that the war would be a long one and that success depended on political activity that would complement the IRA's armed campaign. For some, this wedding of politics and armed struggle culminated in Danny Morrison's statement at the 1981 Sinn F\u00e9in \"ardfheis\" in which he asked \"Who here really believes we can win the war through the ballot box? But will anyone here object if, with a ballot paper in one hand and the Armalite in the other, we take power in Ireland?\" For others, however, the call to link political activity with armed struggle had already been defined in Sinn F\u00e9in policy and in the presidential addresses of Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh, but this had not resonated with young Northerners.\nEven after the election of Bobby Sands as MP for Fermanagh and South Tyrone, a part of the mass mobilisation associated with the 1981 Irish hunger strike by republican prisoners in the H blocks of the Maze Prison, Adams was cautious that the level of political involvement by Sinn F\u00e9in could lead to electoral embarrassment. Charles Haughey, the Taoiseach of Ireland, called an election for June 1981. At an \"ard chomhairle\" meeting, Adams recommended that they contest only four constituencies which were in border counties. Instead, H-Block/Armagh candidates contested nine constituencies and elected two TDs. This, along with the election of Sands, was a precursor to an electoral breakthrough in elections in 1982 to the 1982 Northern Ireland Assembly. Adams, Danny Morrison, Martin McGuinness, Jim McAllister and Owen Carron were elected as abstentionists. The Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) had announced before the election that it would not take any seats and so its 14 elected representatives also abstained from participating in the Assembly and it was a failure. The 1982 election was followed by the 1983 Westminster election, in which Sinn F\u00e9in's vote increased and Adams was elected, as an abstentionist, as MP for Belfast West. It was in 1983 that Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh resigned as President of Sinn F\u00e9in and was succeeded by Adams.\nIn 1983, Adams was elected president of Sinn F\u00e9in and became the first Sinn F\u00e9in MP elected to the British House of Commons since Phil Clarke and Tom Mitchell in the mid-1950s. Following his election as MP for Belfast West, the British government lifted a ban on his travelling to Great Britain. In line with Sinn F\u00e9in policy, he refused to take his seat in the House of Commons.\nAssassination attempt by the UDA.\nOn 14 March 1984 in central Belfast, Adams was seriously wounded in an assassination attempt when Ulster Defence Association (UDA) gunmen fired about 20 shots into the car in which he was travelling. He was hit in the neck, shoulder and arm. He was rushed to the Royal Victoria Hospital, where he underwent surgery to remove three bullets. John Gregg and his team were apprehended almost immediately by a British Army patrol that opened fire on them before ramming their car. The attack had been known in advance by security forces due to a tip-off from informants within the UDA; Adams and his co-passengers had survived in part because RUC officers, acting on the informants' information, had replaced much of the ammunition in the UDA's Rathcoole weapons dump with low-velocity bullets. Some, including Adams himself, still have unanswered questions about the RUC's actions prior to the shooting. An Ulster Defence Regiment NCO subsequently received the Queen's Gallantry Medal for chasing and arresting an assailant.\nPresident of Sinn F\u00e9in.\nMany republicans had long claimed that the only legitimate Irish state was the Irish Republic declared in the 1916 Proclamation of the Republic. In their view, the legitimate government was the IRA Army Council, which had been vested with the authority of that Republic in 1938 (prior to the Second World War) by the last remaining anti-Treaty deputies of the Second D\u00e1il. In his 2005 speech to the Sinn F\u00e9in \"ardfheis\" in Dublin, Adams explicitly rejected this view. \"But we refuse to criminalise those who break the law in pursuit of legitimate political objectives. ... Sinn F\u00e9in is accused of recognising the Army Council of the IRA as the legitimate government of this island. That is not the case. [We] do not believe that the Army Council is the government of Ireland. Such a government will only exist when all the people of this island elect it. Does Sinn F\u00e9in accept the institutions of this state as the legitimate institutions of this state? Of course we do.\"\nAs a result of this non-recognition, Sinn F\u00e9in had abstained from taking any of the seats they won in the British or Irish parliaments. At its 1986 \"ardfheis\", Sinn F\u00e9in delegates passed a resolution to amend the rules and constitution that would allow its members to sit in the Dublin parliament. At this, Ruair\u00ed \u00d3 Br\u00e1daigh led a small walkout, just as he and Sean Mac Stiofain had done sixteen years earlier with the creation of Provisional Sinn F\u00e9in. This minority, which rejected dropping the policy of abstentionism, now distinguishes itself from Sinn F\u00e9in by using the name Republican Sinn F\u00e9in, and maintains that they are the true Sinn F\u00e9in.\nAdams's leadership of Sinn F\u00e9in was supported by a Northern-based cadre that included people like Danny Morrison and Martin McGuinness. Over time, Adams and others pointed to republican electoral successes in the early and mid-1980s, when hunger strikers Bobby Sands and Kieran Doherty were elected to the British House of Commons and D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann respectively, and they advocated that Sinn F\u00e9in become increasingly political and base its influence on electoral politics rather than paramilitarism. The electoral effects of this strategy were shown later by the election of Adams and McGuinness to the House of Commons.\nVoice ban.\nAdams's prominence as an Irish republican leader was increased by the 1988\u20131994 British broadcasting voice restrictions, which were imposed by British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher to \"starve the terrorist and the hijacker of the oxygen of publicity on which they depend\". Thatcher was moved to act after BBC interviews of Martin McGuinness and Adams had been the focus of a row over an edition of \"After Dark\", a proposed Channel 4 discussion programme which in the event was never made. While the ban covered 11 Irish political parties and paramilitary organisations, in practice it mostly affected Sinn F\u00e9in, the most prominent of these bodies.\nA similar ban, known as Section 31, had been law in the Republic of Ireland since the 1970s. However, media outlets soon found ways around the bans. In the UK, this was initially by the use of subtitles, but later and more often by an actor reading words accompanied by video footage of the banned person speaking. Actors who voiced Adams included Stephen Rea and Paul Loughran. This loophole could not be used in the Republic, as word-for-word broadcasts were not allowed. Instead, the banned speaker's words were summarised by the newsreader, over video of them speaking.\nThese bans were lampooned in cartoons, by comedians and satirical TV shows, such as \"Jasper Carrott\", \"Spitting Image\", and in \"The Day Today\", and were criticised by freedom of speech organisations and media personalities, including BBC Director General John Birt and BBC foreign editor John Simpson. The Republic's ban was allowed to lapse in January 1994, and the British ban was lifted by Prime Minister John Major in September 1994.\nMovement into mainstream politics.\nSinn F\u00e9in continued its policy of refusing to sit in the Westminster parliament after Adams won the Belfast West constituency. He lost his seat to Joe Hendron of the SDLP in the 1992 general election, regaining it at the following 1997 election. Under Adams, Sinn F\u00e9in moved away from being a political voice of the Provisional IRA to becoming a professionally organised political party in both Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.\nSDLP leader John Hume identified the possibility that a negotiated settlement might be possible and began secret talks with Adams in 1988. These discussions led to unofficial contacts with the British Northern Ireland Office under the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, Peter Brooke, and with the government of the Republic under Charles Haughey\u00a0\u2013 although both governments maintained in public that they would not negotiate with terrorists. These talks provided the groundwork for what was later to be the Belfast Agreement, preceded by the milestone Downing Street Declaration and the Joint Framework Document.\nThese negotiations led to the IRA ceasefire in August 1994. Taoiseach Albert Reynolds, who had replaced Haughey and who had played a key role in the Hume/Adams dialogue through his Special Advisor Martin Mansergh, regarded the ceasefire as permanent. However, the slow pace of developments contributed in part to the (wider) political difficulties of the British government of John Major. His consequent reliance on Ulster Unionist Party (UUP) votes in the House of Commons led to him agreeing with the UUP demand to exclude Sinn F\u00e9in from talks until the IRA had decommissioned its weapons. Sinn F\u00e9in's exclusion led the IRA to end its ceasefire and resume its campaign.\nAfter the 1997 United Kingdom general election, the new Labour government had a majority in the House of Commons and was not reliant on unionist votes. The subsequent dropping of the insistence led to another IRA ceasefire, as part of the negotiations strategy, which saw teams from the British and Irish governments, the UUP, the SDLP, Sinn F\u00e9in, and representatives of loyalist paramilitary organisations, under the chairmanship of former United States Senator George Mitchell, produce the Good Friday Agreement in 1998. Under the Agreement, structures were created reflecting the Irish and British identities of the people of Ireland, creating a British-Irish Council and a Northern Ireland Legislative Assembly.\nArticles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland of the Republic's constitution, which claimed sovereignty over all of Ireland, were reworded, and a power-sharing Executive Committee was provided for. As part of their deal, Sinn F\u00e9in agreed to abandon its abstentionist policy regarding a \"six-county parliament\", as a result taking seats in the new Stormont-based Assembly and running the education and health and social services ministries in the power-sharing government.\nSinn F\u00e9in in government.\nOn 15 August 1998, four months after the signing of the Good Friday Agreement, the Omagh bombing by the Real IRA, killed 29 people and injured 220, from multiple communities. Adams said in reaction to the bombing: \"I am totally horrified by this action. I condemn it without any equivocation whatsoever.\" Prior to this, Adams had not used the word \"condemn\" in relation to IRA or their splinter groups' actions.\nIn March 2007, Adams was re-elected to the Northern Ireland Assembly, and subsequently met with DUP leader Ian Paisley face-to-face for the first time. These talks led to the St Andrews Agreement, which brought about the return of the power-sharing Executive in Northern Ireland. When Sinn F\u00e9in came to nominate its two ministers to the Northern Ireland Executive, for tactical reasons the party, like the SDLP and the DUP, chose not to include its leader among its ministers.\nIn January 2009, Adams attended the United States presidential inauguration of Barack Obama as a guest of US representative Richard Neal.\nElection to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann.\nAdams was re-elected as MP for West Belfast with 71.1% of the vote in May 2010, but resigned his seat the following December, in order to seek election as a TD (member of the Irish Parliament) for the constituency of Louth at the 2011 Irish general election. He topped the poll in the constituency with 15,072 (21.7%) first preference votes, and was duly elected to D\u00e1il \u00c9ireann where he succeeded Caoimhgh\u00edn \u00d3 Caol\u00e1in as Sinn F\u00e9in parliamentary leader.\nIn December 2013, Adams was a member of the Guard of Honour at Nelson Mandela's funeral.\n2014 arrest.\nOn 30 April 2014, Adams was arrested by detectives from the Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) Serious Crime Branch, under the Terrorism Act 2000, in connection with the murder of Jean McConville in 1972. He had previously voluntarily arranged to be interviewed by police regarding the matter, and maintained he had no involvement. Fellow Sinn F\u00e9in politician Alex Maskey stated that the timing of the arrest, \"three weeks into an election\", was evidence of a \"political agenda [...] a negative agenda\" by the PSNI. McConville's family had campaigned for the arrest of Adams for the murder. McConville's son Michael said that his family did not think the arrest of Adams would ever happen, and were glad that the arrest took place. Adams was released without charge after four days in custody when a file was sent to the Public Prosecution Service, which would decide if criminal charges should be brought.\nAt a press conference after his release, Adams criticised the timing of his arrest, reiterated Sinn F\u00e9in's support for the PSNI and said: \"The IRA is gone. It is finished.\" Adams denied that he had any involvement in the murder or was ever a member of the IRA, and said the allegations came from \"enemies of the peace process\". On 29 September 2015 the Public Prosecution Service announced Adams would not face charges, due to insufficient evidence, as had been expected ever since a BBC report dated 6 May 2014 (2 days after the BBC reported his release), which was widely repeated elsewhere.\nLate presidency.\nOn 19 May 2015, while on an official royal trip to Ireland, Prince Charles shook Adams's hand in what was described as a highly symbolic gesture of reconciliation. The meeting, described as \"historic\", took place in Galway.\nIn September 2017, Adams said he would allow his name to go forward for a one-year term as president of Sinn F\u00e9in at the November \"ardfheis\", at which point Sinn F\u00e9in would begin a \"planned process of generational change, including [Adams's] own future intentions\". This resulted in speculation in the Irish and British media that Adams was preparing to stand down as party leader, and that he might run for President of Ireland in the next election. At the \"ardfheis\" on 18 November, Adams was re-elected for another year as party president, but announced that he would step down at some point in 2018, and would not seek re-election as TD for Louth.\nEnd of Sinn F\u00e9in presidency.\nAdams's presidency of Sinn F\u00e9in ended on 10 February 2018, with his stepping down and the election of Mary Lou McDonald as the party's new president.\nOn 13 July 2018, a home-made bomb was thrown at Adams's home in West Belfast, damaging a car parked in his driveway. Adams escaped injury and claimed that his two grandchildren were standing in the driveway only ten minutes before the blast. Another bomb was set off that same evening at the nearby home of former IRA volunteer and Sinn F\u00e9in official Bobby Storey. In a press conference the following day, Adams said he thought the attacks were linked to the riots in Derry, and asked that those responsible \"come and sit down\" and \"give us the rationale for this action\".\nBBC Libel Case.\nIn 2017, Adams launched a defamation case against the BBC over a programme it ran that alleged he sanctioned the murder of an informer. The case stems from a 2016 BBC Northern Ireland Spotlight TV documentary. The programme focused on Denis Donaldson, a member of Sinn F\u00e9in, who was also in the IRA. He was murdered in 2006, four months after Adams revealed that he was an informer for the MI5. At the time, the murder was condemned by all, including Adams. Adams also denied any involvement in his murder. In May 2025, Adams won the case, with the jury ruling the programme defamatory and awarding him \u20ac100,000 (approximately \u00a385,000) in damages. Following the trial, Adams said: \"I've always been satisfied with my reputation ... we all have flaws in our character, but the jury made the decision and let's accept the outcome.\"\nPersonal life.\nIn 1971, Adams married Collette McArdle. Their son Gearoid who was born in 1973, went on to play Gaelic football for Antrim GAA senior men's team and became its assistant manager in 2012.\nIn 2013, Adams's brother Liam was found guilty of 10 offences, including rape and gross indecency committed against his own daughter. After the allegations of abuse were first made public in 2009, Gerry Adams alleged that his father had subjected family members to emotional, physical, and sexual abuse. Liam was jailed for 16 years, and died of pancreatic cancer in February 2019 at the age of 63 while in Maghaberry Prison.\nIn 2016, Adams sparked controversy by posting \"Watching \"Django Unchained\"\u2014A Ballymurphy Nigger!\" on social media. This was widely reported, and Adams deleted it and apologised.\nMedia portrayals.\nAdams has been portrayed in a number of films, TV series, and books:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExternal links.\n * https:// at TheyWorkForYou "}
{"id": "38118", "revid": "19839598", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38118", "title": "Grey (disambiguation)", "text": "Grey or gray is a neutral color between black and white.\nGrey, greys, gray, or grays may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "38120", "revid": "23115738", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38120", "title": "Grey (color)", "text": ""}
{"id": "38121", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=38121", "title": "Peperomia", "text": "Genus of plants\nPeperomia is one of the two large genera of the family Piperaceae. It is estimated that there are over 1,000 species, occurring in all tropical and subtropical regions of the world. They are concentrated in South and Central America, but may also be found in southern North America, the Caribbean islands, Africa, Oceania, and southern and eastern parts of Asia. The exact number of species is difficult to determine, as some plants have been recorded several times with different names, and new species continue to be discovered. Peperomias have adapted to many different environments and their appearances vary greatly. Some are epiphytes (growing on other plants) or lithophytes (growing on rock or in rock crevices), and many are xerophytes (drought-tolerant, with thick succulent structures to save water) or possess underground tubers (geophytes). Most species are compact perennial shrubs or vines.\nSome Peperomias have thick, waxy, succulent leaves and stems; still, others are rather delicate, with paper-thin leaves. Many species will easily sunburn, preferring filtered or indirect, bright sunlight. Most of the Peperomias have minimal to virtually non-existent root systems (species-depending), with the entire mass often being nothing more than a collection of tiny, hair-like appendages used to anchor the plant. These roots, while delicate, also enable the plants to survive in less-than-ideal conditions; however, their fragility also places them at a greater risk for root rot if water does not drain sufficiently quickly.\nThe genus name \"Peperomia\" was coined by Spanish botanists Ruiz L\u00f3pez and Pav\u00f3n Jim\u00e9nez in 1794 after their travels in Peru and Chile. \"Peperomia\" plants do not have a widely- accepted common name, and some argue that it is better to use the genus name, as is the case with genera such as \"Petunia\" and \"Begonia\". They are sometimes called radiator plants, a name possibly coined by L.H. Bailey because many of them enjoy bright and dry environments similar to a windowsill above a radiator. Furthermore, many individuals simply refer to the many Peperomias by their individual nicknames, such as \"Peperomia polybotrya\" being called the \u201cRaindrop Peperomia\u201d (due to its large, drop-shaped leaves), or \"P. argyreia\" being the \u201cWatermelon Peperomia\u201d, due to its leaf veining and shape resembling the look of a watermelon.\nDescription.\nPeperomias vary considerably in appearance (see gallery below) and there is no universally accepted method of categorising them, although three main groups can be distinguished. Most species are compact and usually do not exceed in height.\nFirst are plants with decorative foliage, which often grow in rain or cloud forests as epiphytes. They are adapted to living in small shady crevices on, for example, trees, with small root systems. As they do not have access to ground water they are typically succulent to a certain degree, which in many species shows as thick, fleshy leaves which have a waxy surface and are sometimes rippled. The leaves may be oval with the leafstalk at or near the center of the leaf blade, or they may be heart-shaped or lance-shaped; their size varies from long. They may be green or striped, marbled or bordered with pale green, red or gray, and the petioles of some kinds are red. They also enjoy high air humidity, warm temperatures, and grow all year round. Examples include \"P. argyreia\", \"P. caperata\", \"P. nitida\", \"P. obtusifolia\", \"P. polybotrya\", and \"P. scandens\".\nThe second group consists of more arid-climate, succulent peperomias, which are often found in higher altitudes. They are adapted to withstanding a long warm season followed by a colder winter and very little rainfall. They store water both in their stout stems and in their succulent leaves, which typically form a sort of \u201ctube\u201d or \u201cburrito\u201d, appearing U- or V-shaped in cross-section, often with epidermal windows on the top-side. \"P. columella\", \"P. ferreyrae\", \"P. graveolens\" and \"P. nivalis\" fall into this category.\nThe third group contains geophytic peperomias. These plants have leaves that fall off in the colder dry season, survive due to their underground tubers, and grow the leaves back as more rain falls. Examples include \"P. macrorhiza\", \"P. peruviana\", and \"P. umbilicata\". Currently just under 50 species of geophytic peperomias are known, but new ones continue to be discovered.\nPeperomia flowers are typically unnoticeable, growing in cordlike spikes, although there are some exceptions such as \"P. fraseri\". Most peperomia flowers seem odorless to humans but some carry a musty or even unpleasant odor, such as \"P. graveolens\". The fruit is a berry that eventually dries out and shows the tiny pepper-like seed.\nSpecies.\nThere are over a thousand Peperomia species, although the exact number is unclear as some plants have been recorded several times with different names (c. 3,000 names have been used in publications) and new species continue to be discovered. At the moment Catalogue of Life lists around 1,400 recognized species.\nDistribution.\nPeperomias are found in tropical and sub-tropical regions around the world. Northern South America and Central America host the largest number of species, but peperomias can also be found in Africa, southern Asia, and Oceania. The exact number of peperomia species continues to change as new plants are discovered and some distinct plant names, perhaps catalogued in separate geographical regions, are realised to describe the same species. Therefore, the table below gives only a rough overall impression of the worldwide distribution.\nNote that many peperomias are found in wide overlapping regions, for example everywhere in tropical America or Asia, and so may have not been included in the species count for individual areas.\nPeperomias and humans.\nHorticulture.\nPeperomias are often grown for their ornamental foliage and many species are considered easy to grow in homes and greenhouses. Several species have been given the Award of Garden Merit by the Royal Horticultural Society. Peperomias are considered non-toxic and are recommended for households with children or animals.\nOut of the 1,000+ \"Peperomia\" species, currently only about 40 of them are commonly used as houseplants. These peperomias fare well in average home conditions and can relatively easily be found in stores and garden centers. Species in this basic group include \"P. alata\", \"P. albovittata\", \"P. argyreia\", \"P. blanda\", \"P. boivinii\", \"P. caperata\", \"P. clusiifolia\", \"P. columella\", \"P. dolabriformis\", \"P. ferreyrae\", \"P. fraseri\", \"P. glabella\", \"P. graveolens\", \"P. griseoargentea\", \"P. hoffmannii\", \"P. incana\", \"P. japonica\", \"P. kimnachii\", \"P. maculosa\", \"P. metallica\", \"P. nitida\" (often sold as \"P. scandens\"), \"P. nivalis\", \"P. obtusifolia\", \"P. pellucida\", \"P. perciliata\", \"P. pereskiifolia\", \"P. polybotrya\", \"P. prostrata\", \"P. quadrangularis\" (syn. \"P. angulata\"), \"P. rotundifolia\", \"P. rugosa\", \"P. tetragona\" (syn. \"P. puteolata\"), \"P. tetraphylla\", \"P. turboensis\", \"P. urocarpa\", \"P. verschaffeltii\", \"P. verticillata\" (syn. \"P. rubella\"), and \"P. wheeleri\".\nThere can be, however, several cultivars available from each species. Identifying species can be challenging as plants are often sold under marketing names, older synonyms, or under names that have not been officially accepted. This is the case, for example, with \"Peperomia orba\" (often sold as \"Peperomia\" 'Pixie'), \"Peperomia viridis\", and \"Peperomia axillaris\". In addition to natural species and their cultivars, some artificial hybrid varieties can also be found on the market, such as \"Peperomia\" 'Hope' (a cross between \"P. deppeana\" and \"P. quadrifolia\").\nMost species need airy, well-draining substrate and want to dry out to some extent or even completely between waterings. A typical reason for losing a peperomia is through root rot caused by over-watering. The tropical, decorative foliage plants, typically enjoy shadier conditions with more humidity. Some might even require a terrarium or a bottle garden to maintain high humidity. The arid climate succulent types should be treated similarly to cacti and other succulents: they can tolerate more light and will survive a dry cold period, during which they are watered only seldomly. The geophytic peperomias are used to experiencing a cold resting period once a year.\nFood and medicine.\nMany peperomias are herbs in the sense that their leaves carry a spicy flavour and, when crushed, emit a strong odour. Therefore, some species, such as \"Peperomia pellucida\" are used in salads and cooking, or to flavour drinks. But it is advised that people should not try to eat the peperomias sold as houseplants.\nSome species, including \"Peperomia inaequalifolia\"\",\" \"Peperomia congona\" and \"Peperomia pellucida\", are also used in herbal medicine for various health conditions. \nWhile such folk medicine usage is common in Peru and elsewhere, the possible medicinal qualities of peperomias remain poorly investigated, although there has been a growing interest for the subject recently.\nPropagation.\nThese plants can be propagated by seeds, by cuttings, or by dividing. \"Peperomia\" cuttings of many species root easily.\nCuttings should be taken in spring or summer, with the lower leaves removed and a cut made just below a node. The cuttings are left to dry for about an hour to allow a protective callus tissue to form, preventing rot. Once dried, they can be planted in a well-draining substrate such as perlite or peat moss. Semi-succulent species benefit from bottom heat around 21\u201324\u00b0C (70\u201375\u00b0F), but it is important not to seal the top completely, as excessive humidity can be detrimental. Once roots have formed, the cuttings can be transplanted into 75 mm (3 in) pots or hanging baskets.\nPeperomia plants can also be propagated by division, especially clumping species. Division involves separating the plant into smaller sections, each with roots attached, and is best done during repotting in the growing season. Seed propagation is less common due to slower germination but can be achieved by sowing seeds in a well-draining, sterile medium while maintaining warm, humid conditions.\nMaintaining warm temperatures (18\u201324\u00b0C) and moderate humidity is essential for successful propagation. Overwatering should be avoided, as Peperomias are prone to root rot in poorly draining soils.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
