{"id": "33709", "revid": "44941471", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33709", "title": "Walrus", "text": "Species of marine mammal with tusks\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Taxobox/core/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe walrus (Odobenus rosmarus) is a large pinniped marine mammal with discontinuous distribution about the North Pole in the Arctic Ocean and subarctic seas of the Northern Hemisphere. It is the only extant species in the family Odobenidae and genus \"Odobenus\". This species is subdivided into two subspecies: the Atlantic walrus (\"O. r. rosmarus\"), which lives in the Atlantic Ocean, and the Pacific walrus (\"O. r. divergens\"), which lives in the Pacific Ocean.\nAdult walrus are characterised by prominent tusks and whiskers, and considerable bulk: adult males in the Pacific can weigh more than and, among pinnipeds, are exceeded in size only by the two species of elephant seals. Walrus live mostly in shallow waters above the continental shelves, spending significant amounts of their lives on the sea ice looking for benthic bivalve molluscs. Walruses are relatively long-lived, social animals, and are considered to be a \"keystone species\" in the Arctic marine regions.\nThe walrus has played a prominent role in the cultures of many indigenous Arctic peoples, who have hunted it for meat, fat, skin, tusks, and bone. During the 19th century and the early 20th century, walrus were widely hunted for their blubber, walrus ivory, and meat. The population of walruses dropped rapidly all around the Arctic region. It has rebounded somewhat since, though the populations of Atlantic and Laptev walruses remain fragmented and at low levels compared with the time before human interference.\nEtymology.\nThe origin of the word \"walrus\" derives from a Germanic language, and it has been attributed largely to either Dutch or Old Norse. Its first part is thought to derive from a word such as Old Norse ('whale') and the second part has been hypothesized to come from the Old Norse word ('horse'). For example, the Old Norse word means 'horse-whale' and is thought to have been passed in an inverted form to both Dutch and the dialects of northern Germany as and . An alternative theory is that it comes from the Dutch words 'shore' and 'giant'.\nThe species name \"rosmarus\" is Scandinavian. The Norwegian manuscript \"Konungs skuggsj\u00e1\", thought to date from around AD 1240, refers to the walrus as in Iceland and in Greenland (walruses were by now extinct in Iceland and Norway, while the word evolved in Greenland). Several place names in Iceland, Greenland and Norway may originate from walrus sites: Hvalfjord, Hvallatrar and Hvalsnes to name some, all being typical walrus breeding grounds.\nThe archaic English word for walrus\u2014\"morse\"\u2014is widely thought to have come from the Slavic languages, which in turn borrowed it from Finno-Ugric languages, and ultimately (according to Ante Aikio) from an unknown Pre-Finno-Ugric substrate language of Northern Europe. Compare () in Russian, in Finnish, in Northern Saami, and in French. Olaus Magnus, who depicted the walrus in the in 1539, first referred to the walrus as the , probably a Latinization of , and this was adopted by Linnaeus in his binomial nomenclature.\nThe coincidental similarity between \"morse\" and the Latin word ('a bite') supposedly contributed to the walrus's reputation as a \"terrible monster\".\nThe compound \"Odobenus\" comes from ' (Greek for 'teeth') and ' (Greek for 'walk'), based on observations of walruses using their tusks to pull themselves out of the water. The term in Latin means 'turning apart', referring to their tusks.\nThe Inuttitut term for the creature is \"aivik\", similar to the Inuktitut word: \"aiviq\" \u140a\u1403\u1555\u1585.\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nThe walrus is a mammal in the order Carnivora. It is the sole surviving member of the family Odobenidae, one of three lineages in the suborder Pinnipedia along with true seals (Phocidae) and eared seals (Otariidae). While there has been some debate as to whether all three lineages are monophyletic, i.e. descended from a single ancestor, or diphyletic, recent genetic evidence suggests all three descended from a caniform ancestor most closely related to modern bears. Recent multigene analysis indicates the odobenids and otariids diverged from the phocids about 20\u201326 million years ago, while the odobenids and the otariids separated 15\u201320 million years ago. Odobenidae was once a highly diverse and widespread family, including at least twenty species in the subfamilies Imagotariinae, Dusignathinae and Odobeninae. The key distinguishing feature was the development of a squirt/suction feeding mechanism; tusks are a later feature specific to Odobeninae, of which the modern walrus is the last remaining (relict) species.\nTwo subspecies of walrus are widely recognized: the Atlantic walrus, \"O. r. rosmarus\" (Linnaeus, 1758) and the Pacific walrus, \"O. r. divergens\" (Illiger, 1815). Fixed genetic differences between the Atlantic and Pacific subspecies indicate very restricted gene flow, but relatively recent separation, estimated at 500,000 and 785,000 years ago. These dates coincide with the hypothesis derived from fossils that the walrus evolved from a tropical or subtropical ancestor that became isolated in the Atlantic Ocean and gradually adapted to colder conditions in the Arctic.\nThe modern walrus is mostly known from Arctic regions, but a substantial breeding population occurred on isolated Sable Island, southeast of Nova Scotia and due east of Portland, Maine, until the early Colonial period. Abundant walrus remains have also been recovered from the southern North Sea dating to the Eemian interglacial period, when that region would have been submerged as it is today, unlike the intervening glacial lowstand when the shallow North Sea was dry land. Fossils known from San Francisco, Vancouver, and the Atlantic US coast as far south as North Carolina have been referred to glacial periods.\nAn isolated population in the Laptev Sea was considered by some authorities, including many Russian biologists and the canonical \"Mammal Species of the World\", to be a third subspecies, \"O. r. laptevi\" (Chapskii, 1940), but has since been determined to be of Pacific walrus origin.\nAnatomy.\nWhile some outsized Pacific males can weigh as much as , most weigh between . An occasional male of the Pacific subspecies far exceeds normal dimensions. In 1909, a walrus hide weighing was collected from an enormous bull in Franz Josef Land, while in August 1910, Jack Woodson shot a walrus, harvesting its hide. Since a walrus's hide usually accounts for about 20% of its body weight, the total body mass of these two giants is estimated to have been at least . The Atlantic subspecies weighs about 10\u201320% less than the Pacific subspecies. Male Atlantic walrus weigh an average of . The Atlantic walrus also tends to have relatively shorter tusks and somewhat more of a flattened snout. Females weigh about two-thirds as much as males, with the Atlantic females averaging , sometimes weighing as little as , and the Pacific female averaging . Length typically ranges from . Newborn walruses are already quite large, averaging in weight and in length across both sexes and subspecies. All told, the walrus is the third largest pinniped species, after the two elephant seals. Walruses maintain such a high body weight because of the blubber stored underneath their skin. This blubber keeps them warm and the fat provides energy to the walrus.\nThe walrus's body shape shares features with both sea lions (eared seals: Otariidae) and seals (true seals: Phocidae). As with otariids, it can turn its rear flippers forward and move on all fours; however, its swimming technique is more like that of true seals, relying less on flippers and more on sinuous whole body movements. Also like phocids, it lacks external ears.\nThe extraocular muscles of the walrus are well-developed. This and its lack of orbital roof allow it to protrude its eyes and see in both a frontal and dorsal direction. However, vision in this species appears to be more suited for short-range.\nTusks and dentition.\nWhile this was not true of all extinct walruses, the most prominent feature of the living species is its long tusks. These are elongated canines, which are present in both male and female walruses and can reach a length of 1 m (3\u00a0ft 3 in) and weigh up to 5.4\u00a0kg (12\u00a0lb). Tusks are slightly longer and thicker among males, which use them for fighting, dominance and display; the strongest males with the largest tusks typically dominate social groups. Tusks are also used to form and maintain holes in the ice and aid the walrus in climbing out of water onto ice. Tusks were once thought to be used to dig out prey from the seabed, but analyses of abrasion patterns on the tusks indicate they are dragged through the sediment while the upper edge of the snout is used for digging. While the dentition of walruses is highly variable, they generally have relatively few teeth other than the tusks. The maximal number of teeth is 38 with dentition formula: 3.1.4.23.1.3.2, but over half of the teeth are rudimentary and occur with less than 50% frequency, such that a typical dentition includes only 18 teeth 1.1.3.00.1.3.0\nVibrissae (whiskers).\nSurrounding the tusks is a broad mat of stiff bristles (\"mystacial vibrissae\"), giving the walrus a characteristic whiskered appearance. There can be 400 to 700 vibrissae in 13 to 15 rows reaching 30\u00a0cm (12\u00a0in) in length, though in the wild they are often worn to much shorter lengths due to constant use in foraging. The vibrissae are attached to muscles and are supplied with blood and nerves, making them highly sensitive organs capable of differentiating shapes thick and wide.\nSkin.\nAside from the vibrissae, the walrus is sparsely covered with fur and appears bald. Its skin is highly wrinkled and thick, up to around the neck and shoulders of males. The blubber layer beneath is up to thick. Young walruses are deep brown and grow paler and more cinnamon-colored as they age. Old males, in particular, become nearly pink. Because skin blood vessels constrict in cold water, the walrus can appear almost white when swimming. As a secondary sexual characteristic, males also acquire significant nodules, called \"bosses\", particularly around the neck and shoulders.\nThe walrus has an air sac under its throat which acts like a flotation bubble and allows it to bob vertically in the water and sleep. The males possess a large baculum (penis bone), up to in length, the largest of any land mammal, both in absolute size and relative to body size.\nLife history.\nReproduction.\nWalruses live to about 20\u201330 years old in the wild. The males reach sexual maturity as early as seven years, but do not typically mate until fully developed at around 15 years of age. They rut from January through April, decreasing their food intake dramatically. The females begin ovulating as soon as four to six years old. The females are diestrous, coming into heat in late summer and around February, yet the males are fertile only around February; the potential fertility of this second period is unknown. Breeding occurs from January to March, peaking in February. Males aggregate in the water around ice-bound groups of estrous females and engage in competitive vocal displays. The females join them and copulate in the water.\nGestation lasts 15 to 16 months. The first three to four months are spent with the blastula in suspended development before it implants itself in the uterus. This strategy of delayed implantation, common among pinnipeds, presumably evolved to optimize both the mating season and the birthing season, determined by ecological conditions that promote newborn survival. Calves are born during the spring migration, from April to June. They weigh at birth and are able to swim. The mothers nurse for over a year before weaning, but the young can spend up to five years with the mothers. Walrus milk contains higher amounts of fats and protein compared to land animals but lower compared to phocid seals. This lower fat content in turn causes a slower growth rate among calves and a longer nursing investment for their mothers. Young may be suckled at sea as well as during long haul-outs, making walrus the only pinnipeds that exhibit aquatic suckling. Because ovulation is suppressed until the calf is weaned, females give birth at most every two years, leaving the walrus with the lowest reproductive rate of any pinniped.\nMigration.\nThe rest of the year (late summer and fall), walruses tend to form massive aggregations of tens of thousands of individuals on rocky beaches or outcrops. The migration between the ice and the beach can be long-distance and dramatic. In late spring and summer, for example, several hundred thousand Pacific walruses migrate from the Bering Sea into the Chukchi Sea through the relatively narrow Bering Strait.\nEcology.\nRange and habitat.\nThe majority of the population of the Pacific walrus spends its summers north of the Bering Strait in the Chukchi Sea of the Arctic Ocean along the northern coast of eastern Siberia, around Wrangel Island, in the Beaufort Sea along the northern shore of Alaska south to Unimak Island, and in the waters between those locations. Smaller numbers of males summer in the Gulf of Anadyr on the southern coast of the Siberian Chukchi Peninsula, and in Bristol Bay off the southern coast of Alaska, west of the Alaska Peninsula. In the spring and fall, walruses congregate throughout the Bering Strait, reaching from the western coast of Alaska to the Gulf of Anadyr. They winter over in the Bering Sea along the eastern coast of Siberia south to the northern part of the Kamchatka Peninsula, and along the southern coast of Alaska. A 28,000-year-old fossil walrus was dredged up from the bottom of San Francisco Bay, indicating that Pacific walruses ranged that far south during the last Ice Age.\nCommercial harvesting reduced the population of the Pacific walrus to between 50,000 and 100,000 in the 1950s\u20131960s. Limits on commercial hunting allowed the population to increase to a peak in the 1970s-1980s, but subsequently, walrus numbers have again declined. Early aerial censuses of Pacific walrus conducted at five-year intervals between 1975 and 1985 estimated populations of above 220,000 in each of the three surveys.\nIn 2006, the population of the Pacific walrus was estimated to be around 129,000 on the basis of an aerial census combined with satellite tracking. There were roughly 200,000 Pacific walruses in 1990.\nThe much smaller population of Atlantic walruses ranges from the Canadian Arctic, across Greenland, Svalbard, and the western part of Arctic Russia. There are eight hypothetical subpopulations of Atlantic walruses, based largely on their geographical distribution and movements: five west of Greenland and three east of Greenland. The Atlantic walrus once ranged south to Sable Island, off of Nova Scotia; as late as the 18th century, they could be found in large numbers in the Greater Gulf of St. Lawrence region, sometimes in colonies of 7-8,000 individuals. This population was nearly eradicated by commercial harvest; their current numbers, though difficult to estimate, probably remain below 20,000. In April 2006, the Canadian Species at Risk Act listed the populations of northwestern Atlantic walrus in Qu\u00e9bec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland and Labrador as having been eradicated in Canada. A genetically distinct population existed in Iceland that was wiped out after Norse settlement around 1213\u20131330 AD.\nAn isolated population is restricted, year-round, to the central and western regions of the Laptev Sea, from the eastern Kara Sea to the westernmost regions of the East Siberian Sea. The current population of these Laptev walruses has been estimated at between 5-10,000.\nEven though walruses can dive to depths beyond 500 meters, they spend most of their time in shallow waters (and the nearby ice floes) hunting for bivalves.\nIn March 2021, a single walrus, nicknamed Wally the Walrus, was sighted at Valentia Island, Ireland, far south of its typical range, potentially due to having fallen asleep on an iceberg that then drifted south towards Ireland. Days later, a walrus, thought to be the same animal, was spotted on the Pembrokeshire coast, Wales.\nIn June 2022, a single walrus was sighted on the shores of the Baltic Sea - at R\u00fcgen Island, Germany, Mielno, Poland and Sk\u00e4lder Bay, Sweden. In July 2022, there was a report of a lost, starving walrus (nicknamed as Stena) in the coastal waters of the towns of Hamina and Kotka in Kymenlaakso, Finland, that, despite rescue attempts, died of starvation when the rescuers tried to transport it to the Korkeasaari Zoo for treatment.\nDiet.\nWalruses prefer shallow shelf regions and forage primarily on the sea floor, often from sea ice platforms. They are not particularly deep divers compared to other pinnipeds; the deepest dives in a study of Atlantic walrus near Svalbard were only . However, a more recent study recorded dives exceeding in Smith Sound, between NW Greenland and Arctic Canada \u2013 in general, peak dive depth can be expected to depend on prey distribution and seabed depth.\nThe walrus has a diverse and opportunistic diet, feeding on more than 60 genera of marine organisms, including shrimp, crabs, priapulids, spoon worms, tube worms, soft corals, tunicates, sea cucumbers, various mollusks (such as snails, octopuses, and squid), some types of slow-moving fish, and even parts of other pinnipeds. However, it prefers benthic bivalve mollusks, especially clams, for which it forages by grazing along the sea bottom, searching and identifying prey with its sensitive vibrissae and clearing the murky bottoms with jets of water and active flipper movements. The walrus sucks the meat out by sealing its powerful lips to the organism and withdrawing its piston-like tongue rapidly into its mouth, creating a vacuum. The walrus palate is uniquely vaulted, enabling effective suction; researchers measured pressures in the oral cavity as low as -87.9 kPa in air, and -118.8 kPa underwater. Walruses at the Tierpark Hagenbeck were easily able to suck the five-pound (2.3 kg) metal plug out of the bottom of their pool, at a water depth of 1.1 metres. The diet of the Pacific walrus consist almost exclusively of benthic invertebrates (97 percent).\nAside from the large numbers of organisms actually consumed by the walrus, its foraging has a large peripheral impact on benthic communities. It disturbs (bioturbates) the sea floor, releasing nutrients into the water column, encouraging mixing and movement of many organisms and increasing the patchiness of the benthos.\nSeal tissue has been observed in a fairly significant proportion of walrus stomachs in the Pacific, but the importance of seals in the walrus diet is under debate. There have been isolated observations of walruses preying on seals up to the size of a bearded seal. Rarely, incidents of walruses preying on seabirds, particularly the Br\u00fcnnich's guillemot (\"Uria lomvia\"), have been documented. Walruses may occasionally prey on ice-entrapped narwhals and scavenge on whale carcasses but there is little evidence to prove this.\nPredators.\nDue to its great size and tusks, the walrus has only two natural predators: the orca and the polar bear. The walrus does not, however, comprise a significant component of either of these predators' diets. Both the orca and the polar bear are also most likely to prey on walrus calves. The polar bear often hunts the walrus by rushing at beached aggregations and consuming the individuals crushed or wounded in the sudden exodus, typically younger or infirm animals. The bears also isolate walruses when they overwinter and are unable to escape a charging bear due to inaccessible diving holes in the ice. However, even an injured walrus is a formidable opponent for a polar bear, and direct attacks are rare. Armed with its ivory tusks, walruses have been known to fatally injure polar bears in battles if the latter follows the other into the water, where the bear is at a disadvantage. Polar bear\u2013walrus battles are often extremely protracted and exhausting, and bears have been known to break away from the attack after injuring a walrus. Orcas regularly attack walruses, although walruses are believed to have successfully defended themselves via counterattack against the larger cetacean. However, orcas have been observed successfully attacking walruses with few or no injuries.\nRelationship with humans.\nConservation.\nIn the 18th and 19th centuries, the walrus was heavily exploited by American and European sealers and whalers, leading to the near-extinction of the Atlantic subspecies. As early as 1871 traditional hunters were expressing concern about the numbers of walrus being hunted by whaling fleets. Commercial walrus harvesting is now outlawed throughout its range, although Chukchi, Yupik and Inuit peoples are permitted to kill small numbers towards the end of each summer.\nTraditional hunters used all parts of the walrus. The meat, often preserved, is an important winter nutrition source; the flippers are fermented and stored as a delicacy until spring; tusks and bone were historically used for tools, as well as material for handicrafts; the oil was rendered for warmth and light; the tough hide made rope and house and boat coverings; and the intestines and gut linings made waterproof parkas. While some of these uses have faded with access to alternative technologies, walrus meat remains an important part of local diets, and tusk carving and engraving remain a vital art form.\nAccording to Adolf Erik Nordenski\u00f6ld, European hunters and Arctic explorers found walrus meat not particularly tasty, and only ate it in case of necessity; however walrus tongue was a delicacy.\nWalrus hunts are regulated by resource managers in Russia, the United States, Canada, and Greenland, and by representatives of the respective hunting communities. An estimated four to seven thousand Pacific walruses are harvested in Alaska and in Russia, including a significant portion (about 42%) of struck and lost animals. Several hundred are removed annually around Greenland. The sustainability of these levels of harvest is difficult to determine given uncertain population estimates and parameters such as fecundity and mortality. The \"Boone and Crockett Big Game Record\" book has entries for Atlantic and Pacific walrus. The recorded largest tusks are just over 30 inches and 37 inches long respectively.\nThe effects of global climate change are another element of concern. The extent and thickness of the pack ice has reached unusually low levels in several recent years. The walrus relies on this ice while giving birth and aggregating in the reproductive period. Thinner pack ice over the Bering Sea has reduced the amount of resting habitat near optimal feeding grounds. This more widely separates lactating females from their calves, increasing nutritional stress for the young and lower reproductive rates. Reduced coastal sea ice has also been implicated in the increase of stampeding deaths crowding the shorelines of the Chukchi Sea between eastern Russia and western Alaska. Analysis of trends in ice cover published in 2012 indicate that Pacific walrus populations are likely to continue to decline for the foreseeable future, and shift further north, but that careful conservation management might be able to limit these effects.\nCurrently, two of the three walrus subspecies are listed as least concern by the IUCN, while the third is data deficient. The Pacific walrus is not listed as depleted according to the Marine Mammal Protection Act nor as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species Act. The Russian Atlantic and Laptev Sea populations are classified as Category 2 (decreasing) and Category 3 (rare) in the Russian Red Book. Global trade in walrus ivory is restricted according to a CITES Appendix III listing. In October 2017, the Center for Biological Diversity announced they would sue the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to force it to classify the Pacific Walrus as a threatened or endangered species.\nIn 1952, walruses in Svalbard were nearly gone due to ivory hunting over a 300 years period, but the Norwegian government banned their commercial hunting and the walruses began to repopulate. By 2018, the population had increased to an estimated 5,503 walruses in the Svalbard area.\nCulture.\nFolklore.\nThe walrus plays an important role in the religion and folklore of many Arctic peoples. Skin and bone are used in some ceremonies, and the animal appears frequently in legends. For example, in a Chukchi version of the widespread myth of the Raven, in which Raven recovers the sun and the moon from an evil spirit by seducing his daughter, the angry father throws the daughter from a high cliff and, as she drops into the water, she turns into a walrus . According to various legends, the tusks are formed either by the trails of mucus from the weeping girl or her long braids. This myth is possibly related to the Chukchi myth of the old walrus-headed woman who rules the bottom of the sea, who is in turn linked to the Inuit goddess Sedna. Both in Chukotka and Alaska, the aurora borealis is believed to be a special world inhabited by those who died by violence, the changing rays representing deceased souls playing ball with a walrus head.\nMost of the distinctive 12th-century Lewis Chessmen from northern Europe are carved from walrus ivory, though a few have been found to be made of whales' teeth.\nLiterature.\nBecause of its distinctive appearance, great bulk, and immediately recognizable whiskers and tusks, the walrus also appears in the popular cultures of peoples with little direct experience with the animal, particularly in English children's literature. Perhaps its best-known appearance is in Lewis Carroll's whimsical poem \"The Walrus and the Carpenter\" that appears in his 1871 book \"Through the Looking-Glass\". In the poem, the eponymous antiheroes use trickery to consume a great number of oysters. Although Carroll accurately portrays the biological walrus's appetite for bivalve mollusks, oysters, primarily nearshore and intertidal inhabitants, these organisms in fact comprise an insignificant portion of its diet in captivity.\nThe \"walrus\" in the cryptic song \"I Am the Walrus\" by the Beatles is a reference to the Lewis Carroll poem.\nAnother appearance of the walrus in literature is in the story \"The White Seal\" in Rudyard Kipling's \"The Jungle Book\", where it is the \"old Sea Vitch\u2014the big, ugly, bloated, pimpled, fat-necked, long-tusked walrus of the North Pacific, who has no manners except when he is asleep\".\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nFurther reading.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33710", "revid": "47220715", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33710", "title": "Woozy", "text": "Woozy may refer to:\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33716", "revid": "45463755", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33716", "title": "Wolfville", "text": "Wolfville is a Canadian town in the Annapolis Valley, Kings County, Nova Scotia, located about northwest of the provincial capital, Halifax. The town is home to Acadia University and Landmark East School.\nThe town is a tourist destination due to its views of Cape Blomidon, the Bay of Fundy and Gaspereau Valley, as well as its wine industry. The downtown portion of Wolfville is home to pubs, bars, cafes and shops. Wolfville is also home to the Acadia Cinema Cooperative, a non-profit organization that runs the local movie/performance house. In the past few years, several Victorian houses in Wolfville have been converted to bed and breakfast establishments.\nHistory.\nFrench settlement in the Wolfville area began in about 1680, when Pierre Melanson established his family at Grand-Pr\u00e9. The Acadians prospered as farmers by enclosing the estuarine salt marshes with dykes, and successfully converting the reclaimed lands into fertile fields for crops and pasturage. In 1710, however, Acadia was lost by the French crown after the English laid siege to Annapolis Royal. Under the 1713 Peace of Utrecht, signed at the close of the War of the Spanish Succession, Acadia was ceded for the final time to the British.\nFor the next 36 years, until the establishment of Halifax in 1749, the British remained at Annapolis Royal and Canso. The French-speaking Catholic population grew over the intervening years to well over 10,000 and the Minas region (Wolfville and environs) quickly became the principal settlement. Acadia was a borderland region between the British and French empires, and this caused a complex socio-political environment to develop for the Acadians. Both the British and the French coaxed and threatened the Acadians in attempts to secure their loyalty, as is evidenced by the various oaths of allegiance each side attempted to extract from them. This complex situation led many Acadians to attempt to maintain a neutral path; while others openly supported either the French or the British. During the War of the Austrian Succession, the Acadians in the Wolfville area were implicated in the Battle of Grand Pr\u00e9, during which a French military force, reinforced by Mi'kmaq and Acadian allies, defeated a British force.\nAfter the outbreak of the Seven Years' War between Great Britain and France, the Acadians in the Wolfville area, along with all Acadians in peninsular Nova Scotia, were involved in the deportations which took place as part of the expulsion of the Acadians (see also the Bay of Fundy Campaign). Beginning in September 1755 and continuing into the fall, approximately 2,000 Acadians were deported by the British from the area around Wolfville. The villages lying beyond Grand-Pr\u00e9 were burned by British forces, and still more buildings were destroyed by both sides during the guerrilla war that took place until 1758.\nBritish rule.\nIn around 1760, the British authorities in Nova Scotia made several township plots of land available in the Annapolis Valley for colonization by English-speaking settlers. Horton Township was created in the Grand-Pr\u00e9/Wolfville Area. Because of pressure on agricultural lands in New England, Anglophone farmers moved north in search of fertile land at a reasonable price. It is thought that between 1760 and 1789, more than 8,000 people known as New England Planters immigrated to the land around the Annapolis Valley. In 1763, there were 154 families living in the area of Horton Township.\nThe New England Planters set up a primarily agricultural economy, exporting cattle, potatoes, and grain, and later apples, as well as developing lumbering and shipbuilding. They settled and re-used the same dyke-lands as the Acadians had used before them, repairing and later expanding the agricultural dykes. They developed a major expansion in 1808, the three-mile-long Wickwire Dyke, which connected the Wolfville and Grand Pre dykes. This allowed the agricultural development of an additional 8,000 acres. The town site for Horton was initially surveyed in the Grand-Pr\u00e9 area at Horton Landing near the mouth of the Gaspereau River. However, the town developed around the sheltered harbour on the Cornwallis River at Wolfville, at first known as Mud Creek.\nThe first official record of a Baptist church in Canada was that of the Horton Baptist Church (now Wolfville), established on October 29, 1778. The church was established with the assistance of the New Light evangelist Henry Alline. The Baptist movement remained strong in the area. In 1838 Acadia University was founded as a Baptist college.\nIn 1830, the town of Mud Creek changed its name to Wolfville, in honour of Elisha DeWolf, the town's postmaster at the time. In the mid-19th century, Wolfville was renowned as the world's smallest port. The town became part of Canada with Confederation in 1867.\nCanada.\nThe Windsor and Annapolis Railway arrived in 1868, later becoming the Dominion Atlantic Railway. Wolfville became a seaport devoted principally to the export of apples from the orchards of the fertile Annapolis Valley. Wolfville Harbour was also a terminus of the MV \"Kipawo\" ferry, the last of a long succession of ferries that connected Wolfville, Kingsport, and Parrsboro for 200 years. The harbour, which empties twice a day due to the high tides of the Bay of Fundy, was once described by Robert Ripley as the smallest in the world. On March 20, 1893, the Town was incorporated, with E. Perry Bowles elected as its first mayor.\nIn 1985, the town was declared a nuclear free zone. Wolfville was declared Canada's first fair trade town on April 17, 2007. In May 2016, Wolfville was designated as the third Cittaslow in Canada.\nDemographics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Wolfville had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.\nWith Acadia University having a full time student population of 3,765, the population can fluctuate greatly with the school semesters.\nArts and culture.\nThe Acadia University Art Gallery and The Festival Theatre are both located on Main Street, along with many bistros and boutiques. The town's history is presented at the Randall House Museum, operated by the Wolfville Historical Society. Each year, the Annapolis Valley Music Festival is held at Acadia Campus, where musicians from across the valley compete. Wolfville hosts two annual arts festivals, the Deep Roots Music Festival in September and Devour! The Food Film Fest in late October.\nThe Al Whittle Theatre operated by the Acadia Cinema Cooperative has for generations served as a nexus of culture and entertainment for the town's populace. Opened in 1911 and operating as an opera house until 1923 when it became a community theater and cinema, the theater underwent various changes in ownership until 1997 under the management of Acadia Cinems. With the retirement of its long-serving manager Al Whittle (1929\u20132021), the theater closed in 2000. In 2004, the theater was re-opened by the Acadia Cinema Cooperative Ltd. and named in honour of Al Whittle. The theater has continued to serve as a local gathering place and centre for the arts ever since, from hosting local theater productions to screening international independent films.\nWolfville has a farmers market located in the DeWolfe building, a former apple packing warehouse. In July 2022, the town hosted the first Annapolis Valley Pride Festival.\nIt has a library called Wolfville Memorial Library.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33717", "revid": "158436", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33717", "title": "Wild type", "text": "Phenotype of the typical form of a species as it occurs in nature\nThe wild type (WT) is the phenotype of the typical form of a species as it occurs in nature. Originally, the wild type was conceptualized as a product of the standard \"normal\" allele at a locus, in contrast to that produced by a non-standard, \"mutant\" allele. \"Mutant\" alleles can vary to a great extent, and even become the wild type if a genetic shift occurs within the population. Continued advancements in genetic mapping technologies have created a better understanding of how mutations occur and interact with other genes to alter phenotype. It is now regarded that most or all gene loci exist in a variety of allelic forms, which vary in frequency throughout the geographic range of a species, and that a uniform wild type does not exist. In general, however, the most prevalent allele \u2013 i.e., the one with the highest gene frequency \u2013 is the one deemed wild type.\nThe concept of wild type is useful in some experimental organisms such as fruit flies \"Drosophila melanogaster\", in which the standard phenotypes for features such as eye color or wing shape are altered by particular mutations that produce distinctive phenotypes, such as \"white eyes\" or \"vestigial wings\". Wild-type alleles are indicated with a \"+\" superscript, for example \"w+\" and \"vg+\" for red eyes and full-size wings, respectively. Manipulation of the genes behind these traits led to the current understanding of how organisms form and how traits mutate within a population. Research involving the manipulation of wild-type alleles has application in many fields, including fighting disease and commercial food production.\nMedical applications.\nThe genetic sequence for wild-type versus \"mutant\" phenotypes and how these genes interact in expression is the subject of much research. Better understanding of these processes is hoped to bring about methods for preventing and curing diseases that are currently incurable such as infection with the herpes virus. One example of such promising research in these fields was the study done examining the link between wild-type mutations and certain types of lung cancer. Research is also being done dealing with the manipulation of certain wild-type traits in viruses to develop new vaccines. This research may lead to new ways to combat deadly viruses such as the Ebola virus and HIV. Research using wild-type mutations is also being done to establish how viruses transition between species to identify harmful viruses with the potential to infect humans.\nCommercial applications.\nSelective breeding to enhance the most beneficial traits is the structure upon which agriculture is built, this expedited the evolution process to make crop plants and animals larger and more disease resistant. Genetic manipulation went further. Genetic alteration of plants leads to not only larger crop production, but also more nutritious products, allowing isolated populations to receive vital vitamins and minerals that would otherwise be unavailable to them. Utilization of these wild-type mutations has also led to plants capable of growing in extremely arid environments, making more of the planet habitable than ever before. As more is understood about these genes, agriculture will continue to become a more efficient process, which will be relied upon to sustain a continually growing population. Amplification of advantageous genes allows the best traits in a population to be present at much higher percentages than normal, although this practice has been the subject of some ethical debate. These changes have also been the reason behind certain plants and animals being almost unrecognizable when compared to their ancestral lines.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33718", "revid": "21830423", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33718", "title": "William Faulkner", "text": "American writer (1897\u20131962)\nWilliam Cuthbert Faulkner (; September 25, 1897\u00a0\u2013 July 6, 1962) was an American writer. He is best known for his novels and short stories set in the fictional Yoknapatawpha County, Mississippi, a stand-in for Lafayette County where he spent most of his life. A Nobel laureate, Faulkner is one of the most celebrated writers of American literature, often considered the greatest writer of Southern literature and regarded as one of the most influential and important writers of the 20th century.\nFaulkner was born in New Albany, Mississippi, and raised in Oxford, Mississippi. During World War I, he joined the Royal Canadian Air Force, but did not serve in combat. Returning to Oxford, he attended the University of Mississippi for three semesters before dropping out. He moved to New Orleans, where he wrote his first novel \"Soldiers' Pay\" (1925). He went back to Oxford and wrote \"Sartoris\" (1927), his first work set in Yoknapatawpha County. In 1929, he published \"The Sound and the Fury\". The following year, he wrote \"As I Lay Dying\". Later that decade, he wrote \"Light in August\"; \"Absalom, Absalom!;\" and \"The Wild Palms\". He also worked as a screenwriter, contributing to Howard Hawks's \"To Have and Have Not\" and \"The Big Sleep\", adapted from Raymond Chandler's novel. The former film, adapted from Ernest Hemingway's novel, is the only film with contributions by two Nobel laureates.\nFaulkner's reputation grew following publication of Malcolm Cowley's \"The Portable Faulkner,\" and he was awarded the 1949 Nobel Prize in Literature for \"his powerful and unique contribution to the modern American novel.\" He is the only Mississippi-born Nobel laureate. Two of his works, \"A Fable\" (1954) and \"The Reivers\" (1962), won the Pulitzer Prize for Fiction. Faulkner died from a heart attack on July 6, 1962, following a fall from his horse the month before. Ralph Ellison called him \"the greatest artist the South has produced\".\nLife.\nChildhood and heritage.\nFaulkner was born on September 25, 1897, in New Albany, Mississippi, the first of four sons of Murry Cuthbert Falkner and Maud Butler. His family was upper middle-class, but \"not quite of the old feudal cotton aristocracy\". After Maud rejected Murry's plan to become a rancher in Texas, the family moved to Oxford, Mississippi in 1902, where Faulkner's father established a livery stable and hardware store before becoming the University of Mississippi's business manager. Except for short periods elsewhere, Faulkner lived in Oxford for the rest of his life.\nFaulkner spent his boyhood listening to stories told to him by his elders \u2013 stories that spanned the Civil War, slavery, the Ku Klux Klan, and the Faulkner family. Young William was greatly influenced by the history of his family and the region in which he lived. Mississippi marked his sense of humor, his sense of the tragic position of \"black and white\" Americans, his characterization of Southern characters, and his timeless themes, including fiercely intelligent people who are dwelling behind the fa\u00e7ades of good ol' boys and simpletons. He was particularly influenced by stories of his great-grandfather William Clark Falkner, who had become a near legendary figure in North Mississippi. Born into poverty, the elder Falkner was a strict disciplinarian and was a Confederate colonel. Tried and acquitted twice on charges of murder, he became a member of the Mississippi House and became a part-owner of a railroad before being murdered by a co-owner. Faulkner incorporated many aspects of his great-grandfather's biography into his later works.\nFaulkner initially excelled in school and skipped the second grade. However, beginning somewhere in the fourth and fifth grades, he became a quieter and more withdrawn child. He occasionally played truant and became indifferent about schoolwork. Instead, he took an interest in studying the history of Mississippi. The decline of his performance in school continued, and Faulkner wound up repeating the eleventh and twelfth grades, never graduating from high school. As a teenager in Oxford, Faulkner dated Estelle Oldham (1897\u20131972), the popular daughter of Major Lemuel and Lida Oldham, and he also believed he would marry her. However, Estelle dated other boys during their romance, and, in 1918, Cornell Franklin (five years Faulkner's senior) proposed marriage to her before Faulkner did. She accepted.\nTrip to the North and early writings.\nWhen he was 17, Faulkner met Phil Stone, who became an important early influence on his writing. Stone was four years his senior and came from one of Oxford's older families; he was passionate about literature and had bachelor's degrees from Yale and the University of Mississippi. Stone read and was impressed by some of Faulkner's early poetry, becoming one of the first to recognize and encourage Faulkner's talent. Stone mentored the young Faulkner, introducing him to the works of writers like James Joyce, who influenced Faulkner's own writing. In his early 20s, Faulkner gave poems and short stories he had written to Stone in hopes of their being published. Stone sent these to publishers, but they were uniformly rejected. In spring 1918, Faulkner traveled to live with Stone at Yale, his first trip to the North. Through Stone, Faulkner met writers like Sherwood Anderson, Robert Frost, and Ezra Pound.\nDuring the First World War, Faulkner attempted to join the US Army. There are accounts of this that indicate he was rejected for being under weight and his short stature of 5'5\". Other accounts purport to prove that the aforementioned accounts are false. Although he initially planned to join the British Army in hopes of being commissioned as an officer, Faulkner instead joined the Royal Air Force (Canada) with a forged letter of reference and left Yale to receive training in Toronto. He enlisted in Toronto on July 10, 1918, as a Private (II Class), No.173799, in the RAF (C) but never saw active service overseas during the First World War, only training at the recruit depot in Toronto. \nOn January 4, 1919, he was discharged as a Private (II Class) due to the end of the War, having served 179 days. Despite claiming so in his letters, Faulkner did not receive cockpit training or ever fly. Returning to Oxford in December 1918, Faulkner told acquaintances false war-stories and even faked a war wound.\nIn 1918, Faulkner's surname changed from \"Falkner\" to \"Faulkner\". According to one story, a careless typesetter made an error. When the misprint appeared on the title page of his first book, Faulkner was asked whether he wanted the change. He supposedly replied, \"Either way suits me.\" His 1918 Attestation Papers for the RAF (C) note his name as \"Faulkner\". In adolescence, Faulkner began writing poetry almost exclusively. He did not write his first novel until 1925. His literary influences are deep and wide. He once stated that he modeled his early writing on the Romantic era in late 18th- and early 19th-century England.\nHe attended the University of Mississippi, enrolling in 1919, studying for three semesters before dropping out in November 1920. Faulkner joined the Sigma Alpha Epsilon fraternity, and pursued his dream to become a writer. He skipped classes often and received a \"D\" grade in English. However, some of his poems were published in campus publications. In 1922, his poem \"Portrait\" was published in the New Orleans literary magazine \"Double Dealer\". The magazine published his \"New Orleans\" short story collection three years later. After dropping out, he took a series of odd jobs: at a New York City bookstore, as a carpenter in Oxford, and as the Ole Miss postmaster. He resigned from the post office with the declaration: \"I will be damned if I propose to be at the beck and call of every itinerant scoundrel who has two cents to invest in a postage stamp.\"\nNew Orleans and early novels.\nWhile most writers of Faulkner's generation traveled to and lived in Europe, Faulkner remained writing in the United States. Faulkner spent the first half of 1925 in New Orleans, Louisiana, where many bohemian artists and writers lived, specifically in the French Quarter where Faulkner lived beginning in March. During his time in New Orleans, Faulkner's focus drifted from poetry to prose and his literary style made a marked transition from Victorian to modernist. \"The Times-Picayune\" published several of his short works of prose.\nAfter being directly influenced by Sherwood Anderson, Faulkner wrote his first novel, \"Soldiers' Pay,\" in New Orleans. \"Soldiers' Pay\" and his other early works were written in a style similar to contemporaries Ernest Hemingway and F. Scott Fitzgerald, at times nearly exactly appropriating phrases. Anderson assisted in the publication of \"Soldiers' Pay\" and \"Mosquitoes\" by recommending them to his publisher.\nThe miniature house at 624 Pirate's Alley, just around the corner from St. Louis Cathedral in New Orleans, is now the site of Faulkner House Books, where it also serves as the headquarters of the Pirate's Alley Faulkner Society.\nDuring the summer of 1927, Faulkner wrote his first novel set in his fictional Yoknapatawpha County, \"Flags in the Dust\". This novel drew heavily from the traditions and history of the South, in which Faulkner had been engrossed in his youth. He was extremely proud of the novel upon its completion and he believed it a significant step up from his previous two novels\u2014however, when submitted for publication to Boni &amp; Liveright, it was rejected. Faulkner was devastated by this rejection but he eventually allowed his literary agent, Ben Wasson, to edit the text, and the novel was published in 1929 as \"Sartoris.\" The work was notable in that it was his first novel that dealt with the Civil War rather than the contemporary emphasis on World War I and its legacy. Eventually Faulkner's daughter, Jill, would approach University of Virginia professor Douglas Day about restoring the text. Almost a fourth of the original manuscript had been cut by Wasson to meet the demands of publishers Harcourt, Brace in 1929. Working from a surviving typescript, Day reinstated cut passages but also included at least one added section from the published text. This new edition, published in 1973, also restored Faulkner's original title, \"Flags in the Dust.\" A third version by Noel Polk has since replaced Day's and is considered the definitive text by Random House, the current publishers of Faulkner's fiction.\n\"The Sound and the Fury\".\nIn autumn 1928, just after his 31st birthday, Faulkner began working on \"The Sound and the Fury\". He started by writing three short stories about a group of children with the last name Compson, but soon began to feel that the characters he had created might be better suited for a full-length novel. Perhaps as a result of disappointment in the initial rejection of \"Flags in the Dust\", Faulkner had now become indifferent to his publishers and wrote this novel in a much more experimental style. In describing the writing process for this work, Faulkner later said, \"One day I seemed to shut the door between me and all publisher's addresses and book lists. I said to myself, 'Now I can write.'\" After its completion, Faulkner insisted that Wasson not do any editing or add any punctuation for clarity.\n1929\u20131931.\nIn 1929, Faulkner married Estelle Oldham, with Andrew Kuhn serving as best man at the wedding. Estelle brought with her two children from her previous marriage to Cornell Franklin and Faulkner hoped to support his new family as a writer. Faulkner and Estelle had one child together, daughter Jill (1933\u20142008). He began writing \"As I Lay Dying\" in 1929 while working night shifts at the University of Mississippi Power House. The novel was published in 1930.\nBeginning in 1930, Faulkner sent some of his short stories to various national magazines. Several of these were published and brought him enough income to buy a house in Oxford for his family, which he named Rowan Oak. Fueled by a desire to make money, Faulkner wrote \"Sanctuary\". With limited royalties from his work, he published short stories in magazines such as \"The Saturday Evening Post\" to supplement his income.\n\"Light in August\" and Hollywood years.\nBy 1932, Faulkner was in need of money. He asked Wasson to sell the serialization rights for his newly completed novel, \"Light in August\", to a magazine for $5,000, but none accepted the offer. Then MGM Studios offered Faulkner work as a screenwriter in Hollywood. Faulkner was not an avid moviegoer and had reservations about working in the movie industry. As Andr\u00e9 Bleikasten comments, he \"was in dire need of money and had no idea how to get it...So he went to Hollywood.\" It has been noted that authors like Faulkner were not always hired for their writing prowess but \"to enhance the prestige of the ...writers who hired them.\" He arrived in Culver City, California, in May 1932. The job began a sporadic relationship with moviemaking and with California, which was difficult but he endured in order to earn \"a consistent salary that supported his family back home.\"\nInitially, he declared a desire to work on Mickey Mouse cartoons, not realizing that they were produced by Walt Disney Productions and not MGM. His first screenplay was for \"Today We Live\", an adaptation of his short story \"Turnabout\", which received a mixed response. He then wrote a screen adaptation of \"Sartoris\" that was never produced. From 1932 to 1954, Faulkner worked on around 50 films. In early 1944, Faulkner wrote a screenplay adaptation of Ernest Hemingway's novel \"To Have and Have Not\". The film was the first starring Lauren Bacall and Humphrey Bogart. Bogart and Bacall would star in Hawks's \"The Big Sleep\", another film Faulkner worked on.\nFaulkner was highly critical of what he found in Hollywood, and he wrote letters that were \"scathing in tone, painting a miserable portrait of a literary artist imprisoned in a cultural Babylon.\" Many scholars have brought attention to the dilemma he experienced and the predicament that caused him serious unhappiness. In Hollywood he worked with director Howard Hawks, with whom he quickly developed a friendship, as they both enjoyed drinking and hunting. Howard Hawks' brother, William Hawks, became Faulkner's Hollywood agent. Faulkner continued to find reliable work as a screenwriter from the 1930s to the 1950s. While staying in Hollywood, Faulkner adopted a \"vagrant\" lifestyle, living in brief stints in hotels like the Garden of Allah Hotel and frequenting the bar at the Roosevelt Hotel and the Musso &amp; Frank Grill where he was said to have regularly gone behind the bar to mix his own Mint Juleps. He had an extramarital affair with Hawks' secretary and script girl, Meta Carpenter.\nWith the onset of World War II, in 1942, Faulkner tried to join the United States Air Force but was rejected. He instead worked on local civil defense. The war drained Faulkner of his enthusiasm. He described the war as \"bad for writing\". Amid this creative slowdown, in 1943, Faulkner began work on a new novel that merged World War I's Unknown Soldier with the Passion of Christ. Published over a decade later as \"A Fable\", it won the 1954 Pulitzer Prize. The award for \"A Fable\" was a controversial political choice. The jury had selected Milton Lott's \"The Last Hunt\" for the prize, but Pulitzer Prize Administrator Professor John Hohenberg convinced the Pulitzer board that Faulkner was long overdue for the award, despite \"A Fable\" being a lesser work of his, and the board overrode the jury's selection, much to the disgust of its members.\nBy the time of \"The Portable Faulkner\"'s publication, most of his novels had been out of print.\nNobel Prize and later years.\nFaulkner was awarded the 1949 Nobel Prize in Literature for \"his powerful and artistically unique contribution to the modern American novel\". It was awarded at the following year's banquet along with the 1950 Prize to Bertrand Russell.\nWhen Faulkner visited Stockholm in December 1950 to receive the Nobel Prize, he met Else Jonsson (1912\u20131996), who was the widow of journalist Thorsten Jonsson (1910\u20131950). Jonsson, a reporter for \"Dagens Nyheter\" from 1943 to 1946, had interviewed Faulkner in 1946 and introduced his works to Swedish readers. Faulkner and Else had an affair that lasted until the end of 1953. At the banquet where they met in 1950, publisher Tor Bonnier introduced Else as the widow of the man responsible for Faulkner winning the Nobel Prize.\nFaulkner's Nobel Prize Acceptance Speech on the immortality of the artists, although brief, contained a number of allusions and references to other literary works. However, Faulkner detested the fame and glory that resulted from his recognition. His aversion was so great that his 17-year-old daughter learned of the Nobel Prize only when she was called to the principal's office during the school day. He began by saying: \"I feel that this award was not made to me as a man, but to my work \u2013 a life's work in the agony and sweat of the human spirit, not for glory and least of all for profit, but to create out of the materials of the human spirit something which did not exist before. So this award is only mine in trust. It will not be difficult to find a dedication for the money part of it commensurate with the purpose and significance of its origin.\" He donated part of his Nobel money \"to establish a fund to support and encourage new fiction writers\", eventually resulting in the William Faulkner Foundation (1960\u20131970).\nControversially, he is noted to have once stated: \"Television is for niggers\". On the subject, it was noted that \"for many white southerners nothing changed with the end of slavery except slavery.\"\nIn 1951, Faulkner received the Chevalier de la L\u00e9gion d'honneur medal from the government of France.\nFaulkner served as the first Writer-in-Residence at the University of Virginia at Charlottesville from February to June 1957 and again in 1958.\nIn 1961, Faulkner began writing his nineteenth and final novel, \"The Reivers\". The novel is a nostalgic reminiscence, in which an elderly grandfather relates a humorous episode in which he and two boys stole a car to drive to a Memphis bordello. In summer 1961, he finished the first draft. During this time, he injured himself in a series of falls.\nOn June 17, 1962, Faulkner suffered a serious injury in a fall from his horse, which led to thrombosis. He suffered a fatal heart attack on July 6, 1962, at the age of 64, at Wright's Sanatorium in Byhalia, Mississippi. Faulkner is buried with his family in St. Peter's Cemetery in Oxford.\nWriting.\nFrom the early 1920s to the outbreak of World War II, Faulkner published 13 novels and many short stories. This body of work formed the basis of his reputation and earned him the Nobel Prize at age 52. Faulkner's prodigious output include celebrated novels such as \"The Sound and the Fury\" (1929), \"As I Lay Dying\" (1930), \"Light in August\" (1932), and \"Absalom, Absalom!\" (1936). He was also a prolific writer of short stories.\nFaulkner's first short story collection, \"These 13\" (1931), includes many of his most acclaimed (and most frequently anthologized) stories, including \"A Rose for Emily\", \"Red Leaves\", \"That Evening Sun\", and \"Dry September\". He set many of his short stories and novels in Yoknapatawpha County\u2014which was based on and nearly geographically identical to Lafayette County (of which his hometown of Oxford, Mississippi, is the county seat). Yoknapatawpha was Faulkner's \"postage stamp\", and the bulk of work that it represents is widely considered by critics to amount to one of the most monumental fictional creations in the history of literature. Three of his novels, \"The Hamlet\", \"The Town\" and \"The Mansion\", known collectively as the Snopes trilogy, document the town of Jefferson and its environs, as an extended family headed by Flem Snopes insinuates itself into the lives and psyches of the general populace. Yoknapatawpha County has been described as a mental landscape.\nHis short story \"A Rose for Emily\" was his first story published in a major magazine, the \"Forum\", but received little attention from the public. After revisions and reissues, it gained popularity and is now considered one of his best.\nFaulkner wrote two volumes of poetry which were published in small printings, \"The Marble Faun\" (1924), and \"A Green Bough\" (1933), and a collection of mystery stories, \"Knight's Gambit\" (1949).\nStyle and technique.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe peacefullest words. Peacefullest words. \"Non fui. Sum. Fui. Non sum.\" Somewhere I heard bells once. Mississippi or Massachusetts. I was. I am not. Massachusetts or Mississippi. Shreve has a bottle in his trunk. \"Aren't you even going to open it\" Mr and Mrs Jason Richmond Compson announce the \"Three times. Days. Aren't you even going to open it\" marriage of their daughter Candace \"that liquor teaches you to confuse the means with the end\" I am. Drink. I was not. Let us sell Benjy's pasture so that Quentin may go to Harvard and I may knock my bones together and together. I will be dead in. Was it one year Caddy said.\n \u2014 An example of Faulkner's prose in \"The Sound and the Fury\" (1929)\nCarl Rollyson has argued that, \"as an artist,\" Faulkner believed \"he should be above worldly concerns and even morality.\" Faulkner was known for his experimental style with meticulous attention to diction and cadence. In contrast to the minimalist understatement of his contemporary Ernest Hemingway, Faulkner made frequent use of stream of consciousness in his writing, and wrote often highly emotional, subtle, cerebral, complex, and sometimes Gothic or grotesque stories of a wide variety of characters including former slaves or descendants of slaves, poor white, agrarian, or working-class Southerners, and Southern aristocrats.\nFaulkner's contemporary critical reception was mixed, with \"The New York Times\" noting that many critics regarded his work as \"raw slabs of pseudorealism that had relatively little merit as serious writing\". His style has been described as \"impenetrably convoluted\".\nIn an interview with \"The Paris Review\" in 1956, Faulkner remarked: Let the writer take up surgery or bricklaying if he is interested in technique. There is no mechanical way to get the writing done, no shortcut. The young writer would be a fool to follow a theory. Teach yourself by your own mistakes; people learn only by error. The good artist believes that nobody is good enough to give him advice. He has supreme vanity. No matter how much he admires the old writer, he wants to beat him. In that same interview, Jean Stein says \"Some people say they can't understand your writing, even after they read it two or three times. What approach would you suggest for them?\" Faulkner replies: \"Read it four times.\"\nWhen asked about his influences, Faulkner says \"the books I read are the ones I knew and loved when I was a young man and to which I return as you do to old friends: the Old Testament, Dickens, Conrad, Cervantes, \"Don Quixote\u2014\"I read that every year, as some do the Bible. Flaubert, Balzac\u2014he created an intact world of his own, a bloodstream running through twenty books\u2014Dostoyevsky, Tolstoy, Shakespeare. I read Melville occasionally and, of the poets, Marlowe, Campion, Jonson, Herrick, Donne, Keats, and Shelley.\"\nLike his contemporaries James Joyce and T. S. Eliot, Faulkner uses stories and themes from classic literature in a modern context. Joyce, in \"Ulysses\", modeled the journey of his hero Leopold Bloom on the adventures of Odysseus. Eliot, in his essay \"Ulysses, Order and Myth\", wrote that \"In using the myth, in manipulating a continuous parallel between contemporaneity and antiquity, Mr. Joyce is pursuing a method which others must pursue after him. They will not be imitators, any more than the scientist who uses the discoveries of an Einstein in pursuing his own, independent, further investigations. It is simply a way of controlling, of ordering, of giving a shape and a significance to the immense panorama of futility and anarchy which is contemporary history.\" Faulkner's allusions to earlier authors are evidenced by his titles; the title of \"The Sound and the Fury\" comes from Macbeth's soliloquy: \"it is a tale/ Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,/ Signifying nothing.\" The opening of the novel is told from the perspective of the intellectually disabled Benjy Compson. The title of \"As I Lay Dying\" comes from Homer's \"Odyssey\", where it is spoken by Agamemnon in the past tense: \"As I lay dying, the woman with the dog's eyes would not close my eyes as I descended into Hades.\" Faulkner's novel, in contrast, is narrated in the present tense. The title of \"Go Down, Moses\" is from an African American spiritual, and the book is dedicated \"To Mammy / Caroline Barr / Mississippi / [1840\u20131940] Who was born in slavery and who gave to my family a fidelity without stint or calculation of recompense and to my childhood an immeasurable devotion and love.\"\nThemes and analysis.\nFaulkner advocated a gradual abolition of racial segregation and made racial prejudices the subject of a number of his works including \"Intruder in the Dust\", but was critical of forced or fast-moving desegregation. He argued that civil rights activists should \"go slow\" and be more moderate in their positions. The essayist and novelist James Baldwin was highly critical of Faulkner's views around integration, seeing him as part of a group of educated white Southeners who falsely believed that there could be a middle ground between segregationists and integrationists. Ralph Ellison said that \"No one in American fiction has done so much to explore the types of Negro personality as has Faulkner.\"\nThe New Critics became interested in Faulkner's work, with Cleanth Brooks writing \"The Yoknapatawpha Country\" and Michael Millgate writing \"The Achievement of William Faulkner\". Since then, critics have looked at Faulkner's work using other approaches, such as feminist and psychoanalytic methods. Faulkner's works have been placed within the literary traditions of modernism and the Southern Renaissance.\nFrench philosopher Albert Camus wrote that Faulkner successfully imported classical tragedy into the 20th century through his \"interminably unwinding spiral of words and sentences that conducts the speaker to the abyss of sufferings buried in the past\".\nLegacy.\nInfluence.\nFaulkner is widely considered a towering figure in Southern literature; Flannery O'Connor wrote that \"the presence alone of Faulkner in our midst makes a great difference in what the writer can and cannot permit himself to do. Nobody wants his mule and wagon stalled on the same track the \"Dixie Limited\" is roaring down\". In 1943, while working at Warner Brothers, Faulkner wrote a letter of encouragement to a young Mississippi writer, Eudora Welty. According to critic and translator Valerie Miles, Faulkner's influence on Latin American fiction is considerable, with fictional worlds created by Gabriel Garc\u00eda M\u00e1rquez (Macondo) and Juan Carlos Onetti (Santa Maria) being \"very much in the vein of\" Yoknapatawpha, and that \"Carlos Fuentes's \"The Death of Artemio Cruz\" wouldn't exist if not for \"As I Lay Dying\"\". Fuentes himself cited Faulkner as one of the writers most important to him. Faulkner had great influence on Mario Vargas Llosa, particularly on his early novels \"The Time of the Hero\", \"The Green House\" and \"Conversation in The Cathedral\". Vargas Llosa has claimed that during his student years he learned more from Yoknapatawpha than from classes. Jorge Luis Borges is credited with the translation of Faulkner's \"The Wild Palms\" into Spanish, although Douglas Day believes it's not impossible that Borges' mother may have done the translation. Day also believes that Borges' deep immersion in and study of \"The Wild Palms\" may have influenced him to abandon the novel as his own writing form of choice.\nThe works of William Faulkner are a clear influence on the French novelist Claude Simon, and the Portuguese novelist Ant\u00f3nio Lobo Antunes. Cormac McCarthy has been described as a \"disciple of Faulkner\".\nIn \"The Elements of Style\", E. B. White cites Faulkner: \"If the experiences of Walter Mitty, of Dick Diver, of Rabbit Angstrom have seemed for the moment real to countless readers, if in reading Faulkner we have almost the sense of inhabiting Yoknapatawpha County during the decline of the South, it is because the details used are definite, the terms concrete.\" Later, Faulkner's style is contrasted with that of Hemingway.\nAfter his death, Estelle and their daughter, Jill, lived at Rowan Oak until Estelle's death in 1972. The property was sold to the University of Mississippi that same year. The house and furnishings are maintained much as they were in Faulkner's day. Faulkner's scribblings are preserved on the wall, including the day-by-day outline covering a week he wrote on the walls of his small study to help him keep track of the plot twists in his novel \"A Fable\". Some of Faulkner's Nobel Prize winnings went to establish the William Faulkner Foundation. It gave an Award for Notable First Novel; winners included John Knowles's \"A Separate Peace\", Thomas Pynchon's \"V.\", Cormac McCarthy's \"The Orchard Keeper\", Robert Coover's \"The Origin of the Brunists\" and Frederick Exley's \"A Fan's Notes\". Starting in 1981, this became the PEN/Faulkner Award for Fiction, founded by, among others, Mary Lee Settle as an alternative to the National Book Award.\nSome of Faulkner's works have been adapted into films. They have received a polarized response, with many critics contending that Faulkner's works are \"unfilmable\". Faulkner's final work, \"The Reivers\", was adapted into a 1969 film starring Steve McQueen. Tommy Lee Jones's neo-Western film \"The Three Burials of Melquiades Estada\" was partly based on Faulkner's \"As I Lay Dying\".\nDuring the Nazi Occupation of France in World War II, the German occupiers banned American literature. A black-market of American books emerged, and reading works by Hemingway and Faulkner became an act of defiance. Faulkner remains especially popular in France, where a 2009 poll found him the second most popular writer (after only Marcel Proust). Contemporary Jean-Paul Sartre stated that \"for young people in France, Faulkner is a god\", and Albert Camus made a stage adaptation of Faulkner's \"Requiem for a Nun\". In Jean-Luc Godard's \"Breathless\", Patricia (Jean Seberg) quotes \"The Wild Palms\": \"Between grief and nothing, I will take grief.\"\nHe also won the U.S. National Book Award twice, for \"Collected Stories\" in 1951 and \"A Fable\" in 1955.\nThe United States Postal Service issued a 22-cent postage stamp in his honor on August 3, 1987. Faulkner had once served as Postmaster at the University of Mississippi, and in his letter of resignation in 1923 wrote:\nAs long as I live under the capitalistic system, I expect to have my life influenced by the demands of moneyed people. But I will be damned if I propose to be at the beck and call of every itinerant scoundrel who has two cents to invest in a postage stamp.\nThis, sir, is my resignation.\nOn October 10, 2019, a Mississippi Writers Trail historical marker was installed at Rowan Oak in Oxford, Mississippi honoring the contributions of William Faulkner to the American literary landscape.\nFaulkner has a tribute on Mississippi's float for the 137th Rose Parade.\nCollections.\nThe manuscripts of most of Faulkner's works, correspondence, personal papers, and over 300 books from his working library reside at the Albert and Shirley Small Special Collections Library at the University of Virginia, where he spent much of his time in his final years. The library also houses some of the writer's personal effects and the papers of major Faulkner associates and scholars, such as his biographer Joseph Blotner, bibliographer Linton Massey, and Random House editor Albert Erskine.\nSoutheast Missouri State University, where the Center for Faulkner Studies is located, also owns a generous collection of Faulkner materials, including first editions, manuscripts, letters, photographs, artwork, and many materials pertaining to Faulkner's time in Hollywood. The university possesses many personal files and letters kept by Joseph Blotner, along with books and letters that once belonged to Malcolm Cowley. The university achieved the collection due to a generous donation by Louis Daniel Brodsky, a collector of Faulkner materials, in 1989.\nFurther significant Faulkner materials reside at the University of Mississippi, the Harry Ransom Center, and the New York Public Library.\nThe Random House records at Columbia University also include letters by and to Faulkner.\nIn 1966, the United States Military Academy dedicated a William Faulkner Room in its library.\nNotes and references.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"Oppression and Its Effects on the Individual and Society in Faulkner's 'A Rose for Emily'\", El-Ruha 5th International Conference on Social Sciences Proceedings Book, Eds. Fethi Demir&amp;Mehmet Recep Ta\u015f. . 2019. Tunisia. pp.\u00a031\u201338. www.elruha.org.\nWorks cited.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33719", "revid": "49402000", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33719", "title": "Wim Kok", "text": "Prime Minister of the Netherlands from 1994 to 2002\nWillem &lt;templatestyles src=\"Nobold/styles.css\"/&gt;\"Wim\" Kok (; 29 September 1938 \u2013 20 October 2018) was a Dutch politician and trade union leader who served as Prime Minister of the Netherlands from 22 August 1994 until 22 July 2002. He was a member of the Labour Party (PvdA).\nKok studied business administration at the Nyenrode Business School, obtaining a Bachelor of Business Administration degree, and worked as a trade union leader for the Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions from 1961 until 1976, serving as its chairman from 1972. In 1976 it merged to form the Federation of Dutch Trade Unions, with Kok serving as its first chairman until 1986. In the 1986 general election, Kok was elected to the House of Representatives, taking office on 3 June 1986. Shortly after the election, incumbent leader of the Labour Party Joop den Uyl announced he was stepping down and endorsed Kok as his successor, taking office on 21 July 1986. For the 1989 general election, Kok served as lead candidate, after which he struck a coalition agreement with incumbent Prime Minister Ruud Lubbers of the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), forming the third Lubbers cabinet. Kok became deputy prime minister and minister of finance, taking office on 7 November 1989.\nFor the 1994 general election, Kok served as lead candidate again and, following a cabinet formation, formed the first Kok cabinet, taking office as Prime Minister of the Netherlands on 22 August 1994. For the 1998 general election, Kok served as lead candidate once more, and after another successful cabinet formation, formed the second Kok cabinet, continuing as prime minister for a second term. In December 2001, Kok announced he was stepping down as party leader and that he would not stand for the 2002 general election or serve another term as prime minister. Kok left office following the installation of the first Balkenende cabinet on 22 July 2002.\nKok retired from active politics at 63 and became active in the private and public sectors as a corporate and non-profit director, served on several state commissions and councils on behalf of the government, and continued to be active as a lobbyist for the European Union, advocating further European integration. Kok was known for his abilities as a manager and negotiator. During his premiership, his cabinets were responsible for several major social reforms, such as the legalization of same-sex marriage and euthanasia, and further reducing the deficit. Kok was granted the honorary title of Minister of State on 11 April 2003 and continued to comment on political affairs as a statesman until his death at the age of 80. He holds the distinction of leading the first purple coalitions as prime minister and is consistently ranked both by scholars and the public as one of the best prime ministers after World War II.\nEarly life.\nWillem Kok was born on 29 September 1938, in Bergambacht in the Dutch province of South Holland, the son of Willem Kok, a carpenter, and Neeltje de Jager.\nAfter completing his studies in business at the Nyenrode Business Universiteit, he started his career in 1961 at the socialist Dutch Confederation of Trade Unions (NVV), where he was chairman from 1973 until 1982. In 1982, the NVV merged with the Dutch Catholic Trade Union Federation (NKV) to form the Federation of Dutch Trade Unions (FNV), of which he served as chair until 1986. In this position, he helped negotiate the Wassenaar Agreement.\nPolitical career.\nParliamentary leader and Minister of Finance.\nKok was elected to the House of Representatives on 3 June 1986, after the 1986 general election. Soon after the election Joop den Uyl, the leader of the Labour Party and the party's parliamentary leader in the House of Representatives, announced that he was stepping down after serving twenty years as party leader. Kok was elected to succeed him and became party and parliamentary leader of the Labour Party in the House of Representatives on 21 July 1986, serving as opposition leader during the parliamentary period of the second Lubbers cabinet.\nKok led his party in the 1989 general election. The Labour Party lost three seats, but the following cabinet formation resulted in a coalition agreement with the Christian Democratic Appeal (CDA), which formed the third Lubbers cabinet. Kok entered government for the first time and became both Deputy Prime Minister of the Netherlands and Minister of Finance, serving from 7 November 1989 until 22 August 1994.\nPrime Minister of the Netherlands.\nFirst term (1994\u20131998).\nIn the 1994 general election, the Labour Party lost twelve seats, but the CDA with new leader Elco Brinkman lost twenty seats, making the Labour Party the largest party in the House of Representatives. After an arduous cabinet formation with the conservative liberal People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (VVD) and the social liberal Democrats 66 (D66), a deal was struck that resulted in the first Kok cabinet, with Kok as prime minister. It was considered groundbreaking in Dutch politics as this was the first Cabinet of the Netherlands since 1918 without a Christian democratic party.\nThe main aim of the first Kok cabinet was to create employment. The Dutch economy had been in a deep recession for years. The market was allowed more influence in the economy. This led to a policy of tax reduction, economizing, and trying to keep people out of social care by supporting employment; large infrastructure projects were set in motion. Another aim was to put an end to the enormous debt of the Dutch government. The Treaty of Amsterdam was signed during this cabinet.\nKok's first term also saw various cuts and changes to education and welfare. Regarding education, spending on education, culture and sciences was cut by 1,772 million guilders. In addition, according to one study, \u201cA law concerning the modernization of the universities' administrative structure replaced the democratized structure of the 1970s with a more autocratic system, inspired by the management style of business concerns.\u201d Although primary education received some extra money, which made it possible to introduce computers and decrease the average number of pupils in 4 years, the latter resulted in a shortage of classrooms and teachers. Before 1996, the government provided a study allowance to people with a low income. That year, the Study Costs Allowance Act (WTS) was introduced, under which the number of standard amounts decreased and hard income limits were introduced. According to one study, \u201cIt soon became apparent that the WTS gave rise to a lot distressing situations. These situations are mainly related to the hard income limits that led to a major drop in income. In addition, the income limit of the WTS was independent of the number of children per family.\u201d In the 1998 coalition agreement, however, \u201cthese hard limits were corrected and more money was made available to more people.\u201d Regarding welfare, amendments were made to the General Child Benefit Act in 1995, under which benefit was increased with age only for the first child, while from 1996 child benefit only became payable for children up until the age of 18, while previously child benefit was paid up until the age of 24 under certain circumstances. Social Assistance was revised in 1995, with a tightening of both eligibility and entitlement rules. A special supplement for pensioners was abolished, the eligibility criteria were tightened, certain cash benefits to children and widows were reduced, unemployment eligibility criteria were tightened, and benefits were cut in the disability pension law. A linking law was adopted, which made it possible to link data sets from the population register, social security, and the aliens police\n(where all aliens must register). The goal of this was to oppose illegal residence by excluding illegal aliens from collective provisions such as social security benefits. In 1996, compulsory sick pay was entirely privatized, and wage continuation as a percentage of usual wages went down from 75 to 70%, although duration was extended to 52 weeks. With the review of a rent allowance, residents of non-self-contained accommodation were no longer entitled to rent subsidy in 1997. As noted by one study, \u201cFor people with a minimum social benefit and children, purchasing power decreased in the first three years of the cabinet's term of office. During the whole cabinet period their purchasing power increased with a meagre two-tenths of a per cent per annum, due to an increase oftwo per cent in the election year (cpb 1998: 22,168\u2013177).\u201d Under pressure from the churches and other groupings, however, \u201cthe cabinet placed the problem of poverty on the policy agenda.\u201d Some support was given to financially vulnerable groups, with compensations in the individual rent subsidy for households with children and an income at the level of the social minimum, measures for those elderly with only a general old age pension or a small additional pension, and a higher extra allowance for the first child. In addition, before the elections of 1998, \u201cthe decreased purchasing power was repaired with 850 million guilders, mainly for people on social benefit.\u201d\nDespite its cuts and changes to welfare and education, a number of progressive measures were introduced during the Kok cabinet's time in office. In 1994, a reform was passed including part-time workers in the occupational pension funds. In terms of residential care, a personal budget was introduced in 1995 to meet various individual needs; offering a choice \u201cbetween care in kind, or cash payments that could also be used to purchasing services from private and market sector.\u201d Employment protection was also maintained while past plans to reduce it were \u201cshelved,\u201d income tax for the lower paid was cut, and 40,000 jobs in the public sector for the long-term unemployed were created. From 1995, \u201celderly people with an income in the first tax bracket have a tax benefit. Due to the elderly person's deduction, the net AOW pension is higher.\u201d In 1997, a separate tax deduction for single elderly persons was introduced on 1 January 1997. According to one study, \u201cFor this group of elderly people with only an AOW pension, this measure provides an additional income benefit of approximately 1 percent (approximately NLG 160 on an annual basis).\u201d The personal contribution for the costs of disability support services under the Disability Facilities Act (Wvg) was also considerably relaxed as of 1 April 1996. According to one report \u201cThe personal contribution for a wheelchair has been cancelled and for the other facilities in kind it remains limited to f 100.\u201d \nUnder a circular from the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment dated 6 June 1996 (BZ/UK/96/2613), municipalities \u201chave been given the option of allocating municipal income support benefits categorically (the effect of this circular has been extended by the letter of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Employment of 30 May 2000, no. BZ/IW/00/34933A).\u201d An amendment to the General Assistance Act (Abw) 'in connection with the prevention and combating of poverty and social exclusion' (Bulletin of Acts and Decrees 193 of 2 May 1997) \u201chas ensured that from 1 July 1997 municipalities can also provide categorical special assistance in addition to individual special assistance.\u201d The government also attempted to support child care through the Stimulation of Child Care Act (1996), which made childcare provisions \u201ca shared responsibility between the government, the employer and the working parent.\u201d From 1996, municipalities \u201chave been able to appeal to a new subsidy option to provide childcare to single parents on social assistance, who are following schooling or who accept part-time or full-time work.\u201d In 1996 some 525 municipalities applied for this subsidy. As of 1 January 1997, municipalities and water boards \"have more extensive opportunity to grant a waiver.\"\nIn 1997, more flexibility introduced into the parental leave scheme, with employees able to request to spread leave over more than 26 weeks or take up more hours per week. That same year the rent subsidy was changed, with subject subsidies for tenants becoming more explicitly aimed at support for lower-income groups. Also in 1997, coverage of the AWBZ (a separate mandatory insurance scheme for long-term care set up in 1968) was extended to residential care for the elderly. From 1997 the TOG act on \u2018allowance for cost of maintenance of multiple and severely physically handicapped children\u2019 \u201coffers a financial support to parents who look after their severely handicapped children (3 till 18 years) at their home.\u201d In January 1998, national Disability Insurance was abolished, but a new law called Wajong was introduced. In addition, An Act of 24 April 1997 provided for \u201ca new insurance to protect self-employed workers and their spouses in case of long-term disability.\u201d An Act of 11 September 1997 provided for \u201cnew regulations that concern persons who are under the age of 65, suffer from physical or mental disabilities and can therefore only work full-time in jobs which are especially suited for them.\u201d It also provided that each community (\"gemeente\") \u201chas the responsibility to provide as many employment opportunities as possible to persons who are considered able to work only in jobs tailored to their needs or capacities.\u201d From July 1997 onwards, \u201cthe residents of care homes no longer pay individually for the viewing and listening fee.\u201d The Temporary Income Provision Former In-land Navigation Entrepreneurs Act of 1997 sought \u201cto rectify a lack of income support for entrepreneurs who have become incapable of continuing their work for reasons of old-age or disability. The income assistance and benefit provisions become effective as of 1 January 1999.\u201d\nFrom April 1998 onwards, persons aged 65 and above received a higher than other persons entitled to social assistance, known as the elderly person norm. An Act of 23 April 1998 established new rules with regard to the (re)integration of the disabled, such as renumeration, the promotion of equal opportunities, the provision of facilities, reintegration benefits, allowances for occupationally disabled WAZ insured persons, income supplements for occupationally disabled self-employed persons, wage supplements, and starter loans.\nIn the 1998 general election, the Labour party gained eight seats; the coalition retained its majority, and cabinet formation resulted in a continuation of policies with the second Kok cabinet.\nSecond term (1998\u20132002).\nThe second cabinet was the successor of the first cabinet and was formed from the same coalition of PvdA, VVD and D66. It was also known as the \"second purple cabinet\" called such because it contained both the social democratic PvdA (red) and the liberal VVD (blue). The aim of the cabinet was to continue the policy of cabinet Kok I, which was concerned with economizing, tax reduction, and making an end to unemployment. Kok was the prime minister, while Annemarie Jorritsma served as the deputy prime minister for the VVD, and Els Borst for D66. The cabinet had both left-wing and right-wing political parties as a part of it. There was no strong opposition in the House of Representatives. This did not mean that Kok did not face any problems. In May 1999, D66 stepped out of the coalition when proposed legislation on referendums, entered by this party, was blocked; through negotiations, the crisis was solved, and the cabinet stayed together. Moreover, allegations of expenses abuse were made against Minister of the Interior and Kingdom Relations Bram Peper from the time he was mayor of Rotterdam. On 13 March 2000, Peper resigned as minister, according to himself to no longer bring problems to the public government, and to be better able to defend himself. On the other hand, Kok's second term is known for legalizing same-sex marriage and euthanasia. A number of other reforms were also realised. A reform of bankruptcy was carried out, with the Bankruptcy Act providing a debt rescheduling scheme for natural persons as of 1 December 1998. In January 1999, the Flexibility and Security Act took effect, which made \u201cfixed employment more flexible and increased the security of flexible employees.\u201d On 1 November 1999, a new law on working conditions took effect, which created scope \u201cfor a more prominent role of works councils in the field of working conditions.\u201d A system of penalties was also introduced under which the Labour Inspectorate may fine any employer \u201cwho has not drawn up a risk inventory and assessment covering risks to pregnant women and those who have recently given birth or are breastfeeding, who does not provide the women concerned with information about the potential risks, or who does not offer alternative work if necessary.\u201d In 1999, a law was introduced called WWIK (Work and Income Provision for Artists Act), under which poor artists \u201cwho would otherwise need social benefits can for a maximum of four years receive the WWIK benefits while still being allowed to earn some money in the arts and without an obligation to apply for other jobs.\u201d The Adaptation of Working Hours Act gave employees \u201cthe right to request the shortening or lengthening of their working hours.\u201d One of the aims of the law was to promote the combination of work and care duties for both men and women. A Student Finance Act was introduced in 2000 with the intention of making it financially possible for everyone in the Netherlands to study. Under this Act, \u201cas a student you may be entitled to a loan or gift from the government.\u201d \nUnder the Working Hours Act of 2000, part-time workers were granted an explicit right to equal treatment in all areas negotiated by the social partners, such as second-tier pensions, holiday pay, subsidized care provision, training and education, basic social security, and wages. From 2001 onwards, counselling, training, and job offers were provided for all jobseekers after being unemployed for 6 months. On 1 January 2002, a new Work and Care Act came into force. This legislation brought together various existing and new leave provisions and sought to facilitate the reconciliation of work and family responsibilities. In addition to the amendment of existing regulations, such as those governing maternity and parental leave, new provisions covered the right to adjust working hours if personal circumstances require; two days of paid paternity leave; four weeks' leave for couples who adopt a child; and two days of paid leave per year for urgent personal reasons, along with 10 days of paid leave a year to care for family members. In 2001, a Labor Income Tax Credit (similar to the Earned Income Tax Credit in the United States) was introduced, providing tax relief to earners of labor income as a means of incentivizing employment. An extra tax credit for households with children was also introduced, along with the general tax credit (the successor to the tax-free allowance), and the young disabled person's tax credit for employees receiving a Wajong benefit. In addition, according to one study the percentage of the population living in poverty fell during Kok's second term in office.\nOn 15 December 2001, Kok announced he would retire from national politics after the elections of May 2002. He stood down as leader of the Labour Party that same day, in favour of Ad Melkert. Melkert did not appeal to the voter. Moreover, the \"polder model\" went out of fashion in early 2002, which saw the rise of Pim Fortuyn, a political newcomer.\nThe Srebrenica massacre occurred under the responsibility of the first Kok cabinet, which eventually led to the fall of the second Kok cabinet. On 16 April 2002, close to the natural end of term for the cabinet, prime minister Kok wished to resign early after being harshly criticised in a government-commissioned report by the NIOD Institute for War, Holocaust and Genocide Studies regarding the fall of Srebrenica in 1995 and the other ministers had no choice but to follow him. The second Kok cabinet remained in place as a caretaker cabinet, which had to cope with the murder of Fortuyn, and the CDA with leader Jan Peter Balkenende winning the elections. The caretaker cabinet stepped down on 22 July 2002, when the first Balkenende cabinet was installed.\nLegacy.\nKok was highly praised for his Third Way and polder model philosophies and for the success of leading his Purple Coalitions. During his premiership, his cabinets were responsible for implementing several social reforms, legalizing same-sex marriage and euthanasia, stimulating the economy resulting in more employment and privatization and further reducing the deficit. As a result of this, and because of his skills as a manager and negotiator, Kok was praised by his fellow European leaders.\nSubsequent work.\nAfter his premiership, Kok retired from active politics at the age of 63 and became a lobbyist for the European Union and presided over several \"high-level groups\". He also occupied numerous seats on supervisory boards in the business and industry world (ING Group, Koninklijke TNT Post, Royal Dutch Shell, KLM, Stork B.V., International Commission on Missing Persons, International Crisis Group, Anne Frank Foundation and served as president of the Club of Madrid from 2009 until December 2013). On 11 April 2003, he was granted the honorary title of Minister of State.\nLisbon Strategy.\nBetween April and November 2004, Kok headed up a review of the Lisbon Strategy and presented a report containing suggestions on how to give new impetus to the Lisbon process. The European Commission used this report to declare that the social and environmental parts are no longer a priority and declared a return to the Lisbon Agenda under economic terms only. Kok lobbied for the Lisbon Strategy of the European Commission and was appointed to the Honorary Board of the European Association of History Educators.\nBetween 2006 and 2007, Kok served as member of the Amato Group, a group of high-level European politicians unofficially working on rewriting the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe into what became known as the Treaty of Lisbon following its rejection by French and Dutch voters.\nPersonal life.\nIn 1965, after four years of dating, Kok married Margrietha Lummechiena \"Rita\" Roukema (born 3 November 1939). He adopted her two children from a previous marriage, daughter Carla (born 1959) and son Andr\u00e9 (born 1961 and died 30 March 2022), who was mentally disabled, and together they had a third child, son Marcel (born 1966).\nDeath.\nOn October 20, 2018, Wim Kok died from heart failure in a hospital in Amsterdam, aged 80, in the presence of his wife, children and grandchildren.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33721", "revid": "14650386", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33721", "title": "Weakly interacting massive particle", "text": "Hypothetical particles that may constitute dark matter\nWeakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) are hypothetical particles that are one of the proposed candidates for dark matter.\nThere exists no formal definition of a WIMP, but broadly, it is an elementary particle which interacts via gravity and any other force (or forces) which is as weak as or weaker than the weak nuclear force, but also non-vanishing in strength. Many WIMP candidates are expected to have been produced thermally in the early Universe, similarly to the particles of the Standard Model according to Big Bang cosmology, and usually will constitute cold dark matter. Obtaining the correct abundance of dark matter today via thermal production requires a self-annihilation cross section of formula_1 \u2243 , which is roughly what is expected for a new particle in the 100\u00a0GeV/\"c\"2 mass range that interacts via the electroweak force.\nExperimental efforts to detect WIMPs include the search for products of WIMP annihilation, including gamma rays, neutrinos and cosmic rays in nearby galaxies and galaxy clusters; direct detection experiments designed to measure the collision of WIMPs with nuclei in the laboratory, as well as attempts to directly produce WIMPs in colliders, such as the Large Hadron Collider at CERN.\nBecause supersymmetric extensions of the Standard Model of particle physics readily predict a new particle with these properties, this apparent coincidence is known as the \"WIMP miracle\", and a stable supersymmetric partner has long been a prime WIMP candidate. However, in the early 2010s, results from direct-detection experiments and the lack of evidence for supersymmetry at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) experiment have cast doubt on the simplest WIMP hypothesis.\nTheoretical framework and properties.\nWIMP-like particles are predicted by R-parity-conserving supersymmetry, a type of extension to the Standard Model of particle physics, although none of the large number of new particles in supersymmetry have been observed. WIMP-like particles are also predicted by universal extra dimension and little Higgs theories.\nThe main theoretical characteristics of a WIMP are:\nBecause of their lack of electromagnetic interaction with normal matter, WIMPs would be invisible through normal electromagnetic observations. Because of their large mass, they would be relatively slow moving and therefore \"cold\". Their relatively low velocities would be insufficient to overcome the mutual gravitational attraction, and as a result, WIMPs would tend to clump together. WIMPs are considered one of the main candidates for cold dark matter, the others being massive compact halo objects (MACHOs) and axions. These names were deliberately chosen for contrast, with MACHOs named later than WIMPs. In contrast to WIMPs, there are no known stable particles within the Standard Model of particle physics that have the properties of MACHOs. The particles that have little interaction with normal matter, such as neutrinos, are very light, and hence would be fast moving, or \"hot\".\nAs dark matter.\nA decade after the dark matter problem was established in the 1970s, WIMPs were suggested as a potential solution to the issue. Although the existence of WIMPs in nature is still hypothetical, it would resolve a number of astrophysical and cosmological problems related to dark matter. There is consensus today among astronomers that most of the mass in the Universe is indeed dark. Simulations of a universe full of cold dark matter produce galaxy distributions that are roughly similar to what is observed. By contrast, hot dark matter would smear out the large-scale structure of galaxies and thus is not considered a viable cosmological model.\nWIMPs fit the model of a relic dark matter particle from the early Universe, when all particles were in a state of thermal equilibrium. For sufficiently high temperatures, such as those existing in the early Universe, the dark matter particle and its antiparticle would have been both forming from and annihilating into lighter particles. As the Universe expanded and cooled, the average thermal energy of these lighter particles decreased and eventually became insufficient to form a dark matter particle-antiparticle pair. The annihilation of the dark matter particle-antiparticle pairs, however, would have continued, and the number density of dark matter particles would have begun to decrease exponentially. Eventually, however, the number density would become so low that the dark matter particle and antiparticle interaction would cease, and the number of dark matter particles would remain (roughly) constant as the Universe continued to expand. Particles with a larger interaction cross section would continue to annihilate for a longer period of time, and thus would have a smaller number density when the annihilation interaction ceases. Based on the current estimated abundance of dark matter in the Universe, if the dark matter particle is such a relic particle, the interaction cross section governing the particle-antiparticle annihilation can be no larger than the cross section for the weak interaction. If this model is correct, the dark matter particle would have the properties of the WIMP.\nIndirect detection.\nBecause WIMPs may only interact through gravitational and weak forces, they would be extremely difficult to detect. However, there are many experiments underway to attempt to detect WIMPs both directly and indirectly. \"Indirect detection\" refers to the observation of annihilation or decay products of WIMPs far away from Earth. Indirect detection efforts typically focus on locations where WIMP dark matter is thought to accumulate the most: in the centers of galaxies and galaxy clusters, as well as in the smaller satellite galaxies of the Milky Way. These are particularly useful since they tend to contain very little baryonic matter, reducing the expected background from standard astrophysical processes. Typical indirect searches look for excess gamma rays, which are predicted both as final-state products of annihilation, or are produced as charged particles interact with ambient radiation via inverse Compton scattering. The spectrum and intensity of a gamma ray signal depends on the annihilation products, and must be computed on a model-by-model basis. Experiments that have placed bounds on WIMP annihilation, via the non-observation of an annihilation signal, include the Fermi-LAT gamma ray telescope and the VERITAS ground-based gamma ray observatory. Although the annihilation of WIMPs into Standard Model particles also predicts the production of high-energy neutrinos, their interaction rate is thought to be too low to reliably detect a dark matter signal at present. Future observations from the IceCube observatory in Antarctica may be able to differentiate WIMP-produced neutrinos from standard astrophysical neutrinos; however, by 2014, only 37 cosmological neutrinos had been observed, making such a distinction impossible.\nAnother type of indirect WIMP signal could come from the Sun. Halo WIMPs may, as they pass through the Sun, interact with solar protons, helium nuclei as well as heavier elements. If a WIMP loses enough energy in such an interaction to fall below the local escape velocity, it would theoretically not have enough energy to escape the gravitational pull of the Sun and would remain gravitationally bound. As more and more WIMPs thermalize inside the Sun, they would begin to annihilate with each other, theoretically forming a variety of particles, including high-energy neutrinos. These neutrinos may then travel to the Earth to be detected in one of the many neutrino telescopes, such as the Super-Kamiokande detector in Japan. The number of neutrino events detected per day at these detectors depends on the properties of the WIMP, as well as on the mass of the Higgs boson. Similar experiments are underway to attempt to detect neutrinos from WIMP annihilations within the Earth and from within the galactic center.\nDirect detection.\n\"Direct detection\" refers to the observation of the effects of a WIMP-nucleus collision as the dark matter passes through a detector in an Earth laboratory. While most WIMP models indicate that a large enough number of WIMPs must be captured in large celestial bodies for indirect detection experiments to succeed, it remains possible that these models are either incorrect or only explain part of the dark matter phenomenon. Thus, even with the multiple experiments dedicated to providing indirect evidence for the existence of cold dark matter, direct detection measurements are also necessary to solidify the theory of WIMPs.\nAlthough most WIMPs encountering the Sun or the Earth are expected to pass through without any effect, it is hoped that a large number of dark matter WIMPs crossing a sufficiently large detector will interact often enough to be seen\u2014at least a few events per year. The general strategy of current attempts to detect WIMPs is to find very sensitive systems that can be scaled to large volumes. This follows the lessons learned from the history of the discovery, and (by now routine) detection, of the neutrino.\nExperimental techniques.\nCryogenic crystal detectors \u2013 A technique used by the Cryogenic Dark Matter Search (CDMS) detector at the Soudan Mine relies on multiple very cold germanium and silicon crystals. The crystals (each about the size of a hockey puck) are cooled to about 50 mK. A layer of metal (aluminium and tungsten) at the surfaces is used to detect a WIMP passing through the crystal. This design hopes to detect vibrations in the crystal matrix generated by an atom being \"kicked\" by a WIMP. The tungsten transition edge sensors (TES) are held at the critical temperature so they are in the superconducting state. Large crystal vibrations will generate heat in the metal and are detectable because of a change in resistance. CRESST, CoGeNT, and EDELWEISS run similar setups.\nNoble gas scintillators \u2013 Another way of detecting atoms \"knocked about\" by a WIMP is to use scintillating material, so that light pulses are generated by the moving atom and detected, often with PMTs. Experiments such as DEAP at SNOLAB and DarkSide at the LNGS instrument a very large target mass of liquid argon for sensitive WIMP searches. ZEPLIN, and XENON used xenon to exclude WIMPs at higher sensitivity, with the most stringent limits to date provided by the XENON1T detector, utilizing 3.5 tons of liquid xenon. Even larger multi-ton liquid xenon detectors have been approved for construction from the XENON, LUX-ZEPLIN and PandaX collaborations.\nCrystal scintillators \u2013 Instead of a liquid noble gas, an in principle simpler approach is the use of a scintillating crystal such as NaI(Tl). This approach is taken by DAMA/LIBRA, an experiment that observed an annular modulation of the signal consistent with WIMP detection (see \"\"). Several experiments are attempting to replicate those results, including ANAIS, COSINUS and DM-Ice, which is codeploying NaI crystals with the IceCube detector at the South Pole. KIMS is approaching the same problem using CsI(Tl) as a scintillator.\nBubble chambers \u2013 The PICASSO (Project In Canada to Search for Supersymmetric Objects) experiment is a direct dark matter search experiment that is located at SNOLAB in Canada. It uses bubble detectors with Freon as the active mass. PICASSO is predominantly sensitive to spin-dependent interactions of WIMPs with the fluorine atoms in the Freon. COUPP, a similar experiment using trifluoroiodomethane(CF3I), published limits for mass above 20\u00a0GeV/\"c\"2 in 2011. The two experiments merged into PICO collaboration in 2012.\nA bubble detector is a radiation sensitive device that uses small droplets of superheated liquid that are suspended in a gel matrix. It uses the principle of a bubble chamber but, since only the small droplets can undergo a phase transition at a time, the detector can stay active for much longer periods. When enough energy is deposited in a droplet by ionizing radiation, the superheated droplet becomes a gas bubble. The bubble development is accompanied by an acoustic shock wave that is picked up by piezo-electric sensors. The main advantage of the bubble detector technique is that the detector is almost insensitive to background radiation. The detector sensitivity can be adjusted by changing the temperature, typically operated between 15\u00a0\u00b0C and 55\u00a0\u00b0C. There is another similar experiment using this technique in Europe called SIMPLE.\nPICASSO reports results (November 2009) for spin-dependent WIMP interactions on 19F, for masses of 24 Gev new stringent limits have been obtained on the spin-dependent cross section of 13.9 pb (90% CL). The obtained limits restrict recent interpretations of the DAMA/LIBRA annual modulation effect in terms of spin dependent interactions.\nPICO is an expansion of the concept planned in 2015.\nOther types of detectors \u2013 Time projection chambers (TPCs) filled with low pressure gases are being studied for WIMP detection. The Directional Recoil Identification From Tracks (DRIFT) collaboration is attempting to utilize the predicted directionality of the WIMP signal. DRIFT uses a carbon disulfide target, that allows WIMP recoils to travel several millimetres, leaving a track of charged particles. This charged track is drifted to an MWPC readout plane that allows it to be reconstructed in three dimensions and determine the origin direction. DMTPC is a similar experiment with CF4 gas.\nThe DAMIC (DArk Matter In CCDs) and SENSEI (Sub Electron Noise Skipper CCD Experimental Instrument) collaborations employ the use of scientific Charge Coupled Devices (CCDs) to detect light Dark Matter. The CCDs act as both the detector target and the readout instrumentation. WIMP interactions with the bulk of the CCD can induce the creation of electron-hole pairs, which are then collected and readout by the CCDs. In order to decrease the noise and achieve detection of single electrons, the experiments make use of a type of CCD known as the Skipper CCD, which allows for averaging over repeated measurements of the same collected charge.\nRecent limits.\nThere are currently no confirmed detections of dark matter from direct detection experiments, with the strongest exclusion limits coming from the LUX and SuperCDMS experiments, as shown in figure 2.\nWith 370 kilograms of xenon, LUX is more sensitive than XENON or CDMS. The first results from October 2013 report that no signals were seen, appearing to refute results obtained from less sensitive instruments. This was confirmed after the final data run ended in May 2016.\nHistorically, there have been four anomalous sets of data from different direct detection experiments, two of which have now been explained with backgrounds (CoGeNT and CRESST-II), and two which remain unexplained (DAMA/LIBRA and CDMS-Si). In February 2010, researchers at CDMS announced that they had observed two events that may have been caused by WIMP-nucleus collisions.\nCoGeNT, a smaller detector using a single germanium puck, designed to sense WIMPs with smaller masses, reported hundreds of detection events in 56 days. They observed an annual modulation in the event rate that could indicate light dark matter. However, a dark matter origin for the CoGeNT events has been refuted by more recent analyses, in favour of an explanation in terms of a background from surface events.\nAnnual modulation is one of the predicted signatures of a WIMP signal, and on this basis the DAMA collaboration has claimed a positive detection. Other groups, however, have not confirmed this result. The CDMS data, made public in May 2004. exclude the entire DAMA signal region given certain standard assumptions about the properties of the WIMPs and the dark matter halo, and this has been followed by many other experiments (see Figure 2).\nThe COSINE-100 collaboration (a merging of KIMS and DM-Ice groups) published their results on replicating the DAMA/LIBRA signal in December 2018 in journal Nature; their conclusion was that \"this result rules out WIMP\u2013nucleon interactions as the cause of the annual modulation observed by the DAMA collaboration\". In 2021, new results from COSINE-100 and ANAIS-112 both failed to replicate the DAMA/LIBRA signal and in August 2022, COSINE-100 applied an analysis method similar to one used by DAMA/LIBRA and found a similar annual modulation suggesting the signal could be just a statistical artifact, supporting a hypothesis first put forward in 2020.\nFuture of direct detection.\nThe 2020s should see the emergence of several multi-tonne mass direct detection experiments, which will probe WIMP-nucleus cross sections orders of magnitude smaller than the current state-of-the-art sensitivity. Examples of such next-generation experiments are LUX-ZEPLIN (LZ) and XENONnT, which are multi-tonne liquid xenon experiments, followed by DARWIN, another proposed liquid xenon direct detection experiment of 50\u2013100 tonnes.\nSuch multi-tonne experiments will also face a new background in the form of neutrinos, which will limit their ability to probe the WIMP parameter space beyond a certain point, known as the neutrino floor. However, although its name may imply a hard limit, the neutrino floor represents the region of parameter space beyond which experimental sensitivity can only improve at best as the square root of exposure (the product of detector mass and running time). For WIMP masses below 10\u00a0GeV/\"c\"2, the dominant source of neutrino background is from the Sun, while for higher masses the background contains contributions from atmospheric neutrinos and the diffuse supernova neutrino background.\nIn December 2021, results from PandaX have found no signal in their data, with a lowest excluded cross section of at 40\u00a0GeV with 90% confidence level. \nIn July 2023, the XENONnT and LZ experiment published the first results of their searches for WIMPs, the first excluding cross sections above at 28\u00a0GeV with 90% confidence level and the second excluding cross sections above at 36\u00a0GeV with 90% confidence level.\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33725", "revid": "1316454972", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33725", "title": "Weregild", "text": "Paid in atonement for blood guilt\nWeregild (also spelled wergild, wergeld (in archaic/historical usage of English), weregeld, etc.), also known as man price (blood money), was a tradition in Germanic law whereby a monetary value was established for a person's life, to be paid as a fine or as compensatory damages to the person's family if that person was killed or injured by another.\nEtymology and terminology.\nThe compound noun weregild means \"remuneration for a man\", from Proto-Germanic \"man, human\" and \"retaliation, remuneration\". In the southern Germanic areas, this is the most common term used to mean \"payment for killing a man\" (Old High German , Langobardic , Old English ), whereas in the North Germanic areas, the more common term is Old Norse , with the same meaning. Wolfgang Haubrichs argues that wergild is \"undoubtably a West Germanic word\" which spread throughout the various Germanic-speaking peoples, but which in the north was replaced with since the meaning of the element \"wer-\" had been forgotten; comparable replacement words such as (\"repayment\") are known from the south.\nSeveral alternative terms are also found, such as (\"man\") and (\"violation of a man\") in the Lex Salica, and the short from in Old English. Both of these terms appear to derive from a word meaning the subject harmed, with a shift to meaning the payment for that harm.\nOverview.\nA weregild or wergeld was a defined value placed on every man graded according to rank, used as a basis of a fine or compensation for murder, disablement, injury, and certain other serious crimes against that person. It was assessed from the guilty party, payable as restitution to the victim's family.\nThe weregild was codified, for example, under Frankish Salic Code.\nWeregild payment was an important legal mechanism in early Germanic society; the other common form of legal reparation at this time was blood revenge. The payment was typically made to the family or to the clan. Similar to the way a payment was made to family, it was also a family's or kin group's responsibility to ensure the payment for the wrong committed, especially if the offender is unable to cover the cost of the offense himself.\nNo distinction was made between murder and manslaughter until these distinctions were instituted by the re-introduction of Roman law in the 12th century.\nPayment of the weregild was gradually replaced with capital punishment due to Christianization, starting around the 9th century, and almost entirely by the 12th century when weregild began to cease as a practice throughout the Holy Roman Empire.\nWeregild from \"Nor\u00f0leoda Laga\":\nOrigins.\nWergild first appears in the European historical record in 500 AD in the \"Lex Burgundionum\", but the concept of paying blood-money is found widely in many pre-modern societies. Scholars debate if wergild was a traditional Germanic legal concept, or if it developed from a Roman predecessor. Christophe Gamby argued in 2013 that the entire institution was essentially derived from Roman law, whereas Harald Siems and Ralph Mathisen both rejected this concept in 2021, arguing that nothing comparable existed in Roman Law. However, Siems and Mathisen both argue that Roman law still influenced the definitions of crimes and possibly legal procedures in the \"barbarian law codes\" that first contain wergild.\nAmount.\nThe size of the weregild was largely conditional upon the social rank of the victim. There used to be something of a \"basis\" fee for a standard \"free man\" that could then be multiplied according to the social rank of the victim and the circumstances of the crime. The weregild for women relative to that of men of equal rank varied: among the Saxons half that of men.\nIn the Migration period, the standard weregild for a freeman appears to have been 200 solidi (shillings), an amount reflected as the basic fee due for the death of a \"churl\" (or \"ceorl\") both in later Anglo-Saxon and continental law codes.\nIn the 8th century, the \"Lex Alamannorum\" sets the weregild for a duke or archbishop at three times the basic fee (600 shillings), while the killing of a low ranking cleric was fined with 300, raised to 400 if the cleric was attacked while he was reading mass.\nDuring the reign of Charlemagne, his \"missi dominici\" required three times the regular weregild should they be killed whilst on a mission from the king.\nIn 9th century Mercian law a regular freeman (churl) was worth 200 shillings (\"twyhyndeman\"), and a nobleman was worth 1,200 (\"twelfhyndeman\"), a division established enough that two centuries later a charter of King Cnut's would simply refer to \"all his people - the twelve-hundreders and the two-hundreders\". The law code even mentions the weregild for a king, at 30,000 thrymsas, composed of 15,000 for the man, paid to the royal family, and 15,000 for the kingship, paid to the people. An archbishop or nobleman is likewise valued at 15,000 thrymsas. The weregild for a Welshman was 120 shillings if he owned at least one hide of land and was able to pay the king's tribute. If he has only 1 hide and cannot pay the tribute, his wergild was 80 shillings and then 70 if he was landless yet free.\nThralls and slaves legally commanded no weregild, but it was commonplace to make a nominal payment in the case of a thrall and the value of the slave in such a case. Technically this amount cannot be called a weregild, because it was more akin to a reimbursement to the owner for lost or damaged property.\nIn literature.\nMedieval.\nA classic example of a dispute over the weregild of a slave is contained in Iceland's \"Egil's Saga\".\nIn the V\u00f6lsunga saga or Saga of the Volsungs, the \u00c6sir (Odin, Loki and H\u0153nir) are asked to pay weregild for killing Otr, son of Hreidmar. Otr is a \"great fisherman\" and resembles an otter. He is 'eating a salmon and half dozing' on the river banks of Andvari's Falls when Loki kills him by throwing a stone at him. Later that evening, the \u00c6sir visit Hreidmar's house where they are seized and imposed with a fine. Their fine consists of \"filling the [Otr] skin with gold and covering the outside with red gold.\" Loki is sent to get the gold and he manages to trick the dwarf Andvari into giving him the gold as well as a cursed ring: \"The dwarf went into the rock and said that the gold ring would be the death of whoever owned it, and the same applied to all the gold.\"\nIn the \"Story of Grettir the Strong\", chapter 27, \"The Suit for the Slaying of Thorgils Makson\", Thorgeir conveys to court Thorgils Arison's offer of weregild as atonement for killing Thorgils Makson.\nIn the Old English epic poem \"Beowulf\", lines 156\u2013158 Grendel refuses to settle his killings with payment or recompense, and at lines 456\u2013472, Hro\u00f0gar recalls the story of how Ecg\u00feeow (Beowulf's father) once came to him for help, for he had slain Hea\u00f0olaf, a man from another tribe called the Wulfings, and either could not pay the wergild or they refused to accept it. Hro\u00f0gar had married Wealh\u00feeow, who probably belonged to the Wulfing tribe, and was able to use his kinship ties to persuade the Wulfings to accept the wergild and end the feud. Hro\u00f0gar sees Beowulf's offer as a son's gratitude for what Hro\u00f0gar had done for Beowulf's father.\nModern.\nIn the novel \"The Lord of the Rings\" by J. R. R. Tolkien, the journal of Isildur reveals that he justified taking the One Ring as a weregild for the deaths of his father (Elendil) and brother (An\u00e1rion) in battle. This fact is mentioned by Elrond during the council in chapter II: \u2018Alas! yes,\u2019 said Elrond (\u2026) But Isildur would not listen to our counsel. \u201cThis I will have as weregild for my father, and my brother,\u201d he said. Appendix A of \"The Return of the King\" also mentions a rich weregild of gold sent by T\u00farin II, Steward of Gondor, to King Folcwine of Rohan, after the death of his twin sons, Folcred and Fastred, in battle in Ithilien.\nIn Jim Butcher's Dresden Files novel \"Skin Game\", Harry Dresden offers John Marcone a cashbox of diamonds as \"weregild\" for an employee murdered by Deirdre. Dresden says \"That's for your dead employee's family. Take care of them with it. And leave my people out of it. It ends here.\"\nIn Rick Riordan's novel \"The Hammer of Thor\", Hearthstone, an elf, must pay a wergild for his brother Andiron's death when they were children. Hearthstone, the older brother, was distracted and playing with rocks when a Brunnmigi emerged from a well and killed Andiron. Since Hearthstone was deaf, he did not notice until it was too late. Hearthstone was forced by their father to skin the large beast by himself, which was turned into a rug and placed on the floor of his room. To pay his wergild, he had to cover every single hair with gold earned from his father, generally by doing chores. Every meal and any free time, among other things, cost Hearthstone earned gold. This task was not accomplished until years later, and his father, Alderman, was reluctant to consider the debt paid, but finally conceded that Hearthstone was released from the debt.\nSee also.\nInternational:\nGeneral:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33726", "revid": "1777127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33726", "title": "Washington Irving", "text": "American writer, historian, and diplomat (1783\u20131859)\nWashington Irving (April 3, 1783 \u2013 November 28, 1859) was an American short-story writer, essayist, biographer, historian, and diplomat of the early 19th century. He wrote the short stories \"Rip Van Winkle\" (1819) and \"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" (1820), both of which appear in his collection \"The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.\" His historical works include biographies of Oliver Goldsmith, Muhammad, and George Washington, as well as several histories of 15th-century Spain that deal with subjects such as the Alhambra, Christopher Columbus, and the Moors. Irving served as the American ambassador to Spain in the 1840s.\nIrving was born and raised in Manhattan to a merchant family. He made his literary debut in 1802 with a series of observational letters to the \"Morning Chronicle\", written under the pseudonym Jonathan Oldstyle. He temporarily moved to England for the family business in 1815, where he achieved fame with the publication of \"The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.\" which was serialized from 1819 to 1820. He continued to publish regularly throughout his life, and he completed a five-volume biography of George Washington just eight months before his death at age 76 in Tarrytown, New York.\nIrving was one of the first American writers to earn acclaim in Europe, and he encouraged other American authors such as Nathaniel Hawthorne, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Herman Melville, and Edgar Allan Poe. He was also admired by some British writers, including Lord Byron, Thomas Campbell, Charles Dickens, Mary Shelley, Francis Jeffrey, and Walter Scott. He advocated for writing as a legitimate profession and argued for stronger laws to protect American writers from copyright infringement.\nBiography.\nEarly years.\nWashington Irving's parents were William Irving Sr., originally of Quholm, Shapinsay, Orkney, Scotland, and Sarah (n\u00e9e Saunders), originally of Falmouth, Cornwall, England. They married in 1761 while William was serving as a petty officer in the British Navy. They had eleven children, eight of whom survived to adulthood. Their first two sons died in infancy, both named William, as did their fourth child John. Their surviving children were William Jr. (1766), Ann (1770), Peter (1771), Catherine (1774), Ebenezer (1776), John Treat (1778), Sarah (1780), and Washington.\nThe Irving family settled in Manhattan, and were part of the city's merchant class. Washington was born on April 3, 1783, the same week that New York City residents learned of the British ceasefire which ended the American Revolution. Irving's mother named him after George Washington. Irving met his namesake at age 6 when George Washington came to New York just before his inauguration as President in 1789. The President blessed young Irving, an encounter that Irving had commemorated in a small watercolor painting which continues to hang in his home.\nThe Irvings lived at 131 William Street at the time of Washington's birth, but they later moved across the street to 128 William Street. Several of Irving's brothers became active New York merchants; they encouraged his literary aspirations, often supporting him financially as he pursued his writing career.\nIrving was an uninterested student who preferred adventure stories and drama, and he regularly sneaked out of class in the evenings to attend the theater by the time he was 14. An outbreak of yellow fever in Manhattan in 1798 prompted his family to send him upriver, where he stayed with his friend James Kirke Paulding in Tarrytown, New York. It was in Tarrytown where he became familiar with the bucolic beauty of the region with its Dutch customs and local ghost stories. Though the town of Sleepy Hollow did not exist in Irving's time (North Tarrytown changed its name to Sleepy Hollow in 1996), the area had been known as Slapershaven or \"Sleeper's Haven\" by the Dutch. Irving made several other trips up the Hudson as a teenager, including an extended visit to Johnstown, New York, where he passed through the Catskill Mountains region, the setting for \"Rip Van Winkle\". \"Of all the scenery of the Hudson\", Irving wrote, \"the Kaatskill Mountains had the most witching effect on my boyish imagination\".\nIrving began writing letters to the New York \"Morning Chronicle\" in 1802 when he was 19, submitting commentaries on the city's social and theater scene under the pseudonym Jonathan Oldstyle. The name evoked his Federalist leanings and was the first of many pseudonyms he employed throughout his career. The letters brought Irving some early fame and moderate notoriety. Aaron Burr was a co-publisher of the \"Chronicle\", and was impressed enough to send clippings of the Oldstyle pieces to his daughter Theodosia. Charles Brockden Brown made a trip to New York to try to recruit Oldstyle for a literary magazine he was editing in Philadelphia.\nConcerned for his health, Irving's brothers financed an extended tour of Europe from 1804 to 1806. He bypassed most of the sites and locations considered essential for the social development of a young man, to the dismay of his brother William who wrote that he was pleased that his brother's health was improving, but he did not like the choice to \"\"gallop through Italy\" ... leaving Florence on your left and Venice on your right\". Instead, Irving honed the social and conversational skills that eventually made him one of the world's most in-demand guests. \"I endeavor to take things as they come with cheerfulness\", Irving wrote, \"and when I cannot get a dinner to suit my taste, I endeavor to get a taste to suit my dinner\". While visiting Rome in 1805, Irving struck up a friendship with painter Washington Allston and was almost persuaded into a career as a painter. \"My lot in life, however, was differently cast\".\nFirst major writings.\nIrving returned from Europe to study law with his legal mentor Judge Josiah Ogden Hoffman in New York City. By his own admission, he was not a good student and barely passed the bar examination in 1806. He began socializing with a group of literate young men whom he dubbed \"The Lads of Kilkenny\", and he created the literary magazine \"Salmagundi\" in January 1807 with his brother William and his friend James Kirke Paulding, writing under various pseudonyms, such as William Wizard and Launcelot Langstaff. Irving lampooned New York culture and politics in a manner similar to the 20th century \"Mad\" magazine. \"Salmagundi\" was a moderate success, spreading Irving's name and reputation beyond New York. He gave New York City the nickname \"Gotham\" in its 17th issue dated November 11, 1807, an Anglo-Saxon word meaning \"Goat's Town\".\nIrving completed \"A History of New-York from the Beginning of the World to the End of the Dutch Dynasty, by Diedrich Knickerbocker\" (1809) while mourning the death of his 17-year-old fianc\u00e9e Matilda Hoffman. It was his first major book and a satire on self-important local history and contemporary politics. Before its publication, Irving started a hoax by placing a series of missing person advertisements in the New York Evening Post seeking information on Diedrich Knickerbocker, a crusty Dutch historian who had allegedly gone missing from his hotel in New York City. As part of the ruse, he placed a notice from the hotel's proprietor informing readers that, if Mr. Knickerbocker failed to return to the hotel to pay his bill, he would publish a manuscript that Knickerbocker had left behind.\nUnsuspecting readers followed the story of Knickerbocker and his manuscript with interest, and some New York city officials were concerned enough about the missing historian to offer a reward for his safe return. Irving then published \"A History of New York\" on December 6, 1809, under the Knickerbocker pseudonym, with immediate critical and popular success. \"It took with the public\", Irving remarked, \"and gave me celebrity, as an original work was something remarkable and uncommon in America\". The name Diedrich Knickerbocker became a nickname for Manhattan residents in general and was adopted by the New York Knickerbockers basketball team.\nAfter the success of \"A History of New York\", Irving searched for a job and eventually became an editor of \"Analectic Magazine\", where he wrote biographies of naval heroes such as James Lawrence and Oliver Hazard Perry. He was also among the first magazine editors to reprint Francis Scott Key's poem \"Defense of Fort McHenry\", which was immortalized as \"The Star-Spangled Banner\". Irving initially opposed the War of 1812 like many other merchants, but the British attack on Washington, D.C., in 1814 convinced him to enlist. He served on the staff of Daniel Tompkins, governor of New York and commander of the New York State Militia, but he saw no real action apart from a reconnaissance mission in the Great Lakes region. The war was disastrous for many American merchants, including Irving's family, and he left for England in mid-1815 to salvage the family trading company. He remained in Europe for the next 17 years.\nLife in Europe.\n\"The Sketch Book\".\nIrving spent the next two years trying to bail out the family firm financially but eventually had to declare bankruptcy. With no job prospects, he continued writing throughout 1817 and 1818. In the summer of 1817, he visited Walter Scott, beginning a lifelong personal and professional friendship.\nIrving composed the short story \"Rip Van Winkle\" overnight while staying with his sister Sarah and her husband, Henry van Wart, in Birmingham, England, a place that inspired other works as well. In October 1818, Irving's brother William secured for Irving a post as chief clerk to the United States Navy and urged him to return home. Irving turned the offer down, opting to stay in England to pursue a writing career.\nIn the spring of 1819, Irving sent to his brother Ebenezer in New York a set of short prose pieces that he asked be published as \"The Sketch Book of Geoffrey Crayon, Gent.\" The first installment, containing \"Rip Van Winkle\", was an enormous success, and the rest of the work was equally successful; it was issued in 1819\u20131820 in seven installments in New York and in two volumes in London (\"The Legend of Sleepy Hollow\" appeared in the sixth issue of the New York edition and the second volume of the London edition).\nLike many successful authors of this era, Irving struggled against literary bootleggers. In England, some of his sketches were reprinted in periodicals without his permission, a legal practice as there was no international copyright law at the time. To prevent further piracy in Britain, Irving paid to have the first four American installments published as a single volume by John Miller in London.\nIrving appealed to Walter Scott for help procuring a more reputable publisher for the remainder of the book. Scott referred Irving to his own publisher, London powerhouse John Murray, who agreed to take on \"The Sketch Book\". From then on, Irving would publish concurrently in the United States and Britain to protect his copyright, with Murray as his English publisher of choice.\nIrving's reputation soared, and for the next two years, he led an active social life in Paris and Great Britain, where he was often feted as an anomaly of literature: an upstart American who dared to write English well.\n\"Bracebridge Hall\" and \"Tales of a Traveller\".\nWith both Irving and publisher John Murray eager to follow up on the success of \"The Sketch Book\", Irving spent much of 1821 traveling in Europe in search of new material, reading widely in Dutch and German folk tales. Hampered by writer's block\u2014and depressed by the death of his brother William\u2014Irving worked slowly, finally delivering a completed manuscript to Murray in March 1822. The book, \"Bracebridge Hall, or The Humorists, A Medley\" (the location was based loosely on Aston Hall, occupied by members of the Bracebridge family, near his sister's home in Birmingham) was published in June 1822.\nThe format of \"Bracebridge\" was similar to that of \"The Sketch Book\", with Irving, as Crayon, narrating a series of more than 50 loosely connected short stories and essays. While some reviewers thought \"Bracebridge\" to be a lesser imitation of \"The Sketch Book\", the book was well received by readers and critics. \"We have received so much pleasure from this book\", wrote critic Francis Jeffrey in the \"Edinburgh Review\", \"that we think ourselves bound in gratitude ... to make a public acknowledgement of it\". Irving was relieved at its reception, which did much to cement his reputation with European readers.\nStill struggling with writer's block, Irving traveled to Germany, settling in Dresden in the winter of 1822. Here he dazzled the royal family and attached himself to Amelia Foster, an American living in Dresden with her five children. The 39-year-old Irving was particularly attracted to Foster's 18-year-old daughter Emily and vied in frustration for her hand. Emily finally refused his offer of marriage in the spring of 1823.\nHe returned to Paris and began collaborating with playwright John Howard Payne on translations of French plays for the English stage, with little success. He also learned through Payne that the novelist Mary Wollstonecraft Shelley was romantically interested in him, though Irving never pursued the relationship.\nIn August 1824, Irving published the collection of essays \"Tales of a Traveller\"\u2014including the short story \"The Devil and Tom Walker\"\u2014under his Geoffrey Crayon persona. \"I think there are in it some of the best things I have ever written\", Irving told his sister. But while the book sold respectably, \"Traveller\" was dismissed by critics, who panned both \"Traveller\" and its author. \"The public have been led to expect better things\", wrote the \"United States Literary Gazette\", while the \"New-York Mirror\" pronounced Irving \"overrated\". Hurt and depressed by the book's reception, Irving retreated to Paris where he spent the next year worrying about finances and scribbling down ideas for projects that never materialized.\nSpanish books.\nWhile in Paris, Irving received a letter from Alexander Hill Everett on January 30, 1826. Everett, recently the American Minister to Spain, urged Irving to join him in Madrid, noting that a number of manuscripts dealing with the Spanish conquest of the Americas had recently been made public. Irving left for Madrid and enthusiastically began scouring the Spanish archives for colorful material.\nWith full access to the American consul's massive library of Spanish history, Irving began working on several books at once. The first offspring of this hard work, \"A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus\", was published in January 1828. The book was popular in the United States and in Europe and would have 175 editions published before the end of the century. It was also the first project of Irving's to be published with his own name, instead of a pseudonym, on the title page. Irving was invited to stay at the palace of the Duke of Gor, who gave him unfettered access to his library containing many medieval manuscripts.\"A Chronicle of the Conquest of Granada\" was published a year later, followed by \"Voyages and Discoveries of the Companions of Columbus\" in 1831.\nIrving's writings on Columbus are a mixture of history and fiction, a genre now called romantic history. Irving based them on extensive research in the Spanish archives, but also added imaginative elements aimed at sharpening the story. The first of these works is the source of the durable myth that medieval Europeans believed the Earth was flat. According to the popular book, Columbus proved the Earth was round.\nIn 1829, Irving was elected to the American Philosophical Society. That same year, he moved into Granada's ancient palace Alhambra, \"determined to linger here\", he said, \"until I get some writings under way connected with the place\". Before he could get any significant writing underway, however, he was notified of his appointment as Secretary to the American Legation in London. Worried he would disappoint friends and family if he refused the position, Irving left Spain for England in July 1829.\nSecretary to the American legation in London.\nArriving in London, Irving joined the staff of American Minister Louis McLane. McLane immediately assigned the daily secretary work to another man and tapped Irving to fill the role of aide-de-camp. The two worked over the next year to negotiate a trade agreement between the United States and the British West Indies, finally reaching a deal in August 1830. That same year, Irving was awarded a medal by the Royal Society of Literature, followed by an honorary doctorate of civil law from Oxford in 1831.\nFollowing McLane's recall to the United States in 1831 to serve as Secretary of Treasury, Irving stayed on as the legation's charg\u00e9 d'affaires until the arrival of Martin Van Buren, President Andrew Jackson's nominee for British Minister. With Van Buren in place, Irving resigned his post to concentrate on writing, eventually completing \"Tales of the Alhambra\", which would be published concurrently in the United States and England in 1832.\nIrving was still in London when Van Buren received word that the United States Senate had refused to confirm him as the new Minister. Consoling Van Buren, Irving predicted that the Senate's partisan move would backfire. \"I should not be surprised\", Irving said, \"if this vote of the Senate goes far toward elevating him to the presidential chair\".\nReturn to the United States.\nIrving arrived in New York on May 21, 1832, after 17 years abroad. That September, he accompanied Commissioner on Indian Affairs Henry Leavitt Ellsworth on a surveying mission, along with companions Charles La Trobe and Count Albert-Alexandre de Pourtales, and they traveled deep into Indian Territory (now the state of Oklahoma). At the completion of his western tour, Irving traveled through Washington, D.C., and Baltimore, where he became acquainted with politician and novelist John Pendleton Kennedy.\nIrving was frustrated by bad investments, so he turned to writing to generate additional income, beginning with \"A Tour on the Prairies\" which related his recent travels on the frontier. The book was another popular success and also the first book written and published by Irving in the United States since \"A History of New York\" in 1809. In 1834, he was approached by fur magnate John Jacob Astor, who convinced him to write a history of his fur trading colony in Astoria, Oregon. Irving made quick work of Astor's project, shipping the fawning biographical account \"Astoria\" in February 1836. In 1835, Irving, Astor, and a few others founded the Saint Nicholas Society in the City of New York.\nDuring an extended stay at Astor's home, Irving met explorer Benjamin Bonneville and was intrigued with his maps and stories of the territories beyond the Rocky Mountains. The two men met in Washington, D.C., several months later, and Bonneville sold his maps and rough notes to Irving for $1,000. Irving used these materials as the basis for his 1837 book \"The Adventures of Captain Bonneville\". These three works made up Irving's \"western\" series of books and were written partly as a response to criticism that his time in England and Spain had made him more European than American. Critics such as James Fenimore Cooper and Philip Freneau felt that he had turned his back on his American heritage in favor of English aristocracy. Irving's western books were well received in the United States, particularly \"A Tour on the Prairies\", though British critics accused him of \"book-making\".\nIn 1835, Irving purchased a \"neglected cottage\" and its surrounding riverfront property in Tarrytown, New York, which he named Sunnyside in 1841. It required constant repair and renovation over the next 20 years, with costs continually escalating, so he reluctantly agreed to become a regular contributor to \"The Knickerbocker\" magazine in 1839, writing new essays and short stories under the Knickerbocker and Crayon pseudonyms. He was regularly approached by aspiring young authors for advice or endorsement, including Edgar Allan Poe, who sought Irving's comments on \"William Wilson\" and \"The Fall of the House of Usher\".\nIn 1837, a lady of Charleston, South Carolina brought to the attention of William Clancy, newly appointed bishop to Demerara, a passage in \"The Crayon Miscellany\", and questioned whether it accurately reflected Catholic teaching or practice. The passage under \"Newstead Abbey\" read:One of the parchment scrolls thus discovered, throws rather an awkward light upon the kind of life led by the friars of Newstead. It is an indulgence granted to them for a certain number of months, in which a plenary pardon is assured in advance for all kinds of crimes, among which, several of the most gross and sensual are specifically mentioned, and the weaknesses of the flesh to which they were prone.\nClancy wrote to Irving, who \"promptly aided the investigation into the truth, and promised to correct in future editions the misrepresentation complained of\". Clancy traveled to his new posting by way of England, and bearing a letter of introduction from Irving, stopped at Newstead Abbey and was able to view the document to which Irving had alluded. Upon inspection, Clancy discovered that it was, in fact, not an indulgence issued to the friars from any ecclesiastical authority, but a pardon given by the king to some parties suspected of having broken \"forest laws\". Clancy requested the local pastor to forward his findings to Catholic periodicals in England, and upon publication, send a copy to Irving. Whether this was done is not clear as the disputed text remains in the 1849 edition.\nIrving also championed America's maturing literature, advocating stronger copyright laws to protect writers from the kind of piracy that had initially plagued \"The Sketch Book\". Writing in the January 1840 issue of \"Knickerbocker\", he openly endorsed copyright legislation pending in Congress. \"We have a young literature\", he wrote, \"springing up and daily unfolding itself with wonderful energy and luxuriance, which ... deserves all its fostering care\". The legislation, however, did not pass at that time.\nIn 1841, Irving was elected to the National Academy of Design as an Honorary Academician. He also began a friendly correspondence with Charles Dickens and hosted Dickens and his wife at Sunnyside during Dickens's American tour in 1842.\nMinister to Spain.\nPresident John Tyler appointed Irving as Minister to Spain in February 1842, after an endorsement from Secretary of State Daniel Webster. Irving wrote, \"It will be a severe trial to absent myself for a time from my dear little Sunnyside, but I shall return to it better enabled to carry it on comfortably\". He hoped that his position as Minister would allow him plenty of time to write, but Spain was in a state of political upheaval during most of his tenure, with a number of warring factions vying for control of the 12-year-old Queen Isabella II. Irving maintained good relations with the various generals and politicians, as control of Spain rotated through Espartero, Bravo, then Narv\u00e1ez. Espartero was then locked in a power struggle with the Spanish Cortes. Irving's official reports on the ensuing civil war and revolution expressed his romantic fascination with the regent as young Queen Isabella's knight protector. He wrote with an anti-republican, undiplomatic bias. Though Espartero, ousted in July 1843, remained a fallen hero in his eyes, Irving began to view Spanish affairs more realistically. However, the politics and warfare were exhausting, and Irving was both homesick and suffering from a crippling skin condition.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I am wearied and at times heartsick of the wretched politics of this country ... The last ten or twelve years of my life, passed among sordid speculators in the United States, and political adventurers in Spain, has shewn me so much of the dark side of human nature, that I begin to have painful doubts of my fellow man; and look back with regret to the confiding period of my literary career, when, poor as a rat, but rich in dreams, I beheld the world through the medium of my imagination and was apt to believe men as good as I wished them to be.\nWith the political situation relatively settled in Spain, Irving continued to closely monitor the development of the new government and the fate of Isabella. His official duties as Spanish Minister also involved negotiating American trade interests with Cuba and following the Spanish parliament's debates over the slave trade. He was also pressed into service by Louis McLane, the American Minister to the Court of St. James's in London, to assist in negotiating the Anglo-American disagreement over the Oregon border that newly elected president James K. Polk had vowed to resolve.\nFinal years and death.\nIrving returned from Spain in September 1846, took up residence at Sunnyside, and began work on an \"Author's Revised Edition\" of his works for publisher George Palmer Putnam. For its publication, Irving had made a deal which guaranteed him 12 percent of the retail price of all copies sold, an agreement that was unprecedented at that time. As he revised his older works for Putnam, he continued to write regularly, publishing biographies of Oliver Goldsmith in 1849 and Islamic prophet Muhammad in 1850. In 1855, he produced \"Wolfert's Roost\", a collection of stories and essays that he had written for \"The Knickerbocker\" and other publications, and he began publishing a biography of his namesake George Washington which he expected to be his masterpiece. Five volumes of the biography were published between 1855 and 1859.\nIrving traveled regularly to Mount Vernon and Washington, D.C., for his research, and struck up friendships with Presidents Millard Fillmore and Franklin Pierce. He was elected an Associate Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1855. He was hired as an executor of John Jacob Astor's estate in 1848 and appointed by Astor's will as first chairman of the Astor Library, a forerunner to the New York Public Library.\nIrving continued to socialize and keep up with his correspondence well into his seventies, and his fame and popularity continued to soar. \"I don't believe that any man, in any country, has ever had a more affectionate admiration for him than that given to you in America\", wrote Senator William C. Preston in a letter to Irving. \"I believe that we have had but one man who is so much in the popular heart\". By 1859, author Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. noted that Sunnyside had become \"next to Mount Vernon, the best known and most cherished of all the dwellings in our land\".\nIrving died of a heart attack in his bedroom at Sunnyside on November 28, 1859, age 76\u2014only eight months after completing the final volume of his Washington biography. Legend has it that his last words were: \"Well, I must arrange my pillows for another night. When will this end?\" He was buried under a simple headstone at Sleepy Hollow cemetery on December 1, 1859. Irving and his grave were commemorated by Henry Wadsworth Longfellow in his 1876 poem \"In the Churchyard at Tarrytown\", which concludes with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nLegacy.\nLiterary reputation.\nIrving is largely credited as the first American Man of Letters and the first to earn his living solely by his pen. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow acknowledged Irving's role in promoting American literature in December 1859: \"We feel a just pride in his renown as an author, not forgetting that, to his other claims upon our gratitude, he adds also that of having been the first to win for our country an honourable name and position in the History of Letters\".\nIrving perfected the American short story and was the first American writer to set his stories firmly in the United States, even as he poached from German or Dutch folklore. He is also generally credited as one of the first to write in the vernacular and without an obligation to presenting morals or being didactic in his short stories, writing stories simply to entertain rather than to enlighten. He also encouraged many would-be writers. As George William Curtis noted, there \"is not a young literary aspirant in the country, who, if he ever personally met Irving, did not hear from him the kindest words of sympathy, regard, and encouragement\".\nEdgar Allan Poe, on the other hand, felt that Irving should be given credit for being an innovator but that the writing itself was often unsophisticated. \"Irving is much over-rated\", Poe wrote in 1838, \"and a nice distinction might be drawn between his just and his surreptitious and adventitious reputation\u2014between what is due to the pioneer solely, and what to the writer\". A critic for the \"New-York Mirror\" wrote: \"No man in the Republic of Letters has been more overrated than Mr. Washington Irving\". Some critics claimed that Irving catered to British sensibilities, and one critic charged that he wrote \"\"of\" and \"for\" England, rather than his own country\". For instance, American critic John Neal in his 1824\u201325 critical work \"American Writers\" dismissed Irving as a poor copy of Goldsmith.\nOther critics were more supportive of Irving's style. William Makepeace Thackeray was the first to refer to Irving as the \"ambassador whom the New World of Letters sent to the Old\", a banner picked up by writers and critics throughout the 19th and 20th centuries. \"He is the first of the American humorists, as he is almost the first of the American writers\", wrote critic H.R. Hawless in 1881, \"yet belonging to the New World, there is a quaint Old World flavor about him\". Early critics often had difficulty separating Irving the man from Irving the writer. \"The life of Washington Irving was one of the brightest ever led by an author\", wrote Richard Henry Stoddard, an early Irving biographer. Later critics, however, began to review his writings as all style with no substance. \"The man had no message\", said critic Barrett Wendell.\nAs a historian, Irving's reputation had fallen out of favor but then gained a resurgence. \"With the advent of 'scientific' history in the generations that followed his, Irving's historical writings lapsed into disregard and disrespect. To late 19th- and early 20th-century historians, including John Franklin Jameson, G. P. Gooch, and others, these works were demiromances, worthy at best of veiled condescension. However, more recently several of Irving's histories and biographies have again won praise for their reliability as well as the literary skill with which they were written. Specifically, \"A History of the Life and Voyages of Christopher Columbus\"; \"Astoria, or Anecdotes of an Enterprise beyond the Rocky Mountains\"; and \"Life of George Washington\" have earned the respect of scholars whose writings on those topics we consider authoritative in our generation: Samuel Eliot Morison, Bernard DeVoto, Douglas Southall Freeman\".\nImpact on American culture.\nIrving popularized the nickname \"Gotham\" for New York City, and he is credited with inventing the expression \"the almighty dollar\". The surname of his fictional Dutch historian Diedrich Knickerbocker is generally associated with New York and New Yorkers, as found in New York's professional basketball team the New York Knickerbockers.\nOne of Irving's most lasting contributions to American culture is in the way that Americans celebrate Christmas. In his 1812 revisions to \"A History of New York\", he inserted a dream sequence featuring St. Nicholas soaring over treetops in a flying wagon, an invention which others dressed up as Santa Claus. In his five Christmas stories in \"The Sketch Book\", Irving portrayed an idealized celebration of old-fashioned Christmas customs at a quaint English manor which depicted English Christmas festivities that he experienced while staying in England, which had largely been abandoned. He used text from \"The Vindication of Christmas\" (London 1652) of old English Christmas traditions, and the book contributed to the revival and reinterpretation of the Christmas holiday in the United States.\nIrving introduced the erroneous idea that Europeans believed the world to be flat prior to the discovery of the New World in his biography of Christopher Columbus, yet the flat-Earth myth has been taught in schools as fact to many generations of Americans. American painter John Quidor based many of his paintings on scenes from the works of Irving about Dutch New York, including such paintings as \"Ichabod Crane Flying from the Headless Horseman\" (1828), \"The Return of Rip Van Winkle\" (1849), and \"The Headless Horseman Pursuing Ichabod Crane\" (1858).\nMemorials.\nThe village of Dearman, New York, changed its name to \"Irvington\" in 1854 to honor Washington Irving, who was living in nearby Sunnyside, which is preserved as a museum. Influential residents of the village prevailed upon the Hudson River Railroad, which had reached the village by 1849, to change the name of the train station to \"Irvington\", and the village incorporated as Irvington on April 16, 1872.\nThe town of Knickerbocker, Texas, was founded by two of Irving's nephews, who named it in honor of their uncle's literary pseudonym. The city of Irving, Texas, states that it is named for Washington Irving. Irvington, New Jersey is also named after Irving. It was incorporated on March 27, 1874, from parts of Clinton Township (Clinton Township is now part of Newark, New Jersey since 1902). Irving Street in San Francisco is named after him.\nThe Irving Park neighborhood in Chicago are named for him as well, though the original name of the subdivision was Irvington and then later Irving Park before annexation to Chicago. The major Chicago thoroughfare Illinois Route 19 is also named Irving Park Road. Gibbons Memorial Park, located in Honesdale, Pennsylvania, is located on Irving Cliff, which was named after him. The Irvington neighborhood in Indianapolis is also one of the many communities named after him.\nIrving College (1838\u20131890) in Irving College, Tennessee, was named for Irving. There is also a statue of Irving in Granada, Spain. The Village of North Tarrytown, New York, changed its name to Sleepy Hollow in 1996 to honor Washington Irving and capitalize on the popularity of the story \"The Legend Of Sleepy Hollow\".\nWashington Irving Memorial Park and Arboretum, located in Bixby, Oklahoma, is named in honor of Washington Irving and features an amphitheater stage with a replica fa\u00e7ade of his Sunnyside home. The home includes a statue of Irving seated on the porch of the home. Among the tributes to Irving are memorials to the victims of the Oklahoma City Bombing and the World Trade Center attacks, with a steel beam from the towers on display. The park is also the site of local community events, including the annual Bixby BBQ and Blues festival.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33727", "revid": "50698863", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33727", "title": "World cup", "text": "International sports competition where competitors represent their nation\nA world cup is a global sporting competition in which the participant entities \u2013 usually international teams or individuals representing their countries \u2013 compete for the title of world champion. The event most associated with the name is the FIFA World Cup for association football, which dates back to 1930. Since then there have been a number of sporting events labeled \"world cup\", such as the ICC Men's Cricket World Cup, the Rugby World Cup, Rugby League World Cup, Basketball World Cup, and the Hockey World Cup.\nA world cup is generally, though not always, considered the premier competition in its sport, with the victor attaining the highest honour in that sport and being able to lay claim to the title of their sport's best. In some sports, however, the Olympic title carries at least as much prestige, while other sports such as diving and artistic gymnastics differentiate between their premier competitions, such as World Championships and Olympic Games, and their \"World Cup\", which is organized as a smaller scale but high-level showcase event with small elite fields.\nDifferences between world cup and world championships.\nSome sports governing bodies prefer the title \"world championship\" or a related term; some even organize both a world cup and a world championship with different rules. Usually, such competitions take one of two forms: a short periodic competition or a year-long series of meetings, but more frequently many sports have both a World Cup (usually consisting of multiple events in a season), and a world championship (usually a single event).\nA periodic world cup or world championship usually takes the form of a knockout tournament (possibly with an initial group stage). This is held over a number of days or weeks, with the entrants eventually being whittled down to two, and the tournament culminating in a world cup final. The winner(s) take the title of World Champion(s) and hold it until the next time the event is held (usually one, two, or four years later). This format is most common in team sports. In individual sports however, holding the title can vary in terms of duration, as it is dependent on the timing of the next scheduled individual contest between the defending champion and a challenger.\nSeason-long format.\nA contrasting concept, popular in individual sports, is a year-long competition with several meetings over its course. In this format, victory at an individual meeting earns a number of points, and, usually, a number of positions below also score points inversely related to their position. Contestants accumulate a number of points over the course of the year (often \"season\") and their cumulative total after all meetings have been concluded determines the World Champion or, simply, World Cup winner. The winner is then considered the champion until the next World Cup."}
{"id": "33728", "revid": "4069147", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33728", "title": "List of national capitals", "text": "This is a list of national capitals, including capitals of territories and dependencies, non-sovereign states including associated states and entities whose sovereignty is disputed.\nThe capitals included on this list are those associated with states or territories listed by the international standard ISO 3166-1, or that are included in the list of states with limited recognition.\nSovereign states and observer states within the United Nations are shown in bold text.\nList.\nThe column headings may cover the first row when the letter links are used.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Hlist/styles.css\"/&gt;\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"template:sticky header/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33766", "revid": "1306352", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33766", "title": "List of countries by national capital and largest cities", "text": ""}
{"id": "33767", "revid": "50030585", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33767", "title": "WordPerfect", "text": "Word processing application\n \nWordPerfect (WP) is a word processing application, now owned by Alludo. At the height of its popularity in the 1980s and early 1990s, it was the market leader of word processors, displacing the prior market leader WordStar.\nIt was originally developed under contract at Brigham Young University for use on a Data General minicomputer in the late 1970s. The authors retained the rights to the program, forming the Utah-based Satellite Software International (SSI) in 1979 to sell it; the program first came to market under the name SSI*WP in March 1980. It then moved to the MS-DOS operating system in 1982, by which time the name WordPerfect was in use, and several greatly updated versions quickly followed. The application's feature list was considerably more advanced than its main competition WordStar. Satellite Software International changed its name to WordPerfect Corporation in 1985.\nWordPerfect gained praise for its \"look of sparseness\" and clean display. It rapidly displaced most other systems, especially after the 4.2 release in 1986, and it became the standard in the DOS market by version 5.1 in 1989. Its early popularity was based partly on its availability for a wide variety of computers and operating systems, and also partly because of extensive, no-cost support, with \"hold jockeys\" entertaining users while waiting on the phone.\nIts dominant position ended after a failed release for Microsoft Windows; the company blamed the failure on Microsoft for not initially sharing its Windows Application Programming Interface (API) specifications, causing the application to be slow. After WordPerfect received the Windows APIs, there was a long delay in reprogramming before introducing an improved version. Microsoft Word had been introduced at the same time as their first attempt, and \"Word\" took over the market because it was faster, and was promoted by aggressive bundling deals that ultimately produced Microsoft Office. WordPerfect was no longer a popular standard by the mid-1990s. WordPerfect Corporation was sold to Novell in 1994, which then sold the product to Corel in 1996. Corel (since rebranded as Alludo) has made regular releases to the product since then, often in the form of office suites under the WordPerfect name that include the Quattro Pro spreadsheet, the Presentations slides formatter, and other applications.\nThe common filename extension of WordPerfect document files is codice_1. Older versions of WordPerfect also used file extensions codice_2, codice_3, codice_4, codice_5, codice_6, and originally, no extension at all.\nWordPerfect for DOS.\nIn 1979, Brigham Young University graduate student Bruce Bastian and computer science professor Alan Ashton created word processing software for a Data General minicomputer system owned by the city of Orem, Utah. Bastian and Ashton retained ownership of the software that they created, and founded Satellite Software International, Inc. (SSI) in 1980 to market the program to other Data General users. WordPerfect 1.0 represented a significant departure from the previous Wang standard for word processing. By the end of the year SSI had 16 employees including W. E. \"Pete\" Peterson, hired as bookkeeper and office manager. Bastian worked as program manager while Ashton taught at BYU in the morning and worked on the software with his best students in the afternoon. Bastian and Ashton each owned 49.9% of the company, and Peterson\u2014who became executive vice president, and actively managed the company\u2014received 0.2% to break ties.\nThe first version of WordPerfect for the IBM PC was released the day after Thanksgiving in 1982. It was sold as WordPerfect 2.20, continuing the version numbering from the Data General program. SSI's sales that year were $1 million. Over the next several months, three more minor releases arrived, mainly to correct bugs.\nThe developers had hoped to program WordPerfect in C, but at this early stage, there were no C compilers available for the IBM PC, and they had to program it in x86 assembly language. All versions of WordPerfect up to 5.0 were written in x86, and C was only adopted with WP 5.1, when it became necessary to convert it to non-IBM compatible computers. The use of straight assembly language and a high amount of direct screen access gave WordPerfect a significant performance advantage over WordStar, which used strictly DOS API functions for all screen and keyboard access, and was often very slow. In addition, WordStar, originally created for the CP/M operating system, in which subdirectories are not supported, was slow to support sub-directories in MS-DOS.\nIn 1983, WordPerfect 3.0 was released for DOS. This was updated to support DOS 2.x, sub-directories, and hard disks. It also expanded printer support, where WordPerfect 2.x only supports Epson and Diablo printers that were hard-coded into the main program. Adding support for additional printers this way was impractical, so the company introduced printer drivers, a file containing a list of control codes for each model of printer. Version 3.0 has support for 50 different printers, and this was expanded to 100 within a year. WordPerfect also supplied an editor utility that allows users to make their own printer drivers, or to modify the included ones. A version of WordPerfect 3.0 became the Editor program of WordPerfect Office.\nWordPerfect 4.0 was released in 1984; by then WordPerfect was the third most-popular word processor, behind WordStar and MultiMate. WordPerfect 4.1 appeared in 1985, with versions for various non-PC compatibles such as Tandy 2000 and DEC Rainbow. WordPerfect 4.2, released in 1986, introduced automatic paragraph numbering, important to law offices, and automatic numbering and placement of footnotes and endnotes that were important both to law offices and academics. It became the first program to overtake the original market leader WordStar in a major application category on the DOS platform.\nBy 1986 more than 300 large companies used what had become the best-selling word processor in the United States, with 60% of sales from word of mouth. SSI (renaming itself WordPerfect Corporation that year) was the fifth-largest independent software company, with $52 million in annual sales. Sales doubled to more than $100 million in 1987 for the 350 WordPerfect Corp. employees, including 100 in customer support. Ashton left BYU to serve as full-time president. That year \"Compute!\" magazine described WordPerfect as \"a standard in the MS-DOS world\" and \"a powerhouse program that includes almost everything\". Rapid growth continued, with $196 million in sales in 1988 with 1100 employees increasing to more than $500 million in 1990 with 4000 employees.\nIn November 1989, WordPerfect Corporation released the program's most successful version, WordPerfect 5.1 for DOS, the first version to include pull-down menus to supplement the traditional function key combinations, support for tables, a spreadsheet-like feature, and full support for typesetting options, such as italic, redline, and strike-through. This version also included \"print preview\", a graphical representation of the final printed output that became the foundation for WordPerfect 6.0's graphic screen editing. WordPerfect 5.1+ for DOS was introduced to allow older DOS-based PCs to utilize the new WordPerfect 6 file format. This version can read and write WordPerfect 6 files, included several third-party screen and printing applications (previously sold separately), and has several minor improvements.\nWordPerfect Corporation acquired Reference Software International, makers of Grammatik, a popular grammar checker for DOS, in January 1993 for $19\u00a0million. RSI's employees were absorbed into WordPerfect in Orem, and the functionality of Grammatik and Reference Set (a spell checker that RSI also sold) were eventually integrated into WordPerfect. WordPerfect continued selling Grammatik as a standalone product for several years.\nWordPerfect 6.0 for DOS, released in 1993, can switch between its traditional text-based mode and a graphical mode that shows the document as it would print out, known as WYSIWYG (what you see is\nwhat you get). WordPerfect 5 had introduced a print preview mode that displays the layout of the document on a page using generic fonts, but the view mode is uneditable. The editing still needed to be done in text mode.\nBy WordPerfect 6.0 the company had grown \"to command more than 60 percent of the word processing software market\".\nIn November 1993, WordPerfect acquired another Orem, UT based software company, SoftSolutions, to bolster one of its two core competencies - \"work-group computing\". According to Ken Duncan, president of SoftSolutions, the strategy was to broadly distribute SoftSolutions' \"technical capabilities\" in document management via WordPerfect's large \"installed base\" of users.\nKey characteristics.\nThe distinguishing features of WordPerfect include:\nThe ease of use of tools, like Mail Merge (combine form documents with data from any data source), \"Print as booklet\", and tables (with spreadsheet capabilities and the possibility to generate graphs) are also notable.\nThe WordPerfect document format allows continuous extending of functionality without jeopardizing backward and forward compatibility. Despite the fact that the newer version is extremely rich in functionality, WordPerfect X5 documents are fully compatible with WordPerfect 6.0a documents in both directions. The older program simply ignores the \"unknown\" codes, while rendering the known features of the document. WordPerfect users were never forced to upgrade for compatibility reasons for more than two decades.\nStreaming code architecture.\nWordPerfect's streaming code architecture resembles the formatting features of HTML and Cascading Style Sheets. Documents are created much the same way that raw HTML pages are written, with text interspersed by tags (called \"codes\") that trigger treatment of data until a corresponding closing tag is encountered, at which point the settings active to the point of the opening tag resume control. As with HTML, tags can be nested. Some data structures are treated as objects within the stream as with HTML's treatment of graphic images, e.g., footnotes and styles, but the bulk of a WordPerfect document's data and formatting codes appear as a single continuous stream. A difference between HTML tags and WordPerfect codes is that HTML codes can all be expressed as a string of plain text characters delimited by greater-than and less-than characters, e.g. codice_7, whereas WordPerfect formatting codes consist of hexadecimal values.\nStyles and style libraries.\nThe addition of styles and style libraries in WP 5.0 provided greatly increased power and flexibility in formatting documents, while maintaining the streaming-code architecture of earlier versions. Styles are a preset arrangement of settings having to do with things like fonts, spacings, tab stops, margins and other items having to do with text layout. Styles can be created by the user to shortcut the setup time when starting a new document, and they can be saved in the program's style library. Prior to that, its only use of styles was the Opening Style, which contained the default settings for a document.\nAfter the purchase of the desktop publishing program Ventura, Corel enhanced the WordPerfect styles editor and styles behavior with the majority of Ventura's capabilities. This improved the usability and performance of graphic elements like text boxes, document styles, footer and header styles.\nSince WordPerfect has been enriched with properties from the CorelDraw Graphics suite, graphic styles are editable. The Graphics Styles editor enables customizing the appearance of boxes, borders, lines and fills and store the customized design for reuse. The possibilities include patterns and color gradients for fills; corner, endpoint, pen-type and thickness for lines. Box styles can be used as container style, including a border, lines, fill, text and caption; each with its separate style. A text box style shows that WordPerfect cascades its styles.\nAround the same time, Corel included WordPerfect, with its full functionality, in CorelDraw Graphics Suite as the text editor.\nReveal codes.\nPresent since the earliest versions of WordPerfect, the Reveal Codes feature distinguishes it from other word processors; Microsoft Word's equivalent is much less powerful. This feature in WordPerfect displays and allows editing the codes, reduces retyping, and enables easy formatting changes. It is a second editing screen that can be toggled open and closed, and sized as desired.\nThe codes for formatting and locating text are displayed, interspersed with tags and the occasional objects, with the tags and objects represented by named tokens. This provides a more detailed view to troubleshoot problems than with styles-based word processors, and object tokens can be clicked with a pointing device to directly open the configuration editor for the particular object type, e.g. clicking on a style token brings up the style editor with the particular style type displayed. WordPerfect had this feature already in its DOS incarnations.\nMacro languages.\nWordPerfect for DOS has macros, in which sequences of keystrokes, including function codes, are recorded as the user typed them. These macros can be assigned to any key desired. This enables any sequence of keystrokes to be recorded, saved, and recalled. Macros can examine system data, make decisions, be chained together, and operate recursively until a defined \"stop\" condition occurs. This capability provides a powerful way to rearrange data and formatting codes within a document where the same sequence of actions needs to be performed repetitively, e.g., for tabular data. Since keystrokes are recorded, changes in the function of certain keys as the program evolved mean that macros from one DOS version of WordPerfect do not necessarily run correctly on another version. Editing of macros was difficult until the introduction of a macro editor in Shell, in which a separate file for each WordPerfect product with macros enables the screen display of the function codes used in the macros for that product.\nWordPerfect DOS macros, which assume a text-based screen, with fixed locations on the screen, can not easily be implemented with the Windows WYSIWYG screen and mouse. For example, \"go down four lines\" has a clear meaning on a DOS screen, but no definite meaning with a Windows screen. WordPerfect lacks a way to meaningfully record mouse movements.\nA new and even more powerful interpreted token-based macro recording and scripting language came with both DOS and Windows 6.0 versions, and that became the basis of the language named PerfectScript in later versions. It deals with functions rather than with keystrokes. There is no way to import DOS macros, and users who had created extensive macro libraries must continue using WordPerfect 5.1, or rewrite all the macros from scratch using the new programming language.\nAn important property of WordPerfect macros is that they are not embedded in a document. As a result, WordPerfect is not prone to macro viruses or malware, unlike MS Word. Despite the term \"macro\", the language has hundreds of commands and functions and creates full-fledged programs resident on and executed on the user's computer. In WPDOS 6 the source code is generated using the same interface used to edit documents. A WordPerfect macro can create or modify a document or perform tasks like displaying results of a calculation such as taking a date input, adding a specific number of days and displaying the new date in a dialog box. Documents created or edited by a WordPerfect macro are no different from those produced by manual input; the macros simply improve efficiency or automate repetitive tasks and also enabled creating content-rich document types, which would hardly be feasible manually.\nBeginning with WordPerfect Office 10, the suite also included the Microsoft Office Visual Basic macro language as an alternative, meant to improve compatibility of the suite with Microsoft Office documents.\nMacros may be used to create data-entry programs which enter information directly into WordPerfect documents, saving the time and effort required to retype it.\nSupport for European languages.\nWordPerfect's international division localized software and documentation into 12 languages. WordPerfect has support for European languages other than English.\nThe Language Resource File (WP.LRS) specifies language formatting conventions.\nIn addition, WordPerfect Corporation did some aggressive marketing in Europe. In January 1993 it signed a three-year, $16 million deal to sponsor the WordPerfect cycling team in international competitions. The team was directed by the Dutchman Jan Raas. The move was intended to raise WordPerfect's profile throughout Europe and especially in the Alpine countries of France, Switzerland, and Italy, and it was also thought that young bicycling enthusiasts fit the WordPerfect user profile in the United States. In the third year of the deal (1995), Novell took over the sponsorship, due to having acquired WordPerfect.\nFunction keys.\nLike its 1970s predecessor Emacs and mid-1980s competitor MultiMate, WordPerfect uses almost every possible combination of function keys with Ctrl, Alt, and Shift modifiers, and the Ctrl-Alt, Shift-Alt, and Shift-Ctrl double modifiers, unlike early versions of WordStar, which uses only Ctrl.\nWordPerfect uses F3 instead of F1 for \"Help\", F1 instead of Esc for \"Cancel\", and Esc for \"Repeat\" (though a configuration option in later versions allowed these functions to be rotated to locations that later became more standard).\nThe extensive number of key combinations are one of WP's most popular features among its regular \"power users\" such as legal secretaries, paralegals and attorneys.\nPrinter drivers.\nWordPerfect for DOS shipped with an impressive array of printer drivers\u2014a feature that played an important role in its adoption\u2014and also shipped with a printer driver editor called PTR, which features a flexible macro language and allows technically inclined users to customize and create printer drivers.\nVersion 4.2 for DOS has a Type-Through feature that allows a user with certain compatible printers to use WordPerfect as a conventional typewriter. The functionality was removed in version 5.1 for DOS.\nWordPerfect Library/Office utilities.\nWordPerfect Corporation produced a variety of ancillary and spin-off products. WordPerfect Library, introduced in 1986 and later renamed WordPerfect Office (not to be confused with Corel's Windows office suite of the same name), is a package of DOS network and stand-alone utility software for use with WordPerfect. The package includes a DOS menu shell and file manager which can edit binary files as well as WordPerfect or Shell macros, calendar, and a general-purpose flat file database program that can be used as the data file for a merge in WordPerfect and as a contact manager.\nAfter Novell acquired WordPerfect Corporation, it incorporated many of these utilities into Novell GroupWise.\nLetterPerfect.\nIn 1990, the company offered LetterPerfect, which was a reduced-functionality version of WP-DOS 5.1 intended for use on less-capable hardware such as laptops, and as an entry-level product for students and home users; the name (but not the code) was purchased from a small Missouri company that produced one of the first word processors for the Atari 8-bit computers. LP does not support tables, labels, sorting, equation editing, or styles. It sold for about US$100 but did not catch on and was discontinued.\nDataPerfect.\nAnother program distributed through WordPerfect Corporation (and later through Novell) was DataPerfect for DOS, a fast and capable hierarchical database management system (DBMS) requiring as little as 300 KB of free DOS memory to run. It was written by Lew Bastian. In December 1995, Novell released DataPerfect as copyrighted freeware and allowed the original author to continue to update the program. Updates were developed until at least 2008.\nDataPerfect supports up to 99 data files (\"panels\") with each holding up to 16 million records of up to 125 fields and an unlimited number of variable-length memo fields which can store up to 64,000 characters each. Networked, DataPerfect supports up to simultaneous users.\nPlanPerfect.\nAnother program distributed through WordPerfect Corporation was PlanPerfect, a spreadsheet application. The first version with that name was reviewed in \"InfoWorld\" magazine in September 1987.\nWordPerfect for Windows.\nHistory.\nWordPerfect was late in coming to market with a Windows version. WordPerfect 5.1 for Windows, introduced in 1991, had to be installed from DOS and was largely unpopular due to serious stability issues. The first mature version, WordPerfect 5.2 for Windows, was released in November 1992 and WordPerfect 6.0 for Windows was released in 1993. By the time WordPerfect 5.2 for Windows was introduced, Microsoft Word for Windows version 2 had been on the market for over a year and had received its third interim release, v2.0c.\nWordPerfect's function-key-centered user interface did not adapt well to the new paradigm of a mouse and pull-down menus, especially with many of WordPerfect's standard key combinations overridden by incompatible keyboard shortcuts that Windows itself used; for example, Alt-F4 became \"Exit Program\", as opposed to WordPerfect's \"Block Text\". The DOS version's impressive arsenal of finely tuned printer drivers was also rendered obsolete by Windows' use of its own printer device drivers.\nWordPerfect Office Suite.\nWordPerfect became part of an office suite when the company entered into a co-licensing agreement with Borland Software Corporation in 1993. The offerings were marketed as Borland Office, containing Windows versions of WordPerfect, Quattro Pro, Borland Paradox, and a LAN-based groupware package called WordPerfect Office. Originally based on the WordPerfect Library for DOS, the Novell / WordPerfect Office suite was integrated by \"middleware\". The most important middleware suite, still active in current versions of WordPerfect Office, is called PerfectFit (developed by WordPerfect). The other \"middleware\" (developed by Novell) was called AppWare.\nNovell buys WordPerfect Company.\nPeterson said in 1987 \"We don't want to acquire other companies, we don't want to merge with other companies, and we don't want to go public\". Pressure grew on WordPerfect to either go public or merge with a publicly traded company so shareholders' families could gain market liquidity. Peterson left the company in March 1992, selling his ownership portion to Ashton and Bastian. A seven-person committee including Ashton and Bastian replaced Peterson. Revenue declined that year to $579 million from $622 million. The WordPerfect product line was sold twice, first to Novell in June 1994, for $1.4 billion, giving Ashton and Bastian almost $700 million in Novell stock each. Novell sold it (at a big loss) to Corel in January 1996. However, Novell kept the WordPerfect Office technology, incorporating it into its GroupWise messaging and collaboration product.\nMicrosoft vs Novell.\nCompounding WordPerfect's troubles were issues associated with the release of the first 32-bit version, WordPerfect 7, intended for use on Windows 95. In the lawsuit 'Novell v. Microsoft', Novell argued that these problems were due to anti-competitive acts by Microsoft.\nWhile WordPerfect 7 contained notable improvements over the 16-bit WordPerfect for Windows 3.1, it was released in May 1996, nine months after the introduction of Windows 95 and Microsoft Office 95 (including Word 95). The initial release suffered from notable stability problems. WordPerfect 7 also did not have a Microsoft \"Designed for Windows 95\" logo. This was important to some Windows 95 software purchasers as Microsoft set standards for application design, behavior, and interaction with the operating system. To make matters worse, the original release of WordPerfect 7 was incompatible with Windows NT, hindering its adoption in many professional environments. The \"NT Enabled\" version of WordPerfect 7, which Corel considered to be Service Pack 2, was not available until Q1-1997, over six months after the introduction of Windows NT 4.0, a year and a half after the introduction of Office 95 (which supported Windows NT out of the box), and shortly after the introduction of Office 97.\nMarket share.\nBy 1993 WordPerfect Corporation had three disadvantages as it expanded beyond word processing, according to an industry analyst: A reputation for arrogance, a perception that it was a one-product DOS software company, and shipping products late. While WordPerfect had 85% of the DOS word processor market in 1992, it had only one third of the Windows market compared to Microsoft's more than half. Word was reportedly the top-selling word processor that year. After Windows 3.0 was introduced, Word's market share began to grow at an extraordinary rate. A Windows version of WordPerfect was not introduced until nearly two years after Windows 3.0, and was met with poor reviews. Word also benefited from being included in an integrated office suite package much sooner than WordPerfect.\nComputer Intelligence estimated in 1987 that WordPerfect had 11% of the Fortune 1000 PC word processor market, third behind Ashton-Tate's 18% and IBM and MicroPro's 25% each. By then the company was, \"Computerworld\" said, \"\"the\" leader in word processor sales\", ahead of the \"Big Three\" software companies Microsoft, Lotus Development, and Ashton-Tate. While WordPerfect grew to as much as 60% of the word processing market by the early 1990s, one consultant for the legal profession in 1990 estimated that 70% of law firms used it, 46% of respondents in a 1990 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants survey used WordPerfect, and the application had more than 50% of the worldwide word-processing market in 1995, by 2000 Word had up to 95%; it was so dominant that WordPerfect executives admitted that their software needed to be compatible with Word documents to survive.\nApplication integration and middleware.\nWhile Microsoft offered something that looked like a fully integrated office suite in Microsoft Office, a common complaint about early Windows versions of WordPerfect Office was that it looked like a collection of separate applications from different vendors cobbled together, with inconsistent user interfaces from one application to another.\nIn fact, enabling applications from various software developers to work together on every platform was part of the Novell strategy. Novell had acquired WordPerfect for Windows from WordPerfect Corporation, Paradox from Borland, and various peripheral utilities from other companies and had started to evangelize the Novell \"middleware\"\u00a0\u2013 Appware\u00a0\u2013 as a means for others to run their programs on every operating system. This \"middleware\" strategy would make software vendors and customers independent from operating system vendors, like Microsoft, thus posing a real threat.\nContrary to Microsoft with its MS Office however, starting with WordPerfect Office 9, Corel successfully integrated the components of WordPerfect Office almost seamlessly. PerfectScript and the middleware PerfectFit played the major role here. Elements of applications like CorelDraw and Ventura desktop publishing were also integrated and enriched the document format.\nFaithful customers.\nAmong the remaining avid users of WordPerfect were many law firms and government offices, which favored WordPerfect features such as macros, reveal codes, and the ability to access a large range of formatting options such as left-right block indent directly with key combinations rather than having to click through several layers of submenus as Microsoft Word often requires. Fast typists appreciated the ability to keep their hands on the keyboard, rather than reaching for the mouse as often as would be required if they were using Microsoft Word. WordPerfect users may also define any key or key combination to do what they want, such as typing phrases they often use or executing macros. The user interface stayed almost identical from WPWin 6 through at least WP X5 (2010) and file formats did not change, as incompatible new formats would require keeping both obsolete software versions and obsolete hardware around just to access old documents.\nCorel catered to these markets, with, for example, a major sale to the United States Department of Justice in 2005. A related factor is that WordPerfect Corporation was particularly responsive to feature requests from the legal profession, incorporating many features particularly useful to that niche market; those features have been continued in subsequent versions, usually directly accessible with key combinations. WordPerfect still had a level of presence among such users into the 2020s. Similarly, as of 2024, the French judiciary continues to use WordPerfect, and continues to offer training for its use. \n\"Novell v. Microsoft\" antitrust lawsuit.\nIn November 2004, Novell filed an antitrust lawsuit against Microsoft for alleged anti-competitive behavior (such as tying Word to sales of Windows and withdrawal of support for APIs) that Novell claims led to loss of WordPerfect market share. That lawsuit, after several delays, was dismissed in July 2012. Novell filed an appeal from the judgment in November 2012, but the Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed. Novell sought review in the US Supreme Court, but in 2014 that court declined to hear the case, ending the legal action almost a decade after it had begun.\nCorel buys WordPerfect from Novell.\nNovell stated in November 1995 that it was putting its personal productivity product line up for sale. In January 1996 it announced that the sale of these products, primarily WordPerfect and Quattro Pro, would be made to Corel for $186 million, a large loss from what it had originally paid to acquire WordPerfect. Novell did hold onto a few pieces that it had acquired from WordPerfect, most importantly the GroupWise collaboration product. \nThe sale to Corel, which was headquartered in Ottawa, Ontario, was completed in March 1996. The head of Corel, Michael Cowpland, initially expressed optimism that Corel WordPerfect could compete effectively against Microsoft Word among business users, somewhat akin to a Coke versus Pepsi battle. The optimism was wrong; many new computers came loaded with Word along with Windows. Corel lost over $230 million for 1997. \nIn 1998, the WordPerfect development offices in Orem were closed, affecting over 500 employees. The software engineering for WordPerfect became centred in Corel's home city of Ottawa.\nCorel WordPerfect.\nSince its acquisition by Corel in 1996, WordPerfect for Windows was officially been known as Corel WordPerfect. \nOn January 17, 2006, Corel announced WordPerfect X3. Corel is an original member of the OASIS Technical Committee on the OpenDocument Format, and Paul Langille, a senior Corel developer, is one of the original four authors of the OpenDocument specification.\nIn January 2006, subscribers to Corel's electronic newsletter were informed that WordPerfect 13 was scheduled for release later in 2006. The subsequent release of X3 (identified as \"13\" internally and in registry entries) has been met with generally positive reviews, due to new features including a unique PDF import capability, metadata removal tools, integrated search and online resources and other features.\nVersion X3 was described by CNET in January 2006 as a \"winner\", \"a feature-packed productivity suite that's just as easy to use\u00a0\u2014 and in many ways more innovative than\u00a0\u2014 industry-goliath Microsoft Office 2003.\" CNET went on to describe X3 as \"a solid upgrade for long-time users\", but that \"Die-hard Microsoft fans may want to wait to see what Redmond has up its sleeve with the radical changes expected within the upcoming Microsoft Office 12.\"\nAlthough the released version of X3 at the time did not support the OOXML or OpenDocument formats, a beta was released that supported both.\nReports surfaced late in January 2006 that Apple's iWork had leapfrogged WordPerfect Office as the leading alternative to Microsoft Office. This claim was soon debunked after industry analyst Joe Wilcox described JupiterResearch usage surveys that showed WordPerfect as the No. 2 office suite behind Microsoft Office in the consumer, small and medium businesses, and enterprise markets with a roughly 15 percent share in each market.\nIn April 2008, Corel released its WordPerfect Office X4 office suite containing the new X4 version of WordPerfect which includes support for PDF editing, OpenDocument and Office Open XML. However, X4 does not include support for editing PDF's containing images in JPEG2000 format, a format used by Adobe Acrobat 9.\nIn March 2010, Corel released its WordPerfect Office X5 office suite, which contains the new X5 version of WordPerfect. This version includes improved support for PDF, Microsoft Office 2007, OpenDocument, and Office Open XML. The new release includes integration with Microsoft SharePoint and other web services geared towards government and business users.\nIn April 2012, Corel released its WordPerfect Office X6 office suite, which contains the new X6 version of WordPerfect. The new release adds multi-document/monitor support, new macros, Windows 8 preview support, and an eBook publisher.\nIn May 2021, Corel released its WordPerfect Office 2021 office suite, which superseded versions x7 through x9 and version 2020. New features include creating fillable PDFs, built in Bates numbering (since X7), saving to opendocument and ePub formats (since v2020), and saving and opening Microsoft Office openXML formats (which did not work in x9). In a review, \"PC Magazine\" said that \"WordPerfect Office is the one and only Windows office application suite that isn't a workalike for Microsoft Office. ... WordPerfect [is] the only office app that gives you total control over every detail of the documents you produce.\" The review noted that WordPerfect still had a significant presence in the legal domain, \"where it's the only app that offers both advanced legal-formatting features and a document management system that doesn't rely on Microsoft's networking software.\" However, the magazine noted that the WordPerfect Office 2021 user interface \"has an old-school look and feel that won't attract many new users\", that it does not support real-time collaboration workflows, and that the product only runs on Windows and not Macintosh or mobile platforms. \nWordPerfect Suite and WordPerfect Office.\nWordPerfect Suite and WordPerfect Office is an office suite developed by Corel Corporation. It originates from Borland Software Corporation's Borland Office, released in 1993 to compete against Microsoft Office and AppleWorks. Borland's suite bundled three key applications: WordPerfect, Quattro Pro and Paradox. Borland then sold the suite to Novell in 1994, which led to the addition of Novell Presentations and the now-defunct InfoCentral. It was then sold to Corel in 1996.\nCorel WordPerfect Suite 7 and Office 7 Professional.\nCorel WordPerfect Suite 7 featured version 7 of its core applications: WordPerfect, Quattro Pro and Presentations while Office 7 Professional included Paradox as well. Both versions of the suite also bundled CorelFLOW 3, Sidekick, Dashboard and Envoy 7. The suite for Windows was released in 1996 to retail.\nCorel WordPerfect Office 2000.\nCorel WordPerfect Office 2000 featured version 9 of its core applications: WordPerfect, Quattro Pro, Presentations, Paradox and CorelCentral. All versions of the suite also bundle Trellix 2 and Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications. The suite for Windows was released on November 16, 1998, as a preview and on May 25, 1999, to retail. The Home and Student edition, as well as the Family Pack, omit the Presentations and Paradox software. Small Business edition was released on January 31, 2000, and omits Paradox.\nSeveral variants of this suite exist. One of these is the Family Pack, sold in versions 2 and 3 at a reduced price. This version cannot be used in a commercial setting. Three variants of the suite were created to integrate voice recognition. The first, the Voice Powered Edition, includes Dragon Naturally Speaking 3 and was released in North America. The second, available at some international locations, included Philips newest generation of FreeSpeech. The third is WordPerfect Law Office 2000, released on December 20, 1999. It features NaturallySpeaking Standard 4 and bundles several programs designed for lawyers. Another notable variant is WordPerfect Office 2000 for Linux, released on March 10, 2000. Although it supports various Linux distributions, it was designed with Corel Linux in mind as a way to upgrade such systems, which bundled a free version of the WordPerfect word processor.\nLatest version.\nThe latest version is WordPerfect Office 2021, released May 2021. The suite is offered in three editions: Home and Student, Standard, and Professional, with only the last of these including Paradox.\nQuattro Pro.\nQuattro Pro is a spreadsheet program that originally competed against the dominant Lotus 1-2-3 and now competes against LibreOffice Calc, Microsoft Excel, Google Sheets and Apple's Numbers. Corel's application is available only for the Windows platform.\nPresentations.\nPresentations is a presentation program by Corel. Its main competitors include LibreOffice Impress, Microsoft PowerPoint, Google Slides, and Apple's Keynote.\nWordPerfect Lightning.\nWordPerfect Lightning is a note-taking application. Its main competitors are Evernote, Microsoft OneNote, Google Keep and Apple's Notes.\nOther desktop applications.\nParadox is a relational database manager for Windows. Its main competitors are LibreOffice Base and Microsoft Access.\n\"Classic Mode\".\nCorel added \"Classic Mode\" in WordPerfect 11. Although this displays the \"classic\" cyan Courier text on medium blue background, it is not a true emulation of the DOS version. It does select the WPDOS 5.1 Keyboard. (The 6.1 Keyboard is available too.) The WPWin macro system, which remains unchanged, is quite different from that of WPDOS, and conversion is not easy. The menu remains the WPWin menu, and the available Toolbars are WPWin toolbars.\nVersion history.\nSummary.\nWordPerfect 9 and newer are bundled with the WordPerfect Office Suite and cannot be purchased separately.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIn addition, versions of WordPerfect have also been available for Apricot, Tandy 2000, TI Professional, Victor 9000, and Zenith Z-100 systems.\nKnown versions for IBM System/370 include 4.2, released 1988.\nKnown versions for the DEC Rainbow 100 include version (?), released November 1983.\nUnix.\nAt one time or another, WordPerfect was available on around 30 flavors of Unix, including AT&amp;T, NCR, SCO Xenix, SCO OpenServer, UnixWare, Microport Unix, DEC Ultrix, Pyramid Tech Unix, Tru64, IBM AIX, Motorola System V/88, and HP-UX, SGI IRIX and Solaris.\nIn July 2022, Tavis Ormandy ported \"WordPerfect for Unix\" 7, to modern Linux distributions, as a fully functional deb package. The program can print to CUPS printers through ghostscript.\nMacintosh.\nDevelopment of WordPerfect for Macintosh did not run parallel to versions for other operating systems, and used version numbers unconnected to contemporary releases for DOS and Windows.\nOriginally schedule for release in early 1987, version 1 was so late that it was described as vaporware. In early 1988 the company began selling a beta version for $99, with the promise that customers would receive the $395 final version\u2014scheduled for spring 1988\u2014for free. After releasing version 1.0 in April, the company released three more \"version 1.0\" with bug fixes within three weeks; nonetheless, by the end of the year WordPerfect for Macintosh became a best seller. Version 2 was a total rewrite, adhering more closely to Apple's UI guidelines. Version 3 took this further, making extensive use of the technologies Apple introduced in Systems 7.0\u20137.5, while remaining fast and capable of running well on older machines. Corel released version 3.5 in 1996, followed by the improved version 3.5e (for enhanced) in 1997. It was never updated beyond that, and the product was eventually discontinued. As of 2004[ [update]], Corel has reiterated that the company has no plans to further develop WordPerfect for Macintosh (such as creating a native Mac OS X version).\nFor several years, Corel allowed Mac users to download version 3.5e from their website free of charge, and some Mac users still use this version. The download is still available at the Mac IO group (successor to the Yahoo group) along with the necessary OS 8/9/Classic Updater that slows scroll speed and restores functionality to the Style and Window menus. Like other Mac OS applications of its age, it requires the Classic environment on PowerPC Macs. While Intel Macs do not support Classic, emulators such as SheepShaver, Basilisk II and vMac allow users to run WordPerfect on any Macintosh computer (or indeed any Linux computer). Users wishing to use a current release of WordPerfect can run the Windows version through Boot Camp or virtualization software, and through Darwine or CrossOver Mac with mixed results.\nAtari ST.\nLike the Macintosh version, development of WordPerfect for the Atari ST did not run parallel to the DOS versions. However the Atari ST version number aligned with contemporary DOS releases. In 1987, WordPerfect Corp. released version 4.1. This was the only Atari version ever released, but numerous patches and updates ensured that the Atari version of WordPerfect ran on all Atari ST, Atari STe, TT, and Falcon computers.\nWordPerfect ST differs from the DOS version most notably in speed and number of windows a user can open. On the Atari ST version, a user can open up to four windows (compared to DOS' two) and the application runs three to five times faster than the DOS version (depending on which update or patch is installed). This was possible because WordPerfect for the Atari ST was designed from the ground up and was optimized for the Motorola 68000 processor as well as Atari's GEM (Graphics Environment Manager) operating system.\nWordPerfect for the Atari ST retailed at US$395 with registered Atari user groups being offered the program at $155 along with a student version for US$99. The price of WordPerfect was significantly higher than most of the other Atari word processors available at the time. Atari Corporation published a version of Microsoft Write (the Atari version of Microsoft Word 1.05 for the Macintosh) for US$129.95 (almost 75% off the suggested retail price of WordPerfect), which did not help WordPerfect's campaign to establish itself as the standard word processor on the Atari platform.\nLike other versions, WordPerfect for the ST was not copy-protected. \"Antic\" magazine wrote \"WordPerfect Corp. doesn't need to worry too much about piracy: WordPerfect is almost unusable without its manual of over 600 pages!\" The magazine was mistaken; in 1988 WordPerfect threatened to abandon the Atari market after copies of the word processor were found on several pirate bulletin board systems. However, support from the Atari community convinced WordPerfect to reconsider and support for the Atari ST continued, but only a single developer was assigned to the project to fix bugs.\nCovering the subject of WordPerfect's commitment to the Atari ST market, ST-Log's Ian Chadwick writes, \"WordPerfect Corp. squashed rumours that they would pull out of the Atari market, due to rampant piracy. WP was found on at least three pirate BBSs, but they are still making the effort to stay with us. That shows a serious commitment on their part. If you want them to remain part of this market, then show them the same amount of respect and don't make or accept any pirate copies of their product.\"\nWorldwide sales numbers of WordPerfect for Atari ST would eventually help relieve the concerns of the piracy situation with Atari ST User reporting, \"Talk here in the USA points to the fact that Word Perfect Corp. will continue to support the ST derivative of its WP package, currently at version 4.1 (functionally equivalent to MS-DOS version 4.2). There is even talk of further changes and an upgrade adding a few new features to the package. It seems that Word Perfect's ST sales have been good enough, particularly in Europe, to warrant a continued commitment to the product.\nWordPerfect would go on to fully support version 4.1 for the Atari ST with a number of bug fixes, patches, system compatibility updates with all Atari ST, STe, TT, and Falcon computers, including their renowned excellent customer support from 1987 - 1991.\"\nA WordPerfect 5.1 version for the Atari ST was planned and in development but was later cancelled.\nAmiga.\nIn 1987, WordPerfect was ported to the Amiga 1000 and was upgraded through version 4.1 on the Amiga platform despite rumors of its discontinuation. The company's efforts were not well supported by Amiga users and it did not sell well. Though it could be started from the Workbench or CLI, WordPerfect remained a fundamentally text-oriented program and retained its DOS command structure. Satellite Software received criticism for releasing a non-graphical word processor on a graphically oriented system.\nIn 1989, WordPerfect Corporation stopped all Amiga development, including work on a version of PlanPerfect, stating that it had lost $800,000 on the computer and could not afford to add Amiga-specific features. After customers stated that they would be satisfied with a DOS-like word processor the company resumed development of only the Amiga version of WordPerfect, but discontinued it in 1992.\nLinux.\nIn 1995, WordPerfect 6.0 was made available for Linux as part of Caldera's Internet office package. In late 1997, a newer version was made available for download, but had to be purchased to be activated.\nIn 1998 Corel released WordPerfect 8.0 for Linux. The full version was sold as a package. A cut-down version was made available for downloading.\nHoping to establish themselves in the nascent commercial Linux market, Corel also developed their own distribution of Linux. This included WordPerfect 8.1 for Linux. Although the Linux distribution was fairly well-received, the response to WordPerfect for Linux varied. Some Linux promoters appreciated the availability of a well-known, mainstream application for the operating system.\nOnce OpenOffice.org appeared in 1999, there was little demand for a proprietary, closed-source project like WordPerfect. On top of this, WordPerfect 9.0, which was released as part of the WordPerfect Office 2000 for Linux package, was not a native Linux application like WP 6\u20138, but derived from the Windows version using Corel's own version of the Wine compatibility library, and hence had performance problems.\nWordPerfect failed to gain a large user base, and as part of Corel's change of strategic direction following a (non-voting) investment by Microsoft, WordPerfect for Linux was discontinued and their Linux distribution was sold to Xandros. In April 2004, Corel re-released WordPerfect 8.1 (the last Linux-native version) with some updates, as a \"proof of concept\" and to test the Linux market. As of 2011[ [update]], WordPerfect for Linux is not available for purchase.\nAs of 2023, WordPerfect for Linux (also known as xwp) can still be run on modern distros.\nLinux applications may use the codice_8 library to convert WordPerfect documents.\niOS.\nA WordPerfect X7 app for iOS was released in 2014, but it was merely remote desktop software that connected to a Corel-hosted WordPerfect for Windows session. It was billed as a \"Limited Free Trial\" and was eventually discontinued by Corel.\nUnicode and Asian language editing.\nWordPerfect lacks support for Unicode, which limits its usefulness in many markets outside North America and Western Europe. Despite pleas from long-time users, this feature has not yet been implemented.\nFor users in WordPerfect's traditional markets, the inability to deal with complex character sets, such as Asian language scripts, can cause difficulty when working on documents containing those characters. However, later versions have provided better compliance with interface conventions, file compatibility, and even Word interface emulation.\nHowever, WordPerfect X4 was reported to be able to import IPA character set, and copy and paste works as long as the pastes into WP are done via Paste Special &gt; Unicode command. Publishing to PDF from WordPerfect embeds the WP-phonetic font together with the Unicode-compatible font.\nReception.\n\"PC Magazine\" stated in March 1983 that \"\"WordPerfect\" is very impressive, a more than full-featured program with a few truly state-of-the-art goodies tucked into the package\". It cited WordPerfect's inclusion of mail merge, footnotes, and macros\u2014all missing from WordStar\u2014as well as \"virtually every ... feature that one ought to expect from a higher-priced program\" including find-and-replace, bold and underline display, and automatic paragraph reflow. \"Byte\" in December 1984 noted the application's built-in print buffer, ability to show bold, underline, and centered text, and extensive math capabilities. It criticized the quality of the spell checker and difficult tab settings, but concluded that \"its powerful capabilities far outweigh the problems mentioned\".\n\"I have finally found a program that dethrones WordStar\", the \"Orlando Sentinel\" wrote in August 1985: \"It does everything more than competently, and its shortcomings are minor\". The author praised the software's speed, ease of learning, \"uncluttered screen\", autosave, \"not excessive\" hardware requirements, and \"as little as $219 by mail order\" price. While wishing for split screen, undo, and the ability to save ASCII files without linefeeds, the review concluded \"I'm happy as an otter on a fresh mudslide\". \"Compute!\" in August 1985 called \"WordPerfect\" \"excellent\". It especially praised the clean, uncluttered screen and fast spell checker. Noting the spell checker's size and the company's \"excellent track record of supporting its software\", \"Antic\" in May 1988 concluded that \"If you want to own the most power-packed word processor available for the ST today, and can live with the relative complexity needed for harnessing this power, WordPerfect is what you've been waiting for.\"\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33768", "revid": "91088", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33768", "title": "WordStar", "text": "Word processor application\nWordStar is a discontinued word processor application for microcomputers. It was published by MicroPro International and originally written for the CP/M-80 operating system (OS), with later editions added for MS-DOS and other 16-bit PC OSes. Rob Barnaby was the sole author of the early versions of the program.\nStarting with WordStar 4.0, the program was built on new code written principally by Peter Mierau. WordStar dominated the market in the early and mid-1980s, succeeding the market leader Electric Pencil.\nWordStar was written with as few assumptions as possible about the operating system and machine hardware, allowing it to be easily ported across the many platforms that proliferated in the early 1980s. Because all of these versions had relatively similar commands and controls, users could move between platforms with equal ease. It was already popular when its inclusion with the Osborne 1 portable computer made the program the \"de facto\" standard for much of the small computer word-processing market.\nAs the market became dominated by the IBM PC and later Microsoft Windows, this same portable design made it difficult for the program to add new features, and affected its performance. In spite of its great popularity in the early 1980s, these problems allowed WordPerfect to take WordStar's place as the most widely used word processor from 1985 on.\nHistory.\nFounding.\nSeymour I. Rubinstein was an employee of early microcomputer company IMSAI, where he negotiated software contracts with Digital Research and Microsoft. After leaving IMSAI, Rubinstein planned to start his own software company that would sell through the new network of retail computer stores. He founded MicroPro International Corporation in September 1978 and hired John Robbins Barnaby as programmer, who wrote a word processor, WordMaster, and a sorting program, SuperSort, in Intel 8080 assembly language. After Rubinstein obtained a report that discussed the abilities of contemporary standalone word processors from IBM, Xerox, and Wang Laboratories, Barnaby enhanced WordMaster with similar features and support for the CP/M operating system. MicroPro began selling the product, now renamed WordStar, in June 1979. Priced at $ and $ for the manual, by early 1980, MicroPro said in advertisements that 5,000 people had purchased WordStar in eight months.\nEarly success.\nWordStar was the first microcomputer word processor to offer mail merge and textual WYSIWYG. Besides word-wrapping (still a notable feature for early microcomputer programs), this last was most noticeably implemented as on-screen pagination during the editing session. Using the number of lines-per-page given by the user during program installation, WordStar would display a full line of dash characters onscreen showing where page breaks would occur during hardcopy printout. Many users found this very reassuring during editing, knowing beforehand where pages would end and begin, and where text would thus be interrupted across pages.\nBarnaby left the company in March 1980, but due to WordStar's sophistication, the company's extensive sales and marketing efforts, and bundling deals with Osborne and other computer makers, MicroPro's sales grew from $ in 1979 to $ million in fiscal year 1984, surpassing earlier market leader Electric Pencil. By May 1983 \"BYTE\" magazine called WordStar \"without a doubt the best-known and probably the most widely used personal computer word-processing program\". The company released WordStar 3.3 in June 1983; the 650,000 cumulative copies of WordStar for the IBM PC and other computers sold by that fall was more than double that of the second most-popular word processor, and that year MicroPro had 10% of the personal computer software market. By 1984, the year it held an initial public offering, MicroPro was the world's largest software company with 23% of the word processor market.\nA manual that \"PC Magazine\" described as \"incredibly inadequate\" and \"a looseleaf nightmare\" led many authors to publish replacements. One of them, \"Introduction to WordStar\", was written by future Goldstein &amp; Blair founder and Whole Earth Software Catalog contributor Arthur Naiman, who hated the program and had a term inserted into his publishing contract that he not be required to use WordStar to write the book, using WRITE instead.\nMS-DOS.\nWordStar 3.0, the first version for MS-DOS, appeared in April 1982. Until then, many PC owners bought Z-80 cards so they could run the CP/M version. The first DOS version is very similar to the CP/M original, and although the IBM PC has arrow keys and separate function keys, the traditional \"WordStar diamond\" and other Ctrl-key functions were retained, leading to rapid adoption by former CP/M users. WordStar's ability to use a \"non-document\" mode to create text files without formatting made it popular among programmers as a source-code editor. Like the CP/M versions, the DOS WordStar was not explicitly designed for IBM PCs, but rather for any x86 machine (as there were a number of non-IBM-compatible PCs that used 8086 or 80186 CPUs). As such, it uses only DOS's API calls and avoids any BIOS usage or direct hardware access. This carried with it a performance penalty as everything had to be \"double\" processed (meaning that the DOS API functions would handle screen or keyboard I/O first and then pass them to the BIOS).\nThe first DOS version of WordStar, demonstrated by Jim Fox and executed by a team of Irish programmers in April 1982, was a port of the CP/M-86 version of WordStar, which in turn had been ported from the CP/M-80 version in September 1981. This had been started by Diane Hajicek and was completed by an Irish team of programmers under ISIS-II, probably using Intel's source-to-source translator CONV86. Thus the main program executable was a .COM file which could only access 64\u00a0kB of memory. Users quickly learned they could make WordStar run dramatically faster by installing a RAM disk board, and copying the WordStar program files into it. WordStar would still access the \"disk\" repeatedly, but the far faster access of the RAM drive compared to a floppy disk yielded a substantial speed improvement. However, edited versions of a document were \"saved\" only to this RAM disk, and had to be copied to physical media before rebooting.\n\"InfoWorld\" described WordStar as \"notorious for its complexity\", and Stephen Manes of \"PC\" wrote that its \"function keys seemed to have been assigned late one drunken Saturday night\", but by 1983 WordStar was the leading word processing system (\"the disks moved off the shelves faster than Charlie Chaplin\u2019s pies\", Manes said). Although competition appeared early (the first version of WordPerfect debuted in 1982 and Microsoft Word in 1983), WordStar was the dominant word processor on x86 machines until 1985. It was part of the software bundle that accompanied Kaypro computers.\nAt that time, the evolution from CP/M to MS-DOS, with an \"Alt\" key, had taken place. WordStar had until then never successfully exploited the MS-DOS keyboard, and that is one explanation for its demise.\nBy that point, MicroPro had dropped the generic MS-DOS support and WordStar 4.0 was exclusively for IBM compatibles, which differed from MS-DOS-compatible programs in terms of screen addressing. It was the first version of WordStar supporting directories\u2014a feature nearly mandatory to be usable on machines with hard disks. Also introduced were simple macros (shorthand) and the install program was completely updated to include features like reprogramming function keys and an extensive printer support. During the second half of the 1980s, the fully modernized WordPerfect overtook it in sales.\nWordStar 5 (released in 1989) added footnote and endnote capability and a fairly advanced Page preview function. Versions 5.5 and 6 had added features, and version 7 (released 1991) included a complete macro language as well as support for over 500 printers. It also featured style sheets and mouse support.\nProblems with piracy.\nWordStar was not copy-protected up to and including version 3.3. Columnist John Dvorak recalled: \"WordStar may have been the most pirated software in the world, which in many ways accounted for its success. (Software companies don\u2019t like to admit to this as a possibility.) Books for WordStar sold like hot cakes and the authors knew they were selling documentation for pirated copies of WordStar. The company itself should have just sold the documentation alone to increase sales. This was the wink-wink-nudge-nudge aspect of the industry at the time and everyone knew it. So when WordStar 2000 arrived with a copy protection scheme, everyone should have predicted its immediate demise\".\nBesides the ready availability of third-party books explaining WordStar in detail, the program's extensive and configurable onscreen help facility (help text appeared in a resizable window at the top of the screen) made it easy to use an illegal copy.\nWordStar 2000.\nAt the time, the IBM Displaywriter System dominated the dedicated word processor market. IBM's main competition was Wang Laboratories. Such machines were expensive and were generally accessed through terminals connected to central mainframe or midrange computers.\nWhen IBM announced it was bringing DisplayWrite to the PC, MicroPro focused on creating a clone of it which they marketed, in 1984, as WordStar 2000. WordStar 2000 supported features such as disk directories, but lacked compatibility with the file formats of existing WordStar versions and also made numerous unpopular changes to the interface. Gradually competitors such as WordPerfect reduced MicroPro's market share. MultiMate, in particular, used the same key sequences as Wang word processors, which made it popular with secretaries switching from those to PCs.\n\"BYTE\" stated that WordStar 2000 had \"all the charm of an elephant on motorized skates\", warning in 1986 that an IBM PC AT with hard drive was highly advisable to run the software, which it described as \"clumsy, overdesigned, and uninviting ... I can't come up with a reason why I'd want to use it\". WordStar 2000 had a user interface that was substantially different from the original WordStar, and the company did little to advertise this. However, its lasting legacy on the word processing industry was the introduction of three keyboard shortcuts that are still widely used, namely, Ctrl+B for boldfacing, Ctrl+I for \"italicizing\", and Ctrl+U for underlining text.\nNewStar.\nWordStar became popular in large companies without MicroPro. The company, which did not have a corporate sales program until December 1983, developed an arrogant reputation among customers. After PC DOS 1.1 was incompatible with WordStar 3.02 MicroPro did not update its software for months, then did not notify customers who had mailed in registration cards of its existence or later updates. 3.3, released in 1983, had many improvements and much better documentation but still did not use more than 64K RAM at once. \"PC Magazine\" wrote that year that the company's \"motto often seems to be: 'Ask Your Dealer'\", and in 1985 that\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Almost since its birth 4 years ago, MicroPro has had a seemingly unshakable reputation for three things: arrogant indifference to user feedback (\"MicroPro's classic response to questions about \"WordStar\" was, \"Call your dealer\"); possession of one of the more difficult-to-use word processors on the market; and possession of the most powerful word processor available.\nBy late 1984, the company admitted, according to the magazine, that WordStar's reputation for power was fading, and by early 1985, its sales had decreased for four quarters while those of Multimate and Samna increased. At some point WordStar's source code was reportedly lost and reconstructed by Peter Mierau. After being laid off by the company in October 1982, he and other former MicroPro employees formed rival company NewStar. In September 1983, it published WordStar clone NewWord, which offered several features the original lacked, such as a built-in spell checker and support for laser printers. Advertisements stated that \"Anyone with WordStar experience won't even have to read NewWord's manuals. WordStar text files work with NewWord\". Despite competition from NewStar, Microsoft Word, WordPerfect, and dozens of other companies, which typically released new versions of their software every 12 to 18 months, MicroPro did not release new versions of WordStar beyond 3.3 during 1984 and 1985, in part because Rubinstein relinquished control of the company after a January 1984 heart attack. His replacements canceled the promising office suite Starburst, purchased a WordStar clone, and used it as the basis of WordStar 2000, released in December 1984. It received poor reviews\u2014by April 1985 \"PC Magazine\" referred to WordStar 2000 as \"beleaguered\"\u2014due to not being compatible with WordStar files and other disadvantages, and by selling at the same $ price as WordStar 3.3 confused customers. Company employees were divided between WordStar and WordStar 2000 factions, and fiscal year 1985 sales declined to $ million.\nJerry Pournelle wrote in September 1984 that NewWord was file and command compatible with WordStar 3.3, with comparable speed, more features, and better built-in help. He quoted another user as describing it as \"WordStar without glitches\". By that year, NewWord had released a second version, and many WordStar users switched to it. A third version appeared in 1986; \"The New York Times\" wrote that NewWord 3 \"provides the perfect excuse for WordStar users to switch software, as if WordStar users needed an excuse\".\nIn February 1985 MicroPro promised updates to WordStar 3.3, but the company's attempt to improve Mierau's reconstructed source code reportedly resulted in an unusable product. No update appeared until new management purchased NewWord and used it as the basis of WordStar 4.0 in 1987, four years after the previous version. Word (four versions from 1983 to 1987) and WordPerfect (five versions), however, had become the market leaders. More conflict between MicroPro's two factions delayed WordStar 5.0 until late 1988, again hurting the program's sales. After renaming itself after its flagship product in 1989, WordStar International merged with SoftKey in 1993.\nWordStar for Windows.\nLike many other producers of successful DOS applications, WordStar International delayed before deciding to make a version for the commercially successful Windows 3.0. The company purchased Legacy, an existing Windows-based word processor, which was altered and released as WordStar for Windows in 1991. It was a well-reviewed product and included many features normally only found in more expensive desktop publishing packages. However, its delayed launch meant that Microsoft Word had already firmly established itself as the corporate standard during the two previous years.\nAbandonment.\nWordStar is abandonware. It was last updated in December 1992.\nNotable users.\nWordStar was the program of choice for conservative intellectual William F. Buckley, Jr., who used the software to write many works, including his last book. His son Christopher Buckley wrote of his father's loyalty to WordStar, despite the increasing difficulty of installing it on newer computers. The elder Buckley said of WordStar, \"I'm told there are better programs, but I'm also told there are better alphabets\".\nRalph Ellison also used WordStar.\nRobert J. Sawyer, a Canadian science-fiction writer, continues to use WordStar 7.0 for DOS (the final release, last updated in 1992) to write his novels, All twenty-five of his novels were written with WordStar. As the app is now \"abandonware\", and there was no proper archive of WordStar 7.0 for DOS available online, he decided to create one. He put together as complete a version of WordStar 7 as might exist. He bundled together over 1,000 pages of scanned manuals that came with WordStar, related utilities, his own README guidance, ready-to-run versions of DOSBox-X and VDosPlus, and WordStar 7 Rev. D and posted them on his website as the \"Complete WordStar 7.0 Archive\".\nAs of 2020[ [update]], fantasy author George R. R. Martin used the MS-DOS version of WordStar 4.0.\nAndy Breckman, the creator of \"Monk\", is a devoted WordStar user.\nNovelist Anne Rice was another faithful user of WordStar who struggled to have it installed on newer computers until it could no longer reasonably be done. She then grudgingly transitioned to Microsoft Word, whose design she felt was comparatively unintuitive and illogical. Rice noted \"WordStar was magnificent. I loved it. It was logical, beautiful, perfect,\" adding, \"Compared to it, MS Word which I use today is pure madness.\"\nReception.\n\"InfoWorld\" in 1984 approved of WordStar 3.3 for the IBM PC's improved documentation. The magazine concluded that although \"it doesn't have all the fancy features of some of the newer word-processing programs ... it has virtually everything you might need ... The program performs well in almost any word-processing situation\".\nA 1990 American Institute of Certified Public Accountants member survey found that 13% used WordStar. While second only to WordPerfect (46%) and ahead of Word (8%) among word processors, 10% of users said they would not recommend WordStar, compared to 1% for WordPerfect and 2% for Word.\nVersion list.\nThis is a list of the various WordStar versions released over the years for different machines.\nInterface.\nPrior to WordStar, word processors split text entry and formatting into separate functions; the latter was often not done until a document was about to be printed. WordStar was one of the first \"what you see is what you get\" word processors, showing accurate line breaks and page breaks on the computer screen. It was a major breakthrough to be able to see and modify where line breaks and page breaks would fall\u2014even though, being a text-based program, WordStar couldn't accurately display different typefaces such as bold and italic until version 5.0.\nIn a default installation on a 25-line screen, the top third of the screen contained a menu of commands and a status line; the lower two-thirds of the screen displayed the text of the user's document. A user-configurable option to set the help level released this space for user text. The help system could be configured to display help a short time after the first key of a command sequence was entered. As users became more familiar with the command sequences, the help system could be set to provide less and less assistance until finally all on-screen menus and status information would be turned off.\nThe original computer terminals and microcomputers for which WordStar was developed, many running the CP/M operating system, did not have function keys or cursor control keys (arrow keys, Page Up/Page Down). WordStar used sequences of alphabetic keys combined with the \"Control\" key, which on keyboards of the time was conveniently next to the letter A in the position now usually occupied by the Caps Lock key. For touch typists, in addition, reaching the function and cursor keys generally requires them to take their fingers off the \"home keys\" with consequent loss of typing rhythm.\nFor example, the \"diamond\" of Ctrl-S/E/D/X (s=left, e=up, d=right, x=down) moved the cursors one character or line to the left, up, right, or down. Ctrl-A/F (to the outside of the \"diamond\") moved the cursor a full word left/right, and Ctrl-R/C (just \"past\" the Ctrl keys for up and down) scrolled a full page up/down. Prefacing these keystrokes with Ctrl-Q generally expanded their action, moving the cursor to the end/beginning of the line, end/beginning of the document, etc. Ctrl-G would delete the character under the cursor. Ctrl-H would backspace and delete. Commands to enable bold or italics, printing, blocking text to copy or delete, saving or retrieving files from disk, etc. were typically a short sequence of keystrokes, such as Ctrl-P-B for bold, or Ctrl-K-S to save a file. Formatting codes would appear on screen, such as \"^B\" for bold, \"^Y\" for italics, and \"^S\" for underscoring.\nAlthough many of these keystroke sequences were far from self-evident, they tended to lend themselves to mnemonic devices (e.g., Ctrl-Print-Bold, Ctrl-blocK-Save), and regular users quickly learned them through muscle memory, enabling them to rapidly navigate documents by touch, rather than memorizing \"Ctrl-S = cursor left.\"\nEarly versions of WordStar lacked features found in other word processors, such as the ability to automatically reformat paragraphs to fit the current margins as text was added or deleted; a command had to be issued to force reformatting. The subsequent WordStar 2000 (and later versions of WordStar for DOS) added automatic paragraph reformatting (and all versions of WordStar had commands to manually reformat a paragraph (^B) or the rest of the document (^QQ^B and, as a later synonym, ^QU)).\nWordStar was rare among word processing programs in that it permitted the user to mark (highlight) a block of text (with ^KB and ^KK commands) and leave it marked in place, and then go to a different position in the document and later (even after considerable work on other things) copy the block (with ^KC) or move it to a new location (with ^KV). Many users found it much easier to manipulate blocks this way than with the Microsoft Word system of highlighting with a mouse and then being forced by Word's select-then-do approach to immediately deal with the marked block, lest any typing replace it. The subsequent WordStar 2000 retained WordStar's distinctive functionality for block manipulation. As part of the ^K sequence of shortcuts, it offered true bookmarks (^K1 to ^K9) allowing the editor to move about in large documents with ease.\nColumn Mode editing was probably unique to WordStar. As a basic text editor, the interface showed all characters to be the same width - hence 80 characters across an 80 column screen resolution. By switching on column mode editing a rectangle of text spanning several characters and several lines could be selected and manipulated. This was very handy for manipulating columns of numbers and non-standard files. Once selected, the feature could also be used to calculate the total of a column of numbers and place the result at the insertion point.\nFormatting with WordStar was carried out before the text to be formatted\u2014unlike many other word processors where the formatting of a paragraph is 'buried' within the usually hidden paragraph marker at the end of the paragraph. This latter method leaves the user unclear where formatting starts. In normal editing, WordStar hides formatting markers but these are easily displayed with ^OD command. Formatting information is then displayed in the normal text area displacing the actual text. It nonetheless made it absolutely clear where formatting started and finished. Page and section formatting was handled differently by the addition of formatting lines. A formatting line was indicated by the line starting with a full stop. Some third-party WordStar books called formatting lines \"dot commands\". A few examples: .lh (line height) .lm (left margin) .rm (right margin) - each of which was followed by a number. The number was assumed to be points (pt) but could be easily modified to inches or mm by the addition of \" or mm after the number. .lm and .rm were never equal as both values were from the left hand edge of the page. Setting .rm to 0 made text lines infinitely long. Margins could also be set either absolutely or relatively (by preceding the value with either - or +) when setting the value.\nIf any invalid formatting commands are encountered, when printing WordStar (version 3.3 at least) will ignore the line (all text until the next carriage return terminating the line). This could confuse novice users who unintentionally began a line with a decimal point (same as period or dot character) and WordStar would not print the line. For instance, a line reading: \".05 percent text text text...\" would not appear in the printout though the document would continue on the printout without any error reported.\nWordStar 2000 added few new commands, but completely rewrote the user interface, using simple English-language mnemonics (so the command to remove a word, which had been ^T in WordStar, became ^RW in WordStar 2000; the command to remove the text from the rest of the line to the right of the cursor changed from ^QY to ^RR). However, many in WordStar's large installed user based were happy with the original WordStar interface, and did not consider the changes to be improvements. Although WordStar 2000 was meant as the successor to WordStar, it never gained substantial market share.\nThe original WordStar interface left a large legacy, and many of its control-key command are still available (optionally or as the default) in other programs, such as the modern cross-platform word processing software TextMaker and many text editors running under MS-DOS, Linux, and other UNIX variants. Some Borland products, including the popular Turbo Pascal compiler, and Borland Sidekick, used a subset of WordStar keyboard commands, the former in its IDE and the latter in the \"Notepad\" editors. The TEXT editor built into the firmware of the TRS-80 Model 100 portable computer supported a subset of the WordStar cursor movement commands (in addition to its own). Home word processing software like Write&amp;Set not only use the WordStar interface, but have been based on WordStar DOS file formats, allowing WordStar users who no longer have a copy of the application to easily open and edit their files. There are WordStar keyboard command emulators and keymappings, both freeware and shareware, for current versions of Microsoft Word. Popular modern word processing software WordPerfect can open or save to WordStar documents, enabling users to move back and forth.\nAdd-ons and companion products.\nMailMerge was an add-on program (becoming integrated from WordStar 4 onwards) which facilitated the \"merge printing\" of bulk mailings, such as business letters to clients. Two files were required:\nThe writer would insert placeholders delimited by ampersands into the master document, e.g., &amp;TITLE&amp;, &amp;INITIAL&amp;, &amp;SURNAME&amp;, &amp;ADDRESS1&amp;. In each copy of the letter the placeholders would be replaced with strings read from the DAT file. Mass mailings could thereby be prepared with each letter copy \"individually\" addressed.\nOther add-on programs included SpellStar, a spell checker program, later incorporated as a direct part of the WordStar program; and DataStar, a program whose purpose was specifically to expedite creating of the data files used for merge printing. These were revolutionary features for personal computer users during the early-to-mid-1980s. A companion spreadsheet, CalcStar, was also produced using a somewhat WordStar-like interface; collectively, WordStar (word processing), DataStar/ReportStar (database management, a.k.a. InfoStar), and CalcStar (spreadsheet) comprised StarBurst, the first-ever office suite of personal computer programs.\nAs a product enhancement, in the late 1980s WordStar 5 came bundled with PC-Outline, a popular MS-DOS outliner then available from Brown Bag Software in California. PC-Outline text had to be exported to a WordStar-format file, as the programs were not developed to be internally compatible.\nBidirectional text.\nAround 1978, Elbit Systems in Israel developed a CP/M-capable microcomputer named the DS2100. CP/M machines were readily available and Elbit needed something to differentiate their product from others. An agreement was made with MicroPro to develop a version of WordStar that supported both English and Hebrew input. The concept was revolutionary, as Hebrew is written right-to-left and all word processors of the time assumed left-to-right. WordStar, as developed by Elbit, was the first word processor that offered bidirectional input and mixed alphabets.\nElbit acquired rights to the source code and a development team in Elbit, Haifa, worked on the project. For several years Hebrew-English WordStar was the \"de facto\" WYSIWYG word processor leader until, inevitably, it was ousted by newer competitors.\nFile types.\nWordStar identified files as either \"document\" or \"nondocument,\" which led to some confusion among users. \"Document\" referred to WordStar word processing files containing embedded word processing and formatting commands. \"Nondocument\" files were pure ASCII text files containing no embedded formatting commands. Using WordStar in \"Nondocument Mode\" was essentially the same as using a traditional text editor. WordStar 5 introduced a document-mode \"print preview\" feature, allowing the user to inspect a WYSIWYG version of text, complete with inserted graphics, as it would appear on the printed page.\nInstallation.\nInstallation of early versions of WordStar, especially for CP/M, was very different from the approach of modern programs. While later editions had more-or-less comprehensive installation programs that allowed selection of printers and terminals from a menu, in the very early releases, each of the escape sequences required for the terminal and printer had to be identified in the hardware documentation, then hand-entered (in hex) into reserved locations in the program memory image. This was a fairly typical limitation of all CP/M programs of the time, since there was no mechanism to hide the complexities of the underlying hardware from the application program. To use the program with a different printer required re-installation of the program. Occasionally short machine-language programs had to be entered in a patch area in WordStar, to provide particular screen effects or cope with particular printers. Researching, testing, and proving out such installations was a time-consuming and knowledge-intensive process, making WordStar installation and customization a staple discussion of CP/M users' groups during that time.\nDOS versions of WordStar at least had standardized the screen display, but still had to be customized for different printers.\nRunning on modern platforms.\nWordStar version 3.x used the MS-DOS File Control Block (FCB) interface, an early data structure for file input/output which was based closely on CP/M's file input/output functions. The provision of the FCB interface was intended to simplify the porting of (assembly language) programs from CP/M to the new MS-DOS. When MS-DOS adopted the Unix-like file interface of file handles, FCBs became a legacy interface supported for backward compatibility. Because FCB compatibility has not been maintained, WordStar 3.x will not function properly on modern versions of Windows. In particular, WordStar 3.x cannot save files.\nOne workaround is to use the DOSEMU emulator on Linux, which correctly implements the FCB interface; the DOSBox emulator does not, even on Linux. WordStar 4.0 does not have this problem because it uses the newer MS-DOS interface for input/output. OS/2 can run WordStar in a DOS session. Another option is using the FreeDOS operating system.\nAnother option is to run the CP/M versions of WordStar using a CP/M emulator, such as \"CPMEmu\" for Linux and the Raspberry Pi, or \"CP/M for OS X\" for macOS.\nIn October 2014, WordStar support was added to vDos, a derivative of DOSBox optimized for business applications; vDos allows WordStar 4.0 and above to run under 32- and 64-bit versions of Microsoft Windows from XP through 10.\nIn 2024, Robert J. Sawyer released archives of WordStar capable of running on all modern platforms.\nEmulation.\nAlthough no current version of WordStar is available for modern operating systems, some former WordStar users still prefer WordStar's interface, especially the cursor diamond commands described earlier in this article. These users say that less hand movement is necessary to issue commands, and hence that writing under this interface is more efficient. The user accesses the nearby Ctrl key and then a letter or combination of letters, thus keeping his hands on or close to the home row instead of moving them away from it to reach for a specialty key or a mouse.\nTo accommodate these users, WordStar emulation programs were created. One such program is CtrlPlus by Yoji Hagiya, which remaps the standard PC keyboard, making many WordStar commands available in most Windows programs. CtrlPlus switches the Control and Caps Lock keys so that the Ctrl key is back where it was on older keyboards, next to the A key. It also gives functionality to the chief cursor diamond commands mentioned in this article.\nAnother WordStar emulation utility is 'WordStar Command Emulator for Microsoft Word', also known as 'WordStar for Word,' by Mike Petrie. Designed to work in conjunction with CtrlPlus, the Command Emulator adds many more WordStar commands to MS Word than CtrlPlus by itself, and also changes Word 97-XP's menus to be more like those of WordStar 7.0 for DOS, the last DOS version of WordStar. For example, Ctrl+K? was WordStar's word count command and Ctrl+QL was its spell check command. Hitting these commands in the WordStar Emulator within Word runs Word's equivalent commands. WordStar for Word also adds WordStar's block commands, namely Ctrl+KB to mark the beginning of a block, Ctrl+KK to mark the end, and Ctrl+KV to move it. Alternatively, Ctrl+KC could be used to copy the block. WordStar for Word works on all versions of Word from Word 97 through 2010.\nThe WordStar Command Emulator is written in Microsoft Visual Basic for Applications (VBA), a macro programming language based on Visual Basic built into Microsoft Word to allow for a high level of customization. Most Word add-ins are written in this language.\nGNU Emacs used to come with a library 'wordstar-mode.el' that provides WordStar emulation, but it's been declared obsolete as of version 24.5. A macro set for vi that provides WordStar emulation is available.\nThe cross-platform JOE editor is a very WordStar-like alternative. When invoked as codice_1, Joe emulates many WordStar keybindings. JOE lacks formatting options and essentially only operates in non-document mode, but formatted documents can be authored in HTML/CSS, Markdown or another markup language.\nLegacy.\nNewStar produced NewWord for Amstrad PCW 8256, PCW 8512 in the mid-1980s, running CP/M on floppy disks. NewWord also was available for MS-DOS and in a native version for Concurrent CP/M. It was very similar to WordStar. LapStar was a cut-down clone for the TRS-80 Model 100 portable computer.\nSince 2013 a partial WordStar clone has been in the process of being developed under the name of WordTsar. In addition German software author Martin Vieregg has sold the Write&amp;Set package, a shareware GUI based WordStar clone for Microsoft Windows and OS/2\u2013eComStation since the latter half of the 1990s, and for Linux and OS X as well.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33777", "revid": "50504901", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33777", "title": "Whale", "text": "Informal group of large marine mammals\nWhales are a widely distributed and diverse group of fully aquatic placental marine mammals. As an informal and colloquial grouping, they correspond to large members of the infraorder Cetacea, i.e. all cetaceans apart from dolphins and porpoises. Dolphins and porpoises may be considered whales from a formal, cladistic perspective. Whales, dolphins and porpoises belong to the order Cetartiodactyla, which consists of even-toed ungulates. Their closest non-cetacean living relatives are the hippopotamuses, from which they and other cetaceans diverged about 54 million years ago. The two parvorders of whales, baleen whales (Mysticeti) and toothed whales (Odontoceti), are thought to have had their last common ancestor around 34 million years ago. Mysticetes include four extant (living) families: Balaenopteridae (the rorquals), Balaenidae (right whales), Cetotheriidae (the pygmy right whale), and Eschrichtiidae (the grey whale). Odontocetes include the Monodontidae (belugas and narwhals), Physeteridae (the sperm whale), Kogiidae (the dwarf and pygmy sperm whale), and Ziphiidae (the beaked whales), as well as the six families of dolphins and porpoises which are not considered whales in the informal sense.\nWhales are fully aquatic, open-ocean animals: they can feed, mate, give birth, suckle and raise their young at sea. Whales range in size from the and dwarf sperm whale to the and blue whale, which is the largest known animal that has ever lived. The sperm whale is the largest toothed predator on Earth. Several whale species exhibit sexual dimorphism, in that the females are larger than males.\nBaleen whales have no teeth; instead, they have plates of baleen, fringe-like structures that enable them to expel the huge mouthfuls of water they take in while retaining the krill and plankton they feed on. Because their heads are enormous\u2014making up as much as 40% of their total body mass\u2014and they have throat pleats that enable them to expand their mouths, they are able to take huge quantities of water into their mouth at a time. Baleen whales also have a well-developed sense of smell.\nToothed whales, in contrast, have conical teeth adapted to catching fish or squid. They also have such keen hearing\u2014whether above or below the surface of the water\u2014that some can survive even if they are blind. Some species, such as sperm whales, are particularly well adapted for diving to great depths to catch squid and other favoured prey.\nWhales evolved from land-living mammals, and must regularly surface to breathe air, although they can remain underwater for long periods of time. Some species, such as the sperm whale, can stay underwater for up to 90 minutes. They have blowholes (modified nostrils) located on top of their heads, through which air is taken in and expelled. They are warm-blooded, and have a layer of fat, or blubber, under the skin. With streamlined fusiform bodies and two limbs that are modified into flippers, whales can travel at speeds of up to 20 knots, though they are not as flexible or agile as seals. Whales produce a great variety of vocalizations, notably the extended songs of the humpback whale. Although whales are widespread, most species prefer the colder waters of the Northern and Southern Hemispheres and migrate to the equator to give birth. Species such as humpbacks and blue whales are capable of travelling thousands of miles without feeding. Males typically mate with multiple females every year, but females only mate every two to three years. Calves are typically born in the spring and summer; females bear all the responsibility for raising them. Mothers in some species fast and nurse their young for one to two years.\nOnce relentlessly hunted for their products, whales are now protected by international law. The North Atlantic right whales nearly became extinct in the twentieth century, with a population low of 450, and the North Pacific grey whale population is ranked Critically Endangered by the IUCN. Besides the threat from whalers, they also face threats from bycatch and marine pollution. The meat, blubber and baleen of whales have traditionally been used by indigenous peoples of the Arctic. Whales have been depicted in various cultures worldwide, notably by the Inuit and the coastal peoples of Vietnam and Ghana, who sometimes hold whale funerals. Whales occasionally feature in literature and film. A famous example is the great white whale in Herman Melville's novel \"Moby-Dick\". Small whales, such as belugas, are sometimes kept in captivity and trained to perform tricks, but breeding success has been poor and the animals often die within a few months of capture. Whale watching has become a form of tourism around the world.\nEtymology and definitions.\nThe word \"whale\" comes from the Old English \"hw\u00e6l\", from Proto-Germanic \"*hwalaz\", from Proto-Indo-European \"*(s)kwal-o-\", meaning \"large sea fish\". The Proto-Germanic \"*hwalaz\" is also the source of Old Saxon \"hwal\", Old Norse \"hvalr\", \"hvalfiskr\", Swedish \"val\", Middle Dutch \"wal\", \"walvisc\", Dutch \"walvis\", Old High German \"wal\", and German \"Wal\". Other archaic English forms include \"wal, wale, whal, whalle, whaille, wheal\", etc.\nThe term \"whale\" is sometimes used interchangeably with dolphins and porpoises, acting as a synonym for Cetacea. Six species of dolphins have the word \"whale\" in their name, collectively known as blackfish: the orca, or killer whale, the melon-headed whale, the pygmy killer whale, the false killer whale, and the two species of pilot whales, all of which are classified under the family Delphinidae (oceanic dolphins). Each species has a different reason for it, for example, the killer whale was named \"Ballena asesina\" 'killer whale' by Spanish sailors.\nThe term \"Great Whales\" covers those currently regulated by the International Whaling Commission: the Odontoceti family Physeteridae (sperm whales); and the Mysticeti families Balaenidae (right and bowhead whales), Eschrichtiidae (grey whales), and some of the Balaenopteridae (Minke, Bryde's, Sei, Blue and Fin; not Eden's and Omura's whales).\nTaxonomy and evolution.\nPhylogeny.\nThe whales are part of the largely terrestrial mammalian clade Laurasiatheria. Whales do not form a clade or order; the infraorder Cetacea includes dolphins and porpoises, which are not considered whales in the informal sense. The phylogenetic tree shows the relationships of whales and other mammals, with whale groups marked in green.\nCetaceans are divided into two parvorders. The larger parvorder, Mysticeti (baleen whales), is characterized by the presence of baleen, a sieve-like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin, which it uses to filter plankton, among others, from the water. Odontocetes (toothed whales) are characterized by bearing sharp teeth for hunting, as opposed to their counterparts' baleen.\nCetaceans and artiodactyls now are classified under the order Cetartiodactyla, often still referred to as Artiodactyla, which includes both whales and hippopotamuses. The hippopotamus and pygmy hippopotamus are the whales' closest terrestrial living relatives.\nMysticetes.\nMysticetes are also known as baleen whales. They have a pair of blowholes side by side and lack teeth; instead they have baleen plates which form a sieve-like structure in the upper jaw made of keratin, which they use to filter plankton from the water. Some whales, such as the humpback, reside in the polar regions where they feed on a reliable source of schooling fish and krill. These animals rely on their well-developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water; they swim by moving their fore-flippers and tail fin up and down. Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end, but do not form a rigid rib cage. This adaptation allows the chest to compress during deep dives as the pressure increases. Mysticetes consist of four families: rorquals (balaenopterids), cetotheriids, right whales (balaenids), and grey whales (eschrichtiids).\nThe main difference between each family of mysticete is in their feeding adaptations and subsequent behaviour.\nBalaenopterids are the rorquals. These animals, along with the cetotheriids, rely on their throat pleats to gulp large amounts of water while feeding. The throat pleats extend from the mouth to the navel and allow the mouth to expand to a large volume for more efficient capture of the small animals they feed on. Balaenopterids consist of two genera and eight species.\nBalaenids are the right whales. These animals have very large heads, which can make up as much as 40% of their body mass, and much of the head is the mouth. This allows them to take in large amounts of water into their mouths, letting them feed more effectively.\nEschrichtiids have one living member: the grey whale. They are bottom feeders, mainly eating crustaceans and benthic invertebrates. They feed by turning on their sides and taking in water mixed with sediment, which is then expelled through the baleen, leaving their prey trapped inside. This is an efficient method of hunting, in which the whale has no major competitors.\nOdontocetes.\nOdontocetes are known as toothed whales; they have teeth and only one blowhole. They rely on their well-developed sonar to find their way in the water. Toothed whales send out ultrasonic clicks using the melon. Sound waves travel through the water. Upon striking an object in the water, the sound waves bounce back at the whale. These vibrations are received through fatty tissues in the jaw, which is then rerouted into the ear-bone and into the brain where the vibrations are interpreted. All toothed whales are opportunistic, meaning they will eat anything they can fit in their throat because they are unable to chew. These animals rely on their well-developed flippers and tail fin to propel themselves through the water; they swim by moving their fore-flippers and tail fin up and down. Whale ribs loosely articulate with their thoracic vertebrae at the proximal end, but they do not form a rigid rib cage. This adaptation allows the chest to compress during deep dives as opposed to resisting the force of water pressure. Excluding dolphins and porpoises, odontocetes consist of four families: belugas and narwhals (monodontids), sperm whales (physeterids), dwarf and pygmy sperm whales (kogiids), and beaked whales (ziphiids).\nThe differences between families of odontocetes include size, feeding adaptations and distribution. Monodontids consist of two species: the beluga and the narwhal. They both reside in the frigid arctic and both have large amounts of blubber. Belugas, being white, hunt in large pods near the surface and around pack ice, their coloration acting as camouflage. Narwhals, being black, hunt in large pods in the aphotic zone, but their underbelly still remains white to remain camouflaged when something is looking directly up or down at them. They have no dorsal fin to prevent collision with pack ice.\nPhyseterids and Kogiids consist of sperm whales. Sperm whales consist the largest and smallest odontocetes, and spend a large portion of their life hunting squid. \"P. macrocephalus\" spends most of its life in search of squid in the depths; these animals do not require any degree of light at all, in fact, blind sperm whales have been caught in perfect health. The behaviour of Kogiids remains largely unknown, but, due to their small lungs, they are thought to hunt in the photic zone.\nZiphiids consist of 22 species of beaked whale. These vary from size, to coloration, to distribution, but they all share a similar hunting style. They use a suction technique, aided by a pair of grooves on the underside of their head, not unlike the throat pleats on the rorquals, to feed.\nAs a formal clade (a group which does not exclude any descendant taxon), odontocetes also contains the porpoises (Phocoenidae) and four or five living families of dolphins: oceanic dolphins (Delphinidae), South Asian river dolphins (Platanistidae), the possibly extinct Yangtze River dolphin (Lipotidae), South American river dolphins (Iniidae), and La Plata dolphin (Pontoporiidae).\nEvolution.\nWhales are descendants of land-dwelling mammals of the artiodactyl order (even-toed ungulates). They are related to the \"Indohyus\", an extinct chevrotain-like ungulate, from which they split approximately 48 million years ago. Primitive cetaceans, or archaeocetes, first took to the sea approximately 49 million years ago and became fully aquatic 5\u201310 million years later. What defines an archaeocete is the presence of anatomical features exclusive to cetaceans, alongside other primitive features not found in modern cetaceans, such as visible legs or asymmetrical teeth. Their features became adapted for living in the marine environment. Major anatomical changes included their hearing set-up that channeled vibrations from the jaw to the earbone (\"Ambulocetus\" 49 mya), a streamlined body and the growth of flukes on the tail (\"Protocetus\" 43 mya), the migration of the nostrils toward the top of the cranium (blowholes), and the modification of the forelimbs into flippers (\"Basilosaurus\" 35 mya), and the shrinking and eventual disappearance of the hind limbs (the first odontocetes and mysticetes 34 mya).\nWhale morphology shows several examples of convergent evolution, the most obvious being the streamlined fish-like body shape. Other examples include the use of echolocation for hunting in low light conditions\u00a0\u2014 which is the same hearing adaptation used by bats\u00a0\u2014 and, in the rorqual whales, jaw adaptations, similar to those found in pelicans, that enable engulfment feeding.\nToday, the closest living relatives of cetaceans are the hippopotamuses; these share a semi-aquatic ancestor that branched off from other artiodactyls some 60 mya. Around 40 mya, a common ancestor between the two branched off into cetacea and anthracotheres; nearly all anthracotheres became extinct at the end of the Pleistocene 2.5 mya, eventually leaving only one surviving lineage\u00a0\u2013 the hippopotamus.\nWhales split into two separate parvorders around 34 mya\u00a0\u2013 the baleen whales (Mysticetes) and the toothed whales (Odontocetes).\nBiology.\nAnatomy.\nWhales have torpedo-shaped bodies with non-flexible necks, limbs modified into flippers, non-existent external ear flaps, a large tail fin, and flat heads (with the exception of monodontids and ziphiids). Whale skulls have small eye orbits, long snouts (with the exception of monodontids and ziphiids) and eyes placed on the sides of its head. Whales range in size from the and dwarf sperm whale to the and blue whale. Overall, they tend to dwarf other cetartiodactyls; the blue whale is the largest creature on Earth. Several species have female-biased sexual dimorphism, with the females being larger than the males. One exception is with the sperm whale, which has males larger than the females.\nOdontocetes, such as the sperm whale, possess teeth with cementum cells overlying dentine cells. Unlike human teeth, which are composed mostly of enamel on the portion of the tooth outside of the gum, whale teeth have cementum outside the gum. Only in larger whales, where the cementum is worn away on the tip of the tooth, does enamel show. Mysticetes have large whalebone, as opposed to teeth, made of keratin. Mysticetes have two blowholes, whereas Odontocetes contain only one.\nBreathing involves expelling stale air from the blowhole, forming an upward, steamy spout, followed by inhaling fresh air into the lungs; a humpback whale's lungs can hold about of air. Spout shapes differ among species, which facilitates identification.\nAll whales have a thick layer of blubber. In species that live near the poles, the blubber can be as thick as . This blubber can help with buoyancy (which is helpful for a 100-ton whale), protection to some extent as predators would have a hard time getting through a thick layer of fat, and energy for fasting when migrating to the equator; the primary usage for blubber is insulation from the harsh climate. It can constitute as much as 50% of a whale's body weight. Calves are born with only a thin layer of blubber, but some species compensate for this with thick lanugos.\nWhales have a two- to three-chambered stomach that is similar in structure to those of terrestrial carnivores. Mysticetes contain a proventriculus as an extension of the oesophagus; this contains stones that grind up food. They also have fundic and pyloric chambers.\nLocomotion.\nWhales have two flippers on the front, and a tail fin. These flippers contain four digits. Although whales do not possess fully developed hind limbs, some, such as the sperm whale and bowhead whale, possess discrete rudimentary appendages, which may contain feet and digits. Whales are fast swimmers in comparison to seals, which typically cruise at 5\u201315 kn, or ; the fin whale, in comparison, can travel at speeds up to and the sperm whale can reach speeds of . The fusing of the neck vertebrae, while increasing stability when swimming at high speeds, decreases flexibility; whales are unable to turn their heads. When swimming, whales rely on their tail fin to propel them through the water. Flipper movement is continuous. Whales swim by moving their tail fin and lower body up and down, propelling themselves through vertical movement, while their flippers are mainly used for steering. Some species log out of the water, which may allow them to travel faster. Their skeletal anatomy allows them to be fast swimmers. Most species have a dorsal fin.\nWhales are adapted for diving to great depths. In addition to their streamlined bodies, they can slow their heart rate to conserve oxygen; blood is rerouted from tissue tolerant of water pressure to the heart and brain among other organs; haemoglobin and myoglobin store oxygen in body tissue; and they have twice the concentration of myoglobin than haemoglobin. Before going on long dives, many whales exhibit a behaviour known as sounding; they stay close to the surface for a series of short, shallow dives while building their oxygen reserves, and then make a sounding dive.\nSenses.\nThe whale ear has specific adaptations to the marine environment. In humans, the middle ear works as an impedance equalizer between the outside air's low impedance and the cochlear fluid's high impedance. In whales, and other marine mammals, there is no great difference between the outer and inner environments. Instead of sound passing through the outer ear to the middle ear, whales receive sound through the throat, from which it passes through a low-impedance fat-filled cavity to the inner ear. The whale ear is acoustically isolated from the skull by air-filled sinus pockets, which allow for greater directional hearing underwater. Odontocetes send out high-frequency clicks from an organ known as a melon. This melon consists of fat, and the skull of any such creature containing a melon will have a large depression. The melon size varies between species, the bigger the more dependent they are on it. A beaked whale for example has a small bulge sitting on top of its skull, whereas a sperm whale's head is filled up mainly with the melon.\nThe whale eye is relatively small for its size, yet they do retain a good degree of eyesight. As well as this, the eyes of a whale are placed on the sides of its head, so their vision consists of two fields, rather than a binocular view like humans have. When belugas surface, their lens and cornea correct the nearsightedness that results from the refraction of light; they contain both rod and cone cells, meaning they can see in both dim and bright light, but they have far more rod cells than they do cone cells. Whales do, however, lack short wavelength sensitive visual pigments in their cone cells indicating a more limited capacity for colour vision than most mammals. Most whales have slightly flattened eyeballs, enlarged pupils (which shrink as they surface to prevent damage), slightly flattened corneas and a tapetum lucidum; these adaptations allow for large amounts of light to pass through the eye and, therefore, a very clear image of the surrounding area. They also have glands on the eyelids and outer corneal layer that act as protection for the cornea.\nThe olfactory lobes are absent in toothed whales, suggesting that they have no sense of smell. Some whales, such as the bowhead whale, possess a vomeronasal organ, which does mean that they can \"sniff out\" krill.\nWhales are not thought to have a good sense of taste, as their taste buds are atrophied or missing altogether. However, some toothed whales have preferences between different kinds of fish, indicating some sort of attachment to taste. The presence of the Jacobson's organ indicates that whales can smell food once inside their mouth, which might be similar to the sensation of taste.\nCommunication.\nWhale vocalization is likely to serve several purposes. Some species, such as the humpback whale, communicate using melodic sounds, known as whale song. These sounds may be extremely loud, depending on the species. Humpback whales only have been heard making clicks, while toothed whales use sonar that may generate up to 20,000 watts of sound (+73\u00a0dBm or +43\u00a0dBw) and be heard for many miles.\nCaptive whales have occasionally been known to mimic human speech. Scientists have suggested this indicates a strong desire on behalf of the whales to communicate with humans, as whales have a very different vocal mechanism, so imitating human speech likely takes considerable effort.\nWhales emit two distinct kinds of acoustic signals, which are called whistles and clicks:\nClicks are quick broadband burst pulses, used for sonar, although some lower-frequency broadband vocalizations may serve a non-echolocative purpose such as communication; for example, the pulsed calls of belugas. Pulses in a click train are emitted at intervals of \u224835\u201350 milliseconds, and in general these inter-click intervals are slightly greater than the round-trip time of sound to the target.\nWhistles are narrow-band frequency modulated (FM) signals, used for communicative purposes, such as contact calls.\nIntelligence.\nWhales are known to teach, learn, cooperate, scheme, and grieve. The neocortex of many species of whale is home to elongated spindle neurons that, prior to 2007, were known only in hominids. In humans, these cells are involved in social conduct, emotions, judgement, and theory of mind. Whale spindle neurons are found in areas of the brain that are homologous to where they are found in humans, suggesting that they perform a similar function.\nBrain size was previously considered a major indicator of the intelligence of an animal. Since most of the brain is used for maintaining bodily functions, greater ratios of brain-to-body mass may increase the amount of brain mass available for more complex cognitive tasks. Allometric analysis indicates that mammalian brain size scales at approximately the &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;2\u20443 or &lt;templatestyles src=\"Fraction/styles.css\" /&gt;3\u20444 exponent of the body mass. Comparison of a particular animal's brain size with the expected brain size based on such allometric analysis provides an encephalisation quotient that can be used as another indication of animal intelligence. Sperm whales have the largest brain mass of any animal on Earth, averaging and in mature males, in comparison to the average human brain which averages in mature males. The brain-to-body mass ratio in some odontocetes, such as belugas and narwhals, is second only to humans.\nSmall whales are known to engage in complex play behaviour, which includes such things as producing stable underwater toroidal air-core vortex rings or \"bubble rings\". There are two main methods of bubble ring production: rapid puffing of a burst of air into the water and allowing it to rise to the surface, forming a ring, or swimming repeatedly in a circle and then stopping to inject air into the helical vortex currents thus formed. They also appear to enjoy biting the vortex-rings, so that they burst into many separate bubbles and then rise quickly to the surface. Some believe this is a means of communication. Whales are also known to produce bubble-nets for the purpose of foraging.\nLarger whales are also thought, to some degree, to engage in play. The southern right whale, for example, elevates their tail fluke above the water, remaining in the same position for a considerable amount of time. This is known as \"sailing\". It appears to be a form of play and is most commonly seen off the coast of Argentina and South Africa. Humpback whales, among others, are also known to display this behaviour.\nLife cycle.\nWhales are fully aquatic creatures, which means that birth and courtship behaviours are very different from terrestrial and semi-aquatic creatures. Since they are unable to go onto land to calve, they deliver the baby with the fetus positioned for tail-first delivery. This prevents the baby from drowning either upon or during delivery.\nTo feed the newborn, whales, being aquatic, must squirt the milk into the mouth of the calf. Nursing can occur while the mother whale is in the vertical or horizontal position. While nursing in the vertical position, a mother whale may sometimes rest with her tail flukes remaining stationary above the water. This position with the flukes above the water is known as \"whale-tail-sailing.\" Not all whale-tail-sailing includes nursing of the young, as whales have also been observed tail-sailing while no calves were present.\nBeing mammals, they have mammary glands used for nursing calves; weaning occurs at about 11 months of age. This milk contains high amounts of fat which is meant to hasten the development of blubber; it contains so much fat that it has the consistency of toothpaste. Like humans, female whales typically deliver a single offspring. Whales have a typical gestation period of 12 months. Once born, the absolute dependency of the calf upon the mother lasts from one to two years. Sexual maturity is achieved at around seven to ten years of age. The length of the developmental phases of a whale's early life varies between different whale species.\nAs with humans, the whale mode of reproduction typically produces but one offspring approximately once each year. While whales have fewer offspring over time than most species, the probability of survival for each calf is also greater than for most other species. Female whales are referred to as \"cows.\" Cows assume full responsibility for the care and training of their young. Male whales, referred to as \"bulls,\" typically play no role in the process of calf-rearing.\nMost baleen whales reside at the poles. To prevent the unborn baleen whale calves from dying of frostbite, the baleen mother must migrate to warmer calving/mating grounds. They will then stay there for a matter of months until the calf has developed enough blubber to survive the bitter temperatures of the poles. Until then, the baleen calves will feed on the mother's fatty milk.\nWith the exception of the humpback whale, it is largely unknown when whales migrate. Most will travel from the Arctic or Antarctic into the tropics to mate, calve, and raise their young during the winter and spring; they will migrate back to the poles in the warmer summer months so the calf can continue growing while the mother can continue eating, as they fast in the breeding grounds. One exception to this is the southern right whale, which migrates to Patagonia and western New Zealand to calve; both are well out of the tropic zone.\nSleep.\nUnlike most animals, whales are conscious breathers. All mammals sleep, but whales cannot afford to become unconscious for long because they may drown. While knowledge of sleep in wild cetaceans is limited, toothed cetaceans in captivity have been recorded to sleep with one side of their brain at a time, so that they may swim, breathe consciously, and avoid both predators and social contact during their period of rest.\nA 2008 study found that sperm whales sleep in vertical postures just under the surface in passive shallow \"drift-dives\", generally during the day, during which whales do not respond to passing vessels unless they are in contact, leading to the suggestion that whales possibly sleep during such dives.\nEcology.\nForaging and predation.\nAll whales are carnivorous and predatory. Odontocetes, as a whole, mostly feed on fish and cephalopods, and then followed by crustaceans and bivalves. All species are generalist and opportunistic feeders. Mysticetes, as a whole, mostly feed on krill and plankton, followed by crustaceans and other invertebrates. A few are specialists. Examples include the blue whale, which eats almost exclusively krill, the minke whale, which eats mainly schooling fish, the sperm whale, which specialize on squid, and the grey whale which feed on bottom-dwelling invertebrates. The elaborate baleen \"teeth\" of filter-feeding species, mysticetes, allow them to remove water before they swallow their planktonic food by using the teeth as a sieve. Usually, whales hunt solitarily, but they do sometimes hunt cooperatively in small groups. The former behaviour is typical when hunting non-schooling fish, slow-moving or immobile invertebrates or endothermic prey. When large amounts of prey are available, whales such as certain mysticetes hunt cooperatively in small groups. Some cetaceans may forage with other kinds of animals, such as other species of whales or certain species of pinnipeds.\nLarge whales, such as mysticetes, are not usually subject to predation, but smaller whales, such as monodontids or ziphiids, are. These species are preyed on by the orca. To subdue and kill whales, orcas continuously ram them with their heads; this can sometimes kill bowhead whales, or severely injure them. Other times they corral the narwhals or belugas before striking. They are typically hunted by groups of 10 or fewer orcas, but they are seldom attacked by an individual. Calves are more commonly taken by orcas, but adults can be targeted as well.\nThese small whales are also targeted by terrestrial and pagophilic predators. The polar bear is well adapted for hunting Arctic whales and calves. Bears are known to use sit-and-wait tactics as well as active stalking and pursuit of prey on ice or water. Whales lessen the chance of predation by gathering in groups. This however means less room around the breathing hole as the ice slowly closes the gap. When out at sea, whales dive out of the reach of surface-hunting orcas. Polar bear attacks on belugas and narwhals are usually successful in winter, but rarely inflict any damage in summer.\nWhale pump.\nA 2010 study considered whales to be a positive influence to the productivity of ocean fisheries, in what has been termed a \"whale pump.\" Whales carry nutrients such as nitrogen from the depths back to the surface. This functions as an upward biological pump, reversing an earlier presumption that whales accelerate the loss of nutrients to the bottom. This nitrogen input in the Gulf of Maine is \"more than the input of all rivers combined\" emptying into the gulf, some each year. Whales defecate at the ocean's surface; their excrement is important for fisheries because it is rich in iron and nitrogen. The whale faeces are liquid and instead of sinking, they stay at the surface where phytoplankton feed off it.\nWhale fall.\nUpon death, whale carcasses fall to the deep ocean and provide a substantial habitat for marine life. Evidence of whale falls in present-day and fossil records shows that deep sea whale falls support a rich assemblage of creatures, with a global diversity of 407 species, comparable to other neritic biodiversity hotspots, such as cold seeps and hydrothermal vents.\nDeterioration of whale carcasses happens through a series of three stages. Initially, moving organisms such as sharks and hagfish, scavenge the soft tissues at a rapid rate over a period of months, and as long as two years. This is followed by the colonization of bones and surrounding sediments (which contain organic matter) by enrichment opportunists, such as crustaceans and polychaetes, throughout a period of years. Finally, sulfophilic bacteria reduce the bones releasing hydrogen sulfide enabling the growth of chemoautotrophic organisms, which in turn, support other organisms such as mussels, clams, limpets, and sea snails. This stage may last for decades and supports a rich assemblage of species, averaging 185 species per site.\nRelationship with humans.\nWhaling.\nWhaling by humans has existed since the Stone Age. Ancient whalers used harpoons to spear the bigger animals from boats out at sea. People from Norway and Japan started hunting whales around 2000 B.C. Whales are typically hunted for their meat and blubber by aboriginal groups; they used baleen for baskets or roofing, and made tools and masks out of bones. The Inuit hunted whales in the Arctic Ocean. The Basques started whaling as early as the 11th century, sailing as far as Newfoundland in the 16th century in search of right whales. 18th- and 19th-century whalers hunted whales mainly for their oil, which was used as lamp fuel and a lubricant, baleen or whalebone, which was used for items such as corsets and skirt hoops, and ambergris, which was used as a fixative for perfumes. The most successful whaling nations at this time were the Netherlands, Japan, and the United States.\nCommercial whaling was historically important as an industry well throughout the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. Whaling was at that time a sizeable European industry with ships from Britain, France, Spain, Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany, sometimes collaborating to hunt whales in the Arctic, sometimes in competition leading even to war. By the early 1790s, whalers, namely the Americans and Australians, focused efforts in the South Pacific where they mainly hunted sperm whales and right whales, with catches of up to 39,000 right whales by Americans alone. By 1853, US profits reached US$11,000,000 (\u00a36.5m), equivalent to US$348,000,000 (\u00a3230m) today, the most profitable year for the American whaling industry. Commonly exploited species included North Atlantic right whales, sperm whales, which were mainly hunted by Americans, bowhead whales, which were mainly hunted by the Dutch, common minke whales, blue whales, and grey whales. The scale of whale harvesting decreased substantially after 1982 when the International Whaling Commission (IWC) placed a moratorium which set a catch limit for each country, excluding aboriginal groups until 2004.\nCurrent whaling nations are Norway, Iceland, and Japan, despite their joining to the IWC, as well as the aboriginal communities of Siberia, Alaska, and northern Canada. Subsistence hunters typically use whale products for themselves and depend on them for survival. National and international authorities have given special treatment to aboriginal hunters since their methods of hunting are seen as less destructive and wasteful. This distinction is being questioned as these aboriginal groups are using more modern weaponry and mechanized transport to hunt with, and are selling whale products in the marketplace. Some anthropologists argue that the term \"subsistence\" should also apply to these cash-based exchanges as long as they take place within local production and consumption. In 1946, the IWC placed a moratorium, limiting the annual whale catch. Since then, yearly profits for these \"subsistence\" hunters have been close to US$31 million (\u00a320m) per year.\nOther threats.\nWhales can also be threatened by humans more indirectly. They are unintentionally caught in fishing nets by commercial fisheries as bycatch and accidentally swallow fishing hooks. Gillnetting and Seine netting is a significant cause of mortality in whales and other marine mammals. Species commonly entangled include beaked whales. Whales are also affected by marine pollution. High levels of organic chemicals accumulate in these animals since they are high in the food chain. They have large reserves of blubber, more so for toothed whales as they are higher up the food chain than baleen whales. Lactating mothers can pass the toxins on to their young. These pollutants can cause gastrointestinal cancers and greater vulnerability to infectious diseases. They can also be poisoned by swallowing litter, such as plastic bags. Advanced military sonar harms whales. Sonar interferes with the basic biological functions of whales\u2014such as feeding and mating\u2014by impacting their ability to echolocate. Whales swim in response to sonar and sometimes experience decompression sickness due to rapid changes in depth. Mass strandings have been triggered by sonar activity, resulting in injury or death. Whales are sometimes killed or injured during collisions with ships or boats. This is considered to be a significant threat to vulnerable whale populations such as the North Atlantic right whale, whose total population numbers less than 500. It is believed that up to two thirds of whale-ship collisions are not reported; either because they are not noticed in large ships, they occur at night or during conditions of adverse weather or some other reasons. From 2013 up to at least 2023 Chile has been the country in the world with most registered fatal whale-ship collisions.\nConservation.\nWhaling decreased substantially after 1946 when, in response to the steep decline in whale populations, the International Whaling Commission placed a moratorium which set a catch limit for each country; this excluded aboriginal groups up until 2004. As of 2015, aboriginal communities are allowed to take 280 bowhead whales off Alaska and two from the western coast of Greenland, 620 grey whales off Washington state, three common minke whales off the eastern coast of Greenland and 178 on their western coast, 10 fin whales from the west coast of Greenland, nine humpback whales from the west coast of Greenland and 20 off St. Vincent and the Grenadines each year. Several species that were commercially exploited have rebounded in numbers; for example, grey whales may be as numerous as they were prior to harvesting, but the North Atlantic population is functionally extinct. Conversely, the North Atlantic right whale was extirpated from much of its former range, which stretched across the North Atlantic, and only remains in small fragments along the coast of Canada, Greenland, and is considered functionally extinct along the European coastline.\nThe IWC has designated two whale sanctuaries: the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary, and the Indian Ocean Whale Sanctuary. The Southern Ocean whale sanctuary spans and envelopes Antarctica. The Indian Ocean whale sanctuary takes up all of the Indian Ocean south of 55\u00b0S. Several countries have designated their own sanctuaries within their territorial waters, such as the Australian Whale Sanctuary or the Uruguayan Whale and Dolphin Sanctuary.\nThere are at least 86 cetacean species that are recognized by the International Whaling Commission Scientific Committee. As of 2020[ [update]], six are considered at risk, as they are ranked \"Critically Endangered\" (North Atlantic right whale), \"Endangered\" (blue whale, North Pacific right whale, and sei whale,) and \"Vulnerable\" (fin whale and sperm whale). Twenty-one species have a \"Data Deficient\" ranking. Species that live in polar habitats are vulnerable to the effects of recent and ongoing climate change, particularly the time when pack ice forms and melts.\nWhale watching.\nAn estimated 13 million people went whale watching globally in 2008, in all oceans except the Arctic. Rules and codes of conduct have been created to minimize harassment of the whales. Iceland, Japan and Norway have both whaling and whale watching industries. Whale watching lobbyists are concerned that the most inquisitive whales, which approach boats closely and provide much of the entertainment on whale-watching trips, will be the first to be taken if whaling is resumed in the same areas. Whale watching generated US$2.1 billion (\u00a31.4 billion) per annum in tourism revenue worldwide, employing around 13,000 workers. In contrast, the whaling industry, with the moratorium in place, generates US$31 million (\u00a320 million) per year. The size and rapid growth of the industry has led to complex and continuing debates with the whaling industry about the best use of whales as a natural resource.\nIn myth, literature and art.\nAs marine creatures that reside in either the depths or the poles, humans knew very little about whales over the course of human history; many feared or revered them. The Vikings and various arctic tribes revered the whale as they were important pieces of their lives. In Inuit creation myths, when 'Big Raven', a deity in human form, found a stranded whale, he was told by the Great Spirit where to find special mushrooms that would give him the strength to drag the whale back to the sea and thus, return order to the world. In an Icelandic legend, a man threw a stone at a fin whale and hit the blowhole, causing the whale to burst. The man was told not to go to sea for twenty years, but during the nineteenth year he went fishing and a whale came and killed him.\nWhales played a major part in shaping the art forms of many coastal civilizations, such as the Norse, with some dating to the Stone Age. Petroglyphs off a cliff face in Bangudae, South Korea show 300 depictions of various animals, a third of which are whales. Some show particular detail in which there are throat pleats, typical of rorquals. These petroglyphs show these people, of around 7,000 to 3,500 B.C.E. in South Korea, had a very high dependency on whales.\nThe Pacific Islanders and Aboriginal Australians viewed whales as bringers of good and joy. One exception is French Polynesia, where, in many parts, cetaceans are met with great brutality.\nIn coastal regions of China, Korea and Vietnam, the worship of whale gods, who were associated with Dragon Kings after the arrival of Buddhism, was present along with related legends. The god of the seas, according to Chinese folklore, was a large whale with human limbs.\nIn Thailand, the most common whales found are the Bryde's whale. Thai fishermen refer them as \"Pla pu\" (; ), \"grandfather fish\", what with its large size and its long-term presence in the upper reaches of the Gulf of Thailand. Fishermen do not fish for the whales, holding them in high regard and viewing them as akin to family members. They believe the whales bring good fortune, and their presence is considered as a sign of a healthy marine environment.\nIn Vietnam, whales hold a sense of divinity. They are so respected in their cultures that they occasionally hold funerals for beached whales, a custom deriving from Vietnam's ancient sea-based Champa Kingdom.\nWhales have also played a role in sacred texts. The story of Jonah being swallowed by a great fish is told both in the Qur'an and in the biblical Book of Jonah (and is mentioned by Jesus in the New Testament: Matthew 12:40.). This episode was frequently depicted in medieval art (for example, on a 12th-century column capital at the abbey church of Mozac, France). The Bible also mentions whales in Genesis 1:21, Job 7:12, and Ezekiel 32:2. The \"leviathan\" described at length in Job 41:1-34 is generally understood to refer to a whale. The \"sea monsters\" in Lamentations 4:3 have been taken by some to refer to marine mammals, in particular whales, although most modern versions use the word \"jackals\" instead.\nIn 1585, Alessandro Farnese, 1585, and Francois, Duke of Anjou, 1582, were greeted on his ceremonial entry into the port city of Antwerp by floats including \"Neptune and the Whale\", indicating at least the city's dependence on the sea for its wealth.\nIn 1896, an article in \"The Pall Mall Gazette\" popularised a practice of alternative medicine that probably began in the whaling town of Eden, Australia two or three years earlier. It was believed that climbing inside a whale carcass and remaining there for a few hours would relieve symptoms of rheumatism.\nWhales continue to be prevalent in modern literature. For example, Herman Melville's \"Moby Dick\" features a \"great white whale\" as the main antagonist for Ahab. The whale is an albino sperm whale, considered by Melville to be the largest type of whale, and is partly based on the historically attested bull whale Mocha Dick. Rudyard Kipling's \"Just So Stories\" includes the story of \"How the Whale got in his Throat\". A whale features in the award-winning children's book \"The Snail and the Whale\" (2003) by Julia Donaldson and Axel Scheffler.\nNiki Caro's film the \"Whale Rider\" has a M\u0101ori girl ride a whale in her journey to be a suitable heir to the chieftain-ship. Walt Disney's film \"Pinocchio\" features a showdown with a giant whale named Monstro at the end of the film.\nA recording of \"Song with a Humpback Whale\" by a team of marine scientists became popular in 1970. Alan Hovhaness's orchestral composition \"And God Created Great Whales\" (1970) includes the recorded sounds of humpback and bowhead whales. Recorded whale songs also appear in a number of other musical works, including L\u00e9o Ferr\u00e9's song \"Il n'y a plus rien\" and Judy Collins's \"Farewell to Tarwathie\" (on the 1970 album \"Whales and Nightingales\").\nIn captivity.\nBelugas were the first whales to be kept in captivity. Other species were too rare, too shy, or too big. The first beluga was shown at Barnum's Museum in New York City in 1861. For most of the 20th century, Canada was the predominant source of wild belugas. They were taken from the St. Lawrence River estuary until the late 1960s, after which they were predominantly taken from the Churchill River estuary until capture was banned in 1992. Russia has become the largest provider since it had been banned in Canada. Belugas are caught in the Amur River delta and their eastern coast, and then are either transported domestically to aquariums or dolphinariums in Moscow, St. Petersburg, and Sochi, or exported to other countries, such as Canada. Most captive belugas are caught in the wild, since captive-breeding programs are not very successful.\nAs of 2006, 30 belugas were in Canada and 28 in the United States, and 42 deaths in captivity had been reported up to that time. A single specimen can reportedly fetch up to US$100,000 (\u00a364,160) on the market. The beluga's popularity is due to its unique colour and its facial expressions. The latter is possible because while most cetacean \"smiles\" are fixed, the extra movement afforded by the beluga's unfused cervical vertebrae allows a greater range of apparent expression.\nBetween 1960 and 1992, the Navy carried out a program that included the study of marine mammals' abilities with sonar, with the objective of improving the detection of underwater objects. A large number of belugas were used from 1975 on, the first being dolphins. The program also included training them to carry equipment and material to divers working underwater by holding cameras in their mouths to locate lost objects, survey ships and submarines, and underwater monitoring. A similar program was used by the Russian Navy during the Cold War, in which belugas were also trained for antimining operations in the Arctic.\nAquariums have tried housing other species of whales in captivity. The success of belugas turned attention to maintaining their relative, the narwhal, in captivity. However, in repeated attempts in the 1960s and 1970s, all narwhals kept in captivity died within months. A pair of pygmy right whales were retained in an enclosed area (with nets); they were eventually released in South Africa. There was one attempt to keep a stranded Sowerby's beaked whale calf in captivity; the calf rammed into the tank wall, breaking its rostrum, which resulted in death. It was thought that Sowerby's beaked whale evolved to swim fast in a straight line, and a tank was not big enough. There have been attempts to keep baleen whales in captivity. There were three attempts to keep grey whales in captivity. Gigi was a grey whale calf that died in transport. Gigi II was another grey whale calf that was captured in the Ojo de Liebre Lagoon, and was transported to SeaWorld. The calf was a popular attraction, and behaved normally, despite being separated from his mother. A year later, the whale grew too big to keep in captivity and was released; it was the first of two grey whales, the other being another grey whale calf named JJ, to successfully be kept in captivity. There were three attempts to keep minke whales in captivity in Japan. They were kept in a tidal pool with a sea-gate at the Izu Mito Sea Paradise. Another, unsuccessful, attempt was made by the U.S. One stranded humpback whale calf was kept in captivity for rehabilitation, but died days later.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\nBooks.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nArticles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nWebsites.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nNews.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33778", "revid": "50896219", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33778", "title": "Worcestershire", "text": "County of England\nWorcestershire ( , ; written abbreviation: Worcs) is a ceremonial county in the West Midlands of England. It is bordered by Shropshire, Staffordshire, and the West Midlands county to the north, Warwickshire to the east, Gloucestershire to the south, and Herefordshire to the west. The city of Worcester is the largest settlement. \nThe county is largely rural, and has an area of and an estimated population of 621,360 in 2024. Worcester is located on the River Severn near the centre; Kidderminster lies in the north, Redditch and Bromsgrove in the north-east, Evesham in the south-east, and the spa town of Malvern in the south-west. For local government purposes Worcestershire is a non-metropolitan county with six districts. The county historically has complex boundaries, and included Dudley, Stourbridge, Halesowen, Oldbury, and the southwestern suburbs of Birmingham.\nThe River Severn flows through the centre of the county from north to south, forming a wide plain. The southwest of the county contains part of the Malvern Hills, a National Landscape which contains Worcestershire Beacon, at the county's highest point. The southeast contains a small part of the Cotswolds, and in the northwest is part of the Wyre Forest, a national nature reserve. \nThere is some evidence of Roman occupation in Worcestershire; the area later became part of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of Hwicce, and then Mercia. Worcestershire was constituted as a county around 927, as the Kingdom of England formed. During the High Middle Ages the county was the site of the Battle of Evesham, in which Simon de Montfort was defeated, and in 1651 the Battle of Worcester was the last major engagement of the Wars of the Three Kingdoms. During the Industrial Revolution the north of the county was part of the Black Country, a major manufacturing centre, Kidderminster became famous for carpet production, and Worcester for porcelain.\nLocation.\nThe county borders Herefordshire to the west, Shropshire to the north-west, Staffordshire only just to the north, West Midlands to the north and north-east, Warwickshire to the east and Gloucestershire to the south. The western border with Herefordshire includes a stretch along the top of the Malvern Hills. At the southern border with Gloucestershire, Worcestershire meets the northern edge of the Cotswolds. Two major rivers flow through the county: the Severn and the Avon.\nHistory.\nThe geographical area now known as Worcestershire was first populated at least 700,000 years ago. The area became predominantly agricultural in the Bronze Age, leading to population growth and more evidence of settlement. By the Iron Age, hill forts dominated the landscape. Settlement of these swiftly ended with the Roman occupation of Britain.\nThe Roman period saw establishment of the villa system in the Cotswolds and Vale of Evesham. Droitwich (Salinae) was probably the most important settlement in the county in this period, due to its product of salt. There is also evidence for Roman settlement and industrial activity around Worcester and King's Norton.\nAnglo-Saxon Worcestershire.\nThe area which became Worcestershire formed the heartland of the Anglo-Saxon kingdom of the Hwicce. It was absorbed by the Kingdom of Mercia during the 7th century and became part of the unified Kingdom of England in 927. Worcestershire was established as an administrative and defensive unit in the early tenth century. Its purpose was to take into account and defend the estates within the northern area of the historic See of Worcester, held by the Episcopus Hwicciorum and Worcester Priory, along with the Abbots of Pershore, Westminster and Evesham. The shires and its sub-divisions known as hundreds, formed a framework for administering the resources of each burhs' outlying estates. It was a separate ealdormanship briefly in the 10th century before forming part of the Earldom of Mercia in the 11th century. The last known Anglo-Saxon Sheriff of Worcestershire was Cyneweard of Laughern.\nNorman Conquest.\nDuring the Middle Ages, much of the county's economy was based on the wool trade. Many areas of its dense forests, such as Feckenham Forest, Horewell Forest and Malvern Chase, were royal hunting grounds subject to forest law.\nAfter the Norman conquest of England; the Domesday Book noted in 1086 that in seven of the twelve hundreds covering Worcestershire, the Crown had no authority. The Crown's authority was replaced by the Bishop of Worcester and the Abbots at Pershore, Westminster and Evesham.\nWilliam the Conqueror gave to his allies and friends manors and parishes captured from the Anglo-Saxons. Despite the Norman Conquest, the rest of the county was still held by the Abbeys of Pershore and Evesham, the Bishop of Worcester and Priory.\nThe first Norman Sheriff Urse d'Abetot, built the castle of Worcester and seized much church land, some of which became part of the Crown's hundreds in Worcestershire. and was in dispute with the Bishop of Worcester over the rights of the sheriff.\nBishop Wulfstan was the last Anglo-Saxon bishop in England, and remained in post until his death in 1095. Under his tenure Worcester Cathedral began major reconstruction, and he opposed political interventions against William and the Normans. He was later made a saint.\nHigh Medieval.\nDuring Henry III's disputes and wars with his Barons, in 1263 Worcester's Jewish residents were attacked by a baronial force led by Robert Earl Ferrers and Henry de Montfort. Most were killed. The massacre in Worcester was part of a wider campaign by the De Montforts and their allies in the run-up to the Second Barons' War, aimed at undermining Henry III. Worcestershire was the site of the Battle of Evesham in which Simon de Montfort was killed on 4 August 1265. A few years later, in 1275, the Jews that were still living in Worcester were forced to move to Hereford, as they were expelled from all towns under the jurisdiction of the queen mother.\nCivil War.\nIn 1642, the Battle of Powick Bridge was the first major skirmish of the English Civil War. The county suffered from being on the Royalist front line, as it was subject to heavy taxation and the pressing of men into the Royalist army, which also reduced its productive capacity. The northern part of the county, which was already a centre of iron production, was important for military supplies. Parliamentarian raids and Royalist requisitioning both placed a great strain on the county.\nThere were tensions from the participation of prominent Catholic recusants in the military and civilian organisation of the county. Combined with the opposition to requisitioning from both sides, bands of Clubmen formed to keep the war away from their localities.\nThe Battle of Worcester in 1651 effectively ended the third civil war. There was little enthusiasm or local participation in the mostly Scottish Royalist army, whose defeat was widely welcomed. Nevertheless, Parliamentarian forces ransacked the city of Worcester, causing heavy damage, looting and destruction of property. Around 10,000 mostly Scottish prisoners were sent into forced labour in the New World or fen drainage schemes. The small bands of Scots that fled into Worcestershire's countryside were attacked by local forces and killed.\nNineteenth century.\nIn the 19th century, Worcester was a centre for the manufacture of gloves; the town of Kidderminster became a centre for carpet manufacture, and Redditch specialised in the manufacture of needles, springs and hooks. Droitwich Spa, situated on large deposits of salt, was a centre of salt production from Roman times, with one of the principal Roman roads running through the town. These old industries have since declined, to be replaced by other, more varied light industry. The county is also home to the world's oldest continually published newspaper, the \"Berrow's Journal\", established in 1690. Malvern was one of the centres of the 19th-century rise in English spa towns due to Malvern water being believed to be very pure, containing \"nothing at all\".\nDemographics.\nThe 2011 census found the population of Worcestershire to be 566,169, an increase of 4.4% from the 2001 population of 542,107.\nEthnicity.\nThough the total number of people in every ethnic group increased between 2001 and 2011, the White British share of Worcestershire's population decreased from 95.5% to 92.4%, as did the share of White ethnic groups as whole, which went from 97.5% to 95.7%. Worcestershire is still much more ethnically homogeneous than the national average. In 2011, 79.8% of the population of England identified as White British; much lower than Worcestershire's figure of 92.4%.\nEconomy.\nIn Redditch are Halfords, to the south in Washford, and GKN (it has the second largest turnover in the West Midlands) is in Riverside. Mettis Aerospace are in Enfield, north Redditch, and make light metal components ( former High Duty Alloys, which made most of the forged pistons for Britain's aircraft engines in WWII). Phoenix Group (non-public life assurance schemes) is in the north-east of the county near the Warwickshire boundary, at Wythall, and has a large turnover; nearby to west Metalrax, headquartered in Alvechurch, make (via subsidiaries) most of the bakeware sold in the UK.\nRoger Dyson Group manufactures auto-recovery vehicles in north Droitwich. South of Bromsgrove, L.G. Harris &amp; Co make paintbrushes. Lea &amp; Perrins is in Worcester. Joy Mining Machinery are in the west of Worcester. Worcester, Bosch Group make 1,200 boilers a day. Mazak UK have the parent company's European manufacturing facility (for CNC machine tools) in the north of Worcester. Nearby on the Blackpole Ind Est, Froude Hofmann have their world headquarters, who make dynamometers.\nRoxel UK develops solid-fuel rockets for missiles south of Kidderminster and in Hartlebury. The West Midlands Safari Park is in Bewdley, west of Kidderminster. Morgan Technical Ceramics is headquartered at Lickhill in Stourport-on-Severn. Egbert H. Taylor in Elmley Lovett, near Hartlebury is a manufacturer of metal bins.\nLiquid crystal displays were developed in 1972 in conjunction with the Royal Radar Establishment, where Geoffrey Dummer invented the idea of the integrated circuit in 1952. It was based in Malvern, and became the Royal Signals and Radar Establishment, which developed thermal imaging and pyroelectric infrared detectors, and is now a large site owned by QinetiQ. Morgan Motor Company is in Malvern Link. Commsoft RMS is in Evesham. For many years Group 4 Security, which was the largest security company in Europe, had its headquarters in Broadway, on the edge of the Cotswolds; G4S Integrated Services now has its HQ there.\nLocal government.\nLocal government in Worcestershire has changed several times since the middle of the 19th century.\n1844\u20131911.\nWorcestershire contained numerous exclaves, which were areas of land cut off from the main geographical area of Worcestershire and completely surrounded by the nearby counties of Warwickshire, Staffordshire, Gloucestershire, Herefordshire and Oxfordshire. The most notable islands were Dudley, Evenlode, Blockley and the area around Shipston-on-Stour. Herefordshire, Staffordshire, Warwickshire and Shropshire had their own exclaves within the main part of Worcestershire at Rochford, Broome, Clent, Tardebigge (Tutnall and Cobley) and Halesowen respectively. Tardebigge's history outside the county is even more colourful, changing hands from Worcestershire to Staffordshire and Warwickshire, before returning to Worcestershire at differing times over the centuries. The southern boundary of the county was also complex, with parish boundaries penetrating deep into Gloucestershire and vice versa.\nWorcestershire County Council came into existence following the Local Government Act 1888 and covered the historic traditional county, except for two designated county boroughs at Dudley and Worcester.\nBirmingham's continuous expansion has been a major cause of Worcestershire's fluid boundary changes and associated housing issues. The district of Balsall Heath, which had originally constituted the most northerly part of the parish of King's Norton, was the first area of the county to be added to the County Borough of Birmingham, on 1 October 1891. This was followed by Quinton Urban District, which was ceded to Birmingham in November 1909, and then by the Rural District of Yardley and the greater part of the Urban District of King's Norton and Northfield, which were absorbed into Birmingham under the Greater Birmingham Scheme on 9 November 1911. Thus these areas were transferred from Worcestershire to Warwickshire. Dudley's historical status within the Diocese of Worcester and through its aristocratic links ensured that the exclave was governed on a largely autonomous basis. Worcester was designated a county corporate, and thus became separate from the rest of Worcestershire.\n1926 boundary changes.\nIn 1926, Dudley County Borough council purchased several square miles of land to the north of the town centre, mostly in Sedgley (Staffordshire), including Dudley Castle. This was to build the Priory Estate, a large new council estate on which construction began in 1929. The boundaries of Worcestershire were altered to include all of the proposed new housing estate in Dudley.\n1966\u20131974.\nDuring the Local Government reorganisation of April 1966, Dudley expanded beyond its historical boundaries and took in the bulk of Sedgley, Brierley Hill and the south of Coseley as well as a small section of Amblecote. The Local Government Act redefined its status and the County Borough of Dudley became part of Staffordshire, the county of which all of these areas had been part. At the same time, Worcestershire gained a new county borough named Warley, which was an amalgamation of Oldbury Urban District, Rowley Regis Urban District, the County Borough of Smethwick and parts of Dudley and Tipton. During this reorganisation, the area of the administrative county grew only where Stourbridge took in the majority of Amblecote Urban District from Staffordshire and the designation of Redditch in 1964 as a New Town. This in turn saw expansion into the area in and around the villages of Ipsley and Matchborough in Warwickshire. The Redditch New Town designation coincided with a considerable programme of social and private house building in Droitwich, Worcester, Bromsgrove, Kidderminster and along the Birmingham boundary at Frankley, Rubery and Rednal. Frankley parish was later split into two: New Frankley and the area around Bartley Reservoir transferred from Bromsgrove District to Birmingham in April 1995; but the small village of Frankley remained in Worcestershire and became a new civil parish under the same name.\n1974\u20131998.\nFrom 1974, the central and southern parts of the county were amalgamated with Herefordshire and with Worcester County Borough to form a single non-metropolitan county of Hereford and Worcester. The County Boroughs of Dudley and Warley, along with Stourbridge and Halesowen, were incorporated into the new West Midlands Metropolitan county. The West Midlands County Council existed for only a few years before abolition in April 1986, although the West Midlands still exists as a ceremonial county.\n1998\u2013present.\nIn the 1990s UK local government reform, the county of Hereford &amp; Worcester was abolished, and the non-metropolitan county or shire county of Worcestershire regained its historic border with Herefordshire. The recreated County of Worcestershire came into existence on 1 April 1998 as an administrative and ceremonial county, although this excluded the Black Country towns of Dudley, Halesowen, Oldbury and Stourbridge (which remained part of the West Midlands). Worcestershire County Council was reformed, although some services are shared with the newly formed Herefordshire Council, including waste management and the youth offending service.\nThe former Hereford and Worcester districts of Redditch, Worcester, Bromsgrove, Wychavon and Wyre Forest were retained with little or no change. However the former Hereford and Worcester districts of Leominster and Malvern Hills straddled the reinstated border with Herefordshire, so a new Malvern Hills district was constituted which aligned with the Worcestershire's boundary to the west, south-west and north-west. The remaining parts of the former districts of Leominster and Malvern Hills returned to Herefordshire.\nSummary of main changes.\nThese settlements were historically part of the county as noted above, that now fall under the counties of Warwickshire, West Midlands or Gloucestershire.\nPhysical geography.\nThe Malvern Hills, which run from the south of the county into Herefordshire, are made up mainly of volcanic igneous rocks and metamorphic rocks, some of which date from more than 1,200\u00a0million years ago. They are designated as an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB). The Worcestershire Beacon, which at is the highest point in the county, lies in this range.\nThe rest of the county consists of undulating hills and farmland stretching either side of the Severn valley. The Severn is the United Kingdom's longest river and flows through Bewdley, Stourport-on-Severn and Worcester. The River Avon flows through the Worcestershire town of Evesham and joins the Severn at Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire.\nSeveral coniferous and deciduous woodlands are located in the north of the county. The Vale of Evesham runs through the south of the county and to its south are the Cotswolds AONB.\nGreen belt.\nWorcestershire contains a broad expanse of green belt area, widening to over in places. It is part of the larger belt surrounding the West Midlands county, and first drawn up from the 1950s. All of the county's districts other than Malvern Hills contain some portion of the belt.\nSport.\nThe largest and most successful football club in the county is Kidderminster Harriers. Founded in 1877 as a running club and doubling as a rugby club from 1880, the football club was founded in 1886. In 1987, the club won the FA Trophy for the first time, and seven years later reached the fifth round of the FA Cup, also winning the GM Vauxhall Conference title in 1994 but being denied Football League status as their Aggborough Stadium did not meet capacity requirements. However, when the club next won the Conference title six years later, their stadium had been upgraded and promotion was granted, giving the county its first (and thus far only) Football League members. However, the club's Football League membership was short-lived, as Harriers were relegated back to the Conference in 2005 after just five years in the Football League, and have yet to reclaim their status.\nThe county is also represented by Alvechurch, Bromsgrove Sporting and Redditch United of the Southern Premier League, and Worcester City of the Northern Premier League.\nThe county is home to Worcestershire County Cricket Club, traditionally the first stop on any touring national side's schedule in England. Formed officially in 1865, the Club initially played in Boughton Park, before moving to its current New Road ground, which today can host 5,500 spectators, in 1895. The club has won five County Championships in its history, most recently in 1989.\nWorcester Rugby Football Club, the Worcester Warriors, are the county's largest and most successful Rugby Union team, having been promoted to the Premiership in 2004. The Warriors were relegated to the RFU Championship in 2010 but rebounded back to the Premiership in 2011. Worcester Warriors play at the Sixways Stadium on the outskirts of Worcester, holding over 12,000 spectators, thus making it the largest stadium in the county. Sixways has hosted the final of the LV Cup on three occasions.\nCulture.\nThe village of Broadheath, about northwest of the city of Worcester, is the birthplace of the composer Edward Elgar.\nIt is claimed that the county was the inspiration for the Shire, a region of J. R. R. Tolkien's fictional Middle-earth, described in \"The Hobbit\" and \"The Lord of the Rings\". Tolkien was thought to have named Bilbo Baggins' house \"Bag End\" after his Aunt Jane's Worcestershire farm. Tolkien wrote of Worcestershire, \"Any corner of that county (however fair or squalid) is in an indefinable way 'home' to me, as no other part of the world is.\"\nWorcestershire is one of the three counties associated with the Border Morris style of English folk dancing. Worcestershire Monkey is a popular Border Morris dance; although normally performed as a group of eight, it is sometimes danced \"en masse\" with multiple Border Morris sides performing the dance together.\nWorcestershire appeared as one of the main settings in the DreamWorks Animation animated film \"Shrek the Third\". The director Chris Miller said they chose Worcestershire because it is always being mispronounced. \"It just made us laugh. Plus we love the sauce, it's hugely popular in the States.\" The film makes multiple references to the real Worcestershire in the film, even commenting on the famous Worcestershire Sauce.\nMedia.\nWorcestershire has a long history in radio broadcasting. The county is home to the Droitwich Transmitting Station near Wychbold, currently broadcasting BBC Radio 5 Live and commercial radio services - Absolute Radio and Talksport on Medium Wave/AM and BBC Radio 4 on Long Wave. The site is the location of the British Broadcasting Corporation's most powerful long-wave transmitter, which during World War II, coded messages read during normal programme broadcasts, were received by the French Resistance. Lying close to the county's north western border is the Woofferton Transmitting Station, which was used during the Cold War to broadcast the Voice of America's Short Wave transmissions into the Eastern Bloc countries of Europe. These sets of transmitters are still in use today.\nIn 1939, the BBC bought the historic Wood Norton site near Evesham, and equipped the premises with a dozen temporary studios. These were to be used in the event of an evacuation of the BBC's operations in London and other urban areas. By 1940; Wood Norton was one of the largest broadcasting centres in Europe with an average output of 1,300 radio programmes a week. The BBC monitoring service were also based at Wood Norton, where linguists, many of them foreign nationals, were hired to listen in to broadcasts from Europe until they were relocated to Caversham Park in early 1943. The move was made to release space at Wood Norton so that it could become the BBC's main broadcasting centre, should London have to be evacuated because of the threat from Nazi Germany's V-weapons. The site was also prepared for use during the Cold War, as an emergency broadcast centre. The site is still in use for the BBC's engineering and technical training.\nTelevision.\nThe county's television news is covered by BBC West Midlands and ITV Central from its studios in Birmingham. Television signals are received from either the Ridge Hill or Sutton Coldfield TV transmitters.\nRadio.\nBBC Hereford &amp; Worcester and Hits Radio Herefordshire &amp; Worcestershire broadcast to both Herefordshire and Worcestershire on analogue and digital radio platforms, whilst Greatest Hits Radio Midlands broadcasts to Kidderminster, Stourport-on-Severn, Bewdley and Droitwich. A community radio station - Radio Wyvern, is licensed to serve the Worcester area. Meanwhile, Capital Mid-Counties, Sunshine Radio and Like Radio, broadcast to the county on VHF/FM and/or DAB Digital Radio. Historically; West Midlands-based radio stations such as BBC Radio WM, Hits Radio Birmingham and Beacon Radio have considered parts of Worcestershire as their broadcast areas. However what were known as Wyvern, Beacon, BRMB along with Mercia are now known collectively as 'Hits Radio' and under the same Bauer Radio ownership. Other regional stations, such as Heart West Midlands and Smooth West Midlands also cover the county.\nIn 2007 the Office of Communications (Ofcom) awarded a DAB Digital Radio multiplex licence for Herefordshire &amp; Worcestershire to MuxCo Ltd. MuxCo proposed new stations and a digital radio platform for Wyvern FM, Sunshine Radio and BBC Hereford &amp; Worcester, who were initially licensed to broadcast on VHF/FM and/or AM. MuxCo eventually launched in December 2013 following changes in legislation through the Digital Economy Act 2010, and utilises existing transmitter locations at Great Malvern, Ridge Hill and Bromsgrove. The multiplex continues to uses the same transmission sites, albeit with an additional transmitter at Kidderminster and broadcasts a combination of local and national services. In 2008, MXR, who owned and operated the West Midlands regional DAB multiplex licence, improved coverage of DAB Digital Radio across other parts of the county to include Worcester and Malvern. This regional multiplex closed on 27 August 2013, partially replaced by CE Digital's Birmingham DAB Multiplex, who opened new transmitters at Lickey Hills and Headless Cross. Ofcom has earmarked two potential 'Small Scale DAB' digital radio multiplexes within Worcestershire - one at Worcester, and the other within Bromsgrove, Kidderminster and Redditch. The legal framework for the potential new multiplexes come under 'The Small-Scale Radio Multiplex and Community Digital Radio Order 2019'.\nEconomy.\nThis is a chart of trend of regional gross value added of Worcestershire at current basic prices https:// (pp.\u00a0240\u2013253) by \"Office for National Statistics\" with figures in millions of British Pounds Sterling.\nIndustry and agriculture.\nFruit farming and the cultivation of hops were traditional agricultural activities in much of the county. During the latter half of the 20th century, this has largely declined with the exception southern area of the county around the Vale of Evesham, where orchards are still worked on a commercial scale. Worcester City's coat of arms includes three black pears, representing a now rare local pear variety, the Worcester Black Pear. The county's coat of arms follows this theme, having a pear tree with black pears. The apple variety known as Worcester Pearmain originates from Worcestershire, and the Pershore plum comes from the small Worcestershire town of that name, and is widely grown in that area.\nWorcestershire is also famous for a number of its non-agricultural products. The original Worcestershire sauce, a savoury condiment made by Lea &amp; Perrins, is made in Worcester, and the now-closed Royal Porcelain works was based in the city. The town of Malvern is the home of the Morgan traditional sports car.\nEducation.\nWorcestershire has a comprehensive school system with over thirty-five independent schools including the RGS Worcester, The King's School, Worcester, Malvern St James and Malvern College. State schools in Worcester, the Wyre Forest District, and the Malvern Hills District are two-tier primary schools and secondary schools whilst Redditch and Bromsgrove have a three-tier system of first, middle and high schools. Several schools in the county provide Sixth-form education including two in the city of Worcester. Several vocational colleges provide GCSE and A-level courses and adult education, such as South Worcestershire College, and an agricultural campus of Warwickshire College in Pershore. There is also the University of Worcester, which is located in the city itself and is home to the National Pollen and Aerobiology Research Unit and five other national research centres.\nTowns and villages.\nThe county town and only city is Worcester. The other major settlements are Kidderminster, Bromsgrove and Redditch. There are also several market towns: Malvern, Bewdley, Evesham, Droitwich Spa, Pershore, Tenbury Wells, Stourport-on-Severn and Upton-upon-Severn. The village of Hartlebury housed the Bishop of Worcester from the 13th century until 2007.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33779", "revid": "44275859", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33779", "title": "Worcestershire sauce", "text": "English fermented condiment\nWorcestershire sauce or Worcester sauce ( ) is a fermented liquid condiment invented by pharmacists John Wheeley Lea and William Henry Perrins in the city of Worcester in Worcestershire, England, during the first half of the 19th century. The inventors went on to form the company Lea &amp; Perrins. Worcestershire sauce has been a generic term since 1876, when the High Court of Justice ruled that Lea &amp; Perrins did not own a trademark for the name \"Worcestershire\".\nWorcestershire sauce is used directly as a condiment on steaks, hamburgers, and other finished dishes, and to flavour cocktails such as the Bloody Mary and Caesar. It is also frequently used to augment recipes such as Welsh rarebit, Caesar salad, Oysters Kirkpatrick, and devilled eggs. As both a background flavour and a source of savouriness, it is also added to dishes such as beef stew and baked beans.\nHistory.\nFish-based fermented sauces, such as garum, date back to antiquity. In the seventeenth century, English recipes for sauces (typically to put \"on\" fish) already combined anchovies with other ingredients.\nThe Lea &amp; Perrins brand was commercialised in 1837 and was the first sauce to bear the Worcestershire name. The origin of the Lea &amp; Perrins recipe is unclear. The packaging originally stated that the sauce came \"from the recipe of a nobleman in the county\". The company has also claimed that \"Lord Sandys, ex-Governor of Bengal\" encountered it while in India with the East India Company in the 1830s, and commissioned the local pharmacists (the partnership of John Wheeley Lea and William Perrins of 63 Broad Street, Worcester) to recreate it. However, neither Marcus Lord Sandys nor any Baron Sandys was ever a Governor of Bengal, nor had they ever visited India as far as available records indicate.\nAccording to company lore, when the recipe was first mixed, the resulting product was so strong that it was considered inedible and the barrel was abandoned in the basement. Looking to make space in the storage area some 18 months later, the chemists decided to try it and discovered that the long-fermented sauce had mellowed and become palatable. In 1838, the first bottles of Lea &amp; Perrins Worcestershire sauce were released to the general public.\nIngredients.\nThe ingredients vary by manufacturer but often include vinegar; salt; a sweetener such as sugar or molasses; aromatics such as garlic, shallots, or onions; soy sauce; and fish or fish sauce. Some formulations may include tamarind, umeboshi or other pickles, chili peppers, citrus, or spices such as cloves.\nSeveral anchovy-free vegetarian and vegan varieties are available for those who avoid, or are allergic to, fish. The \"Codex Alimentarius\" recommends that prepared food containing Worcestershire sauce with anchovies include a label warning of fish content, although this is not required in most jurisdictions. The US Department of Agriculture has required the recall of some products with undeclared Worcestershire sauce. Generally, Orthodox Jews refrain from eating fish and meat in the same dish, so they do not use traditional Worcestershire sauce to season meat. However, certain brands are certified to contain less than 1/60 of the fish product and can be used with meat.\nAlthough soy sauce is used in many variations of Worcestershire sauce since the 1880s, it is debated whether Lea &amp; Perrins has ever used any in their preparation. According to William Shurtleff's SoyInfo Center, a 1991 letter from factory general manager J. W. Garnett describes the brand switching to hydrolyzed vegetable protein during World War II due to shortages. As of 2021, soy is not declared as an ingredient in the Lea &amp; Perrins sauce.\nVarieties.\nLea &amp; Perrins.\nThe Lea &amp; Perrins brand was commercialised in 1837 and continues to be the leading global brand of Worcestershire sauce.\nOn 16 October 1897, Lea &amp; Perrins relocated manufacturing of the sauce from their pharmacy in Broad Street to a factory in the city of Worcester on Midland Road, where it is still made. The factory produces ready-mixed bottles for domestic distribution and a concentrate for bottling abroad.\nIn 1930, the Lea &amp; Perrins operation was purchased by HP Foods, which was in turn acquired by the Imperial Tobacco Company in 1967. HP was sold to Danone in 1988 and then to Heinz in 2005.\nSome sizes of bottles sold by Lea &amp; Perrins in the United States come packaged in dark glass with a beige label and wrapped in paper. Lea &amp; Perrins USA explains this practice as a vestige of shipping practices from the 19th century, when the product was imported from England, as a measure of protection for the bottles. The producer also claims that its Worcestershire sauce is the oldest commercially bottled condiment in the U.S. The ingredients in the US version of Lea &amp; Perrins also differ somewhat, in that the US version (which include distilled white vinegar, molasses, sugar, water, salt, onions, anchovies, garlic, cloves, tamarind extract, natural flavourings, and chili pepper extract) replaces the malt vinegar used by the UK and Canadian versions with spirit vinegar.\nBrazil and Portugal.\nIn Brazil and Portugal, it is known as ('English sauce').\nCosta Rica.\nIn Costa Rica, a local variation of the sauce is , created in 1920 and a staple condiment at homes and restaurants.\nEl Salvador.\nWorcestershire sauce, known as ('English sauce') or ('Perrins sauce'), is very popular in El Salvador. Many restaurants provide a bottle on each table, and the per capita annual consumption is , the highest in the world as of 1996.\nGermany.\nA sweeter, less salty version of the sauce called was developed in the beginning of the 20th century in Dresden, where it is still being produced. It contains smaller amounts of anchovies. It is mostly consumed in the eastern part of the country.\nMexico.\nIn Mexico, it is known as (English sauce).\nUnited Kingdom, Australia.\nHolbrook's Worcestershire sauce was produced in Birmingham, England from 1875: today only the Australian subsidiary survives. Holbrook's Worcestershire sauce remains very popular in Australia where it is a staple in many households.\nUnited States.\nLea &amp; Perrins Worcestershire Sauce is sold in the United States by Kraft Heinz following the Kraft &amp; Heinz merger in 2015.\nOther Worcestershire sauce brands in the United States include French's, which was introduced in 1941.\nVenezuela.\nIt is commonly named ('English sauce') and is part of many traditional dishes such as (a traditional Christmas dish) and some versions of .\nNon-fish variations.\nSome \"Worcestershire sauces\" are inspired by the original sauce but have deviated significantly from the original taste profile, most notably by the exclusion of fish.\n () Worcestershire sauce has been produced since 1917. It relies on soy sauce instead of anchovies for the umami flavour. The company makes two versions: Formula 1 for Asian taste, and Formula 2 for international taste. The two differ only in that Formula 2 contains slightly less soy sauce and slightly more spices.\nIn Japan, Worcestershire sauce is labelled \"Worcester\" (rather than \"Worcestershire\"), rendered as . Many sauces are more of a vegetarian variety, with the base being water, syrup, vinegar, puree of apple and tomato puree, and the flavour less spicy and sweeter. Japanese Agricultural Standard defines Worcester-type sauces by viscosity, with Worcester sauce proper having a viscosity of less than 0.2 poiseuille, 0.2\u20132.0 poiseuille sauces categorised as , commonly used in Kant\u014d region and northwards, and sauces over 2.0 poiseuille categorised as ; they are manufactured under brand names such as Otafuku and Bulldog, but these are brown sauces more similar to HP Sauce rather than Worcestershire sauce.\nTonkatsu sauce is a thicker Worcester-style sauce made from vegetables and fruits and associated with the dish .\nWorcestershire sauce has a history of multiple introduction in Chinese-speaking areas. These sauces, each differently named, have diverged both from the original and from each other:\n Worcestershire sauce was first produced under this name in 1933 by Mailing Aquarius, then an English-owned company. With Mailing moving to Hong Kong in 1946, the Shanghai branch was nationalised in 1954. Sauce production was transferred to Taikang in 1960. The sauce was reformulated in 1981 under a \"nine flavours in one\" formula, and again changed in 1990 into two \"Taikang Yellow\" and \"Taikang Blue\" varieties. As of 2020, only the yellow variety remains available.\n The Taikang Yellow sauce contains no fish. It is used in Haipai cuisine, especially on pork chops and Shanghainese borscht.\n A descendant of an earlier form of the sauce is found in Taiwan as \"Mailing spicy soy sauce\", originally produced by the HK branch of Mailing. It is found in steakhouses.\n This variety is of uncertain etymology: it may have come from \"catsup\" or the verb \"give\". Save for the Lea &amp; Perrins original sold as a gip-sauce, most varieties of this type have a stronger umami flavour with the addition of soy sauce, fish sauce, and/or MSG; some commercial varieties forgo fish altogether. This sauce is commonly used in dim sum dishes such as steamed meatball and spring rolls.\n This variety is descended from the Japanese Worcester Sauce via the Kongyen company, originally founded by Japanese businesspeople. It is also known under the name \"Taiwan Black Vinegar\" due to confusion post-WW2.\nIn popular culture.\nOn 1 April 2025, the University of Gloucestershire issued a tongue-in-cheek press release announcing a temporary ban on Worcestershire sauce across its campuses ahead of a Varsity competition against the University of Worcester. The ban was a light-hearted act of sporting rivalry intended to rally student support and generate social media engagement.\nFurther reading.\n\"History of Worcestershire Sauce (1837-2012)\" Shurtleff, William (2012), ISBN 9781928914433, Soyinfo Center https://\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33782", "revid": "38415975", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33782", "title": "Westminster system", "text": "Parliamentary system of government\nThe Westminster system, or Westminster model, is a type of parliamentary government modelled on that of the Parliament of the United Kingdom. Key aspects of the system include an executive branch made up of members of the legislature which is responsible to the legislature; the presence of parliamentary opposition parties; and a ceremonial head of state who is separate from the head of government. The term derives from the Palace of Westminster, the seat of the British parliament. The Westminster system can be contrasted with the presidential system, which originated in the United States, and with the semi-presidential system based on the government of France.\nThe Westminster system is used, or was once used, in the national and subnational legislatures of most former colonies of the British Empire upon gaining self-government, beginning with the Province of Canada in 1848. However, many former colonies have since adopted other forms of government.\nCharacteristics.\nThe Westminster system of government may include some of the following features:\nMost of the procedures of the Westminster system originated with the conventions, practices, and precedents of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, which form a part of what is known as the Constitution of the United Kingdom. Unlike the uncodified British constitution, most countries that use the Westminster system have codified the system, at least in part, in a written constitution.\nHowever, uncodified conventions, practices, and precedents continue to play a significant role in most countries, as many constitutions do not specify important elements of procedure. For example, some older constitutions using the Westminster system do not mention the existence of the cabinet or the prime minister, because these offices were taken for granted by the authors of these constitutions. Sometimes these conventions, reserve powers, and other influences collide in times of crisis and in such times the weaknesses of the unwritten aspects of the Westminster system, as well as the strengths of the Westminster system's flexibility, are put to the test. As an illustrative example, in the Australian constitutional crisis of 1975, the Governor-General of Australia, Sir John Kerr, dismissed Prime Minister Gough Whitlam and replaced him with opposition leader Malcolm Fraser.\nOperation.\nThe pattern of executive functions within a Westminster system is quite complex. In essence, the head of state, usually a monarch or president, is a ceremonial figurehead who is the theoretical, nominal or source of executive power within the system. In practice, such a figure does not actively exercise executive powers, even though executive authority is nominally exercised in their name.\nThe head of government, usually called the prime minister or premier, will ideally have the support of a majority in the responsible house, and must, in any case, be able to ensure the existence of no absolute majority against the government. If the parliament passes a motion of no confidence, or refuses to pass an important bill such as the budget, then the government must either resign so that a different government can be appointed or seek a parliamentary dissolution so that new general elections may be held in order to re-confirm or deny the government's mandate.\nExecutive authority within a Westminster system is de jure exercised by the cabinet as a whole, along with more junior ministers, however, in effect, the head of government dominates the executive as the head of government is ultimately the person from whom the head of state will take advice (by constitutional convention) on the exercise of executive power, including the appointment and dismissal of cabinet members. This results in the situation where individual cabinet members in effect serve at the pleasure of the prime minister. Thus the cabinet is strongly subordinate to the prime minister as they can be replaced at any time, or can be moved (\"demoted\") to a different portfolio in a cabinet reshuffle for \"underperforming\".\nIn the United Kingdom, the sovereign theoretically holds executive authority, even though the prime minister and the cabinet effectively implement executive powers. In a parliamentary republic like India, the president is the executive, even though executive powers are essentially instituted by the prime minister and the Council of Ministers. In Israel, however, executive power is vested and in the cabinet and the president is and a ceremonial figurehead.\nAs an example, the prime minister and cabinet (as the \"de facto\" executive body in the system) generally must seek the permission of the head of state when carrying out executive functions. If, for instance the British prime minister wished to dissolve Parliament in order for a general election to take place, the prime minister is constitutionally bound to request permission from the sovereign in order to attain such a wish. However, the sovereign, in modern times, has virtually always followed the advice of their prime minister without their own agency. This owes to the fact that the British sovereign is a constitutional monarch: he or she abides by the advice of their ministers, except when executing reserve powers in times of crisis. The sovereign's power to appoint and dismiss governments, appoint cabinet ministers to serve in the government, appoint diplomats, declare war, and to sign treaties (among other powers de jure held by the sovereign) is known as the royal prerogative, which in modern times is exercised by the sovereign solely on the advice of the Prime Minister.\nThis custom also occurs in other countries are regions around the world using the Westminster System, as a legacy of British colonial rule. In Commonwealth realms such as Canada, Australia and New Zealand, the day-to-day functions that would be exercised by the sovereign personally in the United Kingdom are instead exercised by the governor-general. In such nations, the prime minister is obligated to formally seek permission from the governor-general when implementing executive decisions, in a manner similar to the British system.\nAn analogous scenario also exists in republics in the Commonwealth of Nations, such as India or Trinidad and Tobago, where there is a president who functions similarly to a governor-general.\nAn unusual case lies in Israel and Japan, where the respective prime ministers have the full legal power to implement executive decisions, and presidential (in Israel) or imperial (in Japan) approval is not required; the prime ministers of these nations are fully the \"de jure\" source of executive authority, and not the head of state.\nThe head of state will often hold meetings with the head of government and cabinet, as a means of keeping abreast of governmental policy and as a means of advising, consulting and warning ministers in their actions. Such a practice takes place in the United Kingdom and India. In the UK, the sovereign holds confidential weekly meetings with the prime minister to discuss governmental policy and to offer their opinions and advice on issues of the day. In India, the prime minister is constitutionally bound to hold regular sessions with the president, in a similar manner to the aforementioned British practice. In essence, the head of state, as the theoretical executive authority, \"reigns but does not rule\". This phrase means that the head of state's role in government is generally ceremonial and as a result does not directly institute executive powers. The reserve powers of the head of state are sufficient to ensure compliance with some of their wishes. However, the extent of such powers varies from one country to another and is often a matter of controversy.\nSuch an executive arrangement first emerged in the United Kingdom. Historically, the British sovereign held and directly exercised all executive authority. George I of Great Britain (reigned 1714 to 1727) was the first British monarch to delegate some executive powers to a prime minister and a cabinet of the ministers, largely because he was also the monarch of Hanover in Germany and did not speak English fluently. Over time, further arrangements continued to allow the execution of executive authority on the sovereign's behalf and more and more de facto power ended up lying in the Prime Minister's hands. Such a concept was reinforced in \"The English Constitution\" (1876) by Walter Bagehot, who distinguished between the separate \"dignified\" and \"efficient\" functions of government. The sovereign should be a focal point for the nation (\"dignified\"), while the PM and cabinet actually undertook executive decisions (\"efficient\").\nElectoral system, ministers and officials.\nThe electoral system is often set out in a Representation of the People Act. Common ministerial titles include parliamentary secretary and under-secretary. Ministers are supported by private secretaries and government departments are run by permanent secretaries, principal secretaries or chief secretaries.\nRole of the head of state.\nThe head of state or their representative (such as a governor-general) formally appoints as the head of government whoever commands the confidence of the lower or sole house of the legislature and invites him or her to form a government. In the UK, this is known as kissing hands. Although the dissolution of the legislature and the call for new elections is formally performed by the head of state, the head of state, by convention, acts according to the wishes of the head of government.\nA president, monarch, or governor-general might possess clearly significant reserve powers. Examples of the use of such powers include the Australian constitutional crisis of 1975 and the Canadian King\u2013Byng affair in 1926. The Lascelles Principles were an attempt to create a convention to cover similar situations, but have not been tested in practice. Because of differences in their written constitutions, the formal powers of monarchs, governors-general, and presidents vary greatly from one country to another. However, as sovereigns and governors-general are not elected, and some presidents may not be directly elected by the people, they are often shielded from any public disapproval stemming from unilateral or controversial use of their powers.\nIn many Commonwealth realms a governor-general formally represents the monarch, who is usually absent from the realm. In such countries, the identity of the \"head of state\" may be unclear.\nCabinet government.\nIn the book \"The English Constitution\", Walter Bagehot emphasised the divide of the constitution into two components, the Dignified (that part which is symbolic) and the Efficient (the way things actually work and get done), and called the Efficient \"Cabinet Government\".\nMembers of the Cabinet are collectively seen as responsible for government policy, a policy termed cabinet collective responsibility. All Cabinet decisions are made by consensus, a vote is rarely taken in a Cabinet meeting. All ministers, whether senior and in the Cabinet, or junior ministers, must support the policy of the government publicly regardless of any private reservations. When a Cabinet reshuffle is imminent, a lot of time is taken up in the conversations of politicians and in the news media, speculating on who will, or will not, be moved in and out of the Cabinet by the Prime Minister, because the appointment of ministers to the Cabinet, and threat of dismissal from the Cabinet, is the single most powerful constitutional power which a Prime Minister has in the political control of the Government in the Westminster system.\nThe Official Opposition and other major political parties not in the Government, will mirror the governmental organisation with their own Shadow cabinet made up of Shadow Ministers.\nBicameral and unicameral parliaments.\nIn a Westminster system, some members of parliament are elected by popular vote, while others are appointed. Nearly all Westminster-based parliaments have a lower house with powers based on those of the House of Commons (under various names), comprising local, elected representatives of the people (with the only exception being elected entirely by nationwide Proportional Representation). Most also have a smaller upper house, which is made up of members chosen by various methods:\nIn the UK, the lower house is the legislative body, while the upper house practices restraint in exercising its constitutional powers and serves as a consultative body. In other Westminster countries, however, the upper house can sometimes exercise considerable power, as is the case for the Australian Senate.\nSome Westminster-derived parliaments are unicameral for two reasons:\nHong Kong, a former British crown colony and currently a special administrative region of the People's Republic of China, has a unicameral Legislative Council. While the Legislative Councils in British Australasian and North American colonies were unelected upper houses and some of them had since abolished themselves, the Legislative Council of Hong Kong has remained the sole chamber and had in 1995 evolved into a fully elected house, yet only 20 of the 90 seats are returned by universal suffrage. Responsible government was never granted during British colonial rule, and the Governor remained the head of government until the transfer of sovereignty in 1997, when the role was replaced by the Chief Executive. Secretaries had remained to be chosen by the Chief Executive not from the Legislative Council, and their appointments need not be approved by the Legislative Council. Although essentially more presidential than parliamentary, the Legislative Council had inherited many elements of the Westminster system, including parliamentary powers, privileges and immunity, and the right to conduct inquiries, amongst others. The theme colour of the meeting chamber is red as in other upper houses. The Chief Executive may dissolve the Legislative Council under certain conditions, and is obliged to resign, e.g., when a re-elected Legislative Council passes again a bill that he or she had refused to sign.\n\"Washminster system\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The waters of the Thames and of the Potomac both flow into Lake Burley Griffin.\u2014\u200a\nAustralian constitutional law is, in many respects, a unique hybrid with influences from the United States Constitution as well as from the traditions and conventions of the Westminster system and some indigenous features. Australia is exceptional because the government faces a fully elected upper house, the Senate, which must be willing to pass all its legislation. Although government is formed in the lower house, the House of Representatives, the support of the Senate is necessary in order to govern.\nThe Australian Senate is unusual in that it maintains an ability to withhold supply from the government of the day \u2013 a power similar to that held in the UK until 1911 by the House of Lords, which has since then been impossible, in the Westminster system. A government that has lost supply is severely restricted in its abilities to act; unless a solution can be negotiated and supply can be restored, such an occurrence would normally trigger a federal election. Since the governor-general, technically speaking, can dismiss a federal government at any time, loss of supply is sometimes, controversially, considered a suitable trigger for a dismissal (such as with the 1975 Australian constitutional crisis). This is controversial because it conflicts with the Westminster tradition of government by a party with the confidence of the lower house (not an upper house like the Senate). Some political scientists have held that the Australian system of government was consciously devised as a blend or hybrid of the Westminster and the United States systems of government, especially since the Australian Senate is a powerful upper house like the US Senate; this notion is expressed in the nickname \"the Washminster mutation\". The ability of upper houses to block supply also features in the parliaments of most Australian states.\nThe Australian system has also been referred to as a semi-parliamentary system.\nCeremonies.\nThe Westminster system has a very distinct appearance when functioning, with many British customs incorporated into day-to-day government function. A Westminster-style parliament is usually a long, rectangular room, with two rows of seats and desks on either side. Many chambers connect the opposing rows, either with a perpendicular row of seats and desks at the furthermost point from the Speaker's Chair at the opposite end of the chamber (e.g. UK House of Lords or Israel Knesset) or the rows of chairs and desks are rounded at the end, opposite to the Speaker's Chair (e.g. Australian chambers, Ireland, South Africa, India). The chairs in which both the government and opposition sit, are positioned so that the two rows are facing each other. This arrangement is said to have derived from an early Parliament which was held in a church choir. Traditionally, the opposition parties will sit in one row of seats, and the government party will sit in the other. In some countries, the mace will face the government's side whilst lying on the table of the House. In most majority governments, the number of government-party MPs is so large that it must use the \"opposition\" seats as well. In the lower house at Westminster (the UK's House of Commons) there are lines on the floor in front of the government and opposition benches that members may cross only when exiting the chamber. \nAt one end of the room sits a large chair, for the Speaker of the House. The speaker usually wears black robes, and in some countries, a wig. Robed parliamentary clerks often sit at narrow tables between the two rows of seats, as well. These narrow tables in the centre of the chamber, is usually where ministers or members of the house come to speak. A newly elected Speaker is symbolically dragged to the Chair upon being elected. \nOther ceremonies sometimes associated with the Westminster system include an annual Speech from the Throne (or equivalent thereof) in which the head of state gives a special address (written by the government) to parliament about what kind of policies to expect in the coming year, and lengthy State Opening of Parliament ceremonies that often involve the presentation of a large ceremonial mace. Some legislatures retain Westminster's colour-coded chambers, with the upper houses associated with the colour red (after the House of Lords) and the lower with green (after the House of Commons). This is the case in India, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and Barbados.\nCurrent countries.\nCountries that use variations on the theme of the Westminster system, as of 2023, include the following:\nFormer countries.\nThe Westminster system was adopted by a number of countries which subsequently evolved or reformed their system of government departing from the original model. In some cases, certain aspects of the Westminster system were retained or codified in their constitutions. For instance South Africa and Botswana, unlike Commonwealth realms or parliamentary republics such as India, have a combined head of state and head of government but the President remains responsible to the lower house of parliament; it elects the President at the beginning of a new Parliament, or when there is a vacancy in the office, or when the sitting President is defeated on a vote of confidence. If the Parliament cannot elect a new President within a short period of time (a week to a month) the lower house is dissolved and new elections are called.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33783", "revid": "50129093", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33783", "title": "Wernher von Braun", "text": "German-American aerospace engineer (1912\u20131977)\nWernher Magnus Maximilian Freiherr von Braun ( ; ; 23 March 1912\u00a0\u2013 16 June 1977) was a German-American aerospace engineer and space architect. He was a member of the Nazi Party and later the \"Allgemeine SS\" which supported his rocket work. He became the leading figure in the development of rocket technology in Nazi Germany, and later a pioneer of rocket and space technology in the US.\nAs a young man, von Braun worked in Nazi Germany's rocket development program. He helped design and co-developed the V-2 rocket at Peenem\u00fcnde Army Research Center during World War\u00a0II. The V-2 became the first artificial object to travel into space by crossing the K\u00e1rm\u00e1n line on 20 June 1944. Following the war, he was secretly moved to the United States, along with about 1,600 other German scientists, engineers, and technicians, as part of Operation Paperclip. He worked for the United States Army on an intermediate-range ballistic missile program, and he developed the rockets that launched the United States' first space satellite Explorer 1 in 1958. He worked with Walt Disney on a series of films, which popularized the idea of human space travel in the US and beyond from 1955 to 1957.\nIn 1960, his group was assimilated into NASA, where he served as director of the newly formed Marshall Space Flight Center and as the chief architect of the Saturn V super heavy-lift launch vehicle that propelled the Apollo spacecraft to the Moon. In 1967, von Braun was inducted into the National Academy of Engineering, and in 1975, he received the National Medal of Science.\nVon Braun is seen by some as escaping justice for his awareness of Nazi war crimes due to the Americans' desire to beat the Soviets in the Cold War. He is also sometimes described by others as the \"father of space travel\", the \"father of rocket science\", or the \"father of the American lunar program\". Towards the end of his career, he also advocated a human mission to Mars.\nEarly life.\nWernher von Braun was born on 23 March 1912, in the small town of Wirsitz in the Province of Posen, Kingdom of Prussia (then part of the German Empire, now part of Poland).\nHis father, Magnus Freiherr von Braun (1878\u20131972), was a civil servant and conservative politician; he served as Minister of Agriculture in the federal government during the Weimar Republic. His mother, Emmy von Quistorp (1886\u20131959), traced her ancestry through both parents to medieval European royalty and was a descendant of Philip III of France, Valdemar I of Denmark, Robert III of Scotland, and Edward III of England. He had an older brother, the West German diplomat Sigismund von Braun, who served as Secretary of State in the Foreign Office in the 1970s, and a younger brother, Magnus von Braun, who was a rocket scientist and later a senior executive with Chrysler.\nThe family moved to Berlin, Brandenburg, in 1915, where his father worked at the Ministry of the Interior. After his Confirmation, his mother gave him a telescope, and he developed a passion for astronomy. Von Braun learned to play both the cello and the piano at an early age and at one time wanted to become a composer. He took lessons from the composer Paul Hindemith. The few pieces of von Braun's youthful compositions that exist are reminiscent of Hindemith's style. He could play piano pieces of Beethoven and Bach from memory. Beginning in 1925, he attended a boarding school at Ettersburg Castle near Weimar, Free State of Thuringia, where he did not do well in physics and mathematics. There he acquired a copy of \"Die Rakete zu den Planetenr\u00e4umen\" (1923, \"By Rocket into Planetary Space\") by rocket pioneer Hermann Oberth. In 1928, his parents moved him to the Hermann-Lietz-Internat (also a residential school) on the East Frisian North Sea island of Spiekeroog. Space travel had always fascinated him, and from then on he applied himself to physics and mathematics to pursue his interest in rocket engineering.\nIn 1928 the \"Raketenrummel\" or \"Rocket Rumble\" fad initiated by Fritz von Opel and Max Valier was highly influential on von Braun as a teenage space enthusiast. He was so enthusiastic after seeing one of the public Opel-RAK rocket car demonstrations, that he constructed his own homemade toy rocket car and caused a disruption in a crowded sidewalk by launching the toy wagon, to which he had attached the largest firework rockets he could purchase. He was later taken in for questioning by the local police, until released to his father for disciplinary action. The incident highlighted the young von Braun's determination to \"dedicate his life to space travel\".62-64\nIn 1930, von Braun attended the Technische Hochschule Berlin, where he joined the Spaceflight Society (Verein f\u00fcr Raumschiffahrt or VfR), co-founded by Valier, and worked with Willy Ley in his liquid-fueled rocket motor tests in conjunction with others such as Rolf Engel, Rudolf Nebel, Hermann Oberth or Paul Ehmayr. In spring 1932, he graduated with a diploma in mechanical engineering. His early exposure to rocketry convinced him that the exploration of space would require far more than applications of the current engineering technology. Wanting to learn more about physics, chemistry, and astronomy, von Braun entered the Friedrich-Wilhelm University of Berlin for doctoral studies and graduated with a doctorate in physics in 1934. He also studied at ETH Z\u00fcrich for a term from June to October 1931.\nGerman career.\nIn 1930, von Braun attended a presentation given by Auguste Piccard. After the talk, the young student approached the famous pioneer of high-altitude balloon flight, and stated to him: \"You know, I plan on traveling to the Moon at some time.\" Piccard is said to have responded with encouraging words.\nVon Braun was greatly influenced by Oberth, of whom he said:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Hermann Oberth was the first who, when thinking about the possibility of spaceships, grabbed a slide-rule and presented mathematically analyzed concepts and designs... I, myself, owe to him not only the guiding-star of my life, but also my first contact with the theoretical and practical aspects of rocketry and space travel. A place of honor should be reserved in the history of science and technology for his ground-breaking contributions in the field of astronautics.\nAccording to historian Norman Davies, von Braun was able to pursue a career as a rocket scientist in Germany due to a \"curious oversight\" in the Treaty of Versailles which did not include rocketry in its list of weapons forbidden to Germany.\nInvolvement with the Nazi regime.\nNazi Party membership.\nVon Braun was an opportunist who joined the Nazi Party to continue his work on rockets for Nazi Germany. He applied for membership in the Party on 12 November 1937, and was issued membership number 5,738,692.\nMichael J. Neufeld, an author of aerospace history and chief of the Space History Division at the Smithsonian's National Air and Space Museum, wrote that ten years after von Braun obtained his Nazi Party membership, he signed an affidavit for the U.S. Army, though he stated the incorrect year:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nIt has not been ascertained whether von Braun's error with regard to the year was deliberate. Neufeld wrote:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Von Braun, like other Peenem\u00fcnders, was assigned to the local group in Karlshagen; there is no evidence that he did more than send in his monthly dues. But he is seen in some photographs with the party's swastika pin in his lapel \u2013 it was politically useful to demonstrate his membership.\nVon Braun's later attitude toward the Nazi regime of the late 1930s and early 1940s was complex. He said that he had been so influenced by the early Nazi promise of release from the post\u2013World War I economic effects, that his patriotic feelings had increased. In a 1952 memoir article he admitted that, at that time, he \"fared relatively rather well under totalitarianism\". Yet, he also wrote that \"to us, Hitler was still only a pompous fool with a Charlie Chaplin moustache\" and that he perceived him as \"another Napoleon\" who was \"wholly without scruples, a godless man who thought himself the only god\".\nLater examination of von Braun's background, conducted by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation, suggests that his background check file contained no derogatory information pertaining to his involvement in the party, but it was found that he had numerous letters of commendation for outstanding performance of duties during his time working under the Nazi party. Overall FBI conclusions point to von Braun's involvement in the Nazi Party to be purely for the advancement of his academic career, or out of fear of imprisonment or execution.\nMembership in the \"Allgemeine-SS\".\nVon Braun joined the SS horseback riding school on 1 November 1933 as an \"SS-Anw\u00e4rter\". He left the following year. In 1940, von Braun joined the SS and was given the rank of \"Untersturmf\u00fchrer\" in the \"Allgemeine-SS\" and issued membership number 185,068. In 1947, he gave the U.S. War Department this explanation:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;In spring 1940, one SS-Standartenf\u00fchrer (SS-Colonel) M\u00fcller from Greifswald, a bigger town in the vicinity of Peenem\u00fcnde, looked me up in my office...and told me that Reichsf\u00fchrer-SS Himmler had sent him with the order to urge me to join the SS. I told him I was so busy with my rocket work that I had no time to spare for any political activity. He then told me, that...the SS would cost me no time at all. I would be awarded the rank of a[n] \"Untersturmfuehrer\" (lieutenant) and it were [\"sic\"] a very definite desire of Himmler that I attend his invitation to join.\nI asked M\u00fcller to give me some time for reflection. He agreed.\nRealizing that the matter was of highly political significance for the relation between the SS and the Army, I called immediately on my military superior, Dr. Dornberger. He informed me that the SS had for a long time been trying to get their \"finger in the pie\" of the rocket work. I asked him what to do. He replied on the spot that if I wanted to continue our mutual work, I had no alternative but to join.\nWhen shown a picture of himself standing behind Himmler, von Braun said that he had only worn the SS uniform that one time, but in 2002 a former SS officer at Peenem\u00fcnde told the BBC that von Braun had regularly worn the SS uniform to official meetings. He began as an \"Untersturmf\u00fchrer\" (Second lieutenant) and was promoted three times by Himmler, the last time in June 1943 to SS-\"Sturmbannf\u00fchrer\" (Major). Von Braun later stated that these were simply technical promotions received each year regularly by mail.\nWork under Nazi regime.\nIn 1932, von Braun received a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mechanical Engineering from Technische Hochschule Berlin (now Technische Universit\u00e4t Berlin), Germany. During a period in 1931, von Braun attended the ETH Z\u00fcrich in Switzerland. During this time in Switzerland, von Braun assisted Professor Hermann Oberth in writing a book concerning the possibilities of creating and manufacturing liquid-propellant rockets. Shortly after this, von Braun founded his own private rocket development business in Berlin, and through which he made the first rocket fired by gasoline and liquid oxygen.\nIn 1932, having caught wind of von Braun's rocket business, the German Army connected with von Braun to pursue basic missile research and weather data experimentation. Von Braun said that the German government financed the development of test stands and facilities for experimentation in Darmstadt, Germany. In 1939, von Braun was appointed a technical advisor at Peenem\u00fcnde Army Research Center on the Baltic Sea.\nIn 1933, von Braun was working on his creative doctorate when the Nazi Party came to power in a coalition government in Germany; rocketry was almost immediately moved onto the national agenda. An artillery captain, Walter Dornberger, arranged an Ordnance Department research grant for von Braun, who then worked next to Dornberger's existing solid-fuel rocket test site at Kummersdorf.\nVon Braun received his doctorate in physics (aerospace engineering) on 27 July 1934, from the University of Berlin for a thesis titled \"About Combustion Tests.\" His doctoral supervisor was Erich Schumann. However, this thesis represented only the public aspect of von Braun's work. His actual thesis, entitled \"Construction, Theoretical, and Experimental Solution to the Problem of the Liquid Propellant Rocket\" (dated 16 April 1934), detailed the construction and design of the A2 rocket. It remained classified by the German army until its publication in 1960. By the end of 1934, his group had successfully launched two liquid fuel A2 rockets that rose to heights of 2.2 and .\nVon Braun continued his guided missile work throughout World War Two, and met with Adolf Hitler on several occasions, being formally decorated by Hitler twice, including being awarded the Iron Cross.\nAt the time, Germany was highly interested in American physicist Robert H. Goddard's research. Before 1939, German scientists occasionally contacted Goddard directly with technical questions. Von Braun used Goddard's plans from various journals and incorporated them into the building of the \"Aggregat\" (A) series of rockets. The first successful launch of an A-4 took place on 3 October 1942. The A-4 rocket became well known as the V-2. In 1963, von Braun reflected on the history of rocketry, and said of Goddard's work: \"His rockets\u00a0... may have been rather crude by present-day standards, but they blazed the trail and incorporated many features used in our most modern rockets and space vehicles.\"\nGoddard confirmed his work was used by von Braun in 1944, shortly before the Nazis began firing V-2s at England. A V-2 crashed in Sweden and some parts were sent to an Annapolis lab where Goddard was doing research for the Navy. If this was the so-called B\u00e4ckebo Bomb, it had been procured by the British in exchange for Spitfires; Annapolis would have received some parts from them. Goddard is reported to have recognized components he had invented and inferred that his brainchild had been turned into a weapon. Later, von Braun said: \"I have very deep and sincere regret for the victims of the V-2 rockets, but there were victims on both sides...A war is a war, and when my country is at war, my duty is to help win that war.\"351\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n The engineer who designed the V2, Wernher von Braun, came to be feted as a hero of the space age. The Allies realised that the V-2 was a machine, unlike anything they had developed themselves.\n\u2014\"V-2: The Nazi rocket that launched the space age\", BBC, September 2014.\nIn response to Goddard's statements, von Braun said \"at no time in Germany did I or any of my associates ever see a Goddard patent\". This was independently confirmed. He wrote that statements that he had lifted Goddard's work were the furthest from the truth, noting that Goddard's paper \"A Method of Reaching Extreme Altitudes\", which was studied by von Braun and Oberth, lacked the specificity of liquid-fuel experimentation with rockets. It was also confirmed that he was responsible for an estimated 20 patentable innovations related to rocketry, as well as receiving U.S. patents after the war concerning the advancement of rocketry. Documented accounts also stated he provided solutions to a host of aerospace engineering problems in the 1950s and 1960s.\nOn 22 December 1942, Adolf Hitler ordered the production of the A-4 as a \"vengeance weapon\", and the Peenem\u00fcnde group developed it to target London. Following von Braun's 7 July 1943 presentation of a color movie showing an A-4 taking off, Hitler was so enthusiastic that he personally made von Braun a professor shortly thereafter.\nBy that time, the British and Soviet intelligence agencies were aware of the rocket program and von Braun's team at Peenem\u00fcnde, based on the intelligence provided by the Polish underground Home Army. Over the nights of 17\u201318 August 1943, RAF Bomber Command's Operation Hydra dispatched raids on the Peenem\u00fcnde camp consisting of 596 aircraft, and dropped 1,800 tons of explosives. The facility was salvaged and most of the engineering team remained unharmed; however, the raids killed von Braun's engine designer Walter Thiel and Chief Engineer Walther, and the rocket program was delayed.\nThe V-2 became the first artificial object to travel into space by crossing the K\u00e1rm\u00e1n line with the vertical launch of MW 18014 on 20 June 1944.\nThe first combat A-4, renamed the V-2 (\"Vergeltungswaffe 2\" \"Retaliation/Vengeance Weapon 2\") for propaganda purposes, was launched toward England on 7 September 1944, only 21 months after the project had been officially commissioned.184 Doug Millard of the Science Museum, London states:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nExperiments with rocket aircraft.\nIn 1936, von Braun's rocketry team working at Kummersdorf investigated installing liquid-fuelled rockets in aircraft. Ernst Heinkel enthusiastically supported their efforts, supplying a He-72 and later two He-112s for the experiments. Later in 1936, Erich Warsitz was seconded by the RLM to von Braun and Heinkel, because he had been recognized as one of the most experienced test pilots of the time, and because he also had an extraordinary fund of technical knowledge. After he familiarized Warsitz with a test-stand run, showing him the corresponding apparatus in the aircraft, he asked: \"Are you with us and will you test the rocket in the air? Then, Warsitz, you will be a famous man. And later we will fly to the Moon \u2013 with you at the helm!\"\nIn June 1937, at Neuhardenberg (a large field about east of Berlin, listed as a reserve airfield in the event of war), one of these latter aircraft was flown with its piston engine shut down during flight by Warsitz, at which time it was propelled by von Braun's rocket power alone. Despite a wheels-up landing and the fuselage having been on fire, it proved to official circles that an aircraft could be flown satisfactorily with a back-thrust system through the rear.\nAt the same time, Hellmuth Walter's experiments into hydrogen peroxide based rockets were leading toward light and simple rockets that appeared well-suited for aircraft installation. Also, the firm of Hellmuth Walter at Kiel had been commissioned by the RLM to build a rocket engine for the He-112, so there were two different new rocket motor designs at Neuhardenberg: whereas von Braun's engines were powered by alcohol and liquid oxygen, Walter engines had hydrogen peroxide and calcium permanganate as a catalyst. Von Braun's engines used direct combustion and created fire, while the Walter devices used hot vapors from a chemical reaction, but both created thrust and provided high speed. The subsequent flights with the He-112 used the Walter-rocket instead of von Braun's; it was more reliable, simpler to operate, and safer for the test pilot, Warsitz.\nSlave labor.\nSS General Hans Kammler, who as an engineer had constructed several concentration camps, including Auschwitz, had a reputation for brutality and had conceived the idea of using concentration camp prisoners as slave laborers in the rocket program. Arthur Rudolph, chief engineer of the V-2 rocket factory at Peenem\u00fcnde, endorsed this idea in April 1943 when a labor shortage developed. More people died building the V-2 rockets than were killed by it as a weapon. Von Braun admitted visiting the plant at Mittelwerk on many occasions, and called conditions at the plant \"repulsive\", but stated that he had never personally witnessed any deaths or beatings, although it had become clear to him by 1944 that deaths had occurred. He denied ever having visited the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp, where 20,000 died from illness, beatings, hangings, and intolerable working conditions.\nSome prisoners state that von Braun engaged in brutal treatment or approved of it. Guy Morand, a French resistance fighter who was a prisoner in Dora, testified in 1995 that, after an apparent sabotage attempt, von Braun ordered a prisoner to be flogged, while Robert Cazabonne, another French prisoner, stated that von Braun stood by as prisoners were hanged by chains suspended by cranes. However, these accounts may have been a case of mistaken identity. Former Buchenwald inmate Adam Cabala stated that von Braun went to the concentration camp to pick slave laborers:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;... also the German scientists led by Prof. Wernher von Braun were aware of everything daily. As they went along the corridors, they saw the exhaustion of the inmates, their arduous work and their pain. Not one single time did Prof. Wernher von Braun protest against this cruelty during his frequent stays at Dora. Even the aspect of corpses did not touch him: On a small area near the ambulance shed, inmates tortured to death by slave labor and the terror of the overseers were piling up daily. But, Prof. Wernher von Braun passed them so close that he was almost touching the corpses.\nVon Braun later stated that he was aware of the treatment of prisoners, but felt helpless to change the situation. When asked if von Braun could have protested against the brutal treatment of the slave laborers, von Braun team member Konrad Dannenberg (a member of the Nazi party since 1932) told \"The Huntsville Times\": \"If he had done it, in my opinion, he would have been shot on the spot.\"\nArrest and release by the Nazi regime.\nAccording to Andr\u00e9 Sellier, a French historian and survivor of the Mittelbau-Dora concentration camp, Heinrich Himmler had von Braun come to his Feldkommandostelle Hochwald HQ in East Prussia in February 1944. To increase his power-base within the Nazi regime, Himmler was conspiring to use Kammler to gain control of all German armament programs, including the V-2 program at Peenem\u00fcnde. He therefore recommended that von Braun work more closely with Kammler to solve the problems of the V-2. Von Braun stated that he replied that the problems were merely technical and he was confident that they would be solved with Dornberger's assistance.\nVon Braun had been under SD surveillance since October 1943. A secret report stated that he and his colleagues Klaus Riedel and Helmut Gr\u00f6ttrup were said to have expressed regret at an engineer's house one evening in early March 1944 that they were not working on a spaceship and that they felt the war was not going well; this was considered a \"defeatist\" attitude. A young female dentist who was an SS spy reported their comments. Himmler's unfounded allegations branding von Braun and his colleagues as communist sympathizers and accusing them of sabotaging the V-2 program, coupled with von Braun's regular piloting of a government-provided airplane that could facilitate an escape to Britain, led to their arrest by the Gestapo.\nThe unsuspecting von Braun was detained on 14 March (or 15 March), 1944, and was taken to a Gestapo cell in Stettin (now Szczecin, Poland). where he was held for two weeks without knowing the charges against him.\nThrough Major Hans Georg Klamroth, in charge of the Abwehr for Peenem\u00fcnde, Dornberger obtained von Braun's conditional release and Albert Speer, Reichsminister for Munitions and War Production, persuaded Hitler to reinstate von Braun so that the V-2 program could continue or turn into a \"V-4 program\" (the Rheinbote as a short-range ballistic rocket) which in their view would be impossible without von Braun's leadership. In his memoirs, Speer states Hitler had finally conceded that von Braun was to be \"protected from all prosecution as long as he is indispensable, difficult though the general consequences arising from the situation.\"\nAn investigation by the United States Federal Bureau of Investigation on 1 May 1961 advised that \"there was no record of an arrest in their respective files\" suggesting that von Braun's imprisonment was wiped from German prison records at a point after his conditional release or after the Nazi regime had fallen.\nSurrender to the Americans.\nThe Soviet Army was about from Peenem\u00fcnde in early 1945 when von Braun assembled his planning staff and asked them to decide how and to whom they should surrender. Unwilling to go to the Soviets, von Braun and his staff decided to try to surrender to the Americans. Kammler had ordered the relocation of his team to central Germany; however, a conflicting order from an army chief ordered them to join the army and fight. Deciding that Kammler's order was their best bet to defect to the Americans, von Braun fabricated documents and transported 500 of his affiliates to the area around Mittelwerk, where they resumed their work in Bleicherode and surrounding towns after the middle of February 1945. For fear of their documents being destroyed by the SS, von Braun ordered the blueprints to be hidden in an abandoned iron mine in the Harz mountain range near Goslar. The U.S. Army Counter Intelligence Corps managed to unveil the location after lengthy interrogations of von Braun, Walter Dornberger, Bernhard Tessmann and Dieter Huzel and recovered 14 tons of V-2 documents by 15 May 1945, from the British Occupation Zone.\nWhile on an official trip in March, von Braun suffered a complicated fracture of his left arm and shoulder in a car accident after his driver fell asleep at the wheel. His injuries were serious, but he insisted that his arm be set in a cast so that he could leave the hospital. Due to this neglect of the injury, he had to be hospitalized again a month later when his bones had to be rebroken and realigned.\nIn early April, as the Allied forces advanced deeper into Germany, Kammler ordered the engineering team, around 450 specialists, to be moved by train into the town of Oberammergau in the Bavarian Alps, where they were closely guarded by the SS with orders to execute the team if they were about to fall into enemy hands. However, von Braun managed to convince SS Major Kummer to order the dispersal of the group into nearby villages so that they would not be an easy target for U.S. bombers. On 29 April 1945, Oberammergau was captured by the Allied forces who seized the majority of the engineering team.\nNearing the end of the war, Hitler instructed SS troops to gas all technical men concerned with rocket development. Upon hearing this, von Braun commandeered a train and fled with other \"technical men\" to a location in the mountains of South Germany. After some time, von Braun and many of the others who made it to the mountains left their location to flee to advancing American lines in Austria.\nVon Braun and several members of the engineering team, including Dornberger, made it to Austria. On 2 May 1945, upon finding an American private from the U.S. 44th Infantry Division, von Braun's brother and fellow rocket engineer, Magnus, approached the soldier on a bicycle, calling out in broken English: \"My name is Magnus von Braun. My brother invented the V-2. We want to surrender.\" After the surrender, Wernher von Braun spoke to the press:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;I myself and everybody you see here decided to go west. And I think our decision was not one of expediency, but a moral decision. We knew that we had created a new means of warfare, and the question as to what nation, to what victorious nation we were willing to entrust this brainchild of ours was a moral decision more than anything else. We wanted to see the world spared another conflict such as Germany had just been through, and we felt that only by surrendering such a weapon to people who are guided by the Bible could such an assurance to the world be best secured.\nThe American high command was well aware of how important their catch was: von Braun had been at the top of the \"Black List\", the code name for the list of German scientists and engineers targeted for immediate interrogation by U.S. military experts. On 9 June 1945, two days before the originally scheduled handover of the Nordhausen and Bleicherode area in Thuringia to the Soviets, U.S. Army Major Robert B. Staver, Chief of the Jet Propulsion Section of the Research and Intelligence Branch of the U.S. Army Ordnance Corps in London, and Lieutenant Colonel R. L. Williams took von Braun and his department chiefs by Jeep from Garmisch to Munich, from where they were flown to Nordhausen. In the following days, a larger group of rocket engineers, among them Helmut Gr\u00f6ttrup, was evacuated from Bleicherode southwest to Witzenhausen, a small town in the American Zone.\nAccording to Dornberger, there the Soviets tried to kidnap von Braun at night using English [sic] uniforms: Americans recognized this and did not let them in.\nVon Braun was briefly detained at the \"Dustbin\" interrogation center at Kransberg Castle, where the elite of Nazi Germany's economic, scientific, and technological sectors were debriefed by U.S. and British intelligence officials. Initially, he was recruited to the U.S. under a program called Operation Overcast, subsequently known as Operation Paperclip. There is evidence, however, that British intelligence and scientists were the first to interview him in depth, eager to gain information that they knew U.S. officials would deny them. The team included the young L.S. Snell, then the leading British rocket engineer, later chief designer of Rolls-Royce Limited and inventor of the Concorde's engines. The specific information the British gleaned remained top secret, both from the Americans and from the other allies.\nAmerican career.\nU.S. Army career.\nOn 20 June 1945, U.S. Secretary of State Edward Stettinius Jr. approved the transfer of von Braun and his specialists to the United States as one of his last acts in office. This was announced to the public on 1 October 1945.\nIn September 1945, von Braun and other members of the Peenem\u00fcnde team signed a work contract with the United States Army Ordnance Corps. On 20 September 1945, the first seven technicians arrived in the United States at New Castle Army Air Field, just south of Wilmington, Delaware. They were then flown to Boston, Massachusetts, and taken by boat to the Army Intelligence Service post at Fort Strong in Boston Harbor. Later, with the exception of von Braun, the men were transferred to Aberdeen Proving Ground in Maryland to sort out the Peenem\u00fcnde documents, enabling the scientists to continue their rocketry experiments.\nFinally, von Braun and his remaining Peenem\u00fcnde staff (see List of German rocket scientists in the United States) were transferred to their new home at Fort Bliss, a large Army installation just north of El Paso, Texas. Von Braun later wrote that he found it hard to develop a \"genuine emotional attachment\" to his new surroundings. His chief design engineer Walther Reidel became the subject of a December 1946 article, \"German Scientist Says American Cooking Tasteless; Dislikes Rubberized Chicken\", exposing the presence of von Braun's team in the country and drawing criticism from Albert Einstein and John Dingell. Requests to improve their living conditions such as laying linoleum over their cracked wood flooring were rejected. Von Braun was hypercritical of the slowness of the United States' development of guided missiles. His lab was never able to get sufficient funds to go on with their programs. Von Braun remarked \"at Peenem\u00fcnde we had been coddled, here you were counting pennies\". Whereas von Braun had thousands of engineers who answered to him at Peenem\u00fcnde, he was now subordinate to \"pimply\" 26-year-old Jim Hamill, an Army major who possessed only an undergraduate degree in engineering. His loyal Germans still addressed him as \"Herr Professor\", but Hamill addressed him as \"Wernher\" and never responded to von Braun's request for more materials. Every proposal for new rocket ideas was dismissed.\nWhile at Fort Bliss, they trained military, industrial, and university personnel in the intricacies of rockets and guided missiles. As part of the Hermes project, they helped refurbish, assemble, and launch a number of V-2s that had been shipped from Allied-occupied Germany to the White Sands Proving Ground in New Mexico. They also continued to study the future potential of rockets for military and research applications. Since they were not permitted to leave Fort Bliss without military escort, von Braun and his colleagues began to refer to themselves only half-jokingly as \"PoPs\" \u2013 \"Prisoners of Peace\".218\nIn 1950, at the start of the Korean War, von Braun and his team were transferred to Huntsville, Alabama, his home for the next 20 years. From 1952 to 1956, von Braun led the Army's rocket development team at Redstone Arsenal, resulting in the Redstone rocket, which was used for the first live nuclear ballistic missile tests conducted by the United States. He personally witnessed this historic launch and detonation. Work on the Redstone led to the development of the first high-precision inertial guidance system on the Redstone rocket. By 1953 von Braun's title was, \"Chief, Guided Missiles Development Division, Redstone Arsenal.\"\nAs director of the Development Operations Division of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency, von Braun, with his team, then developed the Jupiter-C, a modified Redstone rocket. The Jupiter-C was the basis for the Juno I rocket that successfully launched the West's first satellite, Explorer 1, on 31 January 1958. This event signaled the birth of America's space program.\nPopular concepts for a human presence in space.\nRepeating the pattern he had established during his earlier career in Germany, von Braun \u2013 while directing military rocket development in the real world \u2013 continued to entertain his engineer-scientist's dream of a future in which rockets would be used for space exploration. However, he was no longer at risk of being fired. As American public opinion of Germans began to recover, von Braun found himself increasingly in a position to popularize his ideas. The 14 May 1950 headline of \"The Huntsville Times\" (\"Dr. von Braun Says Rocket Flights Possible to Moon\") might have marked the beginning of these efforts. Von Braun's ideas rode a publicity wave that was created by science fiction movies and stories.\nIn 1952, von Braun first published his concept of a crewed space station in a \"Collier's Weekly\" magazine series of articles titled \"Man Will Conquer Space Soon!\". These articles were illustrated by the space artist Chesley Bonestell and were influential in spreading his ideas. Frequently, von Braun worked with fellow German-born space advocate and science writer Willy Ley to publish his concepts, which, unsurprisingly, were heavy on the engineering side and anticipated many technical aspects of space flight that later became reality.\nThe space station (to be constructed using rockets with recoverable and reusable ascent stages) was a toroid structure, with a diameter of ; this built on the concept of a rotating wheel-shaped station introduced in 1929 by Herman Poto\u010dnik in his book \"The Problem of Space Travel \u2013 The Rocket Motor\". The space station spun around a central docking nave to provide artificial gravity, and was assembled in a two-hour, high-inclination Earth orbit allowing observation of essentially every point on Earth on at least a daily basis. The ultimate purpose of the space station was to provide an assembly platform for crewed lunar expeditions. More than a decade later, the movie version of drew heavily on the design concept in its visualization of an orbital space station.\nVon Braun envisioned these expeditions as very large-scale undertakings, with a total of 50\u00a0astronauts traveling in three huge spacecraft (two for crew, one primarily for cargo), each long and in diameter and driven by a rectangular array of 30\u00a0rocket propulsion engines. Upon arrival, astronauts would establish a permanent lunar base in the Sinus Roris region by using the emptied cargo holds of their craft as shelters, and would explore their surroundings for eight weeks. This would include a expedition in pressurized rovers to the crater Harpalus and the Mare Imbrium foothills.\nAt this time, von Braun also worked out preliminary concepts for a human mission to Mars that used the space station as a staging point. His initial plans, published in \"The Mars Project\" (1952), had envisaged a fleet of 10 spacecraft (each with a mass of 3,720 metric tonnes), three of them uncrewed and each carrying one 200-tonne winged lander in addition to cargo, and nine crew vehicles transporting a total of 70\u00a0astronauts. The engineering and astronautical parameters of this gigantic mission were thoroughly calculated. A later project was much more modest, using only one purely orbital cargo ship and one crewed craft. In each case, the expedition used minimum-energy Hohmann transfer orbits for its trips to Mars and back to Earth.\nBefore technically formalizing his thoughts on human spaceflight to Mars, von Braun had written a science fiction novel on the subject, set in the year 1980. However, 18\u00a0publishers rejected the manuscript. Von Braun later published small portions of this opus in magazines, to illustrate selected aspects of his Mars project popularizations. The complete manuscript, titled \"\", did not appear as a printed book until December 2006.\nIn the hope that its involvement would bring about greater public interest in the future of the space program, von Braun also began working with Walt Disney and the Disney studios as a technical director, initially for three television films about space exploration. The initial broadcast devoted to space exploration was \"Man in Space\", which first went on air on 9 March 1955, drawing 40 million viewers.\nLater (in 1959) von Braun published a short booklet, condensed from episodes that had appeared in \"This Week Magazine\" before\u00a0\u2013 describing his updated concept of the first crewed lunar landing. The scenario included only a single and relatively small spacecraft\u00a0\u2013 a winged lander with a crew of only two experienced pilots who had already circumnavigated the Moon on an earlier mission. The brute-force direct ascent flight schedule used a rocket design with five sequential stages, loosely based on the Nova designs that were under discussion at this time. After a night launch from a Pacific island, the first three stages brought the spacecraft (with the two remaining upper stages attached) to terrestrial escape velocity, with each burn creating an acceleration of 8\u20139 times standard gravity. The residual propellant in the third stage was used for the deceleration intended to commence only a few hundred kilometers above the landing site in a crater near the lunar north pole. The fourth stage provided acceleration to lunar escape velocity, and the fifth stage was responsible for a deceleration during return to the Earth to a residual speed that allows aerocapture of the spacecraft ending in a runway landing, much in the way of the Space Shuttle. One remarkable feature of this technical tale is that the engineer von Braun anticipated a medical phenomenon that became apparent only years later: being a veteran astronaut with no history of serious adverse reactions to weightlessness offers no protection against becoming unexpectedly and violently spacesick.[]\nReligious conversion.\nIn the first half of his life, von Braun was a nonpracticing, perfunctory Lutheran.4 As described by Ernst Stuhlinger and Frederick I. Ordway III: \"Throughout his younger years, von Braun did not show signs of religious devotion, or even an interest in things related to the church or to biblical teachings. In fact, he was known to his friends as a 'merry heathen' (\"fr\u00f6hlicher Heide\").\" Nevertheless, in 1945 he explained his decision to surrender to the Western Allies, rather than Russians, as being influenced by a desire to share rocket technology with people whom he felt followed the Bible. In 1946, he attended church in El Paso, El Paso County, Texas, and underwent a religious conversion to Evangelical Christianity. In an unnamed religious magazine he stated:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;One day in Fort Bliss, a neighbor called and asked if I would like to go to church with him. I accepted, because I wanted to see if the American church was just a country club as I'd been led to expect. Instead, I found a small, white frame building... in the hot Texas sun on a browned-grass lot... Together, these people make a live, vibrant community. This was the first time I really understood that religion was not a cathedral inherited from the past, or a quick prayer at the last minute. To be effective, a religion has to be backed up by discipline and effort.\nOn the motives behind this conversion, Michael J. Neufeld is of the opinion that he turned to religion \"to pacify his own conscience\", and University of Southampton scholar Kendrick Oliver said that von Braun was presumably moved \"by a desire to find a new direction for his life after the moral chaos of his service for the Third Reich\". Having \"concluded one bad bargain with the Devil, perhaps now he felt a need to have God securely at his side\".\nAt a Gideons conference in 2004, W. Albert Wilson, a former pilot and NASA employee, stated that he had talked with von Braun about the Christian faith while von Braun was working for NASA, and believed that conversation had been instrumental in von Braun's conversion.\nLater in life, he joined an Episcopal congregation, and became increasingly religious. He publicly spoke and wrote about the complementarity of science and religion, the afterlife of the soul, and his belief in God. He stated, \"Through science man strives to learn more of the mysteries of creation. Through religion he seeks to know the Creator.\" He was interviewed by the Assemblies of God pastor C. M. Ward and stated that \"The farther we probe into space, the greater my faith.\" In addition, he met privately with evangelist Billy Graham and with the civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr.\nConcepts for orbital warfare.\nVon Braun developed and published his space station concept during the time of the Cold War when the U.S. government put the containment of the Soviet Union above everything else. The fact that his space station \u2013 if armed with missiles that could be easily adapted from those already available at this time \u2013 would give the United States space superiority in both orbital and orbit-to-ground warfare did not escape him. In his popular writings, von Braun elaborated on them in several of his books and articles, but he took care to qualify such military applications as \"particularly dreadful\". This much-less-peaceful aspect of von Braun's \"drive for space\" has been reviewed by Michael J. Neufeld from the Space History Division of the National Air and Space Museum in Washington.\nNASA career.\nThe U.S. Navy had been tasked with building a rocket to lift satellites into orbit, but the resulting Vanguard rocket launch system was unreliable. In 1957, with the launch of Sputnik 1, a belief grew within the United States that it lagged behind the Soviet Union in the emerging Space Race. American authorities then chose to use von Braun and his German team's experience with missiles to create an orbital launch vehicle. Von Braun had originally proposed such an idea in 1954, but it was denied at the time.\nNASA was established by law on 29 July 1958. One day later, the 50th Redstone rocket was successfully launched from Johnston Atoll in the south Pacific as part of Operation Hardtack I. Two years later, NASA opened the Marshall Space Flight Center at Redstone Arsenal in Huntsville, and the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA) development team led by von Braun was transferred to NASA. In a face-to-face meeting with Herb York at the Pentagon, von Braun made it clear he would go to NASA only if development of the Saturn were allowed to continue. Von Braun became the center's first director on 1 July 1960 and held the position until 27 January 1970.\nVon Braun's early years at NASA included a failed \"4 inch mission.\" On 21 November 1960 during which the first uncrewed Mercury-Redstone rocket, the rocket only rose up a mere 4 inches before settling back down onto the launch pad. The unfortunate and untimely failure of the rocket launch created a \"nadir of morale in Project Mercury.\" The launch failure was later determined to be the result of a \"power plug with one prong shorter than the other because a worker failed it to make it fit.\" Because of the difference in the length of one prong, the launch system detected the difference in the power disconnection as a \"cut-off signal to the engine.\" The safety system in fact stopped the launch.\nAfter the success of the Mercury-Redstone 2 mission in January 1961, a mere 2 months after the failed \"4 inch mission,\" NASA morale was improved. Still, a new string of problems emerged. Von Braun insisted on one more test before the Redstone could be deemed man-rated. His overly cautious nature brought about clashes with other people involved in the program, who argued that MR-2's technical issues were simple and had been resolved shortly after the flight. He overruled them, so a test mission involving a Redstone on a boilerplate capsule was flown successfully in March. Von Braun's stubbornness was blamed for the inability of the U.S. to launch a crewed space mission before the Soviet Union, which ended up putting the first man in space the following month. Three weeks later on 5 May, von Braun's team successfully launched Alan Shepard into space. He named his Mercury-Redstone 3 Freedom 7.\nThe Marshall Center's first major program was the development of Saturn rockets to carry heavy payloads into and beyond Earth orbit. From this, the Apollo program for crewed Moon flights was developed. Von Braun initially pushed for a flight engineering concept that called for an Earth orbit rendezvous technique (the approach he had argued for building his space station), but in 1962, he converted to the lunar orbit rendezvous concept that was subsequently realized. During Apollo, he worked closely with former Peenem\u00fcnde teammate, Kurt H. Debus, the first director of the Kennedy Space Center. His dream to help mankind set foot on the Moon became a reality on 16 July 1969, when a Marshall-developed Saturn V rocket launched the crew of Apollo 11 on its historic eight-day mission. Over the course of the program, Saturn V rockets enabled six teams of astronauts to reach the surface of the Moon.\nDuring the late 1960s, von Braun was instrumental in the development of the U.S. Space and Rocket Center in Huntsville. The desk from which he guided America's entry into the Space Race remains on display there. He also was instrumental in the launching of the experimental Applications Technology Satellite. He traveled to India and hoped that the program would be helpful in bringing a massive educational television project to help the poorest people in that country.\nDuring the local summer of 1966\u201367, von Braun participated in a field trip to Antarctica, organized for him and several other members of top NASA management. The goal of the field trip was to determine whether the experience gained by the U.S. scientific and technological community during the exploration of Antarctic wastelands would be useful for the crewed exploration of space. Von Braun was mainly interested in the management of the scientific effort on Antarctic research stations, logistics, habitation, and life support, and in using the barren Antarctic terrain like the glacial dry valleys to test the equipment that one day was used to look for signs of life on Mars and other worlds.\nIn an internal memo dated 16 January 1969, von Braun had confirmed to his staff that he would stay on as a center director at Huntsville to head the Apollo Applications Program. He referred to this time as a moment in his life when he felt the strong need to pray, stating \"I certainly prayed a lot before and during the crucial Apollo flights\". A few months later, on the occasion of the first Moon landing, he publicly expressed his optimism that the Saturn V carrier system would continue to be developed, advocating human missions to Mars in the 1980s.\nNonetheless, on 1 March 1970, von Braun and his family relocated to Washington, D.C., when he was assigned the post of NASA's Deputy Associate Administrator for Planning at NASA Headquarters. After a series of conflicts associated with the truncation of the Apollo program, and facing severe budget constraints, von Braun retired from NASA on 26 May 1972. Not only had it become evident by this time that NASA and his visions for future U.S. space flight projects were incompatible, but also it was perhaps even more frustrating for him to see popular support for a continued presence of man in space wane dramatically once the goal to reach the Moon had been accomplished.\nVon Braun also developed the idea of a Space Camp that would train children in fields of science and space technologies, as well as help their mental development much the same way sports camps aim at improving physical development.\nCareer after NASA.\nAfter leaving NASA, von Braun moved to the Washington, D.C. area and became vice president for Engineering and Development at the aerospace company Fairchild Industries in Germantown, Maryland on 1 July 1972.\nIn 1973, during a routine physical examination, von Braun was diagnosed with kidney cancer, which could not be controlled with the medical techniques available at the time.\nVon Braun helped establish and promote the National Space Institute, a precursor of the present-day National Space Society, in 1975, and became its first president and chairman. In 1976, he became a scientific consultant to Lutz Kayser, the CEO of OTRAG, and a member of the Daimler-Benz board of directors. However, his deteriorating health forced him to retire from Fairchild on 31 December 1976. When the 1975 National Medal of Science was awarded to him in early 1977, he had been hospitalized, and was unable to attend the White House ceremony.\nEngineering philosophy.\nVon Braun's insistence on more tests after Mercury-Redstone 2 flew higher than planned has been identified as contributing to the Soviet Union's success in launching the first human in space. The successful Mercury-Redstone BD flight took the launch slot that might have put Alan Shepard into space, three weeks ahead of Yuri Gagarin. His Soviet counterpart Sergei Korolev insisted on two successful flights with dogs before risking Gagarin's life on a crewed attempt. The second test flight took place one day after the Mercury-Redstone BD mission.\nVon Braun took a conservative approach to engineering, designing with ample safety factors and redundant structure. This became a point of contention with other engineers, who struggled to keep vehicle weight down so that payload could be maximized. As noted above, his caution likely led to the U.S. losing the race to put a man into space before the Soviets. Krafft Ehricke likened von Braun's approach to building the Brooklyn Bridge. Many at NASA headquarters jokingly referred to Marshall as the \"Chicago Bridge and Iron Works\", but acknowledged that the designs worked. The conservative approach paid off when a fifth engine was added to the Saturn C-4, producing the Saturn V. The C-4 design had a large crossbeam that could easily absorb the thrust of an additional engine.\nVon Braun did not indicate interest in politics or political philosophy during his onboarding working for the U.S. Army. He was primarily focused on his work in guided missiles for the purpose of advancing science and technology. According to FBI background checks, \"any political activity he may have engaged in was a means to an end to provide him with the necessary freedom to conduct his experiments.\" This included time spent in the Nazi party during World War 2.\nDuring his time in NASA, he opposed racial segregation which brought him into conflict with George Wallace, who advocated racial discrimination in Alabama and wanted to continue segregation. Von Braun accused segregationist policies of obstructing the development of Alabama. His statements were considered \"unusual for a space scientist, particularly in the south, but well within agency and national policy.\nPersonal life.\nVon Braun had a charismatic personality and was known as a ladies' man. As a student in Berlin, he often was seen in the evenings in the company of two girlfriends at once. He later had a succession of affairs within the secretarial and computer pool at Peenem\u00fcnde.\nIn January 1943, von Braun became engaged to Dorothee Brill, a physical education teacher in Berlin, and he sought permission to marry from the SS Race and Settlement Main Office. However, the engagement was broken due to his mother's opposition. Later in 1943, he had an affair with a French woman while in Paris preparing V-2 launch sites in northeastern France. She was imprisoned for collaboration after the war and became destitute.\nDuring his stay at Fort Bliss, von Braun proposed marriage to Maria Luise von Quistorp (10 June 1928\u00a0\u2013 20 January 2025), his maternal first cousin, in a letter to his father. He married her in a Lutheran church in Landshut, Bavaria, on 1 March 1947, having received permission to go back to Germany and return with his wife. He was 35, and his new bride was 18. Shortly after, he converted to Evangelicalism. He returned to Manhattan on 26 March 1947, with his wife, father, and mother. On 8 December 1948, the von Brauns' first daughter together, Iris Careen, was born at Fort Bliss Army Hospital. The couple had two more children: Margrit C\u00e9cile, born in 1952, and Peter Constantine, born in 1960.\nOn 15 April 1955, von Braun became a naturalized citizen of the United States.\nDeath.\nIn 1973, von Braun was diagnosed with kidney cancer during a routine medical examination. However, he continued to work for a couple of years. In 1975, President Gerald R. Ford awarded him the country's highest science honor, the National Medal of Science in Engineering. He was too ill to attend the White House ceremony. In January 1977, then very ill, he resigned from Fairchild Industries. \nVon Braun died on 16 June 1977 of pancreatic cancer in Alexandria, Virginia, at age 65. He is buried on Valley Road at the Ivy Hill Cemetery in Alexandria. His gravestone cites Psalm 19:1: \"The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament sheweth his handywork\" (KJV).\nHonors.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nIn popular culture.\nVon Braun has been featured in a number of films and television shows or series:\nSeveral fictional characters have been modeled on von Braun:\nOther appearances.\nPrint media:\nLiterature:\nTheatre:\nMusic:\nVideo games:\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33785", "revid": "45227015", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33785", "title": "Western", "text": "Western may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33787", "revid": "7903804", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33787", "title": "Wrecking (shipwreck)", "text": "Community salvage of shipwrecks\nWrecking is the practice of taking valuables from a shipwreck which has foundered or run aground close to shore. Often an unregulated activity of opportunity in coastal communities, wrecking has been subjected to increasing regulation and evolved into what is now known as marine salvage.\nWrecking is no longer economically significant. However, as recently as the 19th century in some parts of the world, it was the mainstay of otherwise economically marginal coastal communities.\nA traditional legendary trope is that of wreckers deliberately decoying ships on to coasts using tricks, especially false lights, so that they run ashore for easy plundering. While this has been depicted in many stories and legends, there is no clear evidence that this has ever happened.\nLuring ships to wreck with false lights.\nThere are legends that some ships were deliberately lured into danger by a display of false lights. John Viele, retired U.S. Navy officer and author of a history of wrecking in the Florida Keys, states that such tricks simply would not work. He points out that mariners interpret a light as indicating land, and so avoid them if they cannot identify them. Moreover, oil lanterns cannot be seen very far over water at night, unless they are large, fitted with mirrors or lenses, and mounted at a great height (i.e., in a lighthouse). In hundreds of admiralty court cases heard in Key West, Florida, no captain of a wrecked ship ever charged that he had been led astray by a false light.\nA Bahamian wrecker, when asked if he and his crewmates made beacons on shore or showed their lights to warn ships away from the land at night, is reported to have said, \"No, no [laughing]; we always put them out for a better chance by night\".\nLegend maintains that the town of Nags Head, North Carolina takes its name from wreckers or \"bankers\" deploying false lights. The toponymic legend states that in the 18th century, wreckers would hang lanterns from the necks of mules (colloquially called \"nags\" at the time) and walk the animals very slowly up and down the beach. The alleged intent was to fool mariners into believing that the slow-moving lights were ships drifting at rest or at anchor, prompting the ships to change course and subsequently run aground.\nIn 1860, a writer for \"Harper\u2019s New Monthly Magazine\" corroborated the story of the \"bankers\" who gave Nags Head its name.\nWrecking in the Americas.\nSpanish America.\nAs soon as the Spanish began sending home the treasures they found in the New World, some of the treasure was lost in shipwrecks. By the 1540s Indians along the coast of Florida, where many of the Spanish treasure ships wrecked, were diving on the wrecks and recovering significant amounts of gold and silver. By that time the Spanish had been using first Indians (the Lucayans from the Bahamas were particularly prized for the task) and then Africans to dive for pearls around the islands near present-day Venezuela. The Spanish began using these divers to recover treasure from shipwrecks. The Spanish kept salvage ships with crews of African divers on-call in major ports around the Caribbean, ready to sail as soon as word of a wreck was received. In the course of the 16th through the 18th centuries the Spanish recovered more than 100,000,000 pesos worth of treasure by such means. Spanish salvage efforts had varying success. Although the Spanish carried out salvage operations on the wrecks of the 1715 Treasure Fleet for four years, they recovered less than half of the treasure recorded as sent on the fleet. On the other hand, the Spanish recovered more treasure from the 1733 treasure fleet than had been officially registered on it.\nBermuda and Jamaica.\nIn the 16th and 17th centuries, Spanish ships returning to Spain from the Caribbean rode the Gulf Stream to Cape Canaveral and then aimed for Bermuda. Raising Bermuda was essential to Spanish ships for verifying their position before setting course for the Azores. As a result, some Spanish ships wrecked on Bermuda. After the English settled on Bermuda in the early 17th century, they quickly took up \"wracking\" on Bermuda, and then extended their search for wrecks to all of the Caribbean. Later in the 17th century the center for English \"wracking\" in the Caribbean shifted to Port Royal in Jamaica. William Phips went there to recruit the divers he used to salvage treasure from a Spanish wreck on the north shore of Hispaniola, where he recovered the largest amount of treasure from a single wreck before the 20th century.\nThe Bahamas.\nWrecking (or \"wracking\") was an important activity in the Bahamas from its first settlement in 1648. A company of religious dissidents from Bermuda, the Eleutheran Adventurers, established a colony on Eleutheria. Their governing document, the \"Articles and Orders\", included regulations of wrecking, providing that any salvaged ordnance would be held in common for the defense of the colony, and all other salvaged goods would be delivered to designated agents, \"made fit for sale\" and then sold, with one-third of the proceeds going to the wreckers.\nWhile the Eleutheran Adventurers were primarily farmers, seamen from Bermuda began settling on New Providence in the 1660s, attracted by ambergris, wrecks and salt. There were vessels dedicated to wrecking from this time, but wrecking was a secondary occupation for most men. These seamen, who called themselves \"wrackers\" or \"wreckers\", pursued wrecking aggressively, regarding all salvage as their property. They were rumored to have killed people who had inconveniently survived a shipwreck. They drove Spanish salvors away from Spanish wrecks, and even took goods that the Spanish had already salvaged. Spain regarded the Bahamian wreckers as pirates, and retaliated by attacking the wreckers' ships, kidnapping farmers from New Providence, and burning the capital, Charles Town.\nThe Bahamian government eventually exerted control over the wreckers. The wreckers were required to carry salvaged goods to Nassau, where they were auctioned. However, goods useful on a ship or in a wrecker's home were often diverted with a blind eye turned by government officials. Increased shipping after the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 led to more wrecks. Vessels specifically designed for wrecking were built in the Bahamas. A U.S law of 1825 required that all goods salvaged from wrecks in U.S. waters be taken to an American port of entry (which, for the Bahamians, meant Key West, Florida). Many Bahamian wreckers eventually moved to Key West and became U.S. citizens.\nWrecking was a mainstay of the Bahamian economy through most of the 19th century. In 1856, there were 302 ships and 2,679 men (out of a total population of 27,000) licensed as wreckers in the Bahamas. In that year salvaged wreck cargo brought to Nassau was valued at \u00a396,304, more than half of all imports to the Bahamas. More than two-thirds of exports from the Bahamas were salvaged goods. The government normally took 15% customs duty on salvaged goods. If the salvaged cargo was not claimed, the Vice Admiralty Court took 30%, and the Governor took another 10%. Shore workers (warehouse workers, agents and laborers) usually received around 14% of the value. The wreckers themselves usually received 40% to 60% of the value of the salvaged goods. Even so, the average annual income of an ordinary seaman on a wrecker was about \u00a320.\nThe American Civil War sharply cut the volume of shipping around the Bahamas, and the wreckers suffered with far fewer wrecks to salvage. The end of the Civil War brought back increased shipping and wrecks. In 1865, the last year of the Civil War, \u00a328,000 worth of salvaged goods were taken to Nassau. In 1866, that rose to \u00a3108,000, and peaked at \u00a3154,000 in 1870. Wrecking then entered a decline, and was nearly gone by the end of the 19th century. More lighthouses (eventually numbering 37 in the Bahamas), better charts, more ships powered by steam, better qualified ship's officers, and more seaworthy ships all contributed to fewer wrecks.\nThe Florida Keys.\nFor several centuries, wrecking was an important economic activity in the Florida Keys. During the 19th century, wrecking in the Keys became a highly organized and regulated industry, with dozens of vessels and hundreds of men active in the trade at any given time. The Florida Keys form a long arc of islands extending from the southern end of the east coast of Florida to the Dry Tortugas. A line of shallow coral reefs, the Florida Reef, runs parallel to the Keys from east of Cape Florida to southwest of Key West, with dangerous shoals stretching west from Key West to the Dry Tortugas. This chain of reefs and shoals is approximately long, separated from the Keys by the narrow and relatively shallow Hawk Channel. The Gulf Stream passes close to the Florida Reef through the Straits of Florida, which is the major route for shipping between the eastern coast of the United States and ports in the Gulf of Mexico and the western Caribbean Sea. The combination of heavy shipping and a powerful current flowing close to dangerous reefs made the Florida Keys the site of a great many wrecks, especially during the 19th century. Ships were wrecking on the Florida Reef at the rate of almost once a week in the middle of the 19th century (the collector of customs in Key West reported a rate of 48 wrecks a year in 1848). For a period of almost 100 years, wrecking captains and wrecking vessels in the Keys had to hold a license issued by the Federal court. In 1858, there were 47 boats and ships licensed as wreckers.\nEarly history.\nShips began wrecking along the Florida Reef almost as soon as Europeans reached the New World. From early in the 16th century, Spanish ships returning from the New World to Spain sailed from Havana to catch the Gulf Stream, which meant they passed close to the Florida Reef, with some wrecking. The first wreckers in the Keys were Indians; when Hernando de Escalante Fontaneda's ship was wrecked in 1549, he was taken prisoner by Indians who were experienced in plundering wrecked ships. In 1622, six ships of the Spanish treasure fleet wrecked during a hurricane in the lower Keys. Spanish operations to recover the gold and silver from the lost ships continued intermittently for 21 years, but the Spanish lost track of the \"Nuestra Se\u00f1ora de Atocha\", which was finally found and excavated in the 20th century. In 1733, 19 ships of the Spanish treasure fleet wrecked during a hurricane in the middle and upper keys, and salvage operations lasted four years. The Spanish used dragged chains, grapnels, free divers and even an early diving bell to find and recover goods from the wrecked ships.\nStarting in the 18th century, ships from The Bahamas began frequenting the Florida Keys. The Bahamians were opportunists, fishing, turtling, logging tropical hardwoods on the Keys, and salvaging wrecks as the opportunity arose. When the Spanish were salvaging the wrecks of the 1733 treasure fleet, the Spanish commander of the operation expressed concern that the Bahamians would try to salvage some of the treasure on their own. By 1775, George Gauld, who produced a chart of the Keys that was still being used 75 years later, advised mariners to stay with their ships if they wrecked, so that the Bahamian wreckers could assist them. Although the Keys were at various times part of Spanish Florida, the British colony of East Florida and the U.S. Florida Territory, the Bahamians took goods salvaged from ships wrecked in the Keys to Nassau for adjudication, rather than to the Florida port of entry, St. Augustine. After the end of the Napoleonic Wars and the War of 1812 in 1815, increased shipping through the Straits of Florida resulted in an increase in wrecks on the Keys, and the Crown's share from the auction of salvaged goods became the major support of the economy of Nassau.\nUnder United States jurisdiction.\nAfter 1815, fishing boats from New England began visiting the Florida Keys in the winter to fish for the Havana market. These fishermen engaged in wrecking when the opportunity arose. With the acquisition of Florida by the United States in 1821 and the settlement of Key West in 1822, the New England fishermen-wreckers began moving their homes to Key West. Conflicts quickly developed with the Bahamian wreckers. U.S. Navy ships stopped and boarded Bahamian wreckers to check papers, and arrested two Bahamian captains on suspicion of smuggling slaves. American wreckers became increasingly hostile to Bahamian wreckers, and in 1825 the U.S. Congress passed a law requiring all goods salvaged in U.S. waters to be taken to an American port of entry. This measure created a great inconvenience for the Bahamian wreckers, as they had to take salvaged goods and ships to Key West before they could return home to the Bahamas. Some of them soon moved to Key West and acquired U.S. citizenship.\nKey West had become a port of entry in 1822. In the same year, the U.S. Navy chose Key West as its base for suppressing piracy in the West Indies. The city quickly developed into Florida's most important port. By the 1830s, Key West accounted for 60% to 90% of imports and exports for the Territory. Most of this traffic was due to the activities of the wreckers. Warehouses for storing salvaged goods, shipyards for repairing damaged ships that had been removed from the reefs and for building vessels to be used in wrecking, and ship chandlers for refitting ships all contributed to the city's prosperity.\nIn the 1820s and 1830s, Indian Key functioned as a secondary center for the wrecking industry in the Keys. Closer to most of the reefs off the keys than Key West, Indian Key enjoyed a brief prosperity before being destroyed in a raid by Seminoles in 1840.\nWrecking operations.\nWrecking in the Florida Keys was conducted from sailing vessels. Numerous vessels would patrol along the Florida Reef looking for wrecks. The wreckers would normally anchor at night in protected anchorages along the Keys, and then sail out in the morning to see if any ships had wrecked during the night. As a result, a ship that ran on the reef during the night might attract a dozen wreckers by the afternoon of the next day. The first wrecking captain to reach a stranded ship became the wreck master, determining how many wreckers he needed to help salvage the ship, and directing the operation. Wreckers had an obligation to save passengers and crew of the wrecked ship (for which they received no compensation), and to salvage as much of the cargo as possible, and the ship, as well. If the judge in Federal court decided that a wrecking crew had not done everything possible to salvage cargo and ship, he would reduce the award.\nThe salvaged cargo and the ship, if it could be saved, were taken to Key West where they were appraised or auctioned. The wrecking vessels and crews that participated in the operations would then be awarded a share of the salvage value. Half of the salvage award went to the owners of the wrecking vessels, divided among the boats on a tonnage basis. The other half went to the wrecker crews, proportional to the number of crewmen on each vessel. Ordinary crewmen received one share, \"boys\" a half-share, cooks, one-and-a-quarter shares, and captains one to three shares, depending on the size of the vessel. Divers, who dived into the flooded holds of ships to retrieve cargo, received extra shares. By the time a salvage award was divided this way, individual shares were often quite small. Contemporary observers estimated that wrecking crews on average made no more than an ordinary seaman.\nIn the first few years after Florida was acquired by the United States, salvage awards were determined either by prior agreement between the wreck master and the captain of the wrecked ship, or by arbitration. As the persons available to serve as arbitrators usually had ties to the wrecking industry, if not a direct business relationship with the wreck master and/or the owners of the wrecking vessels, the process was often abused, with awards as high as 90% of the salvaged value. In 1829, a United States District Court was established in Key West with admiralty jurisdiction, after which most salvage cases were decided in court. Court awards for a wrecking operation averaged about 25% of the salvage value. Private agreements and arbitration remained an option, however, particularly when the judge was not available. A visitor to Key West in the 1880s reported that the United States District Court was in session almost every week, and had heard more than 700 Admiralty law cases during the preceding year.\nWreckers were required by the Federal law to carry equipment that might be needed to save cargo and ships. Such equipment included heavy anchors for kedging (hauling) ships off reefs, heavy hawsers and chain, fenders and blocks and tackle. Wreckers also had to be prepared to make emergency repairs to ships to refloat them or keep them afloat while they were sailed or towed back to Key West. By the middle of the 19th century, windmill-powered pumps, and later a steam-powered pump, were kept in Key West. If the wreckers were not able to pump out a ship fast enough to float it using the ship's own pumps, they could rent one of the large pumps from Key West. As the wrecking vessels could not always directly approach wrecked ships, they had to carry sturdy boats.\nCargoes saved by wreckers varied tremendously. Cotton was perhaps the most valuable bulk cargo. A bale of cotton might be worth US$50 or $60 in Charleston, South Carolina, but a bale pulled from a flooded hold would be saturated with water, and weigh as much as half a ton. Unusual cargoes salvaged by wreckers included the fossilized \"Hydrarchos\" skeleton collected in Alabama by Albert Koch, and a locomotive. In 1827, \"Guerrero\", a Spanish slave-runner carrying 500 African captives, and the Royal Navy warship HMS \"Nimble\" ran onto the Florida Reef during a running gun battle. Wreckers went to the aid of both ships. After most of the Africans and the Spanish crewmen had been transferred to wrecker vessels, the Spanish crewmen commandeered two of the ships and sailed to Cuba with most of the Africans. The remaining 120 Africans were taken to Key West, and then to St. Augustine. After Congress passed a special law the next year, 96 surviving Africans were sent to Liberia.\nDecline.\nIn an effort to reduce the number of wrecks along the Florida Reef, the United States government funded the construction of lighthouses. Lighthouses were built in the 1820s at Cape Florida, Key West (both on the island itself and on nearby Sand Key), and on Garden Key in the Dry Tortugas. A lightship was stationed at Carysfort Reef. Mariners complained that the lights were not visible enough. There were also long interruptions. The Cape Florida lighthouse was burned by Seminoles in 1836 and remained dark for ten years. It was also dark while the tower was made higher in 1855. It was put out of commission again in 1860 by Confederate sympathizers and remained dark until the end of the American Civil War in 1865. The Key West and Sand Key lighthouses were destroyed by a hurricane in 1846. A lightship was placed at Sand Key until the lighthouses could be rebuilt. Beginning in 1852 lighthouses were built directly on the Florida Reef, but it was 1880 before mariners could rely on having a lighthouse in sight at all times while sailing along the Florida Reef.\nThe wreckers were unhappy about the lights, expecting them to reduce the number of wrecks and their livelihood. Initially, however, the lights did not greatly reduce the number of wrecks. Some ships wrecked when their captains became confused about which lights they were seeing, mistaking lights on the Florida Reef for lights on the Bahama Banks. Some wrecks may have been deliberate, as well. On a few occasions wreckers trying to refloat flooded ships discovered that holes had been bored through the hull below the water line. The captain of a ship that had wrecked stated that the wreck was not to be greatly regretted, as there were too many ships in the freight business. Judge Marvin of the Federal court in Key West told a navy officer in 1860 there was \"a great deal of wrecking by design.\"\nShipping through the Straits of Florida, and therefore the number of wrecks on the Florida Reef, declined sharply during the Civil War. Following the Civil War, the number of wrecks did not increase as fast as the ship traffic through the Straits. More lighthouses were in place, better charts were available, and more ships were powered by steam and thus less vulnerable to being pushed onto reefs by unfavorable winds. Steam-powered vessels began to enter the wrecking trade. Eventually ocean-going tugboats took over what became known as marine salvage operations. By the end of the 19th century, wrecks were infrequent. The last major wrecking operation was in 1905, when 77 small vessels and 500 men salvaged cargo from the steamer \"Alicia\". Salvage work was abandoned when divers refused to continue, as contaminated water in the hold was causing them to become blind for 24 hours after a dive. The salvage award was US$17,690. The last local wrecker was bought out by a New York company in 1920. The Federal court closed the book of wrecking licenses the next year.\nBritish North America and Canada.\nResidents of the isolated communities along the outer banks of North Carolina and the Islands of Hatteras, Ocracoke, and Portsmouth and in Newfoundland and the islands and coastline of the Gulf of Saint Lawrence and engaged in wrecking for many years. In Nova Scotia, Seal Island and especially Sable Island were known for wrecking. Reports of violent wreckers on Sable helped spur efforts by the colony of Nova Scotia to establish a rescue station in Sable Island in 1801.\nWrecking in Europe.\nBritain.\nWrecks were frequent in Devon and Cornwall where the rocky coastline, and strong prevailing onshore winds helped wreck many merchant ships and warships.\nIn 1735 a law was passed to make it an offence to make false lights, but no one was prosecuted as a result. In 1753 the co-called Wreck Act made unauthorized wrecking a felony punishable by death. In 1769 William Pearse was hanged at Launceston in Cornwall for stealing from a wreck. It was not until after a case in the Court of Appeal in 1870 that rewards were made for rescuing people.\nWrecking was a major industry in the 19th century, and as far back as the 16th century, especially of ships returning from the New World using the Gulf Stream, which passes by the south west of England. This would help to speed these ships on their way to France and Spain and put them out of position. Wreckers would attempt to frighten off the curious, suspicious or unwanted visitors, by spreading wild rumours concerning supernatural activity, ghosts and cannibals (as told about in Clovelly) near their wrecking sites.\nWrecking was a major activity of the inhabitants of Stroma Island in the Pentland Firth off the north of Scotland. It was also well known on the Goodwin Sands off the south east of England where over 2000 wrecks have occurred. The boatmen of Deal, who took supplies to ships at anchor off the coast, would plunder any wrecked vessel. Another area where wrecking was prevalent was the Wirral Peninsula, near Liverpool, where wrecking continued to be reported into the early twentieth century.\nA 2005 BBC documentary, \"Coast\", successfully replicated the conditions of false light wrecking in an experiment which suggested that a single-candle lantern onshore would be insufficient to lure a boat into dangerous water on a dark night. The boat crew did not see the light until they got within 150m of it.\nIn 2007 the container ship MSC \"Napoli\" went aground off Branscombe beach in Devon. Some of its cargo was washed ashore and many wreckers plundered the cargo in spite of attempts to prevent this. People came long distances to retrieve such things as BMW motorcycles. Goods from wrecks are supposed by law to be reported to the \"Receiver of Wreck\" and finders will then be given a reward.\nDenmark.\nWrecking has been practised a long way back in Denmark. The long shorelines, the heavy international marine traffic in combination with some difficult and often harsh waters, has produced many wrecks here. It was only recently, that the light signalling was fully developed and deep sea-bed canals were dug in the often very shallow waters here, making seafaring relatively safe. Skagen's Vippefyr was constructed in 1627, along with several other rudimentary lighting signals in the following years, after complaints. Sea floor canals came centuries later. It was and still is common practice to hire skilled Danish pilots to help navigate in and out of the Baltic Sea.\nSo-called wreck masters used to be employed in the Danish coastal communities, in order to oversee, report on and collect valuables from new wrecks. A former wreck masters home can be experienced at the Wreck Master's Farm near Rubjerg Knude on the North Atlantic coast for example. The last wreck master here left in 1992. A few wreck masters are still appointed in Denmark, but nowadays the job also includes observations and reporting on oil spills, pollutions, vandalism, etc., and they work in close cooperation with the police.\nFictional accounts.\nWreckers have been featured in a number of works of fiction, including references in \"The Shipping News\" by E. Annie Proulx, \"Jamaica Inn\" by Daphne du Maurier, \"Shipwrecks\" by Akira Yoshimura, the film \"The Light at the Edge of the World\" based on the novel \"Le Phare du bout du monde\" by Jules Verne, and also in the opening chapter of Verne's \"The Archipelago on Fire\".\nThe plot of Compton Mackenzie's novel \"Whisky Galore\" revolves around the inhabitants of a small Scottish island recovering as-yet-untaxed whisky from a shipwreck and their subsequent efforts at evading government officials.\nDame Ethel Smyth's opera, \"The Wreckers\", is set in Cornwall\u2014the plot revolves around deliberate wrecking.\nIn 1942, the Technicolor Movie \"Reap The Wild Wind \" by Cecil B. DeMille depicted life in the wrecking business in the Nineteenth Century around Key West, Florida. It garnered an Academy Award for underwater Special Effects.\nIn 1962, the \"Walt Disney's Wonderful World of Color\" TV series aired a two-episode live action adventure film entitled \"The Mooncussers\" about the investigation and exposure of a gang of wreckers.\nEnid Blyton, specifically in the \"Famous Five\" books, writes often about the treasures of the wreckers.\n\"The Wreckers\", by Iain Lawrence, is a book for younger readers about \"The Isle of Skye\" (a London vessel) being shipwrecked along the shores of Pendennis, Cornwall.\nCanadian progressive rock band Rush included a song on their 2012 album \"Clockwork Angels\" titled \"The Wreckers\", the lyrics of which were inspired by historical tales of wreckers luring ships to their demise.\n\"Crimson Shore\" is part of the Agent Pendergast series by Douglas Preston and Lincoln Child. The main story involves a ship, the \"Pembroke Castle\", being purposefully wrecked on the rocks off the coast of Massachusetts.\n\"Coot Club\", the fifth of Arthur Ransome's Swallows and Amazons series of books, features wreckers on the Norfolk Broads.\n\"The Wreck of the Zanzibar\" is a Whitbread Award-winning children's novel by Michael Morpurgo, set on the Isles of Scilly.\n\"H.M.S. Dolores\" is a 2016 board game whose plot centers around rival crews of wreckers.\nCanadian folk singer Stan Rogers would sing of wrecking in the song The Wreck of the Athens Queen, whose subjects \"eat a lot of chicken and sit on a couch of green\".\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33790", "revid": "48264973", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33790", "title": "The Wanderer (Leiber novel)", "text": "1964 novel by Fritz Leiber\nThe Wanderer is a science fiction novel by American writer Fritz Leiber, published as a paperback original by Ballantine Books in 1964. It won the 1965 Hugo Award for Best Novel.\nFollowing its initial paperback edition, \"The Wanderer\" was reissued in hardcover by Walker &amp; Co. in 1969, by Gregg Press in 1980, and by the Easton Press in 1991, as well as a Science Fiction Book Club edition in 1987. It was released in hardcover in the UK by Dennis Dobson in 1967, with a paperback edition following from Penguin Books in 1969. Translations have appeared in Dutch, French, German, Hungarian and Italian.\n\"The Wanderer\" was the first novel to win the Hugo Award without previously being published in hardcover or appearing in some form in a genre magazine.\nThe novel deals with a wandering planet that enters the Solar System. Its narrative follows multiple disconnected groups of characters to portray the widespread impact of the Wanderer on the entire population of the Earth (and above it) as well as the varied reactions of different groups as they struggle to cope and survive.\nPlot.\nThe novel is set in a future, a few years after its 1964 publication date. The Space Race is still ongoing. Both the USA and the USSR have lunar bases, but the Soviets have retained their early lead by sending an expedition to Mars. The Vietnam War continues, but seems not to be a big issue for US citizens. Also an underground anti-Communist army now operates within North Vietnam. Some independent outsiders bring supplies by sea to both sides. Technology is much the same, apart from better spaceflight.\nFrom the point of view of most of the population of the Earth, a new planet appears out of nowhere close to the Moon towards the end of a total lunar eclipse. It is attended by a twinkling of stars, which some astronomers explain as the planet emerging out of hyperspace. This is later confirmed by a man captured by a feline humanoid, and she also explains that the moon was destroyed to fuel the wandering planet.\nThe planet's appearance is startling: several massive patterns of purple and gold, and initially resembling the Tao symbol of human culture.\nWithin a few days the planet\u2014soon referred to by everyone simply as \"The Wanderer\"\u2014consumes the Moon. Its gravity causes mass death and destruction as it raises huge ocean waves and causes earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. Flying saucers appear, apparently trying to mitigate some of the disastrous effects. Then, after a spectacular battle in space between the new planet and yet another which had appeared just as suddenly, the skies are empty again. Earth is left without its Moon.\nThe novel follows the lives of disparate people around the globe. There is a man attempting a solo crossing of the Atlantic Ocean, a smuggler operating off the coast of Vietnam, two friends in England, a trio of drug addicts in New York City, and the military controllers of the USA Moon mission, deep in a bunker somewhere near Washington, D.C.\nThe main protagonists are three longtime friends. Paul Hagbolt is escorting Margo Gelhorn (and her cat, Miaow) to observe the lunar eclipse at an observatory in California. Their friend, and Margo's fiance, is Don Merriam, one of the American astronauts at the Moon base. Following on a whim a sign advertising a \"flying saucer symposium\", Paul and Margo fall in with a group of intellectuals, dreamers, charlatans and misfits. At that point events overtake them. The new planet appears and triggers an earthquake that buries their cars in a landslide. They must avoid tsunamis, more earthquakes, roving mobs and flying saucers to survive. On the Moon Don Merriam is the only astronaut to escape the destruction of the American moonbase. He tries to take off in one of the base's spaceships, only to fall through the Moon itself as it splits asunder under the influence of the new planet. His ship is eventually captured by its crew.\nEvents take a bizarre turn when the group of saucer enthusiasts is faced with a tsunami. A flying saucer appears, and a cat-like being uses some kind of gun to repel the waves. Then the being uses the same device to pull Paul, who is holding Miaow, into the saucer. At the same time the gun falls into the hands of the people on the ground.\nIn the saucer Paul meets a being calling itself Tigerishka. A large, female telepathic feline creature, she initially mistakes Miaow as the intelligent being (whose thoughts she can hear), and Paul as a \"monkey\". Realizing her mistake, she regards Paul with contempt. Monkey-beings are not well regarded by her people. However she slowly warms to him, and explains why her planet had consumed the Moon.\nLike many of the human characters, her people are intellectuals, dreamers, charlatans and misfits. They belong to a culture that spans the Universe, has achieved immortality, and can construct planets and traverse hyperspace. They can even create bodies for themselves that reflect the origins of their races, such as Tigerishka's cat-form. They are, however, fleeing their culture's police. The standard culture rejects nonconformists, and devotes itself to ensuring that intelligent life survives to the end of time, whereas Tigerishka's cohort wants to explore hyperspace and tinker with space, time and the Mind. Their flight has brought them to Earth orbit to refuel as huge amounts of matter must be converted to energy to power their hyperspace drive and their weapons: the Wanderer is running on empty.\nAs alien as Tigerishka is, Paul becomes besotted with her. Tigerishka eventually yields to his advances. At the same time, Don Merriam has been rescued with his ship by the Wanderer's other spaceships. He is reunited with Paul aboard Tigerishka's ship. Now they must testify in the Wanderer's trial, for the police have arrived. A second planet, \"The Stranger\", colored a dull gray where the Wanderer is bright purple and yellow, appears and threatens battle. Don and Paul give their testimony as to the good treatment they have seen, along with thousands of other humans appearing by some kind of holographic projection. However the trial goes badly. Paul and Don are evacuated in Don's ship, placed into position close to Earth by Tigerishka. Tigerishka takes Miaow with her back to her planet. Then the final battle takes place, and both planets disappear. In the final scene, Margo and her companions walk to Vandenberg Spaceport as Don's ship comes in to land.\nReception.\nP. Schuyler Miller described the book as a \"thoroughly uncharacteristic\" Leiber novel, saying that \"the feel of what is happening . . . counts for more than the plot\" and predicting that \"The Wanderer\" \"would eventually be awarded 'classic' status\". Avram Davidson compared the novel unfavorably to Leiber's \"Conjure Wife\", saying \"The canvas is wide, the characters many, the charge scatters like buckshot, if you can imagine a buckshot cannon\".\nJames Nicoll has described the novel as \"terrible\", saying that although its premise \u2014 \"hollow planets filled with catgirls who want to steal the moon\" \u2014 may be \"amazing or at least intriguing\", the novel itself \"falls well short of its potential\"; he attributes its Hugo win to a weak slate of nominees, and to Leiber's \"blatant and unabashed sucking up to SF fandom\".\nAvailability.\n\"The Wanderer\" is available in paperback under (Gollancz, 2000) as part of the SF Collectors' Editions series.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33792", "revid": "1236001131", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33792", "title": "WiFi", "text": ""}
{"id": "33795", "revid": "45789152", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33795", "title": "Wikipedian", "text": ""}
{"id": "33800", "revid": "82432", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33800", "title": "Western Europe", "text": "Subregion of the European continent\nWestern Europe is the western region of Europe. The region's extent varies depending on context.\nThe concept of \"the West\" appeared in Europe in juxtaposition to \"the East\" and originally applied to the Western half of the ancient Mediterranean world, the Latin West of the Roman Empire, and \"Western Christendom\". Beginning with the Renaissance and the Age of Discovery, roughly from the 15th century, the concept of \"Europe\" as \"the West\" slowly became distinguished from and eventually replaced the dominant use of \"Christendom\" as the preferred endonym within the area. By the Age of Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution, the concepts of \"Eastern Europe\" and \"Western Europe\" were more regularly used. The distinctiveness of Western Europe became most apparent during the Cold War, when Europe was divided for 40 years by the Iron Curtain into the Western Bloc and Eastern Bloc, each characterised by distinct political and economical systems.\nHistorical divisions.\nClassical antiquity and medieval origins.\nPrior to the Roman conquest, a large part of Western Europe had adopted the newly developed La T\u00e8ne culture. As the Roman domain expanded, a cultural and linguistic division appeared between the mainly Greek-speaking eastern provinces, which had formed the highly urbanised Hellenistic civilisation, and the western territories, which in contrast largely adopted the Latin language. This cultural and linguistic division was eventually reinforced by the later political east\u2013west division of the Roman Empire. The Western Roman Empire and the Eastern Roman Empire controlled the two divergent regions between the 3rd and the 5th centuries.\nThe division between these two was enhanced during late antiquity and the Middle Ages by a number of events. The Western Roman Empire collapsed, starting the Early Middle Ages. By contrast, the Eastern Roman Empire, mostly known as the Greek or Byzantine Empire, survived and even thrived for another 1000 years. The rise of the Carolingian Empire in the west, and in particular the Great Schism between Eastern Orthodoxy and Roman Catholicism, enhanced the cultural and religious distinctiveness between Eastern and Western Europe.\nAfter the conquest of the Byzantine Empire, center of the Eastern Orthodox Church, by the Muslim Ottoman Empire in the 15th century, and the gradual fragmentation of the Holy Roman Empire (which had replaced the Carolingian Empire), the division between Roman Catholic and Protestant became more important in Europe than that with Eastern Orthodoxy.\nIn East Asia, Western Europe was historically known as in China and in Japan, which literally translates as the \"Far West\". The term Far West became synonymous with Western Europe in China during the Ming dynasty. The Italian Jesuit priest Matteo Ricci was one of the first writers in China to use the Far West as an Asian counterpart to the European concept of the Far East. In Ricci's writings, Ricci referred to himself as \"Matteo of the Far West\". The term was still in use in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.\nReligion.\nChristianity is the largest religion in Western Europe. According to a 2018 study by the Pew Research Center, 71.0% of Western Europeans identified as Christians.\nIn 1054, the East\u2013West Schism divided Christianity into Western Christianity and Eastern Christianity. This split Europe in two, with Western Europe primarily under the Catholic Church, and much of Eastern Europe under the Eastern Orthodox Church. Ever since the Reformation in the 16th century, Protestantism has also been a major denomination in Europe, mostly in the West.\nCold War.\nDuring the four decades of the Cold War, the definition of East and West was simplified by the existence of the Eastern Bloc. A number of historians and social scientists view the Cold War definition of Western and Eastern Europe as outdated or relegating.\nDuring the final stages of World War II, the future of Europe was decided between the Allies in the 1945 Yalta Conference, between the British Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, the U.S. President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, and the Premier of the Soviet Union, Joseph Stalin.\nPost-war Europe was divided into two major spheres: the Western Bloc, influenced by the United States, and the Eastern Bloc, influenced by the Soviet Union. With the onset of the Cold War, Europe was divided by the Iron Curtain. This term had been used during World War II by German Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels and, later, Count Lutz Schwerin von Krosigk in the last days of the war; however, its use was hugely popularised by Winston Churchill, who used it in his famous \"Sinews of Peace\" address on 5 March 1946 at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;From Stettin in the Baltic to Trieste in the Adriatic an \"iron curtain\" has descended across the Continent. Behind that line lie all the capitals of the ancient states of Central and Eastern Europe. Warsaw, Berlin, Prague, Vienna, Budapest, Belgrade, Bucharest and Sofia; all these famous cities and the populations around them lie in what I must call the Soviet sphere, and all are subject, in one form or another, not only to Soviet influence but to a very high and in some cases increasing measure of control from Moscow.\nAlthough some countries were officially neutral, they were classified according to the nature of their political and economic systems. This division largely defines the popular perception and understanding of Western Europe and its borders with Eastern Europe on the east side. On the western side is the Atlantic ocean.\nThe world changed dramatically with the fall of the Iron Curtain in 1989. West Germany peacefully absorbed East Germany, in the German reunification. Comecon and the Warsaw Pact were dissolved, and in 1991, the Soviet Union ceased to exist. Several countries which had been part of the Soviet Union regained full independence.\nWestern European Union.\nIn 1948 the Treaty of Brussels was signed between Belgium, France, Luxembourg, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom. It was further revisited in 1954 at the Paris Conference, when the Western European Union was established. It was declared defunct in 2011 after the Treaty of Lisbon, and the Treaty of Brussels was terminated. When the Western European Union was dissolved, it had 10 member countries. Additionally, it had 6 associate member countries, 7 associate partner countries and 5 observer countries.\nModern divisions.\nUN geoscheme classification.\nThe United Nations geoscheme is a system devised by the United Nations Statistics Division (UNSD) which divides the countries of the world into regional and subregional groups, based on the M49 coding classification. The partition is for statistical convenience and does not imply any assumption regarding political or other affiliation of countries or territories.\nIn the UN geoscheme, the following countries are classified as Western Europe:\nCIA classification.\nThe CIA classifies seven countries as belonging to \"Western Europe\":\nThe CIA also classifies three countries as belonging to \"Southwestern Europe\":\nEuroVoc classification.\nEuroVoc is a multilingual thesaurus maintained by the Publications Office of the European Union. In this thesaurus, the countries of Europe are grouped into sub-regions. The following countries are included in the sub-group Western Europe:\nUN regional groups: Western European and Others Group.\nThe Western European and Others Group is one of several unofficial Regional Groups in the United Nations that act as voting blocs and negotiation forums. Regional voting blocs were formed in 1961 to encourage voting to various UN bodies from different regional groups. The European members of the group are:\nIn addition, Australia, Canada, Israel and New Zealand are members of the group, with the United States as observer.\nPopulation.\nUsing the CIA classification strictly would give the following calculation of Western Europe's population. All figures based on the projections for 2018 by the Population Division of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs.\nUsing the CIA classification a little more liberally and including \"South-Western Europe\", would give the following calculation of Western Europe's population.\n1 \nClimate.\nThe climate of Western Europe varies from Mediterranean in the coasts of Italy, Portugal and Spain to alpine in the Pyrenees and the Alps. The Mediterranean climate of the south is dry and warm. The western and northwestern parts have a mild, generally humid climate, influenced by the North Atlantic Current. Western Europe is a heatwave hotspot, exhibiting upward trends that are three-to-four times faster compared to the rest of the northern midlatitudes.\nLanguages.\nWestern European languages mostly fall within two Indo-European language families: the Romance languages, descended from the Latin of the Roman Empire; and the Germanic languages, whose ancestor language (Proto-Germanic) came from southern Scandinavia.\nRomance languages are spoken primarily in the southern and central part of Western Europe, Germanic languages in the northern part (the British Isles and the Low Countries), as well as a large part of Northern and Central Europe.\nOther Western European languages include the Celtic group (that is, Irish, Scottish Gaelic, Manx, Welsh, Cornish and Breton) and Basque, the only currently living Old European language isolate.\nMultilingualism and the protection of regional and minority languages are recognised political goals in Western Europe today. The Council of Europe Framework Convention for the Protection of National Minorities and the Council of Europe's European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages set up a legal framework for language rights in Europe.\nEconomy.\nWestern Europe is one of the richest regions of the world. Germany has the highest gross domestic product in Europe and the largest financial surplus of any country, Luxembourg has the world's highest GDP per capita, and Germany has the highest net national wealth of any European state.\nSwitzerland and Luxembourg have the highest average wage in the world, in nominal and PPP, respectively. Norway ranks highest in the world on the Social Progress Index.\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33802", "revid": "33982640", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33802", "title": "Werewolf", "text": "Mythological human with acquired ability to transform into a wolflike creature\nIn folklore, a werewolf (from ang\u00a0'man-wolf'), or occasionally lycanthrope (from Ancient Greek 'wolf-human'), is an individual who can shapeshift into a wolf or therianthropic hybrid wolf\u2013humanlike creature, either voluntarily or involuntarily due to a curse or other affliction. In modern fiction, especially film, transformations are often depicted as triggered by the full moon and transmitted by a bite or scratch from another werewolf. Early sources for belief in this ability or affliction, called lycanthropy, are Petronius (27\u201366) and Gervase of Tilbury (1150\u20131228).\nThe werewolf is a widespread concept in European folklore, existing in many variants, which are related by a common development of a Christian interpretation of underlying European folklore developed during the Middle Ages. From the early modern period, werewolf beliefs spread to the Western Hemisphere with colonialism. Belief in werewolves developed in parallel to the belief in witches during the late Middle Ages and the early modern period. Like the witchcraft trials as a whole, the trial of supposed werewolves emerged in what is now Switzerland, especially the Valais and Vaud, in the early 15th century and spread throughout Europe in the 16th, peaking in the 17th and subsiding by the 18th century.\nThe persecution of werewolves and the associated folklore is an integral part of the \"witch-hunt\" phenomenon, albeit a marginal one, with accusations of lycanthropy being involved in only a small fraction of witchcraft trials. During the early period, accusations of lycanthropy (transformation into a wolf) were mixed with accusations of wolf-riding or wolf-charming. The case of Peter Stumpp (1589) led to a significant peak in both interest in and persecution of supposed werewolves, primarily in French-speaking and German-speaking Europe. The phenomenon persisted longest in Bavaria and Austria, with the persecution of wolf-charmers recorded until well after 1650, the final cases taking place in the early 18th century in Carinthia and Styria.\nAfter the end of the witch trials, the werewolf became of interest in folklore studies and in the emerging Gothic horror genre. Werewolf fiction as a genre has premodern precedents in medieval romances (e.g., \"Bisclavret\" and \"\") and developed in the 18th century out of the \"semi-fictional\" chapbook tradition. The trappings of horror literature in the 20th century became part of the horror and fantasy genre of modern popular culture.\nNames.\nThe Modern English \"werewolf\" descends from the Old English \"wer(e)wulf\", which is a cognate of Middle Dutch \"weerwolf\", Middle Low German \"warwulf\", \"werwulf\", Middle High German \"werwolf\", and West Frisian \"waer-\u00fbl(e)\". These terms are generally derived from a Proto-Germanic form reconstructed as \"*wira-wulfaz\" ('man-wolf'), itself from an earlier Pre-Germanic form *\"wiro-wulpos\". An alternative reconstruction, *\"wazi-wulfaz\" ('wolf-clothed'), would bring the Germanic compound closer to the Slavic meaning, with other semantic parallels in Old Norse \"\u00falfhe\u00f0nar\" ('wolf-skinned') and \"\u00falfhe\u00f0inn\" ('wolf-coat'), Old Irish \"luchthonn\" ('wolf-skin'), and Sanskrit \"V\u1e5bk\u0101jina\" ('Wolf-skin').\nThe Norse branch underwent taboo modifications, with Old Norse \"varg\u00falfr\" (only attested as a translation of Old French \"garwaf\" ~ \"garwal(f)\" from Marie's lay of Bisclavret) replacing *\"wiraz\" ('man') with \"vargr\" ('wolf, outlaw'), perhaps under the influence of the Old French expression \"leus warous ~ lous garous\" (modern \"loup-garou\"), which literally means 'wolf-werewolf'. The modern Norse form \"varulv\" (Danish, Norwegian and Swedish) was either borrowed from Middle Low German \"werwulf\", or else derived from an unattested Old Norse \"*varulfr\", posited as the regular descendant of Proto-Germanic *\"wira-wulfaz\". An Old Frankish form \"*werwolf\" is inferred from the Middle Low German variant and was most likely borrowed into Old Norman \"garwa(l)f\" ~ \"garo(u)l\", with regular Germanic\u2013Romance correspondence \"w-\" / \"g-\" (cf. \"William\" / \"Guillaume\", \"Wales\" / \"Galles\", etc.).\nThe Proto-Slavic noun *\"v\u044clko-dlak\u044c\", meaning \"wolf-haired\" (cf. *\"dlaka\", \"animal hair\", \"fur\"), can be reconstructed from Serbian \"vuk\u00f2dlak\", Slovenian \"vo\u0142kodl\u0203k\", and Czech \"vlkodlak\", although formal variations in Slavic languages (*\"v\u044crdl(j)ak\", *\"v\u044clkdolk\", *\"v\u044clklak\") and the late attestation of some forms pose difficulties in tracing the origin of the term. The Greek \"Vrykolakas\" and Romanian \"V\u00eercolac\", designating vampire-like creatures in Balkan folklores, were borrowed from Slavic languages.\nThe same form is found in other non-Slavic languages of the region, such as Albanian \"vurvolak\" and Turkish \"vurkolak.\" Bulgarian \"v\u044crkolak\" and Church Slavonic \"vurkolak\" may be interpreted as back-borrowings from Greek. The name \"vurdalak\" (\u0432\u0443\u0440\u0434\u0430\u043b\u0430\u043a; 'ghoul, revenant') first appeared in Russian poet Alexander Pushkin's work \"Pesni\", published in 1835. The source of Pushkin's distinctive form remains debated in scholarship.\nA Proto-Celtic noun *\"wiro-k\u016b\", meaning 'man-dog', has been reconstructed from Celtiberian \"uiroku\", the Old Brittonic place-name \"Viroconium\" (&lt; *\"wiroconion\", 'place of man-dogs, i.e. werewolves'), the Old Irish noun \"ferchu\" ('male dog, fierce dog'), and the medieval personal names \"Guurci\" (Old Welsh) and \"Gurki\" (Old Breton). Wolves were metaphorically designated as 'dogs' in Celtic cultures.\nThe modern term \"lycanthropy\" comes from Ancient Greek \"lukanthr\u014dp\u00eda\" (\u03bb\u03c5\u03ba\u03b1\u03bd\u03b8\u03c1\u03c9\u03c0\u03af\u03b1), itself from \"luk\u00e1nthr\u014dpos\" (\u03bb\u03c5\u03ba\u03ac\u03bd\u03b8\u03c1\u03c9\u03c0\u03bf\u03c2), meaning 'wolf-man'. Ancient writers used the term solely in the context of clinical lycanthropy, a condition in which the patient imagined himself to be a wolf. Modern writers later used \"lycanthrope\" as a synonym of \"werewolf\", referring to a person who, according to medieval superstition, could assume the form of wolves.\nHistory.\nIndo-European comparative mythology.\nThe European motif of the devilish werewolf devouring human flesh harks back to a common development during the Middle Ages in the context of Christianity, although stories of humans turning into wolves take their roots in earlier pre-Christian beliefs.\nTheir underlying common origin can be traced back to Proto-Indo-European mythology, wherein \"lycanthropy\" is reconstructed as an aspect of the initiation of the \"k\u00f3ryos\" warrior class, which may have included a cult focused on dogs and wolves identified with an age grade of young, unmarried warriors. The standard comparative overview of this aspect of Indo-European mythology is McCone's 1987 work.\nClassical antiquity.\nA few references to men changing into wolves are found in Ancient Greek literature and Greek mythology. Herodotus, in his \"Histories\", wrote that according to what the Scythians and the Greeks settled in Scythia told him, the Neuri, a tribe to the northeast of Scythia, were all transformed into wolves once every year for several days and then changed back to their human shape. He added that he was unconvinced by the story, but the locals swore to its truth. The tale was also mentioned by Pomponius Mela.\nIn the second century BC, the Greek geographer Pausanias related the story of King Lycaon of Arcadia, who was transformed into a wolf because he had sacrificed a child on the altar of Zeus Lycaeus. In the version of the legend told by Ovid in his \"Metamorphoses\", when Zeus visits Lycaon disguised as a commoner, Lycaon wants to test if he is really a god. To that end, he kills a Molossian hostage and serves his entrails to Zeus. Disgusted, the god turns Lycaon into a wolf. However, in other accounts of the legend, like that of Pseudo-Apollodorus's \"Bibliotheca\", Zeus blasts him and his sons with thunderbolts as punishment.\nPausanias also relates the story of an Arcadian man called Damarchus of Parrhasia, who was turned into a wolf after tasting the entrails of a human child sacrificed to Zeus Lycaeus. He was restored to human form 10 years later and became an Olympic champion. This tale is also recounted by Pliny the Elder, who calls the man Demaenetus, quoting Agriopas. According to Pausanias, this was not a one-off event, for men have been transformed into wolves during sacrifices to Zeus Lycaeus since the time of Lycaon. If they abstain from tasting human flesh while wolves, they will be restored to human form nine years later; if they do not abstain, they will remain wolves forever.\nLykos (\u039b\u03cd\u03ba\u03bf\u03c2) of Athens was a wolf-shaped her\u03bf whose shrine stood by the jury court, and the first jurors were named after him.\nPliny the Elder likewise recounts another tale of lycanthropy. Quoting Euanthes, he mentions that in Arcadia, once a year, a man was chosen by lot from the Anthus's clan. The chosen man was escorted to a marsh in the area, where he hung his clothes on an oak tree, swam across the marsh, and transformed into a wolf, joining a pack for nine years. If during these nine years, he refrained from tasting human flesh, he returned to the same marsh, swam back, and recovered his previous human form, with nine years added to his appearance. Ovid also relates stories of men who roamed the woods of Arcadia in the form of wolves.\nVirgil, in his poetic work \"Eclogues\", wrote of a man called Moeris who used herbs and poisons picked in his native Pontus to turn himself into a wolf. In prose, the \"Satyricon\", written circa AD 60 by Petronius, one of the characters, Niceros, tells a story at a banquet about a friend who turned into a wolf (chapters 61\u201362). He describes the incident as follows, \"When I look for my buddy I see he'd stripped and piled his clothes by the roadside... He pees in a circle round his clothes and then, just like that, turns into a wolf!... after he turned into a wolf he started howling and then ran off into the woods.\"\nEarly Christian authors also mentioned werewolves. In \"The City of God\", Augustine of Hippo gives an account similar to that found in Pliny the Elder's \"Natural History\". Augustine explains that \"It is very generally believed that by certain witches' spells men may be turned into wolves...\" Physical metamorphosis was also mentioned in the \"Capitulatum Episcopi\", attributed to the Synod of Ancyra in the 4th century, which became the early Christian Church's doctrinal text in relation to magic, witches, and transformations such as those of werewolves. The \"Capitulatum Episcopi\" states that \"Whoever believes that anything can be...transformed into another species or likeness, except by God Himself...is beyond doubt an infidel.\"\nIn the works of the early Roman Christian writers, werewolves often received the name \"versipellis\" (\"turnskin\"). In \"City of God,\" Augustine instead used the phrase \"in lupum fuisse mutatum\" (changed into the form of a wolf) to describe the metamorphosis of werewolves, which is similar to phrases used in the medieval period.\nMiddle Ages.\nThere is evidence of widespread belief in werewolves in medieval Europe, spanning across the European continent and British Isles. Werewolves were mentioned in medieval law codes, such as that of Cnut the Great, whose \"Ecclesiastical Ordinances\" aimed to ensure that \"...the madly audacious werewolf do[es] not too widely devastate, nor bite too many of the spiritual flock.\" Liutprand of Cremona reports a rumor that Bajan, a son of Simeon I of Bulgaria, could use magic to turn himself into a wolf. The works of Augustine of Hippo had a large influence on the development of Western Christianity, being read widely by Christian clergy of the medieval period. These clergymen occasionally discussed werewolves in their works, including in Gerald of Wales's \"Werewolves of Ossory\"\u2014found in his \"Topographica Hibernica\"\u2014and Gervase of Tilbury's \"Otia Imperialia\"; both works were written for royal audiences.\nGervase of Tilbury, in \"Otia Imperialia\", reveals to the reader that belief in such transformations\u2014he also mentions women turning into cats and snakes\u2014was widespread across Europe; he uses the phrase \"\" ('it is known') when discussing transformations. Writing in Germany, he also notifies the reader that the transformation of men into wolves cannot be easily dismissed, for \"...in England we have often seen men change into wolves\" (\"\").\nFurther evidence of the widespread belief in werewolves and other human-to-animal transformations can be seen in theological attacks made against such beliefs. Conrad of Hirsau, writing in the 11th century, forbids reading stories in which a person's reasoning is obscured following such a transformation. Conrad specifically refers to the tales of Ovid in his tract. Pseudo-Augustine, writing in the 12th century, follows Augustine of Hippo's argument that no physical transformation can be made by any but God, stating that \"...the body corporeally [cannot], be changed into the material limbs of any animal\" in his \"Liber de Spiritu et Anima\".\nMarie de France's song poem \"Bisclavret\" (c.\u20091200), a Breton lai, is another example: the eponymous nobleman Bisclavret, for reasons not described, had to transform into a wolf every week. When his treacherous wife stole his clothing needed to restore his human form, he escaped the king's wolf hunt by imploring the king for mercy, accompanying the king thereafter. His behavior at court was gentle until his wife and her new husband appeared one day\u2014so much so that his hateful attack on the couple was deemed justly motivated, and the truth was revealed.\nThe lai follows many themes found within other werewolf tales: the removal of clothing and attempted refrain from the consumption of human flesh can be found in Pliny the Elder, as well as in Gervase of Tilbury's werewolf story about a werewolf named Chaucevaire. Marie de France also revealed the continued existence of werewolf-related beliefs in Brittany and Normandy in using the Norman word \"garwulf\", which, she explains, are common in that part of France wherein \"...many men turned into werewolves\". Gervase supports this terminology when relating that the French used the term \"gerulfi\" to describe what the English called \"werewolves\". \"Melion\" and \"Biclarel\" are two anonymous lais that share the theme of a werewolf-knight being betrayed by his wife.\nThe German word \"werwolf\" was recorded by Burchard von Worms in the 11th century and Bertold of Regensburg in the 13th century but was not used frequently in medieval German poetry or fiction. While Baring-Gould argues that references to werewolves were rare in England (presumably because whatever significance the \"wolf-men\" of Germanic paganism had carried), their associated beliefs and practices had been successfully repressed by Christianization; if they persisted, he writes, they did so outside of the sphere of evidence available. Other examples of werewolf mythology in Ireland and the British Isles can be found in the work of the 9th-century Welsh monk Nennius. Female werewolves appear in the Irish work \"Acallam na Sen\u00f3rach\" (Tales of the Elders) from the 12th century, and Welsh werewolves are noted in the 12th- to 13th-century work \"Mabinogion\".\nGermanic pagan traditions associated with wolf-men persisted longest in the Scandinavian Viking Age. Harald I of Norway is known to have had a body of an \"ulfhedinn\" (, lit.\u2009'a warrior clothed in wolfskin'; pl. ), being mentioned in the Vatnsd\u00e6la saga, Hrafnsm\u00e1l, and V\u00f6lsunga saga. The were similar to the ('berserkers') but dressed in wolf rather than bear hides and were reputed to channel the spirits of the animals they wore to enhance effectiveness in battle. The were resistant to pain and vicious in battle, much like wild animals. The and are closely associated with the Norse god Odin.\nThe Scandinavian story traditions of the Viking Age may have spread to Kievan Rus', giving rise to the Slavic werewolf tales. The 11th-century Belarusian prince Vseslav of Polotsk was recounted in \"The Tale of Igor's Campaign\" to have been a werewolf capable of moving at superhuman speeds:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nVseslav the Prince judged men. As prince, he ruled towns, but at night he prowled in the guise of a wolf. From Kiev, prowling, he reached, before the cocks crew, Tmutorokan. The path of Great Sun, as a wolf, prowling, he crossed. For him in Polotsk they rang for matins early at St. Sophia the bells; but he heard the ringing in Kiev.\nThe mythology described during the Middle Ages gave rise to two forms of werewolf folklore in early modern Europe. In one form, the Germanic werewolf became associated with European witchcraft; in the other, the Slavic werewolf () became associated with the revenant or vampire. The Eastern werewolf-vampire is found in the folklore of Central and Eastern Europe, including Hungary, Romania, and the Balkans, while the Western werewolf-sorcerer is found in France, German-speaking Europe, and the Baltics.\nBeing a werewolf was a common accusation in witch trials. It featured in the Valais witch trials, one of the earliest such trials, in the first half of the 15th century.\nIn 1539, Martin Luther used the form \"beerwolf\" to describe a hypothetical ruler worse than a tyrant who must be resisted.\nIn \"Historia de Gentibus Septentrionalibus\" (1555), Olaus Magnus describes (Book 18, Chapter 45) an annual assembly of werewolves near the Lithuania\u2013Courland border. The participants, including Lithuanian nobility and werewolves from the surrounding areas, gather to test their strength by attempting to jump over a castle wall's ruins. Those who succeed are regarded as strong, while weaker participants are punished with whippings.\nEarly modern history.\nThere were numerous reports of werewolf attacks \u2013 and consequent court trials \u2013 in 16th-century France. In some of the cases, there was clear evidence against the accused of murder and cannibalism, but no association with wolves. In other cases, people have been terrified by such creatures, such as that of Gilles Garnier in Dole in 1573, who was convicted of being a werewolf.\nLycanthropy received peak attention in the late 16th to early 17th century as part of the European witch-hunts.\nA number of treatises on werewolves were written in France during 1595 and 1615. In 1598, werewolves were sighted in Anjou. In 1602, Henry Boguet wrote a lengthy chapter about werewolves. In 1603, a teenage werewolf was sentenced to life imprisonment in Bordeaux.\nIn the Swiss Vaud region, werewolves were convicted in 1602 and 1624. A treatise by a Vaud pastor in 1653, however, argued that lycanthropy was purely an illusion. After this, the only further record from the Vaud dates to 1670. A boy claimed he and his mother could change into wolves, which was not taken seriously. At the beginning of the 17th century, witchcraft was prosecuted by James I of England, who regarded \"warwoolfes\" as victims of delusion induced by \"a natural superabundance of melancholic\".\nAfter 1650, belief in lycanthropy had mostly disappeared from French-speaking Europe, as evidenced in Diderot's Encyclopedia, which attributed reports of lycanthropy to a \"disorder of the brain\". Although there were continuing reports of extraordinary wolflike beasts, they were not considered to be werewolves. One such report concerned the Beast of G\u00e9vaudan, which terrorized the general area of the former province of G\u00e9vaudan, now called Loz\u00e8re, in south-central France. From 1764 to 1767, it killed upwards of 80 men, women, and children.\nThe part of Europe which showed more vigorous interest in werewolves after 1650 was the Holy Roman Empire. At least nine works on lycanthropy were printed in Germany between 1649 and 1679. In the Austrian and Bavarian Alps, belief in werewolves persisted well into the 18th century. As late as in 1853, in Galicia, northwestern Spain, Manuel Blanco Romasanta was judged and condemned as the author of a number of murders, but he claimed to be not guilty because of his condition of \"lobishome\" (werewolf).\nUntil the 20th century, wolf attacks were an occasional, but still widespread, feature of life in Europe.\nSome scholars have suggested that it was inevitable that wolves, being the most feared predators in Europe, were projected into the folklore of evil shapeshifters. This is said to be corroborated by the fact that areas devoid of wolves typically use different kinds of predator to fill the niche; \"werehyenas\" in Africa, \"weretigers\" in India, as well as \"werepumas\" (\"\"runa uturuncu\") and \"werejaguars\" (\"yaguarat\u00e9-ab\u00e1\" or \"tigre-capiango\") in southern South America.\nAn idea explored in Sabine Baring-Gould's work \"The Book of Werewolves\" is that werewolf legends may have been used to explain serial killings. Perhaps the most infamous example is the case of Peter Stumpp, executed in 1589, the German farmer and alleged serial killer and cannibal, also known as the Werewolf of Bedburg.\nAsian cultures.\nCommon Turkic folklore holds a different, reverential light to the werewolf legends in that Turkic Central Asian shamans, after performing long and arduous rites, would voluntarily be able to transform into the humanoid \"Kurtadam\" (literally meaning \"Wolfman\"). Since the wolf was the totemic ancestor animal of the Turkic peoples, they would respect any shaman in such a form.\nLycanthropy as a medical condition.\nSome modern researchers have tried to explain the reports of werewolf behaviour with recognised medical conditions. In 1963, Dr Lee Illis of Guy's Hospital in London wrote a paper entitled \"On Porphyria and the Aetiology of Werewolves\", in which he argues that historical accounts on werewolves could have been referring to victims of congenital porphyria, stating how the symptoms of photosensitivity, reddish teeth, and psychosis could have been grounds for accusing a person of being a werewolf.\nThis is argued against by Woodward, who points out how mythological werewolves were almost invariably portrayed as resembling true wolves, and that their human forms were rarely physically conspicuous as porphyria victims. Others have pointed out the possibility of historical werewolves having been people with hypertrichosis, a hereditary condition manifesting itself in excessive hair growth. Woodward dismissed the possibility, as the rarity of the disease ruled it out from happening on a large scale, as werewolf cases were in medieval Europe.\nWoodward suggested rabies as the origin of werewolf beliefs, claiming remarkable similarities between the symptoms of that disease and some of the legends. Woodward focused on the idea that being bitten by a werewolf could result in the victim turning into one, which suggested the idea of a transmittable disease like rabies. However, the idea that lycanthropy could be transmitted in this way is not part of the original myths and legends, and only appears in relatively recent beliefs. Lycanthropy can also be met with as the main content of a delusion; for example, the case of a woman has been reported who during episodes of acute psychosis complained of becoming four different species of animals.\nFolk beliefs.\nCharacteristics.\nThe beliefs classed together under lycanthropy are far from uniform, and the term is somewhat capriciously applied. The transformation may be temporary or permanent; the were-animal may be the human themself metamorphosed; may be their double whose activity leaves the real human to all appearance unchanged; may be their soul, which goes forth seeking whomever it may devour, leaving its body in a state of trance; or it may be no more than the messenger of the human being, a real animal or a familiar spirit, whose intimate connection with its owner is shown by the fact that any injury to it is believed, by a phenomenon known as repercussion, to cause a corresponding injury to the human being.\nWerewolves were said in European folklore to bear telltale physical traits even in their human form. These included the meeting of both eyebrows at the bridge of the nose, curved fingernails, low-set ears and a swinging stride. One method of identifying a werewolf in its human form was to cut the flesh of the accused, under the pretense that fur would be seen within the wound. A Russian superstition recalls a werewolf can be recognized by bristles under the tongue.\nThe appearance of a werewolf in its animal form varies from culture to culture. It is most commonly portrayed as being indistinguishable from ordinary wolves, except for the fact that it has no tail (a trait thought characteristic of witches in animal form), is often larger, and retains human eyes and a voice. According to some Swedish accounts, the werewolf could be distinguished from a regular wolf by the fact that it would run on three legs, stretching the fourth one backwards to look like a tail.\nAfter returning to their human forms, werewolves are usually documented as becoming weak, debilitated and undergoing painful nervous depression.\nOne universally reviled trait in medieval Europe was the werewolf's habit of devouring recently buried corpses, a trait that is documented extensively, particularly in the \"Annales Medico-psychologiques\" in the 19th century.\nBecoming a werewolf.\nVarious methods for becoming a werewolf have been reported, with one of the simplest being the removal of clothing and putting on a belt made of wolfskin, probably as a substitute for the assumption of an entire animal skin (which also is frequently described). In other cases, the body is rubbed with a magic salve.\nThe 16th-century Swedish writer Olaus Magnus says that the Livonian werewolves were initiated by draining a cup of specially prepared beer and repeating a set formula. In Italy, France and Germany, it was said that a man or woman could turn into a werewolf if he or she, on a certain Wednesday or Friday, slept outside on a summer night with the full moon shining directly on his or her face.\nIn other cases, the transformation was supposedly accomplished by satanic allegiance for the most loathsome ends, often for the sake of sating a craving for human flesh. \"The werewolves\", writes Richard Verstegan (\"Restitution of Decayed Intelligence\", 1628),\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;are certayne sorcerers, who having annoynted their bodies with an ointment which they make by the instinct of the devil, and putting on a certayne inchaunted girdle, does not only unto the view of others seem as wolves, but to their own thinking have both the shape and nature of wolves, so long as they wear the said girdle. And they do dispose themselves as very wolves, in worrying and killing, and most of humane creatures. [\"sic\"]\nThe phenomenon of repercussion, the power of animal metamorphosis, or of sending out a familiar, real or spiritual, as a messenger, and the supernormal powers conferred by association with such a familiar, are also attributed to the magician, male and female, all the world over; and witch superstitions are closely parallel to, if not identical with, lycanthropic beliefs, the occasional involuntary character of lycanthropy being almost the sole distinguishing feature. In another direction, the phenomenon of repercussion is asserted to manifest itself in connection with the bush-soul of the West African and the \"nagual\" of Central America; although there is no line of demarcation to be drawn on logical grounds, the assumed power of the magician and the intimate association of the bush-soul or the \"nagual\" with a human being are not termed lycanthropy.\nThe curse of lycanthropy was also considered by some scholars as being the outcome of divine judgment. Werewolf literature shows many examples of God or saints allegedly cursing those who invoked their wrath with lycanthropy. Such is the case of Lycaon, who was turned into a wolf by Zeus as punishment for slaughtering one of his own sons and serving his remains to the gods as a dinner. Those who were excommunicated by the Catholic Church were also said to become werewolves.\nThe power of transforming others into wild beasts was attributed not only to malignant sorcerers, but to Christian saints as well. (\"All angels, good and bad, have the power of transmutating our bodies\") was the dictum of Thomas Aquinas. Saint Patrick was said to have transformed the Welsh King Vereticus into a wolf; Natalis supposedly cursed an illustrious Irish family whose members were each doomed to be a wolf for seven years. In other tales, the divine agency is even more direct, while in Russia, again, men supposedly became werewolves when incurring the wrath of the Devil.\nA notable exception to the association of lycanthropy and the Devil comes from a rare and lesser known account of an 80-year-old man named Thiess. In 1692, in J\u00fcrgensburg, Livonia, Thiess testified under oath that he and other werewolves were the Hounds of God.\nHe claimed they were warriors who descended into hell to battle witches and demons. Their efforts ensured that the Devil and his minions did not carry off the grain from local failed crops down to hell. Thiess was ultimately sentenced to ten lashes for idolatry and superstitious belief.\nRemedies.\nVarious methods have existed for removing the werewolf form. In antiquity, the Ancient Greeks and Romans believed in the power of exhaustion in curing people of lycanthropy. The victim would be subjected to long periods of physical activity in the hope of being purged of the malady. This practice stemmed from the fact that many alleged werewolves would be left feeling weak and debilitated after committing depredations.\nIn medieval Europe, traditionally, there are three methods one can use to cure a victim of lycanthropy: medicinally (usually via the use of wolfsbane), surgically, or by exorcism. Many of the cures advocated by medieval medical practitioners proved fatal to the patients. A Sicilian belief of Arabic origin holds that a werewolf can be cured of its ailment by striking it on the forehead or scalp with a knife. Another belief from the same culture involves the piercing of the werewolf's hands with nails. Sometimes, less extreme methods were used. In the German lowland of Schleswig-Holstein, a werewolf could be cured if one were to simply address it three times by its Christian name. One Danish belief holds that merely scolding a werewolf will cure it. Conversion to Christianity was a common method of removing lycanthropy in the medieval period. A devotion to St. Hubert has been cited as both cure for and protection from lycanthropes.\nConnection to revenants.\nBefore the end of the 19th century, the Greeks believed that the corpses of werewolves, if not destroyed, would return to life in the form of wolves or hyenas that prowled battlefields, drinking the blood of dying soldiers. In the same vein, in some rural areas of Germany, Poland, and Northern France, it was once believed that people who died in mortal sin came back to life as blood-drinking wolves.\nThese \"undead\" werewolves would return to their human corpse form at daylight. They were dealt with by decapitation with a spade and exorcism by the parish priest. The head would then be thrown into a stream, where the weight of its sins was thought to weigh it down. Sometimes, the same methods used to dispose of ordinary vampires would be used. The vampire was linked to the werewolf in East European countries, particularly Bulgaria, Serbia and Slovenia. In Serbia, the werewolf and vampire are known collectively as \"vulkodlak\".\nHungary and Balkans.\nIn Hungarian folklore, werewolves are said to live in the region of Transdanubia, and it was thought that the ability to change into a wolf was obtained in infancy, after suffering parental abuse or by a curse. It is told that, at the age of seven, the boy or the girl leave home at night to go hunting, and can change to a person or wolf whenever they want. The curse can also be obtained in adulthood if a person passes three times through an arch made of birch with the help of a wild rose's spine.\nThe werewolves were known to exterminate all kind of farm animals, especially sheep. The transformation usually occurred during the winter solstice, Easter and a full moon. Later in the 17th and 18th century, the trials in Hungary were not only conducted against witches, but against werewolves, too, and many records exist documenting connections between the two. Vampires and werewolves are closely related in Hungarian folklore, both being feared in antiquity.\nAmong the South Slavs, and among the ethnic Kashubian people in present-day northern Poland, there was the belief that if a child was born with hair, a birthmark, or a caul on their head, they were supposed to possess shapeshifting abilities. Though capable of turning into any animal they wished, it was commonly believed that such people preferred to turn into a wolf.\nSerbian \"vukodlaks\" traditionally had the habit of congregating annually in the winter months, when they would strip off their wolfskins and hang them from trees. They would then get a hold of another \"vulkodlak\"'s skin and burn it, releasing from its curse the \"vukodlak\" from whom the skin came.\nCaucasus.\nAccording to Armenian lore, there are women who, in consequence of deadly sins, are condemned to spend seven years in wolf form. In a typical account, a condemned woman is visited by a wolfskin-toting spirit, who orders her to wear the skin, which causes her to acquire frightful cravings for human flesh soon after. With her better nature overcome, the she-wolf devours each of her own children, then her relatives' children in order of relationship, and finally the children of strangers. She wanders only at night, with doors and locks springing open at her approach. When morning arrives, she reverts to human form and removes her wolfskin. The transformation is generally said to be involuntary. There are alternate versions involving voluntary metamorphosis, where the women can transform at will.\nAmericas and Caribbean.\nThe Naskapis believed that the caribou afterlife is guarded by giant wolves that kill careless hunters venturing too near. The Navajo people feared witches in wolf's clothing called \"Mai-cob\".\nWoodward thought that these beliefs were due to the Norse colonization of the Americas.\nWhen the European colonization of the Americas occurred, the pioneers brought their own werewolf folklore with them and were later influenced by the lore of their neighbouring colonies and those of the Natives. Belief in the \"loup-garou\" present in Canada, the Upper and Lower Peninsulas of Michigan, and upstate New York originates from French folklore influenced by Native American stories on the Wendigo.\nIn Mexico, there is a belief in a creature called the \"nagual\".\nHaiti.\nLougawou\nJ\u00e9-rouge \n(literally red eyes) is a superstition that werewolf spirits that can possess the bodies of unwitting persons and nightly transform them into cannibalistic lupine creatures. The Haitian \"j\u00e9-rouges\" typically try to trick mothers into giving away their children voluntarily by waking them at night and asking their permission to take their child, to which the disoriented mother may either reply yes or no. The Haitian \"j\u00e9-rouges\" differ from traditional European werewolves by their habit of actively trying to spread their lycanthropic condition to others, much like vampires.\nEgypt.\nIn Egyptian folklore the is a werewolf like creature that attacks livestock and small children , in one tale it is said that a village man married a woman who appeared completely human. This woman had a sister in a nearby village. At night, however, she would transform into a Salawa and go to her sister so that together they could dig up graves and eat the corpses.One night, her husband noticed she was missing. He followed her toward the neighboring village's grave yard, he heard his wife say that the corpse in the grave was hard to pull out, so her sister told her to \u201cbreak its neck\u201d so they could get it out.\nRealizing the truth about his wife he hurried back home and pretended to be asleep. When she returned he asked her to bring him a cup of water. She replied that she was afraid to fill the jug because it made noises when full. He mocked her, saying, \u201cAnd yet you weren\u2019t afraid when you broke the neck of the man in the grave!\u201d\nHer face darkened, her eyes flashed with anger, and she realized her secret had been discovered. She said, \u201cIf it weren\u2019t for our sons, Muhammad and Muhammadin, your blood would be a small sip of water, and your flesh a bite in my mouth. But for their sake, I\u2019ll spare you \u2014 and I entrust them to your care.\u201d, in modern times some local Fellahin mistake the attacks of wolves for selawas\nModern reception.\nWerewolf fiction.\nMost modern fiction describes werewolves as vulnerable to silver weapons and highly resistant to other injuries. This feature appears in 19th-century German literature and tales, such as those collected in folklore compilations. The claim that the Beast of G\u00e9vaudan, an 18th-century wolf or wolflike creature, was shot by a silver bullet appears to have been introduced by novelists retelling the story from 1935 onwards and not in earlier versions.\n19th-century English literary collections of folklore, such as Baring-Gould's \"The Book of Were-Wolves\", included tales depicting shapeshifters as vulnerable to silver: \"...till the publican shot a silver button over their heads when they were instantly transformed into two ill-favoured old ladies...\" Similarly, an 1840 German tale set c.\u20091640 described the werewolves of Greifswald being defeated with silver items.\nThe 1897 novel \"Dracula\" and the short story \"Dracula's Guest\", both written by Bram Stoker, drew on earlier mythologies of werewolves and similar legendary demons and \"was to voice the anxieties of an age\", and the \"fears of late Victorian patriarchy\". In \"Dracula's Guest\", a band of military horsemen coming to the aid of the protagonist chase off Dracula, who is depicted as a great wolf. They state the only way to kill it is by a \"Sacred Bullet\". This is also mentioned in the main novel Dracula as well. Count Dracula stated in the novel that legends of werewolves originated from his Szekely racial bloodline, who himself is also depicted with the ability to shapeshift into a wolf at will during the night but is unable to do so during the day except at noon.\nThe 1928 novel \"The Wolf's Bride: A Tale from Estonia\", written by the Finnish author Aino Kallas, tells story of the forester Priidik's wife Aalo living in Hiiumaa in the 17th century, who became a werewolf under the influence of a malevolent forest spirit, also known as \"Diabolus Sylvarum\".\nThe first feature film to use an anthropomorphic werewolf was \"Werewolf of London\" in 1935. The main werewolf of this film is a dapper London scientist who retains some of his style and most of his human features after his transformation, as lead actor Henry Hull was unwilling to spend long hours being made up by makeup artist Jack Pierce. Universal Studios drew on a Balkan tale of a plant associated with lycanthropy as there was no literary work to draw upon, unlike the case with vampires. There is no reference to silver nor other aspects of werewolf lore such as cannibalism.\nA more tragic character is Lawrence Talbot, played by Lon Chaney Jr. in 1941's \"The Wolf Man\". With Pierce's makeup more elaborate this time, the movie catapulted the werewolf into public consciousness. Sympathetic portrayals are few but notable, such as the comedic but tortured protagonist David Naughton in \"An American Werewolf in London\", and a less anguished and more confident and charismatic Jack Nicholson in the 1994 film \"Wolf\". Over time, the depiction of werewolves has gone from fully malevolent to even heroic creatures, such as in the \"Underworld\" and \"Twilight\" series, as well as \"Blood Lad\", \"Dance in the Vampire Bund\", \"Rosario + Vampire\", and various other movies, anime, manga, and comic books.\nOther werewolves are decidedly more willful and malevolent, such as those in the novel \"The Howling\" and its subsequent sequels and film adaptations. The form a werewolf assumes was generally anthropomorphic in early films such as \"The Wolf Man\" and \"Werewolf of London\", but a larger and powerful wolf in many later films.\nWerewolves are often depicted as immune to damage caused by ordinary weapons, being vulnerable only to silver objects, such as a silver-tipped cane, bullet or blade; this attribute was first adopted cinematically in \"The Wolf Man\". This negative reaction to silver is sometimes so strong that the mere touch of the metal on a werewolf's skin will cause burns. Current-day werewolf fiction almost exclusively involves lycanthropy being either a hereditary condition or transmitted like an infectious disease by the bite of another werewolf.\nIn some fiction, the power of the werewolf extends to human form, such as invulnerability to conventional injury due to their healing factor, superhuman speed and strength, and falling on their feet from high falls. Aggressiveness and animalistic urges may be intensified and more difficult to control, such as hunger, and sexual arousal. Usually in these cases, the abilities are diminished in human form. In other fiction, it can be cured by medicine men or antidotes.\nAlong with the vulnerability to the silver bullet, the full moon being the cause of the transformation only became part of the depiction of werewolves on a widespread basis in the twentieth century. The first movie to feature the transformative effect of the full moon was \"Frankenstein Meets the Wolf Man\" in 1943.\nWerewolves are typically envisioned as \"working-class\" monsters, often being low in socioeconomic status, although they can represent a variety of social classes and at times were seen as a way of representing \"aristocratic decadence\" during 19th-century horror literature.\nNazi Germany.\nNazi Germany used \"Werwolf\", as the mythical creature's name is spelled in German, in 1942\u201343 as the codename for one of Hitler's headquarters. In the war's final days, the Nazi \"Operation Werwolf\" aimed at creating a commando force that would operate behind enemy lines as the Allies advanced through Germany itself.\nMultiple fictional depictions of \"Operation Werwolf,\" including the US television series \"True Blood\" and the 2012 novel \"Wolf Hunter\" by J. L. Ben\u00e9t, mix the two meanings of \"Werwolf\" by depicting the 1945 diehard Nazi commandos, part of Operation Werwolf, as being actual werewolves.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nSecondary sources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33804", "revid": "44095507", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33804", "title": "Wellington", "text": "Capital city of New Zealand\nWellington is the capital city of New Zealand. It is located at the south-western tip of the North Island, between Cook Strait and the Remutaka Range. Wellington is the third-largest city in New Zealand (second largest in the North Island), and is the administrative centre of the Wellington Region. It is the world's southernmost capital of a sovereign state. Wellington features a temperate maritime climate, and is the world's windiest city by average wind speed.\nM\u0101ori oral tradition tells that Kupe discovered and explored the region in about the 10th century. The area was initially settled by M\u0101ori iwi such as Rangit\u0101ne and Mua\u016bpoko. The disruptions of the Musket Wars led to them being overwhelmed by northern iwi such as Te \u0100ti Awa in the early 19th century.\nWellington's current form was originally designed by Captain William Mein Smith, the first Surveyor General for Edward Wakefield's New Zealand Company, in 1840. Smith's plan included a series of interconnected grid plans, expanding along valleys and lower hill slopes, but without actually taking the terrain into account. The Wellington urban area, which only includes urbanised areas within Wellington City, has a population of 209,800 as of June 2025. The wider Wellington metropolitan area, including the cities of Lower Hutt, Porirua and Upper Hutt, has a population of as of June 2025. The city has served as New Zealand's capital since 1865, a status that is not defined in legislation, but established by convention; the New Zealand Government and Parliament, the Supreme Court and most of the public service are based in the city.\nWellington's economy is primarily service-based, with an emphasis on finance, business services, government, and the film industry. It is the centre of New Zealand's film and special effects industries, and increasingly a hub for information technology and innovation, with two public research universities. Wellington is one of New Zealand's chief seaports and serves both domestic and international shipping. The city is chiefly served by Wellington Airport in Rongotai, the country's third-busiest airport. Wellington's transport network includes train and bus lines, which reach as far as the K\u0101piti Coast and the Wairarapa, and ferries connect the city to the South Island.\nOften referred to as New Zealand's cultural capital, the culture of Wellington is a diverse and often youth-driven one. One of the world's most liveable cities, the 2021 Global Livability Ranking tied Wellington with Tokyo as fourth in the world. From 2017 to 2018, Deutsche Bank ranked it first in the world for both liveability and non-pollution. Cultural precincts such as Cuba Street and Newtown are renowned for creative innovation, \"op shops\", historic character, and food. Wellington is a leading financial centre in the Asia-Pacific region, being ranked 46th in the world by the Global Financial Centres Index for 2024. The global city has grown from a bustling M\u0101ori settlement, to a colonial outpost, and from there to an Australasian capital that has experienced a \"remarkable creative resurgence\".\nToponymy.\nWellington takes its name from Arthur Wellesley, the first Duke of Wellington and victor of the Battle of Waterloo (1815): his title comes from the town of Wellington in the English county of Somerset. It was named in November 1840 by the original settlers of the New Zealand Company on the suggestion of the directors of the same, in recognition of the Duke's strong support for the company's principles of colonisation and his \"strenuous and successful defence against its enemies of the measure for colonising South Australia\". One of the founders of the settlement, Edward Jerningham Wakefield, reported that the settlers \"took up the views of the directors with great cordiality and the new name was at once adopted\".\nIn the M\u0101ori language, Wellington has three names:\nThe legendary M\u0101ori explorer Kupe, a chief from Hawaiki (the homeland of Polynesian explorers, of unconfirmed geographical location, not to be confused with Hawaii), was said to have stayed in the harbour prior to 1000 CE. Here, it is said he had a notable impact on the area, with local mythology stating he named the two islands in the harbour after his daughters, Matiu (Somes Island), and M\u0101karo (Ward Island).\nIn New Zealand Sign Language, the name is signed by raising the index, middle, and ring fingers of one hand, palm forward, to form a \"W\", and shaking it slightly from side to side twice.\nThe city's location close to the mouth of the narrow Cook Strait leaves it vulnerable to strong gales, leading to the nickname of \"Windy Wellington\".\nHistory.\nM\u0101ori settlement.\nIn M\u0101ori mythology, the legendary Polynesian explorer Kupe, a chief from Hawaiki (the homeland of Polynesian explorers, of unconfirmed geographical location, not to be confused with Hawaii), was said to have stayed in the harbour from c.\u2009925. A later M\u0101ori explorer, Whatonga, named the harbour \"Te Whanganui-a-Tara\" after his son Tara. Before the 1820s, most of the inhabitants of the Wellington region identified as being Whatonga's descendants.\nAt about 1820, the people living there were Ng\u0101ti Ira and other groups who claimed descent from the explorer Whatonga, including Rangit\u0101ne and Mua\u016bpoko. However, these groups were eventually forced out of \"Te Whanganui-a-Tara\" by a series of migrations by other iwi (M\u0101ori tribes) from the north. The migrating groups were Ng\u0101ti Toa, which came from K\u0101whia, Ng\u0101ti Rangatahi, from near Taumarunui, and Te \u0100tiawa, Ng\u0101ti Tama, Ng\u0101ti Mutunga, Taranaki and Ng\u0101ti Ruanui from Taranaki. Ng\u0101ti Mutunga later moved on to the Chatham Islands. The Waitangi Tribunal has found that at the time of the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi in 1840, Te \u0100tiawa, Taranaki, Ng\u0101ti Ruanui, Ng\u0101ti Tama, and Ng\u0101ti Toa held mana whenua interests in the area, through conquest and occupation.\nEarly European settlement.\nSteps towards European settlement in the area began in 1839, when Colonel William Wakefield arrived to purchase land for the New Zealand Company to sell to prospective British settlers. Prior to this time, the M\u0101ori inhabitants had had contact with P\u0101keh\u0101 whalers and traders.\nEuropean settlement began with the arrival of an advance party of the New Zealand Company on the ship \"Tory\" on 20 September 1839, followed by 150 settlers on the \"Aurora\" on 22 January 1840. Thus, the Wellington settlement preceded the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi (on 6 February 1840). The 1840 settlers constructed their first homes at Petone (which they called Britannia for a time) on the flat area at the mouth of the Hutt River. Within months that area proved swampy and flood-prone, and most of the newcomers transplanted their settlement across Wellington Harbour to Thorndon in present-day Wellington. The town's layout was originally designed by Captain William Mein Smith, the first Surveyor General for the New Zealand Company, in 1840. Smith's plan included a series of interconnected grid plans, expanding along valleys and lower hill slopes, but without actually taking the terrain into account. Early growth was quick, with 700 buildings constructed by 1843. By 1865 the city had only grown to 1,200 buildings, the majority in Te Aro, with Newtown largely undeveloped.\nNational capital.\nWellington was declared a city in 1840, and was chosen to be the capital city of New Zealand in 1865.\nWellington became the capital city in place of Auckland, which William Hobson had made the capital in 1841. The New Zealand Parliament had first met in Wellington on 7 July 1862, on a temporary basis; in November 1863, the Prime Minister of New Zealand, Alfred Domett, placed a resolution before Parliament in Auckland that \"... it has become necessary that the seat of government\u00a0... should be transferred to some suitable locality in Cook Strait [region].\" There had been some concerns that the more populous South Island (where the goldfields were located) would choose to form a separate colony in the British Empire. Several commissioners (delegates) invited from Australia, chosen for their neutral status, declared that the city was a suitable location because of its central location in New Zealand and its good harbour; it was believed that the whole Royal Navy fleet could fit into the harbour. Wellington's status as the capital is a result of constitutional convention rather than statute.\nWellington is New Zealand's political centre, housing the nation's major government institutions. The New Zealand Parliament relocated to the new capital city, having spent the first ten years of its existence in Auckland. A session of parliament officially met in the capital for the first time on 26 July 1865. At that time, the population of Wellington was just 4,900.\nThe Government Buildings were constructed at Lambton Quay in 1876. The site housed the original government departments in New Zealand. The public service rapidly expanded beyond the capacity of the building, with the first department leaving shortly after it was opened; by 1975 only the Education Department remained, and by 1990 the building was empty. The capital city is also the location of the highest court, the Supreme Court of New Zealand, and the historic former High Court building (opened 1881) has been enlarged and restored for its use. The Governor-General's residence, Government House (the current building completed in 1910) is situated in Newtown, opposite the Basin Reserve. Premier House (built in 1843 for Wellington's first mayor, George Hunter), the official residence of the prime minister, is in Thorndon on Tinakori Road.\nIn 1903 Wellington annexed the Melrose Borough, in 1919 it annexed the Borough of Onslow and Karori and Miramar boroughs in 1920. The Johnsonville Town District was annexed in 1953.\nOver six months in 1939 and 1940, Wellington hosted the New Zealand Centennial Exhibition, celebrating a century since the signing of the Treaty of Waitangi. Held on 55 acres of land at Rongotai, it featured three exhibition courts, grand Art Deco-style edifices and a hugely popular three-acre amusement park. Wellington attracted more than 2.5 million visitors at a time when New Zealand's population was 1.6 million.\nGeography.\nWellington is at the south-western tip of the North Island on Cook Strait, separating the North and South Islands. On a clear day, the snowcapped Kaik\u014dura Ranges are visible to the south across the strait. To the north stretch the golden beaches of the K\u0101piti Coast. On the east, the Remutaka Range divides Wellington from the broad plains of the Wairarapa, a wine region of national notability.\nWith a latitude of 41\u00b0 17' South, Wellington is the southernmost capital city in the world.\nWellington is more densely populated than most other cities in New Zealand due to the restricted amount of land that is available between its harbour and the surrounding hills. It has very few open areas in which to expand, and this has brought about the development of the suburban towns. Because of its location in the Roaring Forties and its exposure to the winds blowing through Cook Strait, Wellington is the world's windiest city, with an average wind speed of .\nWellington's scenic natural harbour and green hillsides adorned with tiered suburbs of colonial villas are popular with tourists. The central business district (CBD) is close to Lambton Harbour, an arm of Wellington Harbour, which lies along an active geological fault, clearly evident on its straight western shore. The land to the west of this rises abruptly, meaning that many suburbs sit high above the centre of the city. There is a network of bush walks and reserves maintained by the Wellington City Council and local volunteers. These include Otari-Wilton's Bush, dedicated to the protection and propagation of native plants. The Wellington region has of regional parks and forests. In the east is the Miramar Peninsula, connected to the rest of the city by a low-lying isthmus at Rongotai, the site of Wellington Airport. Industry has developed mainly in the Hutt Valley, where there are food-processing plants, engineering industries, vehicle assembly and oil refineries.\nThe narrow entrance to the harbour is to the east of the Miramar Peninsula, and contains the dangerous shallows of Barrett Reef, where many ships have been wrecked (notably the inter-island ferry in 1968). The harbour has three islands: Matiu/Somes Island, Makaro/Ward Island and Mokopuna Island. Only Matiu/Somes Island is large enough for habitation. It has been used as a quarantine station for people and animals, and was an internment camp during World War I and World War II. It is a conservation island, providing refuge for endangered species, much like Kapiti Island farther up the coast. There is access during daylight hours by the Dominion Post Ferry.\nWellington is primarily surrounded by water, but some of the nearby locations are listed below.\nGeology.\nWellington suffered serious damage in a series of earthquakes in 1848 and from another earthquake in 1855. The 1855 Wairarapa earthquake occurred on the Wairarapa Fault to the north and east of Wellington. It was probably the most powerful earthquake in recorded New Zealand history, with an estimated magnitude of at least 8.2 on the Moment magnitude scale. It caused vertical movements of two to three metres over a large area, including raising land out of the harbour and turning it into a tidal swamp. Much of this land was subsequently reclaimed and is now part of the central business district. For this reason, the street named Lambton Quay is 100 to 200 metres (325 to 650\u00a0ft) from the harbour \u2013 plaques set into the footpath mark the shoreline in 1840, indicating the extent of reclamation. The 1942 Wairarapa earthquakes caused considerable damage in Wellington.\nThe area has high seismic activity even by New Zealand standards, with a major fault, the Wellington Fault, running through the centre of the city and several others nearby. Several hundred minor faults lines have been identified within the urban area. Inhabitants, particularly in high-rise buildings, typically notice several earthquakes every year. For many years after the 1855 earthquake, the majority of buildings were made entirely from wood. The 1996-restored Government Buildings near Parliament is the largest wooden building in the Southern Hemisphere. While masonry and structural steel have subsequently been used in building construction, especially for office buildings, timber framing remains the primary structural component of almost all residential construction. Residents place their confidence in good building regulations, which became more stringent in the 20th century. Since the Canterbury earthquakes of 2010 and 2011, earthquake readiness has become even more of an issue, with buildings declared by Wellington City Council to be earthquake-prone, and the costs of meeting new standards.\nEvery five years, a year-long slow quake occurs beneath Wellington, stretching from Kapiti to the Marlborough Sounds. It was first measured in 2003, and reappeared in 2008 and 2013. It releases as much energy as a magnitude 7 quake, but as it happens slowly, there is no damage.\nDuring July and August 2013 there were many earthquakes, mostly in Cook Strait near Seddon. The sequence started at 5:09 pm on Sunday 21 July 2013 when the magnitude 6.5 Seddon earthquake hit the city, but no tsunami report was confirmed nor any major damage. At 2:31\u00a0pm on Friday 16 August 2013 the Lake Grassmere earthquake struck, this time magnitude 6.6, but again no major damage occurred, though many buildings were evacuated. On Monday 20 January 2014 at 3:52\u00a0pm a rolling 6.2 magnitude earthquake struck the lower North Island 15\u00a0km east of Eket\u0101huna and was felt in Wellington, but little damage was reported initially, except at Wellington Airport where one of the two giant eagle sculptures commemorating The Hobbit became detached from the ceiling.\nAt two minutes after midnight on Monday 14 November 2016, the 7.8 magnitude Kaik\u014dura earthquake, which was centred between Culverden and Kaik\u014dura in the South Island, caused the Wellington CBD, Victoria University of Wellington, and the Wellington suburban rail network to be largely closed for the day to allow inspections. The earthquake damaged a considerable number of buildings, with 65% of the damage being in Wellington. Subsequently, a number of recent buildings were demolished rather than being rebuilt, often a decision made by the insurer. Two of the buildings demolished were about eleven years old \u2013 the seven-storey NZDF headquarters and Statistics House at Centreport on the waterfront. The docks were closed for several weeks after the earthquake.\nRelief.\nSteep landforms shape and constrain much of Wellington city. Notable hills in and around Wellington include:\nClimate.\nAveraging 2,055 hours of sunshine per year, the climate of Wellington is temperate marine, (K\u00f6ppen: \"Cfb\", Trewartha: \"Cflk\"), generally moderate all year round with warm summers and cool to mild winters, and rarely sees temperatures above or below . The hottest recorded temperature in the city is recorded on 20 February 1896, while is the coldest. The city is notorious for its southerly blasts in winter, which may make the temperature feel much colder. It is generally very windy all year round with high rainfall; average annual rainfall is , June and July being the wettest months. Frosts are quite common in the hill suburbs and the Hutt Valley between May and September. Snow is very rare at low altitudes, although snow fell on the city and many other parts of the Wellington region during separate events on 25 July 2011 and 15 August 2011. Snow at higher altitudes is more common, with light flurries recorded in higher suburbs every few years.\nOn 29 January 2019, the suburb of Kelburn (instruments near the old Metservice building in the Wellington Botanic Garden) reached , the highest temperature since records began in 1927.\nDemographics.\nWellington City covers and had an estimated population of 210,800 as of June 2025, with a population density of people per km2. This comprises 209,800 people in the Wellington urban area and people in the surrounding rural areas.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWellington City had a population of 202,689 in the 2023 New Zealand census, a decrease of 48 people (\u22120.0%) since the 2018 census, and an increase of 11,733 people (6.1%) since the 2013 census. There were 97,641 males, 102,372 females and 2,673 people of other genders in 77,835 dwellings. 9.0% of people identified as LGBTIQ+. The median age was 34.9 years (compared with 38.1 years nationally). There were 29,142 people (14.4%) aged under 15 years, 55,080 (27.2%) aged 15 to 29, 94,806 (46.8%) aged 30 to 64, and 23,664 (11.7%) aged 65 or older.\nPeople could identify as more than one ethnicity. The results were 72.1% European (P\u0101keh\u0101); 9.8% M\u0101ori; 5.7% Pasifika; 20.4% Asian; 3.6% Middle Eastern, Latin American and African New Zealanders (MELAA); and 2.1% other, which includes people giving their ethnicity as \"New Zealander\". English was spoken by 96.3%, M\u0101ori language by 2.7%, Samoan by 1.7% and other languages by 23.4%. No language could be spoken by 1.6% (e.g. too young to talk). New Zealand Sign Language was known by 0.6%. The percentage of people born overseas was 34.4, compared with 28.8% nationally.\nReligious affiliations were 26.9% Christian, 3.8% Hindu, 1.8% Islam, 0.4% M\u0101ori religious beliefs, 1.7% Buddhist, 0.5% New Age, 0.3% Jewish, and 1.9% other religions. People who answered that they had no religion were 57.7%, and 5.2% of people did not answer the census question.\nOf those at least 15 years old, 62,484 (36.0%) people had a bachelor's or higher degree, 66,657 (38.4%) had a post-high school certificate or diploma, and 24,339 (14.0%) people exclusively held high school qualifications. The median income was $55,500, compared with $41,500 nationally. 40,872 people (23.6%) earned over $100,000 compared to 12.1% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 102,369 (59.0%) people were employed full-time, 24,201 (13.9%) were part-time, and 5,283 (3.0%) were unemployed.\nQuality of living.\nWellington ranks 12th in the world for quality of living, according to a 2023 study by consulting company Mercer. Of cities in the Asia\u2013Pacific region, Wellington ranked third behind Auckland and Sydney.\nIn 2024, Wellington was ranked as a highly affordable city in terms of cost of living, coming in at 145th out of 226 cities in the Mercer worldwide Cost of Living Survey.\nIn 2019, Mercer ranked cities on personal safety, including internal stability, crime levels, law enforcement, limitations on personal freedom, relationships with other countries and freedom of the press. Wellington shared ninth place internationally with Auckland.\nCulture and identity.\nIn addition to governmental institutions, Wellington accommodates several of the nation's largest and oldest cultural institutions, such as the National Archives, the National Library, New Zealand's national museum, Te Papa and numerous theatres. It plays host to many artistic and cultural organisations, including the New Zealand Symphony Orchestra and Royal New Zealand Ballet. Its architectural attractions include the Old Government Buildings \u2013 one of the largest wooden buildings in the world \u2013 as well as the iconic Beehive, the executive wing of Parliament Buildings as well as internationally renowned Futuna Chapel. The city's art scene includes many art galleries, including the national art collection at Toi Art at Te Papa. Wellington also has many events such as CubaDupa, Wellington On a Plate, the Newtown Festival, Diwali Festival of Lights and Gardens Magic at the Botanical Gardens.\nUrban area.\nWellington's urban area covers and had an estimated population of 209,800 as of June 2025, with a population density of people per km2.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Module:Historical populations/styles.css\"/&gt;\nThe urban area had a population of 201,708 in the 2023 New Zealand census, a decrease of 84 people (\u22120.0%) since the 2018 census, and an increase of 11,595 people (6.1%) since the 2013 census. There were 97,143 males, 101,898 females and 2,667 people of other genders in 77,472 dwellings. 9.0% of people identified as LGBTIQ+. The median age was 34.9 years (compared with 38.1 years nationally). There were 28,986 people (14.4%) aged under 15 years, 54,912 (27.2%) aged 15 to 29, 94,272 (46.7%) aged 30 to 64, and 23,541 (11.7%) aged 65 or older.\nPeople could identify as more than one ethnicity. The results were 72.0% European (P\u0101keh\u0101); 9.8% M\u0101ori; 5.7% Pasifika; 20.5% Asian; 3.6% Middle Eastern, Latin American and African New Zealanders (MELAA); and 2.1% other, which includes people giving their ethnicity as \"New Zealander\". English was spoken by 96.3%, M\u0101ori language by 2.7%, Samoan by 1.8% and other languages by 23.5%. No language could be spoken by 1.7% (e.g. too young to talk). New Zealand Sign Language was known by 0.6%. The percentage of people born overseas was 34.4, compared with 28.8% nationally.\nReligious affiliations were 26.9% Christian, 3.8% Hindu, 1.8% Islam, 0.4% M\u0101ori religious beliefs, 1.7% Buddhist, 0.5% New Age, 0.3% Jewish, and 1.9% other religions. People who answered that they had no religion were 57.6%, and 5.2% of people did not answer the census question.\nOf those at least 15 years old, 62,259 (36.0%) people had a bachelor's or higher degree, 66,273 (38.4%) had a post-high school certificate or diploma, and 24,219 (14.0%) people exclusively held high school qualifications. The median income was $55,400, compared with $41,500 nationally. 40,632 people (23.5%) earned over $100,000 compared to 12.1% nationally. The employment status of those at least 15 was that 101,892 (59.0%) people were employed full-time, 24,063 (13.9%) were part-time, and 5,268 (3.0%) were unemployed.\nArchitecture.\nWellington showcases a variety of architectural styles from the past 150 years \u2013 19th-century wooden cottages, such as the Italianate Katherine Mansfield Birthplace in Thorndon; streamlined Art Deco structures such as the old Wellington Free Ambulance headquarters, the Central Fire Station, Fountain Court Apartments, the City Gallery, and the former Post and Telegraph Building; and the curves and vibrant colours of post-modern architecture in the CBD.\nThe oldest building is the 1858 Nairn Street Cottage in Mount Cook. The tallest building is the Majestic Centre on Willis Street at 116 metres high, the second-tallest being the structural expressionist Aon Centre (Wellington) at 103 metres. Futuna Chapel in Karori is an iconic building designed by M\u0101ori architect John Scott and is architecturally considered one of the most significant New Zealand buildings of the 20th century. Old St Paul's is an example of 19th-century Gothic Revival architecture adapted to colonial conditions and materials, as is St Mary of the Angels. Sacred Heart Cathedral is a Palladian Revival Basilica with the Portico of a Roman or Greek temple. The Museum of Wellington City &amp; Sea in the Bond Store is in the Second French Empire style, and the Wellington Harbour Board Wharf Office Building is in a late English Classical style. There are several restored theatre buildings: the St James Theatre, the Opera House and the Embassy Theatre.\nTe Ng\u0101kau Civic Square is surrounded by the Town Hall and council offices, the Michael Fowler Centre, the Wellington Central Library, the City-to-Sea Bridge, and the City Gallery.\nAs it is the capital city, there are many notable government buildings. The Executive Wing of New Zealand Parliament Buildings, on the corner of Lambton Quay and Molesworth Street, was constructed between 1969 and 1981 and is commonly referred to as the Beehive. Across the road is the largest wooden building in the Southern Hemisphere, part of the old Government Buildings which now houses part of Victoria University of Wellington's Law Faculty.\nA modernist building housing the Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa lies on the waterfront, on Cable Street. It is strengthened using base isolation \u2013 essentially seating the entire building on supports made from lead, steel and rubber that slow down the effect of an earthquake.\nOther notable buildings include Wellington Town Hall, Wellington railway station, Dominion Museum (now Massey University), Aon Centre (Wellington), Wellington Regional Stadium, and Wellington Airport at Rongotai. Leading architects include Frederick Thatcher, Frederick de Jersey Clere, W. Gray Young, Bill Alington, Ian Athfield, Roger Walker. Wellington contains many iconic sculptures and structures, such as the Bucket Fountain in Cuba Street and \"Invisible City\" by Anton Parsons on Lambton Quay. Kinetic sculptures have been commissioned, such as the Zephyrometer. This 26-metre orange spike built for movement by artist Phil Price has been described as \"tall, soaring and elegantly simple\", which \"reflects the swaying of the yacht masts in the Evans Bay Marina behind it\" and \"moves like the needle on the dial of a nautical instrument, measuring the speed of the sea or wind or vessel.\"\nWellington has many different architectural styles, such as classic Painted Ladies in Mount Victoria, Newtown and Oriental Bay, Wooden Art Deco houses spread throughout (especially further north in the Hutt Valley), the classic masonry buildings in Cuba Street, state houses particularly in the Hutt and Wellington's southern suburbs, railway houses in Ngaio and other railway-side suburbs, large modern buildings in the city centre (such as the distinctive skyscraper called the Majestic Centre) and grand Victorian buildings common in the inner city as well.\nHousing and real estate.\nThe early buildings of Wellington were mostly made from timber due to ample supply. The 1848 Marlborough earthquake destroyed most brick buildings leading to most buildings using timber. Fires tore through the city early on due to the large amount of wooden buildings and the first municipal government tried to establish a building code preventing the use of inflammable materials. The council's actions were controversial and opposed by local architects and businessmen. The regulations were gradually weakened due to lack of enforcement and a desire to keep construction busy during the Long Depression. Despite the suggestion from Charles Tringham to include regulations around earthquake susceptibility there was not any adoption of regulations designed to reduce the risk of collapse form an earthquake.\nHouse prices.\nHistoric.\nWellington experienced a real estate boom in the early 2000s and the effects of the international property bust at the start of 2007. In 2005, the market was described as \"robust\". By 2008, property values had declined by about 9.3% over a 12-month period, according to one estimate. More expensive properties declined more steeply, sometimes by as much as 20%. \"From 2004 to early 2007, rental yields were eroded and positive cash flow in property investments disappeared as house values climbed faster than rents. Then that trend reversed and yields slowly began improving\", according to two \"The New Zealand Herald\" reporters writing in May 2009. In the middle of 2009, house prices had dropped, interest rates were low, and buy-to-let property investment was again looking attractive, particularly in the Lambton precinct, according to these two reporters.\nCurrent.\nSince 2009, house prices in Wellington have increased significantly. In May 2021, the Real Estate Institute of New Zealand (REINZ) reported the median house price was $1,057,000 in Wellington City, $930,000 in Porirua, $873,500 in Lower Hutt and $828,000 in Upper Hutt, compared to a national median house price of $820,000. \nThe substantial increase in house prices has made it difficult for first home buyers to purchase a home in the city and is also credited with pushing up the house prices in neighbouring cities like Porirua. Wellington house prices peaked in February 2022, and by December 2023 had fallen by 25%.\nHousing costs have been identified as making it difficult for some professions, like nurses, to afford to live in Wellington. The median rent in Wellington has also increased significantly in recent years to $600 per week, higher even than Auckland.\nHousing quality.\nDespite the high cost of housing in the capital, the quality of housing in Wellington has been criticised as being poor. 18.4% of houses in Wellington City are sometimes or always mouldy and 24% are sometimes or always damp. Both of these are higher than the New Zealand average.\nDemographics.\nA Wellington City Council survey conducted in March 2009 found the typical central city apartment dweller was a New Zealand native aged 24 to 35 with a professional job in the downtown area, with household income higher than surrounding areas. Three-quarters (73%) walked to work or university, 13% travelled by car, 6% by bus, 2% bicycled (although 31% own bicycles), and did not travel very far since 73% worked or studied in the central city. The large majority (88%) did not have children in their apartments; 39% were couples without children; 32% were single-person households; 15% were groups of people flatting together. Most (56%) owned their apartment; 42% rented. The report continued: \"The four most important reasons for living in an apartment were given as lifestyle and city living (23%), close to work (20%), close to shops and cafes (11%) and low maintenance (11%) ... City noise and noise from neighbours were the main turnoffs for apartment dwellers (27%), followed by a lack of outdoor space (17%), living close to neighbours (9%) and apartment size and a lack of storage space (8%).\"\nHouseholds are primarily one-family, making up 66.9% of households, followed by single-person households (24.7%); there were fewer multiperson households and even fewer households containing two or more families. These counts are from the 2013 census for the Wellington region (which includes the surrounding area in addition to the four cities).\nEconomy.\nWellington Harbour ranks as one of New Zealand's chief seaports and serves both domestic and international shipping. The port handles approximately 10.5 million tonnes of cargo on an annual basis, importing petroleum products, motor vehicles, minerals and exporting meats, wood products, dairy products, wool, and fruit. Many cruise ships also use the port.\nThe Government sector has long been a mainstay of the economy, which has typically risen and fallen with it. Traditionally, its central location meant it was the location of many head offices of various sectors \u2013 particularly finance, technology and heavy industry \u2013 many of which have since relocated to Auckland following economic deregulation and privatisation.\nIn recent years, tourism, arts and culture, film, and ICT have played a bigger role in the economy. Wellington's median income is well above the average in New Zealand, and the highest of all New Zealand cities. It has a much higher proportion of people with tertiary qualifications than the national average. Major companies with their headquarters in Wellington include:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nAt the 2013 census, the largest employment industries for Wellington residents were professional, scientific and technical services (25,836 people), public administration and safety (24,336 people), health care and social assistance (17,446 people), education and training (16,550 people) and retail trade (16,203 people). In addition, Wellington is an important centre of the New Zealand film and theatre industry, and second to Auckland in terms of numbers of screen industry businesses.\nTourism.\nTourism is a major contributor to the city's economy, injecting approximately NZ$1.3\u00a0billion into the region annually and accounting for 9% of total FTE employment. The city is consistently named as New Zealanders' favourite destination in the quarterly FlyBuys Colmar Brunton Mood of the Traveller survey and it was ranked fourth in Lonely Planet Best in Travel 2011's Top 10 Cities to Visit in 2011. New Zealanders make up the largest visitor market, with 3.6\u00a0million visits each year; New Zealand visitors spend on average NZ$2.4\u00a0million a day. There are approximately 540,000 international visitors each year, who spend 3.7\u00a0million nights and NZ$436\u00a0million. The largest international visitor market is Australia, with over 210,000 visitors, spending approximately NZ$334\u00a0million annually.\nIt has been argued that the construction of the Te Papa museum helped transform Wellington into a tourist destination. Wellington is marketed as the 'coolest little capital in the world' by Positively Wellington Tourism, an award-winning regional tourism organisation set up as a council controlled organisation by Wellington City Council in 1997. The organisation's council funding comes through the Downtown Levy commercial rate. In the decade to 2010, the city saw growth of over 60% in commercial guest nights. It has been promoted through a variety of campaigns and taglines, starting with the iconic Absolutely Positively Wellington advertisements. The long-term domestic marketing strategy was a finalist in the 2011 CAANZ Media Awards.\nPopular tourist attractions include Wellington Museum, Wellington Zoo, Zealandia and Wellington Cable Car. Cruise tourism is experiencing a major boom in line with nationwide development. The 2010/11 season saw 125,000 passengers and crew visits on 60 liners. There were 80 vessels booked for visits in the 2011/12 season \u2013 estimated to inject more than NZ$31\u00a0million into the economy and representing a 74% increase in the space of two years.\nWellington is a popular conference tourism destination due to its compact nature, cultural attractions, award-winning restaurants and access to government agencies. In the year ending March 2011, there were 6,495 conference events involving nearly 800,000 delegate days; this injected approximately NZ$100\u00a0million into the economy.\nArts and culture.\nCulture.\nOwing to the work of Positively Wellington Tourism in marketing it as \"the coolest little capital\", the city has been injected into the global zeitgeist as exactly that. It has been traditionally acclaimed as New Zealand's \"cultural and creative capital\". The city is known for its coffee scene, with now-globally common foods and drinks such as the flat white perfected here. Wellington has a strong coffee culture \u2013 the city has more caf\u00e9s per capita than New York City \u2013 and was pioneered by Italian and Greek immigrants to areas such as Mount Victoria, Island Bay and Miramar. Nascent influence is derived from Ethiopian migrants. Wellington's ethnically diverse population also includes significant Malaysian, Italian, Dutch, Korean, Chinese, Greek, Indian, Samoan and indigenous Taranaki Wh\u0101nui communities. Wellington is noted for is contributions to art, cuisine and international filmmaking (with Avatar and The Lord of the Rings being largely produced in the city) among many other factors listed below. The World of Wearable Arts (WOW) is an annual event that brings lots of visitors to Wellington every year.\nMuseums and cultural institutions.\n Wellington is home to many cultural institutions, including Te Papa (the Museum of New Zealand), the National Library of New Zealand, Archives New Zealand, Wellington Museum (formerly the Wellington Museum of City and Sea), the Katherine Mansfield House and Garden (formerly Katherine Mansfield Birthplace), Colonial Cottage, the Wellington Cable Car Museum, the Reserve Bank Museum, Old St Paul's, the National War Memorial Ng\u0101 Taonga Sound and Vision, Capital E children's playspace and the Wellington City Gallery.\nFestivals.\nWellington is home to many high-profile events and cultural celebrations, including the biennial New Zealand Festival of the Arts, biennial Wellington Jazz Festival, biennial Capital E National Arts Festival for Children and major events such as World of Wearable Art, TEDxWellington, Cuba Street Carnival, Wellington On a Plate, New Zealand Fringe Festival, New Zealand International Comedy Festival, New Zealand Affordable Art Show, Out In The Square, Beervana, and Homegrown Music Festival.\nThe annual children's Artsplash Festival brings together hundreds of students from across the region. The week-long festival includes music and dance performances and the presentation of visual arts. The Performance Arcade is an annual live-art event in shipping containers on the waterfront.\nFilm.\nFilmmakers Sir Peter Jackson, Sir Richard Taylor and a growing team of creative professionals have turned the eastern suburb of Miramar into a film-making, post-production and special effects infrastructure centre, giving rise to the moniker 'Wellywood'. Jackson's companies include W\u0113t\u0101 Workshop, W\u0113t\u0101 FX, Camperdown Studios, post-production house Park Road Post, and Stone Street Studios near Wellington Airport. Films shot partly or wholly in Wellington include the \"Lord of The Rings\" trilogy, \"King Kong\" and \"Avatar\". Jackson described Wellington: \"Well, it's windy. But it's actually a lovely place, where you're pretty much surrounded by water and the bay. The city itself is quite small, but the surrounding areas are very reminiscent of the hills up in northern California, like Marin County near San Francisco and the Bay Area climate and some of the architecture. Kind of a cross between that and Hawaii.\"\nSometime Wellington directors Jane Campion and Geoff Murphy have reached the world's screens with their independent spirit. Emerging Kiwi filmmakers, like Robert Sarkies, Taika Waititi, Costa Botes and Jennifer Bush-Daumec, are extending the Wellington-based lineage and cinematic scope. There are agencies to assist film-makers with tasks such as securing permits and scouting locations.\nWellington has a large number of independent cinemas, including the Embassy Theatre, Penthouse, the Roxy and Light House, which participate in film festivals throughout the year. Wellington has one of the country's highest turn-outs for the annual New Zealand International Film Festival. There are a number of other film festivals hosted in Wellington, such as Doc Edge (documentary), the Japanese Film Festival and Show Me Shorts (short films).\nMusic.\nThe music scene has produced bands such as The Warratahs, The Mockers, The Phoenix Foundation, Shihad, Beastwars, Fly My Pretties, Rhian Sheehan, Birchville Cat Motel, Black Boned Angel, Fat Freddy's Drop, The Black Seeds, Fur Patrol, Flight of the Conchords, Connan Mockasin, Rhombus and Module, Weta, Demoniac, and DARTZ. The New Zealand School of Music was established in 2005 through a merger of the conservatory and theory programmes at Massey University and Victoria University of Wellington. New Zealand Symphony Orchestra, Nevine String Quartet and Chamber music New Zealand are based in Wellington. The city is also home to the Rodger Fox Big Band.\nTheatre and dance.\nWellington is home to BATS Theatre, Circa Theatre, the national kaupapa M\u0101ori theatre company Taki Rua, the National Theatre for Children at Capital E, the Royal New Zealand Ballet, Gryphon Theatre, and contemporary dance company Footnote.\nVenues include St James' Theatre on Courtenay Place, The Opera House on Manners Street and the Hannah Playhouse.\nTe Whaea National Dance &amp; Drama Centre, houses New Zealand's university-level schools, Toi Whakaari: New Zealand Drama School &amp; the New Zealand School of Dance, these are separate entities that share the building's facilities.\nTe Auaha the Whitireia Performing Arts Centre is downtown off Cuba Street.\nComedy.\nMany of New Zealand's prominent comedians have either come from Wellington or got their start there, such as Ginette McDonald (\"Lyn of Tawa\"), Raybon Kan, Dai Henwood, Ben Hurley, Steve Wrigley, Guy Williams, the Flight of the Conchords and the satirist John Clarke (\"Fred Dagg\").\nWellington is home to groups that perform improvised theatre and improvisational comedy, including Wellington Improvisation Troupe (WIT). Wellington hosts shows in the annual New Zealand International Comedy Festival.\nVisual arts.\nFrom 1936 to 1992, Wellington was home to the National Art Gallery of New Zealand, when it was amalgamated into Museum of New Zealand Te Papa Tongarewa. Wellington is home to the New Zealand Academy of Fine Arts and the Arts Foundation of New Zealand. The city's arts centre, Toi P\u014dneke, is a nexus of creative projects, collaborations, and multi-disciplinary production. Arts Programmes and Services Manager Eric Vaughn Holowacz and a small team based in the Abel Smith Street facility have produced ambitious initiatives such as Opening Notes, Drive by Art, and public art projects. The city is home to the experimental arts publication \"White Fungus\". The Learning Connexion provides art classes. Other visual art galleries include the City Gallery.\nCuisine.\nWellington is characterised by small dining establishments, and its caf\u00e9 culture is internationally recognised, being known for its large number of coffeehouses. Wellington restaurants offer cuisines including from Europe, Asia and Polynesia; for dishes that have a distinctly New Zealand style, there are lamb, beef, pork and venison, salmon, crayfish (lobster), Bluff oysters, p\u0101ua (abalone), mussels, scallops, pipis and tuatua (both New Zealand shellfish); k\u016bmara (sweet potato); kiwifruit and tamarillo; and pavlova, the national dessert.\nSport.\nWellington is the home to:\nGovernment.\nLocal.\nThe first local government for the city was the Wellington Borough Council, which was established in 1842 but dissolved 18 months later. In 1863 the Wellington Provincial Council formed the Wellington Town Board. The Wellington Town Board was overseen by commissioners that had the power to levy rates, manage water supply, organise road layout, and was responsible for fire prevention.\nWellington city is administered by the territorial authority of Wellington City Council. The present mayor of the Wellington City Council is Tory Whanau, who was elected in 2022.\nWellington is also part of the wider Wellington Region, administered by the Greater Wellington Region Council. The local authorities are responsible for a wide variety of public services, which include management and maintenance of local roads, and land-use planning. \nThe Wellington City Council has created two local community boards under the provisions of Part 4 of the Local Government Act 2002 for certain parts of the city:\nNational.\nWellington is covered by four general electorates: Mana, \u014ch\u0101riu, Rongotai, and Wellington Central. It is also covered by two M\u0101ori electorates: Te Tai Hau\u0101uru, and Te Tai Tonga. Each electorate returns one member to the New Zealand House of Representatives. Two general electorates are held by the Labour Party and two are held by the Green Party and the two Maori electorates are held by Te P\u0101ti M\u0101ori.\nEducation.\nWellington offers a variety of college and university programs for tertiary students:\nVictoria University of Wellington has four campuses and works with a three-trimester system (beginning March, July, and November). It enrolled 21,380 students in 2008; of these, 16,609 were full-time students. Of all students, 56% were female and 44% male. While the student body was primarily New Zealanders of European descent, 1,713 were M\u0101ori, 1,024 were Pacific students, 2,765 were international students. 5,751 degrees, diplomas and certificates were awarded. The university has 1,930 full-time employees.\nMassey University has a Wellington campus known as the \"creative campus\" and offers courses in communication and business, engineering and technology, health and well-being, and creative arts. Its school of design was established in 1886 and has research centres for studying public health, sleep, M\u0101ori health, small &amp; medium enterprises, disasters, and tertiary teaching excellence. It combined with Victoria University to create the New Zealand School of Music.\nThe University of Otago has a Wellington branch, with its Wellington School of Medicine and Health.\nWhitireia New Zealand has large campuses in Porirua, Wellington and Kapiti; the Wellington Institute of Technology and New Zealand's National Drama school, Toi Whakaari. The Wellington area has numerous primary and secondary schools.\nTransport.\nWellington is served by State Highway 1 in the west and State Highway 2 in the east, meeting at the Ngauranga Interchange north of the city centre, where SH 1 runs through the city to the airport. There are two other state highways in the wider region: State Highway 58 which provides a direct connection between the Hutt Valley and Porirua, and State Highway 59 which follows a coastal route between Linden and Mackays Crossing and was previously part of SH 1. Road access into the capital is constrained by the mountainous terrain \u2013 between Wellington and the K\u0101piti Coast, SH 1 passes through the steep and narrow Wainui Saddle, nearby SH 59 travels along the Centennial Highway, a narrow section of road between the Paek\u0101k\u0101riki Escarpment and the Tasman Sea, and between Wellington and Wairarapa SH 2 transverses the Rimutaka Ranges on a similar narrow winding road. Wellington has two motorways: the Johnsonville\u2013Porirua Motorway (largely part of SH 1, with the northernmost section part of SH 59) and the Wellington Urban Motorway (entirely part of SH 1), which in combination with a small non-motorway section in the Ngauranga Gorge connect Porirua with Wellington city. A third motorway in the wider region, the Transmission Gully Motorway forming part of the SH 1 route and officially opened on 30 March 2022, leaves the Johnsonville-Porirua Motorway at the boundary between Wellington and Porirua and provides the main route between Wellington and the wider North Island.\nBus transport in Wellington is supplied by several different operators under the banner of Metlink. Buses serve almost every part of Wellington city, with most of them running along the \"Golden Mile\" from Wellington railway station to Courtenay Place. Until October 2017, there were nine trolleybus routes, all other buses running on diesel. The trolleybus network was the last public system of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere.\nWellington lies at the southern end of the North Island Main Trunk railway (NIMT) and the Wairarapa Line, converging on Wellington railway station at the northern end of central Wellington. Two long-distance services leave from Wellington: the Capital Connection, for commuters from Palmerston North, and the Northern Explorer to Auckland.\nFour electrified suburban lines radiate from Wellington railway station to the outer suburbs to the north of Wellington \u2013 the Johnsonville Line through the hillside suburbs north of central Wellington; the K\u0101piti Line along the NIMT to Waikanae on the K\u0101piti Coast via Porirua and Paraparaumu; the Melling Line to Lower Hutt via Petone; and the Hutt Valley Line along the Wairarapa Line via Waterloo and Tait\u0101 to Upper Hutt. A diesel-hauled carriage service, the Wairarapa Connection, connects several times daily to Masterton in the Wairarapa via the Rimutaka Tunnel. Combined, these five services carry 11.64\u00a0million passengers per year.\nCentrePort Wellington is the operator of the port of Wellington, and provides infrastructure for shipping and cargo, including the commercial wharves in Wellington Harbour. It also provides port services for the Cook Strait ferries to Picton in the South Island, operated by state-owned Interislander and private Bluebridge. Local ferries connect Wellington city centre with Eastbourne and Seatoun.\nWellington Airport is south-east of the city centre. It is serviced by flights from across New Zealand, Australia, and Fiji. Flights to other international destinations require a transfer at another airport, as aircraft range is limited by Wellington's short () runway, which has become an issue in recent years regarding the Wellington region's economic performance.\nCycling in Wellington has been increasing in popularity as a mode of transport. Mode share has increased from 2% in the early 2000s to over 4% in 2013. During the 2020s, a network of cycling infrastructure has been deployed across the city.\nInfrastructure.\nElectric power.\nWellington's first public electricity supply was established in 1904, alongside the introduction of electric trams, and was originally supplied at 105\u00a0volts 80\u00a0hertz. The conversion to the now-standard 230/400\u00a0volts 50\u00a0hertz began in 1925, the same year the city was connected to the Mangahao hydroelectric scheme. Between 1924 and 1968, the city's supply was supplemented by a coal-fired power station at Evans Bay.\nToday, Wellington city is supplied from four Transpower substations: Takapu Road, Kaiwharawhara, Wilton, and Central Park (Mount Cook). Wellington Electricity owns and operates the local distribution network.\nThe city is home to two large wind farms, West Wind and Mill Creek, which combined contribute up to 213\u00a0MW of electricity to the city and the national grid.\nWhile Wellington experiences regular strong winds, and only 63% of Wellington Electricity's network is underground, the city has a very reliable power supply. In the year to March 2018, Wellington Electricity disclosed the average customer spent just 55 minutes without power due to unplanned outages.\nNatural gas.\nWellington was one of the original nine towns and cities in New Zealand to be supplied with natural gas when the Kapuni gas field in South Taranaki entered production in 1970, and a high-pressure pipeline from the field to the city was completed. The high-pressure transmission pipelines supplying Wellington are now owned and operated by First Gas, with Powerco owning and operating the medium- and low-pressure distribution pipelines within the urban area.\nThe three waters.\nThe \"three waters\" \u2013 drinking water, stormwater, and wastewater services for the Wellington metropolitan area are provided by five councils: Wellington City, Hutt, Upper Hutt and Porirua city councils, and the Greater Wellington Regional Council. However, the water assets of these councils are managed by an infrastructure asset management company, Wellington Water.\nWellington's first piped water supply came from a spring in 1867. Greater Wellington Regional Council now supplies Lower Hutt, Porirua, Upper Hutt and Wellington with up to 220 million litres a day. The water comes from Wainuiomata River (since 1884), Hutt River (1914), \u014crongorongo River (1926) and the Waiwhet\u016b Aquifer.\nThere are four wastewater treatment stations serving the Wellington metropolitan area, located at:\nThe Wellington metropolitan area faces challenges with ageing infrastructure for the three waters, and there have been some significant failures, particularly in wastewater systems. The water supply is vulnerable to severe disruption during a major earthquake, although a wide range of projects are planned to improve the resilience of the water supply and allow a limited water supply post-earthquake.\nIn May 2021, the Wellington City Council approved a 10-year plan that included expenditure of $2.7billion on water pipe maintenance and upgrades in Wellington city, and an additional $147 to $208 million for plant upgrades at the Moa Point wastewater treatment plant. In November 2023, Wellington Water noted that on-going investment of $1 billion per annum was required to address water issues across the Greater Wellington region, but that this amount was beyond the funding capacity of councils.\nMedia.\nNewspapers.\nFor many years Wellington had two daily newspapers \u2013 \"The Evening Post\" in the afternoon and \"The Dominion\" in the morning. \"The Evening Post\" was founded in 1865 by Dublin-born printer, newspaper manager and leader-writer Henry Blundell, while \"The Dominion\" was first published on 26 September 1907, the day New Zealand achieved Dominion status. The two newspapers merged in 2002 to form \"The Dominion Post\" and in April 2023 the merged newspaper was renamed \"The Post\".\nRadio.\nWellington is served by 26 full-power radio stations: 17 on FM, four on AM, and five on both FM and AM.\nThe Wellington radio market is the third-largest in New Zealand, with 392,500 listeners aged 10 and over. The largest commercial stations by share as of May 2025 are Newstalk ZB (16.3%), The Breeze (13.6%), ZM and The Rock (8.3% each), and Mai FM (6.0%).\nTelevision.\nTelevision broadcasts began in Wellington on 1 July 1961 with the launch of channel WNTV1, becoming the third New Zealand city (after Auckland and Christchurch) to receive regular television broadcasts. WNTV1's main studios were in Waring Taylor Street in central Wellington and broadcast from a transmitter atop Mount Victoria. In 1967, the Mount Victoria transmitter was replaced with a more powerful transmitter at Mount Kaukau. In November 1969, WNTV1 was networked with its counterpart stations in Auckland, Christchurch and Dunedin to form NZBC TV.\nIn 1975, the NZBC was broken up, with Wellington and Dunedin studios taking over NZBC TV as Television One while Auckland and Christchurch studios launched Television Two. At the same time, the Wellington studios moved to the new purpose-built Avalon Television Centre in Lower Hutt. In 1980, Televisions One and Two merged under a single company, Television New Zealand (TVNZ). The majority of television production moved to Auckland over the 1980s, culminating in the opening of TVNZ's new Auckland television centre in 1989.\nToday, digital terrestrial television (Freeview) is available in the city, transmitting from Mount Kaukau plus three infill transmitters at Baxters Knob, Fitzherbert, and Haywards.\nSister cities.\nWellington has sister city relationships with the following cities:\nWellington is also a \"friendly city\" with Ramallah, Palestine, and a 2023 council vote means both are expected to be sister cities in the future. Wellington also has historical ties with Chania, Greece; Harrogate, England; and \u00c7anakkale, Turkey.\nWellington is the antipode of the municipality of Alaejos, Spain.\nWellington metropolitan area.\nThe wider metropolitan area for Wellington encompasses areas administered by four local authorities: Wellington City itself, on the peninsula between Cook Strait and Wellington Harbour; Porirua City on Porirua Harbour to the north, notable for its large M\u0101ori and Pasifika communities; and Lower Hutt City and Upper Hutt City, largely suburban areas to the northeast, together known as the Hutt Valley. Depending on the source, the Wellington metro area may include Waikanae, Paraparaumu and Paek\u0101k\u0101riki on the K\u0101piti Coast, and/or Featherston and Greytown in the Wairarapa.\nThe urban areas of the four local authorities have a combined population of residents as of June 2025.\nThe four cities comprising the Wellington metropolitan area have a total population of (June 2025), with the urban area containing % of that population. The remaining areas are largely mountainous and sparsely farmed or parkland and are outside the urban area boundary. More than most cities, life is dominated by its central business district (CBD). Approximately 62,000 people work in the CBD, only 4,000 fewer than work in Auckland's CBD, despite that city having four times the population.\nThe Waikanae-Paraparaumu-Paek\u0101k\u0101riki combined urban area in the K\u0101piti Coast district is sometimes included in the Wellington metro area due to its exurban nature and strong transport links with Wellington. If included as part of the Wellington metro, Waikanae-Paraparaumu-Paek\u0101k\u0101riki would add to the population (as of June 2025).\nFeatherston and Greytown in the Wairarapa are rarely considered part of the Wellington metropolitan area, being physically separated from the rest of the metropolitan area by the Remutaka Range. However, both have significant proportions of their employed population working in Wellington city and the Hutt Valley (36.1% and 17.1% in 2006 respectively) and are considered part of the Wellington functional urban area by Statistics New Zealand.\nThe four urban areas combined had a usual resident population of 401,850 at the 2018 New Zealand census, an increase of 26,307 people (7.0%) since the 2013 census, and an increase of 42,726 people (11.9%) since the 2006 census. There were 196,911 males and 204,936 females, giving a sex ratio of 0.961 males per female. Of the total population, 74,892 people (18.6%) were aged up to 15 years, 93,966 (23.4%) were 15 to 29, 185,052 (46.1%) were 30 to 64, and 47,952 (11.9%) were 65 or older.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33805", "revid": "27823944", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33805", "title": "Wookey Hole Caves", "text": "Series of limestone caverns in Somerset, England\nWookey Hole Caves () are a series of limestone caverns, a show cave and tourist attraction in the village of Wookey Hole on the southern edge of the Mendip Hills near Wells in Somerset, England. The River Axe flows through the cave. It is a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) for both biological and geological reasons. Wookey Hole cave is a \"solutional cave\", one that is formed by a process of weathering in which the natural acid in groundwater dissolves the rocks. Some water originates as rain that flows into streams on impervious rocks on the plateau before sinking at the limestone boundary into cave systems such as Swildon's Hole, Eastwater Cavern and St Cuthbert's Swallet; the rest is rain that percolates directly through the limestone. The temperature in the caves is a constant .\nThe caves were used as dens by cave hyenas. The caves have been used by both modern humans and Neanderthals over a period spanning around 45,000 years, demonstrated by the discovery of tools from the Palaeolithic period, along with butchered animal remains. Evidence of Stone and Iron Age occupation continued into Roman Britain. A corn-grinding mill operated on the resurgent waters of the River Axe as early as the Domesday survey of 1086. The waters of the river are used in a handmade paper mill, the oldest extant in Britain, which began operations circa 1610. The low, constant temperature of the caves means that they can be used for maturing Cheddar cheese.\nThe caves were the site of the first cave dives in Britain, undertaken by Jack Sheppard, Graham Balcombe and Penelope Powell in the 1930s. Since then, divers have explored the extensive network of chambers developing breathing apparatus and novel techniques in the process. The full extent of the cave system is still unknown with approximately , including 25 chambers, having been explored. Part of the cave system opened as a show cave in 1927 following exploratory work by Herbert E. Balch. As a tourist attraction it has been owned by Madame Tussauds and, most recently, the circus owner Gerry Cottle. The cave is notable for the Witch of Wookey Hole, a roughly human-shaped stalagmite that legend says is a witch turned to stone by a monk from Glastonbury. It has also been used as a location for film and television productions, including the \"Doctor Who\" serial \"Revenge of the Cybermen\".\nDescription.\nThe show cave consists of a dry gallery connecting three large chambers, the first of which contains the Witch of Wookey formation. There are various high-level passages leading off from these chambers, with two small exits above the tourist entrance. The River Axe is formed by the water entering the cave systems and flows through the third and first chambers, from which it flows to the resurgence, through two sumps long, where it leaves the cave and enters the open air.\nThe river is maintained at an artificially high level and falls a couple of metres when a sluice is lowered to allow access to the fourth and fifth chambers, two small air spaces. Normally, however, these are only accessible by cave diving. Beyond the fifth chamber a roomy submerged route may be followed for a further , passing under three large rifts with air spaces, to surface in the ninth chamber\u00a0\u2013 a roomy chamber over long and the same high. High-level passages here lead to a former resurgence, now blocked, some above the current resurgence.\nAn artificial tunnel leading off from the third chamber allows show cave visitors to cross the seventh and eighth chambers on bridges, and skirt around the ninth chamber on a walkway, before exiting near the resurgence. A second excavated tunnel from the ninth chamber allows visitors to visit the 20th chamber.\nFrom the ninth chamber, a dive of about passes almost immediately from the Dolomitic Conglomerate into the limestone, and descends steadily for to a depth of under a couple of high rifts with airbells (enclosed air spaces between water and roof) before reaching air space in the 19th chamber. The 20th chamber is at the top of a large boulder slope\u00a0\u2013 long, wide, and high. From here a roomy passage some long ascends towards a now-blocked fossil resurgence in the Ebbor Gorge. The total length of passages in this area is about . A passage near the end connects with Chamber 24 near Sting Corner.\nThe continuation is found in the 19th chamber, where of passage descending to a depth of surfaces in the 22nd chamber\u00a0\u2013 of dry passages at various levels with a static pool. The way on is within this pool at a depth of where of passage ascends to surface in the 23rd chamber\u00a0\u2013 of large passage, followed by four short sumps that arrive in the 24th chamber. This is of what is described in the guidebook as \"magnificent\" river passage, high and wide, which finishes at a cascade falling from a long lake. There are also more than of high-level passages above the river. The way on continues underwater for some reaching a depth of before surfacing in the 25th chamber\u00a0\u2013 called the Lake of Gloom because of its thick mud deposits. The sump at the end of this has been dived for to a maximum depth of before gravel chokes prevented further progress. The end is about northeast of the entrance.\nHydrology and geology.\nWookey Hole is on the southern escarpment of the Mendip Hills, and is the resurgence that drains the southern flanks of North Hill and Pen Hill. It is the second-largest resurgence on Mendip, with an estimated catchment area of , and an average discharge of per second. Some of the water is allogenic in origin i.e. drained off non-limestone rocks, collecting as streams on the surface before sinking at or near the Lower Limestone Shale\u00a0\u2014 Black Rock Limestone boundary, often through swallets such as Plantation Swallet near St Cuthbert's lead works between the Hunter's Lodge Inn and Priddy Pools. It then passes through major cave systems such as Swildon's Hole, Eastwater Cavern and St Cuthbert's Swallet, around Priddy, but 95% is autogenic water that has percolated directly into the limestone.\nThe southern slopes of the Mendip Hills largely follow the flanks of an anticline, a fold in the rock that is convex upwards and has its oldest beds at its core. On the Mendips the crest of the anticline is truncated by erosion, forming a plateau. The rock strata here dip 10\u201315 degrees to the southwest. The outer slopes are mainly of Carboniferous Limestone, with Devonian age Old Red Sandstone exposed as an inlier at the centre. Wookey Hole is a solutional cave, mainly formed in the limestone by chemical weathering whereby naturally acidic groundwater dissolves the carbonate rocks, but it is unique in that the first part of the cave is formed in Triassic Dolomitic Conglomerate, a well-cemented fossil limestone scree representing the infill of a Triassic valley.\nThe cave was formed under phreatic conditions i.e. below the local water table, but lowering base levels to which the subterranean drainage was flowing resulted in some passages being abandoned by the river, and there is evidence of a number of abandoned resurgences. In particular, the passages in the 20th chamber are interpreted as a former Vauclusian spring, the waters of which once surfaced in the Ebbor Gorge. It is uncertain whether that was the original rising or whether it formed when the main rising at Wookey was blocked.\nThe current resurgence is located close to the base of the Dolomitic Conglomerate at the head of a short gorge formed by headward erosion with subsequent cavern collapse. The morphology of the passages is determined by the rock strata in which they are formed. The streamway in the outer part of the cave system that is formed within the Dolomitic Conglomerate is characterised by shallow loops linking low bedding chambers, or tall narrow passages, known as 'rifts', developed by phreatic solutional enlargement of fractured rifts. The streamway in the inner part of the system formed within the limestone is characterised by deep phreatic loops reaching depths as much as , with the water flowing down-dip along bedding planes and rising up enlarged joints. In the far reaches of the cave the passages descend to below sea level.\nHistory.\nWitcombe suggests that the name \"Wookey\" is derived from the Celtic (Welsh) for 'cave', \"ogo\" or \"ogof\", which gave the early names for this cave of \"Ochie\" or \"Ochy\". \"Hole\" is Anglo-Saxon for cave, which is itself of Latin/Norman derivation. Therefore, the name \"Wookey Hole Cave\" basically means \"cave cave cave\". Eilert Ekwall gives an alternative derivation of \"Wookey\" from the Old English \"wocig\", meaning a noose or snare for animals. By the 18th century the caves were commonly known as \"Okey Hole\". It was known as such when it was first described in print in 1681 by the geologist John Beaumont.\nFossils of a range of animals have been found including cave lion (\"Panthera spelaea\"), cave hyena (\"Crocuta crocuta spelaea\") and badger (\"Meles meles\"). Cave hyenas are thought to have used Wookey Hole as a den. Wookey Hole was occupied by humans in the Iron Age, possibly around 250\u2013300 BC, while nearby Hyena Cave was occupied by Stone Age hunters. Badger Hole and Rhinoceros Hole are two dry caves on the slopes above the Wookey ravine near the Wookey Hole resurgence and contain in situ cave sediments laid down during the Ice Age. Just outside the cave the foundations of a 1st-century hut have been identified. These had been built on during the Roman era up to the end of the 4th century.\nIn 1544 products of Roman lead working in the area were discovered. The lead mines across the Mendips have produced contamination of the water emerging from the caverns at Wookey Hole. The lead in the water is believed to have affected the quality of the paper produced.\nThe designation of the water catchment area for Wookey Hole, covering a large area of the Mendip Hills as far away as Priddy Pools, as a Site of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) during the 1970s and 1980s was controversial because of conflicts of interest between land owners, recreational cavers and cave scientists. Initial proposals put forward by the Council of Southern Caving Clubs (part of the British Caving Association) were that SSSI designation, which would restrict what farmers and other landowners were allowed to do, would cover the entire catchment area. This was opposed as being too restrictive and difficult to enforce. It was argued that agricultural use of fields not directly in contact with cave entrances would have little detrimental effect on the caves themselves. There was also debate about which caves and cave features should be considered \"important\". The final settlement resulted in a smaller area being designated and many agricultural practices being removed from the list of proscribed \"Potentially Damaging Operations\".\nThe entrance weir and sluice gate servicing the paper mill was built about 1852. The tunnel excavated from the third chamber to the ninth chamber and then out to daylight was dug in 1974\u20131975 by ex-coal miners from the Radstock area. The show cave was further extended in 2015 by excavating a tunnel from the ninth chamber to the 20th chamber.\nThe constant temperature of in the caves is used by Ford Farm of Dorset to mature Cheddar cheese in the 'Cheese Tunnel'\u00a0\u2013 an excavated side tunnel between the ninth chamber and the exit to the show cave.\nCave archaeology.\nArchaeological investigations were undertaken from 1859 to 1874 by William Boyd Dawkins, who moved to Somerset to study classics with the vicar of Wookey. On hearing of the discovery of bones by local workmen, he led excavations in the area of the hyena den. His work led to the discovery of the first evidence for the use by Paleolithic humans in the caves of the Mendip Hills. Middle Paleolithic tools thought to have been created by Neanderthals been found in the cave. These are thought to date to Marine Isotope Stage 3 (around 57-29,000 years ago). Most Neanderthal artifacts at Wookey Hole have been found in the Hyena Den, generally near the entrance, which shows evidence of on-site knapping. An incised red deer tooth found in association with these tools has a radiocarbon age of around 40,400\u00b11600 years (though this age is uncalibrated and thus not true calendar years).\nHerbert E. Balch continued the work from 1904 to 1914, when he led excavations of the entrance passage (1904\u20131915), Witch's Kitchen (the first chamber) and Hell's Ladder (1926\u20131927) and the Badger Hole (1938\u20131954), where Roman coins from the 3rd century were discovered along with Aurignacian flint implements. Rhinoceros Hole was scheduled as an ancient monument in 1992. The 1911 work found of stratification, mostly dating from the Iron Age and sealed into place by Romano-British artefacts. Finds included a silver coin of Marcia (124\u00a0BC), pottery, weapons and tools, bronze ornaments, and Roman coins from Vespasian to Valentinian II (1st to 4th centuries).\nThe work was continued, first by E. J. Mason from 1946 to 1949, and then by G. R. Morgan in 1972. Later work led by Edgar Kingsley Tratman explored the human occupation of Rhinoceros Hole, and showed that the fourth chamber of the great cave was a Romano-British cemetery. During excavations in 1954\u20131957 at Hole Ground, just outside the entrance to the cave, the foundations of a 1st-century hut and Iron Age pottery were seen. These were covered by the foundations of Roman buildings, dating from the 1st to the late 4th century.\nExploration.\nThe cave as far as the third chamber and side galleries has been known since at least the Iron Age period. Before the construction of a dam at the resurgence to feed water to the paper mill downstream, two more chambers (the Fourth and Fifth) were accessible. Further upstream the way lies underwater. Diving was first tried by the Cave Diving Group under the leadership of Graham Balcombe in 1935. With equipment on loan from Siebe Gorman, he and Penelope (\"Mossy\") Powell penetrated into the cave, reaching the seventh chamber, using standard diving dress. The events marked the first successful cave dives in Britain.\nDiving at Wookey resumed in early June 1946 when Balcombe used his homemade respirator and waterproof suit to explore the region between the resurgence and first chamber, as well as the underground course of the river between the third and first chambers. During these dives, the Romano-British remains were found and archaeological work dominated the early dives in the cave. The large ninth chamber was first entered on 24 April 1948 by Balcombe and Don Coase. Using this as an advance dive base, the 10th and then 11th chambers were discovered. The way on, however, was too deep for divers breathing pure oxygen from a closed-circuit rebreather. The cave claimed its first life on 9 April 1949 when Gordon Marriott lost his life returning from the ninth chamber. Another fatality occurred in 1981 when Keith Potter was drowned on a routine dive further upstream.\nFurther progress required apparatus that could overcome the depth limitation of breathing pure oxygen. In 1955, using an aqualung and swimming with fins, Bob Davies reached the bottom of the 11th chamber at depth in clear water and discovered the 12th and 13th chambers. He got separated from his guideline and the other two divers in the 11th chamber, ending up spending three hours trapped in the 13th chamber, and had much trouble getting back to safety. Opinion hardened against the use of the short-duration aqualung in favour of longer-duration closed-circuit equipment. Likewise, the traditional approach of walking along the bottom was preferred over swimming. Employing semi-closed circuit nitrogen-oxygen rebreathers, between 1957 and 1960 John Buxton and Oliver Wells went on to reach the elbow of the sump upstream from the ninth chamber at a depth of . This was at a point known as \"The Slot\", the way on being too deep for the gas mixture they were breathing.\nA six-year hiatus ensued while open circuit air diving became established, along with free-swimming and the use of neoprene wetsuits. The new generation of cave diver was now more mobile above and under water and able to dive deeper. Using this approach, Dave Savage was able to reach air surface in the 18th chamber (chambers did not have to have air spaces to be so named; they were the limits of each exploration) in May 1966. A brief lull in exploration occurred while the mess of guidelines laid from the ninth chamber was sorted out before John Parker progressed first to the large, dry, inlet passage of the 20th chamber, and thence followed the River Axe upstream on a dive covering at a maximum depth of to the 22nd chamber where the way on appeared to be lost.\nMeanwhile, climbing operations in the ninth chamber found an abandoned outlet passage that terminated very close to the surface, as well as a dry overland route downstream through the higher levels of the eighth, seventh and sixth chambers as far as the fifth chamber. These discoveries were used to enable the show cave to be extended into the ninth chamber and the cave divers to start directly from here, bypassing the dive from the third chamber onwards. The way on from the 22nd chamber was at last found by Colin Edmond and Martyn Farr in February 1976 and was explored until the line ran out. A few days later Geoff Yeadon and Oliver Statham somewhat controversially reached the 23rd chamber after laying just a further of line. After a further three short dives they surfaced in the 24th chamber to be confronted by what Statham described as \"a magnificent sight\u2014the whole of the River Axe pouring down a passage high by wide\" terminating in a blue lake after . This lake was dived by Farr a few days later for at a maximum depth of to emerge in the 25th chamber, a desolate, muddy place named \"The Lake of Gloom\".\nThe 25th chamber represents the furthest upstream air surface in Wookey Hole Cave. From here the River Axe rises up from a deep sump where progressive depth records for cave diving in the British Isles have been set: firstly by Farr () in 1977, then Rob Parker () in 1985, and finally by John Volanthen and Rick Stanton () in 2004. The pair returned again in 2005 to explore the sump to a depth of , setting a new British Isles depth record for cave diving. This record was broken in 2008 by Polish explorer Artur Koz\u0142owski, then later again by Michal Marek, on dives in Pollatoomary in Ireland.\nTaking advantage of the tunnel driven through to Chamber 20 by the show cave management in 2015, a team began seriously to investigate the leads in that area. One small passage was pushed to a sump that was dived through to Sting Corner in Chamber 24. In 2020 a dry connection was made to the same location.\nDuring 1996\u20131997 water samples were collected at various points throughout the caves and showed different chemical compositions. Results showed that the \"Unknown Junction\", from where water flows to the static sump in the 22nd chamber by a different route from the majority of the River Axe, is upstream of the sump in the 25th.\nWitch of Wookey Hole.\nThere are old legends of a \"witch of Wookey Hole\", which are still preserved in the name of a stalagmite in the first chamber of the caves. The story has several different versions with the same basic features:\nA man from Glastonbury is engaged to a young woman from Wookey. A witch living in Wookey Hole Caves curses the romance so that it fails. The man, now a monk, seeks revenge on this witch who\u2014having been jilted herself\u2014frequently spoils budding relationships. The monk stalks the witch into the cave and she hides in a dark corner near one of the underground rivers. The monk blesses the water and splashes some of it at the dark parts of the cave where the witch was hiding. The blessed water immediately petrifies the witch, and she remains in the cave to this day.\nA 1000-year-old skeleton was discovered in the caves by Balch in 1912, and has also traditionally been linked to the legendary witch, although analysis indicated that they are the remains of a male aged between 25 and 35. The remains have been part of the collection of the Wells and Mendip Museum, founded by Balch, since they were excavated, though in 2004 the owner of the caves said that he wanted them to be returned to Wookey Hole.\nIt was partly the legend of the witch that prompted TV's \"Most Haunted\" team to visit Wookey Hole Caves and Mill to explore the location in depth, searching for evidence of paranormal activity. The show, which aired on 10 March 2009, was the last episode transmitted in series 11 of the show's run on the satellite and cable TV channel Living. In 2009, a new actress to play the 'witch' was chosen by Wookey Hole Ltd amid much media interest. Carole Bohanan in the role of Carla Calamity was selected from over 3,000 applicants.\nTourism.\nThe cave was first opened to the public by the owner Captain G.W. Hodgkinson in 1927 following preparatory work by Balch. Three years later, John Cowper Powys wrote of the caves in the novel \"A Glastonbury Romance\". Hodgkinson took offence at the portrayal of his fictional equivalent, initiating a costly libel suit.\nThe current paper mill building, whose water wheel is powered by a small canal from the river, dates from around 1860 and is a Grade II listed building. The commercial production of handmade paper ceased in February 2008 after owner Gerry Cottle concluded there was no longer a market for the product, and therefore sold most of the historic machinery. Visitors to the site are still able to watch a short video of the paper being made from cotton. Other attractions include the dinosaur valley, a small museum about the cave and cave diving, a theatre with circus shows, a house of mirrors and penny arcades.\nIn 1956, Olive Hodgkinson, a cave guide whose husband's family owned the caves for over 500 years, was a contestant on \"What's My Line?\"\nIn the late 1950s, the caves were photographed by Stanley Long of VistaScreen, to be sold as both souvenirs and as mail-order stereoviews.\nThe cave and mill were joined, after purchase, by Madame Tussauds in 1973 and operated together as a tourist attraction until there was a management team buyout in 1989. A collection of fairground art of Wookey Hole was sold in 1997 at Christie's. The present owner is the former circus proprietor Gerry Cottle, who has introduced a circus school.\nThe cave was used for the filming of episodes of the BBC TV series \"Doctor Who\": the serial \"Revenge of the Cybermen\" (1975) starring Tom Baker. This has since been referenced in the comedy of \"The League of Gentlemen\". The cave was also used in the filming of the British series \"Blake's 7\" (1978) and \"Robin of Sherwood\" (1983). The caves were used again for \"Doctor Who\" in \"The End of Time\" (2009), including a scene with the Doctor sharing thoughts and visions with the Ood.\nIn 2005, the museum reported that a Dalek prop had gone missing from its collection, and that they had received a ransom note and a detached plunger from the \"Guardians of the Planet Earth\". The prop was later recovered from Glastonbury Tor after thieves had supposedly considered it \"too hot\". Cottle denied that this was a publicity stunt.\nOn 1 August 2006, CNN reported that Barney, a Doberman Pinscher employed as a security dog at Wookey Hole, had destroyed parts of a valuable collection of teddy bears, including one which had belonged to Elvis Presley, which was estimated to be worth \u00a340,000 (US$75,000). The insurance company insuring the exhibition of stuffed animals had supposedly insisted on having guard dog protection. Cottle later admitted that he had invented this story as a publicity stunt, and no such bear had ever been owned by the museum.\nIn February 2009 Cottle turned the Victorian bowling green next to the caves into a crazy golf course without first obtaining planning permission.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33807", "revid": "50999809", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33807", "title": "Walter Gropius", "text": "German-American architect (1883\u20131969)\nWalter Adolph Georg Gropius (; 18 May 1883 \u2013 5 July 1969) was a German-American architect and founder of the Bauhaus School, who is widely regarded as one of the pioneering masters of modernist architecture. He was a founder of Bauhaus in Weimar and taught there for several years, becoming known as a leading proponent of the International Style. Gropius emigrated from Germany to England in 1934 and from England to the United States in 1937, where he spent much of the rest of his life teaching at the Harvard Graduate School of Design. In the United States he worked on several projects with Marcel Breuer and with the firm The Architects Collaborative, of which he was a founding partner. In 1959, he won the AIA Gold Medal, one of the most prestigious awards in architecture.\nEarly life and family.\nBorn in Berlin, Walter Gropius was the third child of Walter Adolph Gropius and Manon Auguste Pauline Scharnweber (1855\u20131933), daughter of the Prussian politician Georg Scharnweber (1816\u20131894). Walter's great-uncle Martin Gropius (1824\u20131880) was the architect of the Kunstgewerbemuseum in Berlin and a follower of Karl Friedrich Schinkel, with whom Walter's great-grandfather Carl Gropius, who fought under Field Marshal Gebhard Leberecht von Bl\u00fccher at the Battle of Waterloo, had shared a flat as a bachelor.\n \nIn 1915, Gropius married Alma Mahler (1879\u20131964), widow of Gustav Mahler. Walter and Alma's daughter, named Manon after Walter's mother, was born in 1916. When Manon died of polio at age 18, in 1935, composer Alban Berg wrote his Violin Concerto in memory of her (it is inscribed \"to the memory of an angel\"). Gropius and Mahler divorced in 1920 (She had by that time established a relationship with Franz Werfel, whom she later married).\nGropius married Ilse Frank, known as Ise, on 16 October 1923; they remained together until his death in 1969. The couple adopted Beate Frank known as Ati, the orphaned daughter of Ise's sister Hertha. Ise Gropius died on 9 June 1983 in Lexington, Massachusetts.\nWalter's sister Manon Burchard (1880\u20131975) is the great-grandmother of the German film and theater actresses Marie Burchard and Bettina Burchard, and of the curator and art historian Wolf Burchard.\nCareer.\nEarly career (1908\u20131914).\nIn 1908, after studying architecture in Munich and Berlin for four semesters, Gropius joined the office of the architect and industrial designer Peter Behrens, one of the first members of the utilitarian school. His fellow employees at this time included Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, Le Corbusier, and Dietrich Marcks.\nGropius left the firm of Behrens in 1910 and established a practice in Berlin with fellow employee Adolf Meyer. Together they share credit for one of the pioneering modernist buildings created during this period: the Faguswerk in Alfeld-an-der-Leine, Germany, a shoe last factory. Although Gropius and Meyer only designed the facade, the glass curtain walls of this building demonstrated both the modernist principle that form reflects function and Gropius's concern with providing healthful conditions for the working class.\nThe factory is now regarded as one of the crucial founding monuments of European modernism. Gropius was commissioned in 1913 to design a car for the Prussian Railroad Locomotive Works in K\u00f6nigsberg. This locomotive was unique and the first of its kind in Germany and perhaps in Europe.\nOther works of this early period include the office and factory building for the Werkbund Exhibition (1914) in Cologne.\nGropius published an article about \"The Development of Industrial Buildings\" in 1913, which included about a dozen photographs of factories and grain elevators in North America. A very influential text, this article had a strong influence on other European modernists, including Le Corbusier and Erich Mendelsohn, both of whom reprinted Gropius's grain elevator pictures between 1920 and 1930.\nGropius's career was interrupted by the outbreak of World War I in 1914. He was drafted in August 1914 and served as a sergeant major at the Western front during the war years (getting wounded and almost killed) and then as a lieutenant in the signal corps. Gropius was awarded the Iron Cross twice&lt;ref name=\"http://www.architectural-review.com\"&gt;Paul Davies (30 April 2013), http:// . \"Architectural Review\".&lt;/ref&gt; (\"when it still meant something,\" he confided to his friend Chester Nagel) after fighting for four years. Gropius then, like his father and his great-uncle Martin Gropius before him, became an architect.\nBauhaus period (1919\u20131932).\nGropius's career advanced in the postwar period. Henry van de Velde, the master of the Grand-Ducal Saxon School of Arts and Crafts in Weimar was asked to step down in 1915 due to his Belgian nationality. His recommendation for Gropius to succeed him led eventually to Gropius's appointment as master of the school in 1919. It was this academy which Gropius transformed into the world-famous Bauhaus (a.k.a. Gropius School of Arts), attracting a faculty that included Paul Klee, Johannes Itten, Josef Albers, Herbert Bayer, L\u00e1szl\u00f3 Moholy-Nagy, Otto Bartning and Wassily Kandinsky.\nIn principle, the Bauhaus represented an opportunity to extend beauty and quality to every home through well designed industrially produced objects. The Bauhaus program was experimental and the emphasis was theoretical. One example product of the Bauhaus was the armchair F 51, designed for the Bauhaus's directors room in 1920 \u2013 nowadays a re-edition in the market, manufactured by the German company TECTA/Lauenfoerde.\nIn 1919, Gropius was involved in the Glass Chain utopian expressionist correspondence under the pseudonym \"Mass.\" Usually more notable for his functionalist approach, the \"Monument to the March Dead\", designed in 1919 and executed in 1920, indicates that expressionism was an influence on him at that time. In 1920, the Bauhaus was given its first major commission that would utilize almost all of the workshops in the school. This commission was for a house for Adolf Sommerfeld made from wood. The architectural designs for the house came from Gropius and Adolf Meyer. The Sommerfeld House was completed in 1921.\nIn 1923, Gropius designed his famous door handles, now considered an icon of 20th-century design and often listed as one of the most influential designs to emerge from Bauhaus. Facing political and financial difficulties in Weimar, Gropius and the Bauhaus moved to Dessau in 1925 following an offer from the city. Gropius designed the new Bauhaus Dessau school building in 1925\u201326 on commission from the city of Dessau. He collaborated with Carl Fieger, Ernst Neufert and others within his private architectural practice. Gropius also designed the Master Houses (Meisterh\u00e4user) (1925\u20131926) in Dessau, along with the T\u00f6rten Housing Estate (Siedlung Dessau-T\u00f6rten) which was built from 1926 to 1928. In 1927 he designed the Dessau City Employment office (Arbeitsamt), but left the Bauhaus and Dessau before construction began. The City Employment office was completed in 1929. He also designed large-scale housing projects in Berlin, Karlsruhe that were major contributions to the New Objectivity movement, including a contribution to the Siemensstadt project in Berlin.\nGropius left the Bauhaus in 1928 and moved to Berlin. Hannes Meyer took over the role of Bauhaus director. His work was also part of the architecture event in the art competition at the 1932 Summer Olympics.\nEngland (1934\u20131937).\nThe rise of Hitler in the 1930s would soon drive Gropius out of Germany. Before that, however, he did accept an invitation in early 1933 to compete for the design of the new Reichsbank building and submitted a detailed plan. He also designed furniture, cars, high-rise housing developments Siedlung and an unrealized Palace of the Soviets in Moscow.\nGropius was able to leave Nazi Germany in 1934 with the help of Maxwell Fry on the pretext of making a temporary visit to Italy for a film propaganda festival; he then fled to the United Kingdom to avoid the fascist powers of Europe. Although not Jewish, his association with \"degenerate\" modern art despised by the Nazis meant he was obliged to emigrate when commissions dried up. He lived and worked in the artists' community associated with Herbert Read in Hampstead, London, as part of the Isokon group.\nUnited States (from 1937).\nGropius and his wife Ilse (or Ise) arrived in the United States in February 1937, while their twelve-year-old daughter, Ati, finished the school year in England. The house the Gropiuses built for themselves in 1938 in Lincoln, Massachusetts (now known as Gropius House) was influential in bringing International Modernism to the US, but Gropius disliked the term: \"I made it a point to absorb into my own conception those features of the New England architectural tradition that I found still alive and adequate.\" In designing his house, Gropius used the approach developed at the Bauhaus. The Gropiuses believed their house could embody architectural qualities similar to those practiced today, such as simplicity, economy, and aesthetic beauty.\nHelen Storrow, a banker's wife and philanthropist, became Gropius's benefactor when she invested a portion of her land and wealth for the architect's home. She was so satisfied with the result that she gave more land and financial support to four other professors, two of whom Gropius designed homes for. With the Bauhaus philosophy in mind, every aspect of the homes and their surrounding landscapes was planned for maximum efficiency and simplicity. Gropius's house received a huge response and was declared a National Landmark in 2000.\nGropius and his Bauhaus prot\u00e9g\u00e9 Marcel Breuer both moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts, to teach at the Harvard Graduate School of Design (1937\u20131952) and collaborate on projects including The Alan I W Frank House in Pittsburgh and the company-town Aluminum City Terrace project in New Kensington, Pennsylvania, before their professional split. In 1938 he was appointed Chair of the Department of Architecture, a post he held until his retirement in 1952.&lt;ref name=\"http://www.britannica.com\"&gt;http:// . Encyclop\u00e6dia Britannica.&lt;/ref&gt; Gropius also sat on the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) Visiting Committee at the end of his career. The well-known architect designed the Richards and Child residence halls on the Harvard campus that were built in the 1950s. In 1944, he became a naturalized citizen of the United States.\nGropius was one of several refugee German architects who provided information to confirm the typical construction of German houses to the RE8 research department set up by the British Air Ministry. This was used to improve the effectiveness of air raids on German cities by the Bomber Command of the Royal Air Force in World War II. The research was to discover the most efficient way of setting fire to houses with incendiary bombs during bombing raids. The findings were used in planning raids such as the bombing of Hamburg in July 1943.\nThe Architects Collaborative.\nIn 1945, Gropius was asked by the young founding members of The Architects Collaborative (TAC) to join as their senior partner. TAC represented a manifestation of his lifelong belief in the significance of teamwork, which he had already successfully introduced at the Bauhaus. Based in Cambridge, the original TAC partners included Norman C. Fletcher, Jean B. Fletcher, John C. Harkness, Sarah P. Harkness, Robert S. MacMillan, Louis A. MacMillen, and Benjamin C. Thompson. Among TAC's earliest works were two residential housing developments in Lexington, Massachusetts: Six Moon Hill and Five Fields. Each incorporated contemporary design ideas, reasonable cost, and practical thinking about how to support community life. Another early TAC work is the Graduate Center of Harvard University in Cambridge (1949/50).&lt;ref name=\"http://bauhaus-online.de\"&gt;http:// . bauhaus-online.de.&lt;/ref&gt; TAC would become one of the most well-known and respected architectural firms in the world before it closed its doors amidst financial problems in 1995.\nIn 1967, Gropius was elected into the National Academy of Design as an Associate member and became a full Academician in 1968.\nDeath.\nGropius died on 5 July 1969, in Boston, Massachusetts, aged 86. He had been diagnosed with inflammation of the glands, and was admitted to hospital on 7 June. After an operation was performed successfully on 15 June, there was hope of a full recovery. Gropius described himself as a \"tough old bird\", and continued to make progress for about a week. However, his lungs became congested and could not supply proper amounts of oxygen to the blood and brain. He lost consciousness, and died in his sleep.\nLegacy.\nToday, Gropius is remembered not only by his various buildings but also by the district of Gropiusstadt in Berlin. In the early 1990s, a series of books entitled The Walter Gropius Archive was published covering his entire architectural career. The CD audiobook \"Bauhaus Reviewed 1919\u201333\" includes a lengthy English Language interview with Gropius.\nUpon his death his widow, Ise Gropius, arranged to have his collection of papers divided into early and late papers. Both parts were photographed with funds provided by the Thyssen Foundation. The late papers, relating to Gropius's career after 1937, and the photos of the early ones, then went to the Houghton Library at Harvard University; the early papers and photos of the late papers went to the Bauhaus Archiv, then in Darmstadt, since reestablished in Berlin. Mrs. Gropius also deeded the Gropius House in Lincoln to Historic New England in 1980, now a house museum. The Gropius House was added to the National Register of Historic Places in 1988 and is now available to the public for tours.\nBauhaus Center Tel Aviv in the White City recognizes the greatest concentration of Bauhaus buildings in the world.\nIn 1959, he received the AIA Gold Medal. On 17 May 2008, Google Doodle commemorated Walter Gropius' 125th birthday.\nIn 1996, the Bauhaus Building and the Master Houses were added to list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites.\nSelected buildings.\nNB: The building in Niederkirchnerstra\u00dfe, Berlin known as the Gropius-Bau is named for Gropius's great-uncle, Martin Gropius, and is not associated with the Bauhaus.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33808", "revid": "194203", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33808", "title": "William Burroughs", "text": ""}
{"id": "33809", "revid": "50906787", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33809", "title": "Walkman", "text": "Series of portable media players by Sony\n is a brand of portable audio players manufactured by Sony since 1979. It was originally introduced as a portable cassette player and later expanded to include a range of portable audio products. Since 2011, the brand has referred exclusively to digital flash memory players.\nThe Walkman became widely popular during the 1980s for its portable design and private listening experience. It influenced popular culture by promoting individualized music consumption and supporting activities such as aerobics. Its widespread use gave rise to the \"Walkman effect,\" a term describing how portable music devices and headphones allow listeners to control their sonic environment. In 1986, \"Walkman\" was added to the Oxford English Dictionary, and in some markets the term became a genericized trademark for portable audio players. The Walkman also contributed to the widespread adoption of the Compact Cassette format, which surpassed vinyl record sales in 1983. Sony sold approximately 220 million cassette-based Walkman units before ending production in 2010.\nSony also achieved commercial success with its CD-based models (originally marketed as the Discman, later rebranded as the CD Walkman), and by 2010, cumulative sales of all Walkman devices had reached around 400 million units. However, despite extensive marketing efforts, MiniDisc Walkman devices remained a niche product. In the digital era, Sony was unable to replicate the brand\u2019s earlier success, as Apple's iPod range gained widespread popularity and limited international Walkman sales.\nThe Walkman\u2019s influence on consumer electronics has been compared to later devices such as mobile phones and personal computers.\nHistory of the cassette Walkman.\nIn March 1979, at the request of Masaru Ibuka, the audio department modified the small recorder used by journalists, \"Pressman\", into a smaller recorder. After many people praised the good sound quality evaluation, Sony, under the leadership of Akio Morita, began to launch the Walkman in July 1979. Morita positioned Walkman in the youth market, emphasized youth, vitality, and fashion, and created a headset culture. In February 1980, he began to sell Walkman to the world, and in November 1980, he began to use the non-standard Japanese and English brands globally. The Walkman has sold more than 250 million units worldwide. When Morita was knighted in October 1992, the headline in the British newspapers \"The Sun\" and \"The Daily Telegraph\" was \"Arise, Sir Sony Walkman\".\nThe Compact Cassette was developed by the Dutch electronics firm Philips and released in August 1963. In the late 1960s, the introduction of prerecorded compact cassettes made it possible to listen to music on portable devices as well as on car stereos, though gramophone records remained the most popular format for home listening.\nPortable tape players of various designs were available, but none of them were intended to be operated by a person as they were walking. In the 1970s, German-Brazilian inventor Andreas Pavel devised a method for carrying a player of this type on a belt around the waist, listening via headphones, but his \"Stereobelt\" concept did not include the required engineering advancements to yield high-quality sound reproduction while the tape player was subject to mechanical shock as would be expected on a person walking. Pavel later lost his suit claiming the Walkman idea as his own. Finally in 2003, with Pavel threatening to file infringement proceedings in the remaining territories where he held protective rights, Sony approached him with a view to settling the matter amicably, which led to both parties signing a contract and confidentiality agreement in 2004. The settlement was reported to be a cash payment in the \"low eight figures\" and ongoing royalties of the sale of certain Walkman models.\nSony co-founder Masaru Ibuka used the company's bulky TC-D5 cassette recorder to listen to music while traveling for business. He asked the executive deputy president Norio Ohga to design a playback-only stereo version optimized for walking. The metal-cased blue-and-silver Walkman TPS-L2, the world's first low-cost personal stereo, went on sale in Japan on 1 July 1979, and was sold for around \u00a533,000 (or $150.00). Though Sony predicted it would sell about 5,000 units a month, it sold more than 30,000 in the first two months.\nThe Walkman was followed by a series of international releases; as overseas sales companies objected to the \"wasei-eigo\" name, it was sold under several names, including \"Sound-about\" in the United States, \"Freestyle\" in Australia and Sweden, and \"Stowaway\" in the UK. Eventually, in the early 1980s, \"Walkman\" caught on globally and Sony used the name worldwide. The TPS-L2 was introduced in the US in June\u00a01980.\nThe 1980s was the decade of the intensive development of the Walkman lineup. In 1981, Sony released the second Walkman model, the WM-2, which was significantly smaller than the TPS-L2, thanks to the \"inverse\" mounting of the power-operated magnetic head and soft-touch buttons. Sony applied the \"Walkman\" brand to some transistor radios starting with the matching blue SRF-40 FM Walkman in 1980, and added a radio system to some Walkman cassette models starting with the model WM-F1 in 1982. The first model with Dolby noise-reduction system and an auto reverse function appeared in 1982.\nThe first ultra-compact \"cassette-size\" Walkman was introduced in 1983, model WM-20, with a telescopic case. This allowed even easier carrying of a Walkman in bags or pockets.\nIn October 1985, the WM-101 model was the first in its class with a \"gum stick\" rechargeable battery. In 1986 Sony presented the first model outfitted with remote control, as well as one with solar battery (WM-F107).\nWithin a decade of launch, Sony held a 50% market share in the United States and 46% in Japan.\nIn 1989, two limited edition 10th anniversary models were released (WM-701S/T) in Japan, made of brass and plated in sterling silver. Only a few hundred were built of each. A 15th anniversary model was also made on 1 July 1994, with vertical loading, and a 20th anniversary on 1 July 1999, with a prestige model.\nBy 1989, 10 years after the launch of the first model, over 100 million Walkmans had been sold worldwide. 150 million units were manufactured by 1995. By 1999, 20 years after the introduction of the first model, Sony sold 186\u00a0million cassette Walkmans.\nPortable compact disc players led to the decline of the cassette Walkman, which was discontinued in Japan in 2010.&lt;ref name=\"ABC_News_10/25/10_Walkman\"&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; The last cassette-based model available in the US was the WM-FX290W, which was first released in 2004.\nPortable radio receivers.\nSports Walkman and some of non-sport cassette Walkman models has built-in radio receivers.\nBut as Sony produced portable radio receivers since 1960s, there is also personal stereo Walkman, were special variants of the same model targeted for different markets according to country-specific radio bands, for example, model SRF-37 has 4 variants:\nMost of Walkman portable stereo varies in size between card deck and USB-stick, except for some of the Sports Walkman portable stereos, like Sports Walkman FM Stereo/AM Monocular Radio SRF-X90 which is larger than cassette Walkman Sport WM-SXF33 with built-in AM/FM stereo. Sports Walkman FM/AM Headset SRF-HM55 is all-in-one portable stereo.\nDiscman, MiniDisc, and digital Walkman.\nAfter the success of the cassette Walkman, Sony extended the brand name to other portable non-cassette audio products: for example in 1990, Sony released Digital Audio Tape (DAT) players marketed as \"DAT Walkman\", then in 1992 it launched the \"MD Walkman\" brand for portable MiniDisc players. Earlier, Sony also marketed the Discman line of portable compact disc (CD) players which started to rebrand as \"CD Walkman\" in 1997. Sony also used the name on other products, such as in 1989 when Sony released portable Video8 recorders marketed as \"Video Walkman\".\nWith the decreasing relevance of cassette tapes, Sony unified the entire Walkman range of products into a single \"Walkman\" name and branding in the summer of 2000, and a new small \"W.\" icon was designed as part of the logo which remains in use to this day.\nFrom 2012, Walkman was also the name of the music player software on Sony Xperia. It has since been rebranded to Music.\nDigital players (1999\u2013present).\nOn 21 December 1999, Sony launched its first ever digital audio players (DAP) under the name \"Network Walkman\" (the VAIO division also released a DAP at the same time). The first Walkman DAP used Memory Stick as its storage medium to store audio files in flash memory. It was branded as \"MS Walkman\", shortly before the Walkman brand unification. Most future digital Walkman models would instead use built-in solid-state flash memory, although hard disk based players were also made from 2004 to 2007. Since 2005, all Walkman DAPs have been marketed as simply \"Walkman\" and thereby dropping the \"Network\" prefix that was previously used for this range.\nIn its early years, the Walkmans came with OpenMG copyright protection and, until 2004, exclusively supported Sony's in-house ATRAC format; there was no support for industry-standard MP3 as Sony wanted to protect its records division, Sony BMG, from piracy. Additionally, Walkman-branded mobile phones were also made by the Sony Ericsson joint venture.\nSony could not repeat the success of the cassette player in the 21st-century digital audio player (DAP) market. Rival Apple's iPod range became a large success in the market, hindering Walkman sales internationally, though it fared better domestically. The Network Walkman for several years had paltry market share and had also been struggling against numerous other rivals such as Creative, Rio, Mpio and iRiver, although sales and share did eventually increase fivefold in 2005 and continued improving, but remained small. Its pricing policy, SonicStage software and lack of MP3 support in earlier years have been suggested factors of its performance. Its U.S. market share in 2006 was 1.9%, placing it behind Apple, SanDisk, Creative and Samsung. In Japan its share in 2009\u20132010 was between 43 and 48%, ahead of Apple for the first time.\nMeanwhile, Sony Computer Entertainment, a Sony division who are not involved in Walkman products, officially described their PlayStation Portable (PSP) in 2004 as the \"21st century Walkman\". While the PSP was a handheld game console first, it was also seen as a modern day portable multimedia and entertainment system akin to the original Walkman.\nOver the years, newer models of the digital Walkman included various new features. The first ever digital Walkman with a color display was the NW-A800 Series released in 2007 and it also provided, for the first time, video playback. The following year came the first with Bluetooth connectivity, and in 2009 the first touchscreen Walkman, the X1000. Beginning in late 2006 and lasting until 2019, most new Walkman players had a proprietary WM-PORT terminal which was used not only for charging and syncing but also for connecting to compatible docks. Other notable features of many Walkman players include the SensMe playlist technology, Karaoke Mode, Virtual Studio Technology (VST), and various proprietary sound enhancement technologies such as DSEE and ClearAudio. Players compatible with high-resolution audio have been released since 2013.\nWith the shrinking market for purpose-made portable media players during the 2010s, Sony streamlined its Walkman line, marketing a narrower range of products and with an increased emphasis on high-end audiophilic players. This began with the launch of the ZX Series Walkman in 2013 and culminated in the luxurious WM1 Series first released in 2016, which is gold plated and retailed for several thousand US dollars. However outside the high-end space, and the mid-range A Series Walkman, as of 2025, Sony continue to market simple budget-oriented DAPs in the form of the E Series (NW-E390) and the thumb-style B Series (NWZ-B180) as well as the waterproof, sports-oriented WS Series.\nMarketing.\nThe marketing of the original Walkman helped introduce the idea of \"Japanese-ness\" into global culture, synonymous with miniaturization and high-technology. The \"Walk-men\" and \"Walk-women\" in advertisements were created to be the ideal reflections of the viewing audience. Sony implemented a marketing strategy, hiring young adults to walk around in public wearing a Walkman, offering nearby people to test out the product. Sony also hired actors to pose with the Walkman around the streets of Tokyo as an additional form of promotion.\nA major component of the Walkman advertising campaign was overspecialization of the device. Prior to the Walkman, the common device for portable music was the portable radio, which could only offer listeners standard music broadcasts. Having the ability to customize a playlist was a new and exciting revolution in music consumption. Potential buyers had the opportunity to choose their perfect match in terms of mobile listening technology. The ability to play one's personal choice of music and listen privately was a huge selling point of the Walkman, especially amongst teens, who greatly contributed to its success. A diversity of features and styles suggested that there would be a product which was \"the perfect choice\" for each consumer. This method of marketing to an extremely expansive user-base while maintaining the idea that the product was made for each individual \"[got] the best of all possible worlds\u2014mass marketing and personal differentiation\".\nIn the early 2000s, Sony debuted Plato, a blue alien, as its mascot for the Walkman.\nImpact and legacy.\nCulturally the Walkman had a great effect and it became ubiquitous. According to \"Time\", the Walkman's \"unprecedented combination of portability (it ran on two AA batteries) and privacy (it featured a headphone jack but no external speaker) made it the ideal product for thousands of consumers looking for a compact portable stereo that they could take with them anywhere\". According to \"The Verge\", \"the world changed\" on the day the Walkman was released.\nThe Walkman became an icon in 1980s culture. In 1986, the word \"Walkman\" entered the \"Oxford English Dictionary\". Millions used the Walkman during exercise, marking the beginning of the aerobics fad. Between 1987 and 1997, the height of the Walkman's popularity, the number of people who said they walked for exercise increased by 30%. Other firms, including Aiwa, Panasonic and Toshiba, produced similar products, and in 1983 cassettes outsold vinyl for the first time.\nThe Walkman has been cited as influencing people's relationship with music and technology, due to its \"solitary\" and \"personal\" nature, as users were listening to their music of choice instead of radio. It has been seen as a precursor of personal mainstream tech possessions such as personal computers or mobile phones. Headphones also started to be worn in public. This caused safety controversies in the US, which in 1982 led to the mayor of Woodbridge, New Jersey banning Walkman from being worn in public due to pedestrian accidents.\nIn the market, the Walkman's success also led to great adoption of the Compact Cassette format. Within a few years, cassettes were outselling vinyl records, and would continue to do so until the compact disc (CD) overtook cassette sales in 1991.\nIn German-speaking countries, the use of \"Walkman\" became generic, meaning a personal stereo of any make, to a degree that the Austrian Supreme Court of Justice ruled in 2002 that Sony could not prevent others from using the term \"Walkman\" to describe similar goods. It is therefore an example of what marketing experts call the \"genericide\" of a brand.\nA large statue of a Sports Walkman FM was erected in Tokyo's Ginza district in 2019 in celebration of the 40th anniversary.\nIn 2025, a cassette Walkman from 1979 (model TPS-L2 ) was included in \",\" an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art featuring \"widely recognized design icons [...] highlighting pivotal moments in design history.\"\nCurrent range.\nBelow here is a timeline of recent Walkman models:\nWalkman portable digital audio and media players are the only Walkman-branded products still being produced today, although the \"Network\" prefix is no longer used, the model numbers still carry the \"NW-\" prefix. The current product range as of 2024 are:\nSince 2017, Sony provided the Music Center for PC software on Microsoft Windows, designed for both content transfer and also playback for Walkman and other audio products.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33810", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33810", "title": "William Seward Burroughs I", "text": "American inventor and businessman (1857\u20131898)\nWilliam Seward Burroughs I (January 28, 1857 \u2013 September 14, 1898) was an American inventor born in Rochester, New York.\nLife and career.\nPersonal life.\nBurroughs was the son of a mechanic and worked with machines throughout his childhood. While a small boy, his parents moved to Auburn, New York, where he and his brothers were educated in public schools.\nHe married his wife, Ida (n\u00e9e Selover) in 1879. They had two sons and two daughters: Jennie, Horace, Mortimer (father of William S. Burroughs II), and Helen.\nInventor.\nIn 1875, he started working as a bank clerk. Much of his job consisted of laboriously reviewing ledgers for errors. Burroughs then became interested in developing an adding machine. At the bank, there had been a number of prototypes, but in inexperienced hands, they would sometimes give incorrect answers. Burroughs' did not find his clerical work agreeable, as he was fond of mechanics. He resigned after seven years working as a clerk.\nIn the early 1880s, Burroughs was advised by a doctor to move to an area with a warmer climate. He moved to St. Louis, Missouri where he worked in the Boyer Machine Shop. These new surroundings hastened the development of an existing idea: an adding machine. His new job gave him the opportunity to build his prototype. Accuracy was the foundation of his work. He made his design drawings on metal plates to prevent distortion. \nBurroughs filed his first patent for the invention of a \"calculating machine\" in 1885. It was designed to ease the monotony of clerical arithmetic. By 1890, they were well known in the banking industry, and adoption spread.\nCompany founder.\nBurroughs founded the American Arithmometer Company in 1886. After his death, in 1904 partner John Boyer renamed the business the Burroughs Adding Machine Company.\nHe was awarded the Franklin Institute's John Scott Legacy Medal shortly before his death. He was posthumously inducted into the National Inventors Hall of Fame. He was the grandfather of Beat Generation writer William S. Burroughs and great-grandfather of William S. Burroughs Jr., who was also a writer.\nBurroughs also received a patent for an electric alarm clock in 1892.\nHe died in Citronelle, Mobile County, Alabama and was interred in Bellefontaine Cemetery in St. Louis, Missouri.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33812", "revid": "27015025", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33812", "title": "Wernigerode", "text": "Town in Saxony-Anhalt, Germany\nWernigerode () is a town in the district of Harz, Saxony-Anhalt, Germany. Until 2007, it was the capital of the district of Wernigerode. Its population was 32,181 in 2020.\nWernigerode is located southwest of Halberstadt, and is picturesquely situated on the Holtemme river, on the northern slopes of the Harz Mountains. Wernigerode is located on the German Timber-Frame Road.\nGeography.\nLocation.\nThe town lies at about above sea level (NN) on the northeastern flank of the Harz Mountains in central Germany, at the foot of their highest peak, the Brocken, on the B 6 and B 244 federal highways and on the railway line from Halberstadt to Vienenburg that links the cities of Halle (Saale) and Hanover.\nThe River Holtemme flows through the town and, not far from its western gate, it is joined by the Zillierbach stream, which is also known as the near its mouth. North of the town the Barrenbach flows through several ponds and empties into the in the village of Minsleben. The historic town centre consists of an old town and a new town ( and ). The town's borough includes Hasserode, N\u00f6schenrode, the residential estates of Stadtfeld, Burgbreite and Harzblick as well as the villages of Benzingerode, Minsleben, Silstedt, Schierke and Reddeber.\nThe borough measures from west to east and from north to south. Its highest point is the Brocken, at above NN, and its lowest is at .\nThe town lies on the German-Dutch holiday road known as the Orange Route.\nThe Northern Harz Boundary Fault crosses the borough along which runs the watershed between the Weser and Elbe rivers. To the north precipitation flows into the Weser, to the southeast, later northeast, waters flow into the Elbe. This fault line runs through the suburb of Hasserode to the west south west of the city centre and forms the town's castle hill to the south east of the city centre.\nTown divisions.\nThe town of Wernigerode is divided into the town itself, including the villages of Hasserode and N\u00f6schenrode incorporated before 1994, and five villages with their own local councils that were integrated after 1994: Benzingerode, Minsleben, Reddeber, Schierke and Silstedt.\nClimate.\nWernigerode is located in the Central European transition subzone of the temperate climatic zone. Its average annual temperature is ; its average annual precipitation is .\nThe warmest months are June to August with average temperatures of and the coldest are December to February at .\nThe most rain falls in July, on average , the least in February, with on average.\nThe climate, more precisely the amounts of precipitation and temperatures, are influenced by the orographic rainfall caused by the Harz Mountains. Because the town lies in the rain shadow (leeward side) of the Harz, less precipitation falls here than in similar temperate regions without the protection of a mountain range. In addition the occasional f\u00f6hn winds that occur result in an increase in temperatures.\nWernigerode has a snow load class of 3 according to the German industrial standard, DIN 1055.\nHistory.\nWernigerode was the capital of the medieval County of Wernigerode and Stolberg-Wernigerode. In 1815, after the Napoleonic Wars, it became part of the Prussian Province of Saxony. The Hasser\u00f6der brewery was founded in Wernigerode in 1872.\nAfter World War II, Wernigerode was included in the new state Saxony-Anhalt within the Soviet occupation zone (relaunched in October 1949 as the German Democratic Republic/East Germany). During the Communist years, the town was very close to the inner German border. Wernigerode became part of the restored state of Saxony-Anhalt in 1990 after German reunification.\nEmergence of the town.\nThere are no written sources confirming exactly when the town was established. According to the latest research\u00a0\u2013 for example, by Eduard Jacobs and Walther Grosse\u00a0\u2013 there were no early relations with the Abbey at Corvey (Weser) and the abbot there, Warin, instead the town name suggests it was a protected clearance settlement.\nThe first area to be settle was the , where there was a lowland castle, the so-called . In 1805 the ruins of this castle site were demolished. The only part remaining is at 12 which dates to the year 1582. At the time of the first settlelement there was still ancient forest, typical of the Harz, on the heights of the , which had first to be cleared, hence the suffix in the town name which means 'clearing'.\nThe town was first mentioned in the records in 1121 in connection with Count Adalbert of Haimar who had moved here from the region near Hildesheim and henceforth was titled the Count of Wernigerode. On 17 April 1229 the settlement was granted town rights along the lines of that for Goslar. In 2004 Wernigerode celebrated the 775th anniversary of that occasion.\nAs a result of the immigration of new townsfolk from the surrounding villages a new settlement, later called , grew up on the northeastern edge of the old town. It was a farming settlement that lay outside the walls of the old town. St. John's Church was built as the parish church of Wernigerode's in the last third of the 13th century in the Romanesque style.\nEarly rulers.\nThe counts of Wernigerode, who can be traced back to the early 12th century, were successively vassals of the margraves of Brandenburg (1268), and the archbishops of Magdeburg (1381). On the extinction of the family in 1429 the county fell to the counts of Stolberg, who founded the Stolberg-Wernigerode branch in 1645. The latter surrendered its military and fiscal independence to Prussia in 1714, but retained some of its sovereign rights till 1876. The counts were raised to princely rank in 1890.\nPopulation statistics.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nArchitecture.\nWernigerode contains several interesting Gothic buildings, including a fine town hall with a timber facade from 1498. Some of the quaint old houses which have escaped the numerous fires through the years are elaborately adorned with wood-carving. The Gerhart-Hauptmann Gymnasium, occupying a modern Gothic building, is the successor to an ancient grammar school that existed until 1825. The castle () of the princes of Stolberg-Wernigerode rises above the town. The original was built in the 12th century but the present castle was built between 1862 and 1893 by Karl Fr\u00fchling and includes parts of the medieval building.\nEconomy.\nBrandy, Hasser\u00f6der lager, cigars and dyes are among the products manufactured in Wernigerode.\nEducation.\nWernigerode is a site of the Harz University of Applied Studies.\nCulture.\nWernigerode is the home of the choir Rundfunk-Jugendchor Wernigerode.\nSport.\nWernigerode hosts the Brocken Marathon each October. Wernigerode's most supported club is Einheit Wernigerode, who competes in the NOFV-Oberliga, and recently qualified for the DFB-Pokal, eventually losing to SC Paderborn 07 0-10. \nWernigerode also has had an American Football club, The Mountain Tigers, since 1993. During the last 19 years this team has played in Germany's Oberliga 4 and Regionaliga 3. Since its inception, it has been a mainstay for American football in the Harz region.\nTwin towns \u2013 sister cities.\nWernigerode is twinned with:\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "33813", "revid": "40993790", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33813", "title": "Wash", "text": "Wash or the Wash may refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33816", "revid": "921080", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33816", "title": "Watchmen", "text": "Comics by Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons\nWatchmen is a comic book limited series by the British creative team of writer Alan Moore, artist Dave Gibbons, and colorist John Higgins. It was published monthly by DC Comics in 1986 and 1987 before being collected in a single-volume edition in 1987. \"Watchmen\" originated from a story proposal Moore submitted to DC featuring superhero characters that the company had acquired from Charlton Comics. As Moore's proposed story would have left many of the characters unusable for future stories, managing editor Dick Giordano convinced Moore to create original characters instead.\nMoore used the story as a means of reflecting contemporary anxieties, deconstructing and satirizing the superhero concept, and making political commentary. \"Watchmen\" depicts an alternate history in which superheroes emerged in the 1940s and 1960s and their presence changed history so that the United States won the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal was never exposed. In 1985, the country is edging toward World War III with the Soviet Union, freelance costumed vigilantes have been outlawed and most former superheroes are in retirement or working for the government. The story focuses on the protagonists' personal development and moral struggles as an investigation into the murder of a government-sponsored superhero pulls them out of retirement.\nGibbons uses a nine-panel grid layout throughout the series and adds recurring symbols such as a blood-stained smiley face. All but the last issue feature supplemental fictional documents that add to the series' backstory and the narrative is intertwined with that of another story, an in-story pirate comic titled \"Tales of the Black Freighter\", which one of the characters reads. Structured at times as a nonlinear narrative, the story skips through space, time, and plot. In the same manner, entire scenes and dialogues have parallels with others through synchronicity, coincidence, and repeated imagery.\nA commercial success, \"Watchmen\" has received critical acclaim both in the comics and mainstream press. \"Watchmen\" was recognized in \"Time\"'s List of the 100 Best Novels as one of the best English language novels published since 1923. In a retrospective review, the BBC's Nicholas Barber described it as \"the moment comic books grew up\". Moore opposed this idea, stating, \"I tend to think that, no, comics hadn't grown up. There were a few titles that were more adult than people were used to. But the majority of comics titles were pretty much the same as they'd ever been. It wasn't comics growing up. I think it was more comics meeting the emotional age of the audience coming the other way.\"\nAfter several attempts to adapt the series into a feature film, director Zack Snyder's \"Watchmen\" was released in 2009. An episodic video game, \"\", was released to coincide with the film's release.\nDC Comics published \"Before Watchmen\", a series of nine prequel miniseries, in 2012, and \"Doomsday Clock\", a 12-issue limited series and sequel to the original \"Watchmen\" series, from 2017 to 2019 \u2013 both without Moore's or Gibbons' involvement. The second series integrated the \"Watchmen\" characters within the DC Universe. A standalone sequel, \"Rorschach\" by Tom King, was published between October 2020 and September 2021. A television continuation to the original comic, set 34 years after the comic's timeline, was broadcast on HBO from October to December 2019 with Gibbons' involvement. Moore has expressed his displeasure with adaptations and sequels of \"Watchmen\" and asked his name not to be used for future works.\nPublication history.\nA single preview page for \"Watchmen\", created by writer Alan Moore and artist Dave Gibbons, first appeared in the 1985 issue of \"DC Spotlight\", the 50th anniversary special. The title was later published as a 12-issue maxiseries from DC Comics, cover-dated September 1986 to October 1987.\nIt was subsequently collected in 1987 as a DC Comics trade paperback that has had at least 24 printings as of March 2017; another trade paperback was published by Warner Books, a DC sister company, in 1987. In February 1988, DC published a limited-edition, slipcased hardcover volume, produced by Graphitti Design, that contained 48 pages of bonus material, including the original proposal and concept art. In 2005, DC released \"Absolute Watchmen\", an oversized slipcased hardcover edition of the series in DC's Absolute Edition format. Assembled under the supervision of Dave Gibbons, \"Absolute Watchmen\" included the Graphitti materials, as well as restored and recolored art by John Higgins. That December DC published a new printing of \"Watchmen\" issue #1 at the original 1986 cover price of $1.50 as part of its \"Millennium Edition\" line.\nIn 2012, DC published \"Before Watchmen\", a series of nine prequel miniseries, with various creative teams producing the characters' early adventures set before the events of the original series.\nIn the 2016 one-shot \"\", numerous symbols and visual references to \"Watchmen\", such as the blood-splattered smiley face, and the dialogue between Doctor Manhattan and Ozymandias in the last issue of \"Watchmen\", are shown. Further \"Watchmen\" imagery was added in the \"DC Universe: Rebirth Special\" #1 second printing, which featured an update to Gary Frank's cover, better revealing the outstretched hand of Doctor Manhattan in the top right corner. Doctor Manhattan later appeared in the 2017 four-part DC miniseries \"The Button\" serving as a direct sequel to both \"DC Universe Rebirth\" and the 2011 storyline \"Flashpoint\". Manhattan reappears in the 2017\u201319 twelve-part sequel series \"Doomsday Clock\".\nBackground and creation.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Quote_box/styles.css\" /&gt;\n\"I suppose I was just thinking, 'That'd be a good way to start a comic book: have a famous super-hero found dead.' As the mystery unraveled, we would be led deeper and deeper into the real heart of this super-hero's world, and show a reality that was very different to the general public image of the super-hero.\"\n\u2014Alan Moore on the basis for \"Watchmen\"\nIn 1983, DC Comics acquired a line of characters from Charlton Comics. During that period, writer Alan Moore contemplated writing a story that featured an unused line of superheroes that he could revamp, as he had done in his \"Miracleman\" series in the early 1980s. Moore reasoned that MLJ Comics' Mighty Crusaders might be available for such a project, so he devised a murder mystery plot which would begin with the discovery of the body of the Shield in a harbor. The writer felt it did not matter which set of characters he ultimately used, as long as readers recognized them \"so it would have the shock and surprise value when you saw what the reality of these characters was\". Moore used this premise and crafted a proposal featuring the Charlton characters titled \"Who Killed the Peacemaker\", and submitted the unsolicited proposal to DC managing editor Dick Giordano. Giordano was receptive to the proposal, but opposed the idea of using the Charlton characters for the story. After the acquisition of Charlton's Action Hero line, DC intended to use their upcoming \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" event to fold them into their mainstream superhero universe. Moore said, \"DC realized their expensive characters would end up either dead or dysfunctional.\" Instead, Giordano persuaded Moore to continue his project but with new characters that simply resembled the Charlton heroes. Moore had initially believed that original characters would not provide emotional resonance for readers but later changed his mind. He said, \"Eventually, I realized that if I wrote the substitute characters well enough, so that they seemed familiar in certain ways, certain aspects of them brought back a kind of generic super-hero resonance or familiarity to the reader, then it might work.\"\nArtist Dave Gibbons, who had collaborated with Moore on previous projects, recalled that he \"must have heard on the grapevine that he was doing a treatment for a new miniseries. I rang Alan up, saying I'd like to be involved with what he was doing\", and Moore sent him the story outline. Gibbons told Giordano he wanted to draw the series Moore proposed and Moore approved. Gibbons brought colorist John Higgins onto the project because he liked his \"unusual\" style; Higgins lived near the artist, which allowed the two to \"discuss [the art] and have some kind of human contact rather than just sending it across the ocean\". Len Wein joined the project as its editor, while Giordano stayed on to oversee it. Both Wein and Giordano stood back and \"got out of their way\", as Giordano remarked later. \"Who copy-edits Alan Moore, for God's sake?\"\nAfter receiving the go-ahead to work on the project, Moore and Gibbons spent a day at the latter's house creating characters, crafting details for the story's milieu and discussing influences. The pair were particularly influenced by a \"Mad\" parody of Superman named \"Superduperman\"; Moore said: \"We wanted to take Superduperman 180 degrees\u2014dramatic, instead of comedic\". Moore and Gibbons conceived of a story that would take \"familiar old-fashioned superheroes into a completely new realm\"; Moore said his intention was to create \"a superhero \"Moby Dick\"; something that had that sort of weight, that sort of density\". Moore came up with the character names and descriptions but left the specifics of how they looked to Gibbons. Gibbons did not sit down and design the characters deliberately, but rather \"did it at odd times [...] spend[ing] maybe two or three weeks just doing sketches.\" Gibbons designed his characters to make them easy to draw; Rorschach was his favorite to draw because \"you just have to draw a hat. If you can draw a hat, then you've drawn Rorschach, you just draw kind of a shape for his face and put some black blobs on it and you're done.\"\nMoore began writing the series very early on, hoping to avoid publication delays such as those faced by the DC limited series \"Camelot 3000\". When writing the script for the first issue Moore said he realized \"I only had enough plot for six issues. We were contracted for 12!\" His solution was to alternate issues that dealt with the overall plot of the series with origin issues for the characters. Moore wrote very detailed scripts for Gibbons to work from. Gibbons recalled that \"[t]he script for the first issue of \"Watchmen\" was, I think, 101 pages of typescript\u2014single-spaced\u2014with no gaps between the individual panel descriptions or, indeed, even between the pages.\" Upon receiving the scripts, the artist had to number each page \"in case I drop them on the floor, because it would take me two days to put them back in the right order\", and used a highlighter pen to single out lettering and shot descriptions; he remarked, \"It takes quite a bit of organizing before you can actually put pen to paper.\" Despite Moore's detailed scripts, his panel descriptions would often end with the note \"If that doesn't work for you, do what works best\"; Gibbons nevertheless worked to Moore's instructions. In fact, Gibbons only suggested one single change to the script \u2013 a compression of Ozymandias' narration while he was preventing a sneak attack by Rorschach \u2013 as he felt that the dialogue was too long to fit with the length of the action; Moore agreed and re-wrote the scene. Gibbons had a great deal of autonomy in developing the visual look of \"Watchmen\" and frequently inserted background details that Moore admitted he did not notice until later. Moore occasionally contacted fellow comics writer Neil Gaiman for answers to research questions and for quotes to include in issues.\nDespite his intentions, Moore admitted in November 1986 that there were likely to be delays, stating that he was, with issue five on the stands, still writing issue nine. Gibbons mentioned that a major factor in the delays was the \"piecemeal way\" in which he received Moore's scripts. Gibbons said the team's pace slowed around the fourth issue; from that point onward the two undertook their work \"just several pages at a time. I'll get three pages of script from Alan and draw it and then toward the end, call him up and say, 'Feed me!' And he'll send another two or three pages or maybe one page or sometimes six pages.\" As the creators began to hit deadlines, Moore would hire a taxi driver to drive 50\u00a0miles and deliver scripts to Gibbons. On later issues the artist even had his wife and son draw panel grids on pages to help save time.\nNear the end of the project, Moore realized that the story bore some similarity to \"The Architects of Fear\", an episode of \"The Outer Limits\" television series. The writer and Wein (an editor) argued over changing the ending and when Moore refused to give in, Wein quit the book. Wein explained, \"I kept telling him, 'Be more original, Alan, you've got the capability, do something different, not something that's already been done!' And he didn't seem to care enough to do that.\" Moore acknowledged the \"Outer Limits\" episode by referencing it in the series' last issue.\nSynopsis.\nSetting.\n\"Watchmen\" is set in an alternate reality that closely mirrors the contemporary world of the 1980s. The primary difference is the presence of superheroes. The point of divergence occurs in the year 1938. Their existence in this version of the United States is shown to have dramatically affected and altered the outcomes of real-world events such as the Vietnam War and the presidency of Richard Nixon. In keeping with the realism of the series, although the costumed crimefighters of \"Watchmen\" are commonly called \"superheroes\", only one, named Doctor Manhattan, possesses any superhuman abilities. The war in Vietnam ends with an American victory in 1971 and Nixon is still president as of October 1985 upon the repeal of term limits and the Watergate scandal not coming to pass due to the implied assassination of Bob Woodard and Carl Bernstein. The Soviet invasion of Afghanistan occurs approximately six years later than in real life.\nWhen the story begins, the existence of Doctor Manhattan has given the U.S. a strategic advantage over the Soviet Union, which has dramatically increased Cold War tensions. Eventually, by 1977, superheroes grow unpopular among the police and the public, leading them to be outlawed with the passage of the Keene Act. While many of the heroes retired, Doctor Manhattan and another superhero, known as The Comedian, operate as government-sanctioned agents. Another named Rorschach continues to operate outside the law.\nPlot.\nIn October 1985, New York City detectives investigate the murder of Edward Blake. With the police having no leads, costumed vigilante Rorschach decides to probe further. Rorschach deduces Blake to have been the true identity of \"The Comedian\", a costumed hero employed by the U.S. government, after finding his costume and signature smiley-face pin badge. Believing that Blake's murder could be part of a larger plot against costumed adventurers, Rorschach seeks out and warns four of his retired comrades: shy inventor Daniel Dreiberg, formerly the second Nite Owl; the superpowered and emotionally detached Jon Osterman, codenamed \"Doctor Manhattan\"; Doctor Manhattan's lover Laurie Juspeczyk, the second Silk Spectre; and Adrian Veidt, once the hero \"Ozymandias\", and now a successful businessman.\nDreiberg, Veidt, and Manhattan attend Blake's funeral, where Dreiberg tosses Blake's pin badge in his coffin before he is buried. Manhattan is later accused on national television of being the cause of cancer in friends and former colleagues. When the government takes the accusations seriously, Manhattan exiles himself to Mars. As the United States depends on Manhattan as a strategic military asset, his departure throws humanity into political turmoil, with the Soviets invading Afghanistan to capitalize on the United States' perceived weakness. Rorschach's concerns appear validated when Veidt narrowly survives an assassination attempt. Rorschach himself is framed for murdering a former supervillain named Moloch. While attempting to flee the scene of Moloch's murder, Rorschach is captured by police and unmasked as Walter Kovacs.\nNeglected in her relationship with the once-human Manhattan, whose godlike powers have left him emotionally detached from ordinary people, and no longer kept on retainer by the government, Juspeczyk stays with Dreiberg. They begin a romance, don their costumes, and resume vigilante work as they grow closer together. With Dreiberg starting to believe some aspects of Rorschach's conspiracy theory, the pair take it upon themselves to break him out of prison. After looking back on his own personal history, Manhattan places the fate of his involvement with human affairs in Juspeczyk's hands. He teleports her to Mars to make the case for emotional investment. During the course of the argument, Juspeczyk is forced to come to terms with the fact that Blake, who once attempted to rape her mother (the original Silk Spectre), was actually her biological father, having fathered her in a second, consensual relationship. This discovery, reflecting the complexity of human emotions and relationships, reignites Manhattan's interest in humanity.\nOn Earth, Dreiberg and Rorschach find evidence that Veidt may be behind the conspiracy. Rorschach writes his suspicions about Veidt in his journal, which includes the full details of his investigation, and mails it to \"New Frontiersman\", a local right-wing newspaper. When Rorschach and Dreiberg travel to Antarctica to confront Veidt at his private retreat, Veidt explains that he plans to save humanity from an impending nuclear war by staging a fake alien invasion and killing half the population of New York, forcing the United States and the Soviet Union to unite against a common enemy. He reveals that he murdered Blake after Blake discovered his plan, arranged for Doctor Manhattan's past associates to contract cancer to force him to leave Earth, staged the attempt on his own life to place himself above suspicion, and framed Rorschach for Moloch's murder to prevent him from discovering the truth. Horrified by Veidt's callous logic, Dreiberg and Rorschach vow to stop him, but Veidt reveals that he already enacted his plan before they arrived.\nWhen Manhattan and Juspeczyk arrive back on Earth, they are confronted by mass destruction and death in New York, with a gigantic squid-like creature, created by Veidt's laboratories, dead in the middle of the city. Manhattan notices his prescient abilities are limited by tachyons emanating from the Antarctic and the pair teleport there. They discover Veidt's involvement and confront him. Veidt shows everyone news broadcasts confirming that the emergence of a new threat has indeed prompted peaceful co-operation between the superpowers; this leads almost all present to agree that concealing the truth is in the best interests of world peace. Rorschach refuses to compromise and leaves, intent on revealing the truth. As he is making his way back, he is confronted by Manhattan who argues that at this point, the truth can only hurt. Rorschach declares that Manhattan will have to kill him to stop him from exposing Veidt, which Manhattan duly does. Manhattan then wanders through the base and finds Veidt, who asks him if he did the right thing in the end. Manhattan cryptically responds that \"nothing ever ends\" before leaving Earth. Dreiberg and Juspeczyk go into hiding under new identities and continue their romance.\nBack in New York, the editor at \"New Frontiersman\" asks his assistant to find some filler material from the \"crank file\", a collection of rejected submissions to the paper, many of which have not yet been reviewed. The series ends with the young man reaching toward the pile of discarded submissions, near the top of which is Rorschach's journal.\nCharacters.\nWith \"Watchmen\", Alan Moore's intention was to create four or five \"radically opposing ways\" to perceive the world and to give readers of the story the privilege of determining which one was most morally comprehensible. Moore did not believe in the notion of \"[cramming] regurgitated morals\" down the readers' throats and instead sought to show heroes in an ambivalent light. Moore said, \"What we wanted to do was show all of these people, warts and all. Show that even the worst of them had something going for them, and even the best of them had their flaws.\"\n A vigilante who wears a white mask that contains a symmetrical but constantly shifting ink blot pattern, he continues to fight crime in spite of his outlaw status. Moore said he was trying to \"come up with this quintessential Steve Ditko character\u2014someone who's got a funny name, whose surname begins with a 'K,' who's got an oddly designed mask\". Moore based Rorschach on Ditko's creation Mr. A; Ditko's Charlton character The Question also served as a template for creating Rorschach. Comics historian Bradford W. Wright described the character's world view as \"a set of black-and-white values that take many shapes but never mix into shades of gray, similar to the ink blot tests of his namesake\". Rorschach sees existence as random and, according to Wright, this viewpoint leaves the character \"free to 'scrawl [his] own design' on a 'morally blank world'\". Moore said he did not foresee the death of Rorschach until the fourth issue when he realized that his refusal to compromise would result in him not surviving the story.\nArt and composition.\nMoore and Gibbons designed \"Watchmen\" to showcase the unique qualities of the comics medium and to highlight its particular strengths. In a 1986 interview, Moore said, \"What I'd like to explore is the areas that comics succeed in where no other media is capable of operating\", and emphasized this by stressing the differences between comics and film. Moore said that \"Watchmen\" was designed to be read \"four or five times\", with some links and allusions only becoming apparent to the reader after several readings. Dave Gibbons notes that, \"[a]s it progressed, \"Watchmen\" became much more about the telling than the tale itself. The main thrust of the story essentially hinges on what is called a macguffin, a gimmick ... So really the plot itself is of no great consequence ... it just really isn't the most interesting thing about \"Watchmen\". As we actually came to tell the tale, that's where the real creativity came in.\"\nGibbons said he deliberately constructed the visual look of \"Watchmen\" so that each page would be identifiable as part of that particular series and \"not some other comic book\". He made a concerted effort to draw the characters in a manner different from that commonly seen in comics. The artist tried to draw the series with \"a particular weight of line, using a hard, stiff pen that didn't have much modulation in terms of thick and thin\" which he hoped \"would differentiate it from the usual lush, fluid kind of comic book line\". In a 2009 interview, Moore recalled that he took advantage of Gibbons' training as a former surveyor for \"including incredible amounts of detail in every tiny panel, so we could choreograph every little thing\". Gibbons described the series as \"a comic about comics\". Gibbons felt that \"Alan is more concerned with the social implications of [the presence of super-heroes] and I've gotten involved in the technical implications.\" The story's alternate world setting allowed Gibbons to change details of the American landscape, such as adding electric cars, slightly different buildings, and spark hydrants instead of fire hydrants, which Moore said, \"perhaps gives the American readership a chance in some ways to see their own culture as an outsider would\". Gibbons noted that the setting was liberating for him because he did not have to rely primarily on reference books.\nColorist John Higgins used a template that was \"moodier\" and favored secondary colors. Moore stated that he had also \"always loved John's coloring, but always associated him with being an airbrush colorist\", which Moore was not fond of; Higgins subsequently decided to color \"Watchmen\" in European-style flat color. Moore noted that the artist paid particular attention to lighting and subtle color changes; in issue six, Higgins began with \"warm and cheerful\" colors and throughout the issue gradually made it darker to give the story a dark and bleak feeling.\nStructure.\nStructurally, certain aspects of \"Watchmen\" deviated from the norm in comic books at the time, particularly the panel layout and the coloring. Instead of panels of various sizes, the creators divided each page into a nine-panel grid. Gibbons favored the nine-panel grid system due to its \"authority\". Moore accepted the use of the nine-panel grid format, which \"gave him a level of control over the storytelling he hadn't had previously\", according to Gibbons. \"There was this element of the pacing and visual impact that he could now predict and use to dramatic effect.\" Bhob Stewart of \"The Comics Journal\" mentioned to Gibbons in 1987, that the page layouts recalled those of EC Comics, in addition to the art itself, which Stewart felt particularly echoed that of John Severin. Gibbons agreed that the echoing of the EC-style layouts \"was a very deliberate thing\", although his inspiration was rather Harvey Kurtzman, but it was altered enough to give the series a unique look. The artist also cited Steve Ditko's work on early issues of \"The Amazing Spider-Man\" as an influence, as well as \"Doctor Strange\", where \"even at his most psychedelic [he] would still keep a pretty straight page layout\".\nThe cover of each issue serves as the first panel to the story. Gibbons said, \"The cover of the \"Watchmen\" is in the real world and looks quite real, but it's starting to turn into a comic book, a portal to another dimension.\" The covers were designed as close-ups that focused on a single detail with no human elements present. The creators on occasion experimented with the layout of the issue contents. Gibbons drew issue five, titled \"Fearful Symmetry\", so the first page mirrors the last (in terms of frame disposition), with the following pages mirroring each other before the center-spread is (broadly) symmetrical in layout.\nThe end of each issue, with the exception of issue twelve, contains supplemental prose pieces written by Moore. Among the contents are fictional book chapters, letters, reports, and articles written by various \"Watchmen\" characters. DC had trouble selling ad space in issues of \"Watchmen\", which left an extra eight to nine pages per issue. DC planned to insert house ads and a longer letters column to fill the space, but editor Len Wein felt this would be unfair to anyone who wrote in during the last four issues of the series. He decided to use the extra pages to fill in the series' backstory. Moore said, \"By the time we got around to issue #3, #4, and so on, we thought that the book looked nice without a letters page. It looks less like a comic book, so we stuck with it.\"\n\"Tales of the Black Freighter\".\n\"Watchmen\" features a story within a story in the form of \"Tales of the Black Freighter\", a fictional comic book from which scenes appear in issues three, five, eight, ten, and eleven. The fictional comic's story, \"Marooned\", is read by a young man named Bernie who spends much of his time hanging out at a newsstand in New York City. Moore and Gibbons conceived a pirate comic because they reasoned that since the characters of \"Watchmen\" experience superheroes in real life, \"they probably wouldn't be at all interested in superhero comics.\" Gibbons suggested a pirate theme, and Moore agreed in part because he is \"a big Bertolt Brecht fan\": the \"Black Freighter\" alludes to the song \"Seer\u00e4uberjenny\" (\"Pirate Jenny\") from Brecht's \"Threepenny Opera\". Moore theorized that since superheroes existed, and existed as \"objects of fear, loathing, and scorn, the main superheroes quickly fell out of popularity in comic books, as we suggest. Mainly, genres like horror, science fiction, and piracy, particularly piracy, became prominent\u2014with EC riding the crest of the wave.\" Moore felt \"the imagery of the whole pirate genre is so rich and dark that it provided a perfect counterpoint to the contemporary world of \"Watchmen\"\". The writer expanded upon the premise so that its presence in the story would add subtext and allegory. The supplemental article detailing the fictional history of \"Tales of the Black Freighter\" at the end of issue five credits real-life artist Joe Orlando as a major contributor to the series. Moore chose Orlando because he felt that if pirate stories were popular in the \"Watchmen\" universe that DC editor Julius Schwartz might have tried to lure the artist over to the company to draw a pirate comic book. Orlando contributed a drawing designed as if it were a page from the fake title to the supplemental piece.\nIn \"Marooned\", a young mariner (called \"The Sea Captain\") journeys to warn his hometown of the coming of \"The Black Freighter\", after he survives the destruction of his own ship. He uses the bodies of his dead shipmates as a makeshift raft and sails home, gradually descending into insanity. When he finally returns to his hometown, believing it to be already under the occupation of \"The Black Freighter\"'s crew, he makes his way to his house and slays everyone he finds there, only to discover that the person he mistook for a pirate was in fact his wife. He returns to the seashore, where he realizes that \"The Black Freighter\" has not come to claim the town, but rather to claim him; he swims out to sea and climbs aboard the ship. According to Richard Reynolds, the mariner is \"forced by the urgency of his mission to shed one inhibition after another.\" Just like Adrian Veidt, he \"hopes to stave off disaster by using the dead bodies of his former comrades as a means of reaching his goal\". Moore stated that the story of \"The Black Freighter\" ends up specifically describing \"the story of Adrian Veidt\" and that it can also be used as a counterpoint to other parts of the story, such as Rorschach's capture and Dr. Manhattan's self-exile on Mars.\nSymbols and imagery.\nMoore named William S. Burroughs as one of his main influences during the conception of \"Watchmen\". He admired Burroughs' use of \"repeated symbols that would become laden with meaning\" in Burroughs' only comic strip, \"The Unspeakable Mr. Hart\", which appeared in the British underground magazine \"Cyclops\". Not every intertextual link in the series was planned by Moore, who remarked that \"there's stuff in there Dave had put in that even I only noticed on the sixth or seventh read\", while other \"things [...] turned up in there by accident.\"\nA stained smiley face is a recurring image in the story, appearing in many forms. In \"The System of Comics\", Thierry Groensteen described the symbol as a recurring motif that produces \"rhyme and remarkable configurations\" by appearing in key segments of \"Watchmen\", notably the first and last pages of the series\u2014spattered with blood on the first, and sauce from a hamburger on the last. Groensteen cites it as one form of the circle shape that appears throughout the story, as a \"recurrent geometric motif\" and due to its symbolic connotations. Gibbons created a smiley face badge as an element of The Comedian's costume in order to \"lighten\" the overall design, later adding a splash of blood to the badge to imply his murder. Gibbons said the creators came to regard the blood-stained smiley face as \"a symbol for the whole series\", noting its resemblance to the Doomsday Clock ticking up to midnight. Moore drew inspiration from psychological tests of behaviorism, explaining that the tests had presented the face as \"a symbol of complete innocence\". With the addition of a blood splash over the eye, the face's meaning was altered to become simultaneously radical and simple enough for the first issue's cover to avoid human detail. Although most evocations of the central image were created on purpose, others were coincidental. Moore mentioned in particular that on \"the little plugs on the spark hydrants if you turn them upside down, you discover a little smiley face\".\nOther symbols, images, and allusions that appeared throughout the series often emerged unexpectedly. Moore mentioned that \"[t]he whole thing with \"Watchmen\" has just been loads of these little bits of synchronicity popping up all over the place\". Gibbons noted an unintended theme was contrasting the mundane and the romantic, citing the separate sex scenes between Nite Owl and Silk Spectre on his couch and then high in the sky on Nite Owl's airship. In a book of the craters and boulders of Mars, Gibbons discovered a photograph of the Galle crater, which resembles a happy face, which they worked into an issue. Moore said, \"We found a lot of these things started to generate themselves as if by magic\", in particular citing an occasion where they decided to name a lock company the \"Gordian Knot Lock Company\".\nThemes.\nThe initial premise of the series was to examine what superheroes would be like \"in a credible, real world\". As the story became more complex, Moore said \"Watchmen\" became about \"power and about the idea of the superman manifest within society.\" The title of the series refers to the question \"Who will watch the watchmen themselves?\", famously posed by the Roman satirist Juvenal (as \"Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\"), although Moore was not aware of the phrase's classical origins until Harlan Ellison informed him. Moore commented in 1987, \"In the context of \"Watchmen\", that fits. 'They're watching out for us, who's watching out for them?'\" The writer stated in the introduction to the Graffiti hardcover of \"Watchmen\" that while writing the series he was able to purge himself of his nostalgia for superheroes, and instead he found an interest in real human beings.\nBradford Wright described \"Watchmen\" as \"Moore's obituary for the concept of heroes in general and superheroes in particular.\" Putting the story in a contemporary sociological context, Wright wrote that the characters of \"Watchmen\" were Moore's \"admonition to those who trusted in 'heroes' and leaders to guard the world's fate\". He added that to place faith in such icons was to give up personal responsibility to \"the Reagans, Thatchers, and other 'Watchmen' of the world who supposed to 'rescue' us and perhaps lay waste to the planet in the process\". Moore specifically stated in 1986 that he was writing \"Watchmen\" to be \"not anti-Americanism, [but] anti-Reaganism\", specifically believing that \"at the moment a certain part of Reagan's America isn't scared. They think they're invulnerable.\" Before the series premiered, Gibbons stated: \"There's no overt political message at all. It's a fantasy extrapolation of what might happen and if people can see things in it that apply to the real America, then they're reading it into the comic [...].\" While Moore wanted to write about \"power politics\" and the \"worrying\" times he lived in, he stated the reason that the story was set in an alternate reality was because he was worried that readers would \"switch off\" if he attacked a leader they admired. Moore stated in 1986 that he \"was consciously trying to do something that would make people feel uneasy.\"\nCiting \"Watchmen\" as the point where the comic book medium \"came of age\", Iain Thomson wrote in his essay \"Deconstructing the Hero\" that the story accomplished this by \"developing its heroes precisely in order to \"deconstruct\" the very idea of the hero and so encouraging us to reflect upon its significance from the many different angles of the shards left lying on the ground\". Thomson stated that the heroes in \"Watchmen\" almost all share a nihilistic outlook, and that Moore presents this outlook \"as the simple, unvarnished truth\" to \"deconstruct the would-be hero's ultimate motivation, namely, to provide a secular salvation and so attain a mortal immortality\". He wrote that the story \"develops its heroes precisely in order to ask us if we would not in fact be better off without heroes\". Thomson added that the story's deconstruction of the hero concept \"suggests that perhaps the time for heroes has passed\", which he feels distinguishes \"this postmodern work\" from the deconstructions of the hero in the existentialism movement. Richard Reynolds states that without any supervillains in the story, the superheroes of \"Watchmen\" are forced to confront \"more intangible social and moral concerns\", adding that this removes the superhero concept from the normal narrative expectations of the genre. Reynolds concludes that the series' ironic self-awareness of the genre \"all mark out \"Watchmen\" either as the last key superhero text, or the first in a new maturity of the genre\".\nGeoff Klock eschewed the term \"deconstruction\" in favor of describing \"Watchmen\" as a \"revisionary superhero narrative\". He considers \"Watchmen\" and Frank Miller's \"\" to be \"the first instances [...] of [a] new kind of comic book [...] a first phase of development, the transition of the superhero from fantasy to literature.\" He elaborates by noting that \"Alan Moore's realism [...] performs a \"kenosis\" towards comic book history [...] [which] does not ennoble and empower his characters [...] Rather, it sends a wave of disruption back through superhero history [...] devalue[ing] one of the basic superhero conventions by placing his masked crime fighters in a realistic world\". First and foremost, \"Moore's exploration of the [often compromised] motives for costumed crimefighting sheds a disturbing light on past superhero stories, and forces the reader to reevaluate\u2014to revision\u2014every superhero in terms of Moore's \"kenosis\"\u2014his emptying out of the tradition\". Klock relates the title to the quote by Juvenal to highlight the problem of controlling those who hold power and quoted repeatedly within the work itself. The deconstructive nature of \"Watchmen\" is, Klock notes, played out on the page also as, \"[l]ike Alan Moore's \"kenosis\", [Veidt] must destroy, then reconstruct, in order to build 'a unity which would survive him.'\"\nMoore has expressed dismay that \"[t]he gritty, deconstructivist postmodern superhero comic, as exemplified by \"Watchmen\" [...] became a genre\". He said in 2003 that \"to some degree there has been, in the 15 years since \"Watchmen\", an awful lot of the comics field devoted to these grim, pessimistic, nasty, violent stories which kind of use \"Watchmen\" to validate what are, in effect, often just some very nasty stories that don't have a lot to recommend them\". Gibbons said that while readers \"were left with the idea that it was a grim and gritty kind of thing\", he said in his view the series was \"a wonderful celebration of superheroes as much as anything else\".\nPublication and reception.\n\"Watchmen\" was first mentioned publicly in the 1985 \"Amazing Heroes Preview\". When Moore and Gibbons turned in the first issue of their series to DC, Gibbons recalled, \"What really clinched it [...] was [writer/artist] Howard Chaykin, who doesn't give praise lightly, and who came up and said, 'Dave what you've done on \"Watchmen\" is freaking A.'\" Speaking in 1986, Moore said, \"DC backed us all the way [...] and have been really supportive about even the most graphic excesses\". To promote the series, DC Comics released a limited-edition badge (\"button\") display card set, featuring characters and images from the series. Ten thousand sets of the four badges, including a replica of the blood-stained smiley face badge worn by the Comedian in the story, were released and sold. Mayfair Games introduced a \"Watchmen\" module for its \"DC Heroes\" Role-playing Game series that was released before the series concluded. The module, which was endorsed by Moore (who also provided story assistance), adds details to the series' backstory by portraying events that occurred in 1966.\n\"Watchmen\" was published in single-issue form over the course of 1986 and 1987. The limited series was a commercial success, and its sales helped DC Comics briefly overtake its competitor Marvel Comics in the comic book direct market. The series' publishing schedule ran into delays because it was scheduled with three issues completed instead of the six editor Len Wein believed were necessary. Further delays were caused when later issues each took more than a month to complete. One contemporaneous report noted that although DC solicited issue #12 for publication in April 1987, it became apparent \"it [wouldn't] debut until July or August\".\nAfter the series concluded, the individual issues were collected and sold in trade paperback form. Along with Frank Miller's 1986 \"Batman: The Dark Knight Returns\" miniseries, \"Watchmen\" was marketed as a \"graphic novel\", a term that allowed DC and other publishers to sell similar comic book collections in a way that associated them with novels and dissociated them from comics. As a result of the publicity given to the books like the \"Watchmen\" trade in 1987, bookstores and public libraries began to devote special shelves to them. Subsequently, new comics series were commissioned on the basis of reprinting them in a collected form for these markets.\n\"Watchmen\" received critical praise, both inside and outside of the comics industry. \"Time\" magazine, which noted that the series was \"by common assent the best of breed\" of the new wave of comics published at the time, praised \"Watchmen\" as \"a superlative feat of imagination, combining sci-fi, political satire, knowing evocations of comics past and bold reworkings of current graphic formats into a dysutopian [\"sic\"] mystery story\". In 1988, \"Watchmen\" received a Hugo Award in the Other Forms category. According to Gibbons, Moore had his award placed upside down in his garden and used it as a bird table. Watchmen received the Locus Award for Best Non-fiction in 1988, a point at which the Locus Awards did not have a category for illustrated works.\nDave Langford reviewed \"Watchmen\" for \"White Dwarf\" #96, and stated that \"The modern myth of the Superhero is curiously powerful despite its usual silliness; \"Watchmen\" lovingly disassembles the mythology into bloodstained cogs and ratchets, concluding with the famous quotation \"Quis custodiet ipsos custodes?\"\"\nOwnership disputes.\nDisagreements about the ownership of the story ultimately led Moore to sever ties with DC Comics. Not wanting to work under a work for hire arrangement, Moore and Gibbons had a reversion clause in their contract for \"Watchmen\". Speaking at the 1985 San Diego Comic-Con, Moore said: \"The way it works, if I understand it, is that DC owns it for the time they're publishing it, and then it reverts to Dave and me, so we can make all the money from the Slurpee cups.\" For \"Watchmen\", Moore and Gibbons received eight percent of the series' earnings. Moore explained in 1986 that his understanding was that when \"DC have not used the characters for a year, they're ours.\" Both Moore and Gibbons said DC paid them \"a substantial amount of money\" to retain the rights. Moore added, \"So basically they're not ours, but if DC is working with the characters in our interests then they might as well be. On the other hand, if the characters have outlived their natural life span and DC doesn't want to do anything with them, then after a year we've got them and we can do what we want with them, which I'm perfectly happy with.\"\nMoore said he left DC in 1989 due to the language in his contracts for \"Watchmen\" and his \"V for Vendetta\" series with artist David Lloyd. Moore felt the reversion clauses were ultimately meaningless because DC did not intend to let the publications go out of print. He told \"The New York Times\" in 2006, \"I said, 'Fair enough\u00a0... You have managed to successfully swindle me, and so I will never work for you again.'\" In 2000, Moore publicly distanced himself from DC's plans for a 15th anniversary \"Watchmen\" hardcover release as well as a proposed line of action figures from DC Direct. While DC wanted to mend its relationship with the writer, Moore felt the company was not treating him fairly in regard to his America's Best Comics imprint (launched under the WildStorm comic imprint, which was bought by DC in 1998; Moore was promised no direct interference by DC as part of the arrangement). Moore added, \"As far as I'm concerned, the 15th anniversary of \"Watchmen\" is purely a 15th Anniversary of when DC managed to take the \"Watchmen\" property from me and Dave [Gibbons].\" Soon afterward, DC Direct canceled the \"Watchmen\" action-figure line, despite the company having displayed prototypes at the 2000 San Diego Comic-Con.\nPrequel projects.\nMoore stated in 1985 that if the limited series was well-received, he and Gibbons would possibly create a 12-issue prequel series called \"Minutemen\" featuring the 1940s superhero group from the story. DC offered Moore and Gibbons chances to publish prequels to the series, such as \"Rorschach's Journal\" or \"The Comedian's Vietnam War Diary\", as well as hinting at the possibility of other authors using the same universe. Tales of the Comedian's Vietnam War experiences were floated because \"The 'Nam\" was popular at the time, while another suggestion was, according to Gibbons, for a \"Nite Owl/Rorschach team\" (in the manner of \"Randall and Hopkirk (Deceased)\"). Neither man felt the stories would have gone anywhere, with Moore particularly adamant that DC not go forward with stories by other individuals. Gibbons was more attracted to the idea of a \"Minutemen\" series because it would have \"[paid] homage to the simplicity and unsophisticated nature of Golden Age comic books\u2014with the added dramatic interest that it would be a story whose conclusion is already known. It would be, perhaps, interesting to see how we got to the conclusion.\"\nTwo prequel stories were published as \"Watchmen: Who Watches the Watchmen?\" and \"Watchmen: Taking Out the Trash\" in 1987. These were modules to the DC Heroes role-playing game, with \"Taking Out the Trash\" being notable as the only Watchmen spin-off material with direct involvement by Alan Moore (he is credited with \"Special design and concepts contribution\" as well as co-writing the essay \"The World of the Watchmen\" with game author Ray Winninger).\nIn 2010, Moore told \"Wired\" that DC offered him the rights to \"Watchmen\" back if he would agree to prequel and sequel projects. Moore said that \"if they said that 10 years ago, when I asked them for that, then yeah it might have worked [...] But these days I don't want \"Watchmen\" back. Certainly, I don't want it back under those kinds of terms.\" DC Comics co-publishers Dan DiDio and Jim Lee responded: \"DC Comics would only revisit these iconic characters if the creative vision of any proposed new stories matched the quality set by Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons nearly 25 years ago, and our first discussion on any of this would naturally be with the creators themselves.\" Following months of rumors about a potential \"Watchmen\" follow-up project, in February 2012 DC announced it was publishing seven prequel series under the \"Before Watchmen\" banner. Among the creators involved were writers J. Michael Straczynski, Brian Azzarello, Darwyn Cooke, and Len Wein, and artists Lee Bermejo, J. G. Jones, Adam Hughes, Andy Kubert, Joe Kubert, and Amanda Conner. Though Moore had no involvement with \"Before Watchmen\", Gibbons supplied the project with a statement in the initial press announcement:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The original series of \"Watchmen\" is the complete story that Alan Moore and I wanted to tell. However, I appreciate DC's reasons for this initiative and the wish of the artists and writers involved to pay tribute to our work. May these new additions have the success they desire.\nSequels.\nComic book sequel: \"Doomsday Clock\".\nThe sequel to \"Watchmen\", entitled \"Doomsday Clock\", is part of the DC Rebirth line of comics, additionally continuing a narrative established with 2016's one-shot \"\" and 2017's crossover \"The Button\", both of which featured Doctor Manhattan in a minor capacity. The miniseries, taking place seven years after the events of \"Watchmen\" in November 1992, follows Ozymandias as he attempts to locate Doctor Manhattan alongside Reginald Long, the successor of Walter Kovacs as Rorschach, following the exposure and subsequent failure of his plan for peace and the subsequent impending nuclear war between the United States and Russia. The series was revealed on May 14, 2017, with a teaser image displaying the Superman logo in the 12 o'clock slot of the clock depicted in \"Watchmen\" and the series title in the bold typeface used for \"Watchmen\". The first of a planned twelve issues was released on November 22, 2017.\nThe story includes many DC characters but has a particular focus on Superman and Doctor Manhattan, despite Superman stated as being a fictional character in the original series\u2014the series uses the plot element of the multiverse. Writer Geoff Johns felt like there was an interesting story to be told in Rebirth with Doctor Manhattan. He thought there was an interesting dichotomy between Superman\u2014an alien who embodies and is compassionate for humanity\u2014and Doctor Manhattan\u2014a human who has detached himself from humanity. This led to over six months of debates among the creative team about whether to intersect the \"Watchmen\" universe with the DC Universe, through the plot element of alternate realities. He explained that \"Doomsday Clock\" was the \"most personal and most epic, utterly mind-bending project\" that he had worked on in his career.\nTelevision series sequel.\nHBO brought on Damon Lindelof to develop a \"Watchmen\" television show, which premiered on October 20, 2019. Lindelof, a fan of the limited series, made the show a \"remix\" of the comic, narratively a sequel while introducing a new set of characters and story that he felt made the work unique enough without being a full reboot of the comic series. Among its main cast are Regina King, Don Johnson, Tim Blake Nelson, Yahya Abdul-Mateen II, and Jeremy Irons. The television show takes place in 2019, 34 years after the end of the limited series, and is primarily set in Tulsa, Oklahoma. Due to liberal policies set by President Robert Redford to provide reparations to those affected by racial violence, white supremacist groups (following the writings of Rorschach) attack the police who enforce these policies, leading to laws requiring police to hide their identity and wear masks. This has allowed new masked crime fighters to assist the police against the supremacists. Doctor Manhattan, Adrian Veidt / Ozymandias, and Laurie Blake / Silk Spectre are central characters to the show's plot.\nAdaptations.\nFilm adaptation.\nThere have been numerous attempts to make a film version of \"Watchmen\" since 1986, when producers Lawrence Gordon and Joel Silver acquired film rights to the series for 20th Century Fox. Fox asked Alan Moore to write a screenplay based on his story, but he declined, so the studio enlisted screenwriter Sam Hamm. Hamm took the liberty of re-writing \"Watchmen\"'s complicated ending into a \"more manageable\" conclusion involving an assassination and a time paradox. Fox put the project into turnaround in 1991, and the project was moved to Warner Bros. Pictures, where Terry Gilliam was attached to direct and Charles McKeown to rewrite it. They used the character Rorschach's diary as a voice-over and restored scenes from the comic book that Hamm had removed. Gilliam and Silver were only able to raise $25 million for the film (a quarter of the necessary budget) because their previous films had gone over budget. Gilliam abandoned the project because he decided that \"Watchmen\" would have been unfilmable. \"Reducing [the story] to a two or two-and-a-half hour film [...] seemed to me to take away the essence of what \"Watchmen\" is about,\" he said. After Warner Bros. dropped the project, Gordon invited Gilliam back to helm the film independently. The director again declined, believing that the comic book would be better directed as a five-hour miniseries.\nIn October 2001, Gordon partnered with Lloyd Levin and Universal Studios, hiring David Hayter to write and direct. Hayter and the producers left Universal due to creative differences, and Gordon and Levin expressed interest in setting up \"Watchmen\" at Revolution Studios. The project did not hold together at Revolution Studios and subsequently fell apart. In July 2004, it was announced Paramount Pictures would produce \"Watchmen\", and they attached Darren Aronofsky to direct Hayter's script. Producers Gordon and Levin remained attached, collaborating with Aronofsky's producing partner, Eric Watson. Aronofsky left to focus on \"The Fountain\" and was replaced by Paul Greengrass. Ultimately, Paramount placed \"Watchmen\" in turnaround.\nIn October 2005, Gordon and Levin met with Warner Bros. to develop the film there again. Impressed with Zack Snyder's work on \"300\", Warner Bros. approached him to direct an adaptation of \"Watchmen\". Screenwriter Alex Tse drew from his favorite elements of Hayter's script, but also returned it to the original Cold War setting of the \"Watchmen\" comic. Similar to his approach to \"300\", Snyder used the comic book panel-grid as a storyboard and opted to shoot the entire film using live-action sets instead of green screens. He extended the fight scenes, and added a subplot about energy resources to make the film more topical. Although he intended to stay faithful to the look of the characters in the comic, Snyder intended Nite Owl to look scarier, and made Ozymandias' armor into a parody of the rubber muscle suits from the 1997 superhero film \"Batman &amp; Robin\". After the trailer to the film premiered in July 2008, DC Comics president Paul Levitz said that the company had to print more than 900,000 copies of \"Watchmen\" trade collection to meet the additional demand for the book that the advertising campaign had generated, with the total annual print run expected to be over one million copies. While 20th Century Fox filed a lawsuit to block the film's release, the studios eventually settled, with Warner agreeing to give Fox 8.5 percent of the film's worldwide gross, including from sequels and spin-offs in return. The film was released to theaters in March 2009 to mixed reviews and grossed $185 million worldwide.\n\"Tales of the Black Freighter\" was adapted as a direct-to-video animated feature from Warner Premiere and Warner Bros. Animation, which was released on March 24, 2009. It was originally included in the screenplay for the \"Watchmen\" film, but was cut due to budget restrictions, as the segment would have added $20 million to the budget, because Snyder wanted to film it in a stylized manner reminiscent of \"300\". Gerard Butler, who starred in \"300\", voices the Captain in the film, having been promised a role in \"Watchmen\" that never materialized.\nJared Harris voices his deceased friend Ridley, whom the Captain hallucinates is talking to him. Snyder had Butler and Harris record their parts together. Snyder considered including the animated film in the final cut, but the film was already approaching a three-hour running time. The \"Tales of the Black Freighter\" was given standalone DVD release which also includes \"Under the Hood\", a documentary detailing the characters' backstories, named after the character Hollis Mason's (the first Nite Owl) memoirs. The film itself was released on DVD four months after \"Tales of the Black Freighter\", and in November 2009, a four-disc set was released as the \"Ultimate Cut\" with the animated film edited back into the main picture. The director's cut and the extended version of \"Watchmen\" both include \"Tales of the Black Freighter\" on their DVD releases.\nLen Wein, the comic's editor, wrote a video game prequel entitled \"\".\nDave Gibbons became an adviser on Snyder's film, but Moore has refused to have his name attached to any film adaptations of his work. Moore has stated he has no interest in seeing Snyder's adaptation; he told \"Entertainment Weekly\" in 2008 that \"[t]here are things that we did with \"Watchmen\" that could only work in a comic, and were indeed designed to show off things that other media can't\". While Moore believes that David Hayter's screenplay was \"as close as I could imagine anyone getting to \"Watchmen\"\", he asserted he did not intend to see the film if it were made.\nMotion comic.\nIn 2008, Warner Bros. Entertainment released \"Watchmen Motion Comics\", a series of narrated animations of the original comic book. The first chapter was released for purchase in the summer of 2008 on digital video stores, such as iTunes Store. A DVD compiling the full motion comic series was released in March 2009.\nAnimated film.\nWarner Bros. announced in April 2017 that they would develop an R-rated animated film based on the comic book. A teaser trailer was released on June 13, 2024, and revealed it to be a two-part film.\n\"Watchmen Chapter I\" received a digital release on August 13, 2024, and Blu-ray and 4K Ultra HD release on August 27, 2024, \"Watchmen Chapter II\" released on November 26, 2024.\nArrowverse.\nThe HBO version of the \"Watchmen\" was referenced in the Arrowverse's \"Crisis on Infinite Earths\" crossover.\nMusic.\nIn 2025, Sevan Kirder's Thalassor released a concept album based on Watchmen, named \"The End is Nigh\"\nLegacy.\nA critical and commercial success, \"Watchmen\" is highly regarded in the comics industry and is frequently considered by several critics and reviewers as comics' greatest series and graphic novel. In addition to being one of the first major works to help popularize the graphic novel publishing format alongside \"The Dark Knight Returns\", \"Watchmen\" has also become one of the best-selling graphic novels ever published. \"Watchmen\" was the only graphic novel to appear on \"Time\"'s 2005 \"All-\"Time\" 100 Greatest Novels\" list, where \"Time\" critic Lev Grossman described the story as \"a heart-pounding, heartbreaking read and a watershed in the evolution of a young medium.\" It later appeared on \"Time\"'s 2009 \"Top 10 Graphic Novels\" list, where Grossman further praised \"Watchmen\", proclaiming \"It's way beyond clich\u00e9 at this point to call \"Watchmen\" the greatest superhero comic ever written-slash-drawn. But it's true.\" In 2008, \"Entertainment Weekly\" placed \"Watchmen\" at number 13 on its list of the best 50 novels printed in the last 25 years, describing it as \"The greatest superhero story ever told and proof that comics are capable of smart, emotionally resonant narratives worthy of the label 'literature'.\" \"The Comics Journal\", however, ranked \"Watchmen\" at number 91 on its list of the Top 100 English-language comics of the 20th century.\nIn \"Art of the Comic Book: An Aesthetic History\", Robert Harvey wrote that, with \"Watchmen\", Moore and Gibbons \"had demonstrated as never before the capacity of the [comic book] medium to tell a sophisticated story that could be engineered only in comics\". In his review of the Absolute Edition of the collection, Dave Itzkoff of \"The New York Times\" wrote that the dark legacy of \"Watchmen\", \"one that Moore almost certainly never intended, whose DNA is encoded in the increasingly black inks and bleak storylines that have become the essential elements of the contemporary superhero comic book,\" is \"a domain he has largely ceded to writers and artists who share his fascination with brutality but not his interest in its consequences, his eagerness to tear down old boundaries but not his drive to find new ones.\" Alan Moore himself said his intentions with works like \"Marvelman\" and \"Watchmen\" were to liberate comics and open them up to new and fresh ideas, thus creating more diversity in the comics world by showing the industry what could be done with already existing concepts. Instead it had the opposite effect, confining the superhero comic to a \"depressive ghetto of grimness and psychosis\". In 2009, Lydia Millet of \"The Wall Street Journal\" contested that \"Watchmen\" was worthy of such acclaim, and wrote that while the series' \"vividly drawn panels, moody colors and lush imagery make its popularity well-deserved, if disproportionate\", that \"it's simply bizarre to assert that, as an illustrated literary narrative, it rivals in artistic merit, say, masterpieces like Chris Ware's 'Acme Novelty Library' or almost any part of the witty and brilliant work of Edward Gorey\".\n\"Watchmen\" was one of the two comic books, alongside \"Batman: The Dark Knight Returns\", that inspired designer Vincent Connare when he created the Comic Sans font.\nIn 2009, Brain Scan Studios released the parody \"Watchmensch\", a comic in which writer Rich Johnston chronicled \"the debate surrounding \"Watchmen\", the original contracts, the current legal suits over the Fox contract\".\nAlso in 2009, to coincide with the release of the \"Watchmen\" movie, IDW Publishing produced a parody one-shot comic titled \"Whatmen?!\"\nGrant Morrison wrote a scene in \"Pax Americana\" (2014) where a child shoots his father in the head with his own gun, killing him. This was meant to symbolize Morrison's opinion about how the limited series had a negative impact on the superhero genre: \"it's Watchmen's shot to the head of the American superhero.\"\nIn September 2016, Hasslein Books published \"Watching Time: The Unauthorized Watchmen Chronology\", by author Rich Handley. The book provides a detailed history of the \"Watchmen\" franchise.\nIn December 2017, DC Entertainment published \"Watchmen: Annotated\", a fully annotated black-and-white edition of the graphic novel, edited, with an introduction and notes by Leslie S. Klinger (who previously annotated Neil Gaiman's \"The Sandman\" for DC). The edition contains extensive materials from Alan Moore's original scripts and was written with the full collaboration of Dave Gibbons.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33819", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33819", "title": "Werner Karl Heisenberg", "text": ""}
{"id": "33820", "revid": "2304267", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33820", "title": "Wassily Kandinsky", "text": "Russian painter and art theorist (1866\u20131944)\nWassily Wassilyevich Kandinsky (16 December\u00a0[O.S. 4 December]\u00a01866\u00a0\u2013 13 December 1944) was a Russian painter and art theorist. Kandinsky is generally credited as one of the pioneers of abstraction in western art. Born in Moscow, he began painting studies (life-drawing, sketching and anatomy) at the age of\u00a030.\nIn 1896, Kandinsky settled in Munich, studying first at Anton A\u017ebe's private school and then at the Academy of Fine Arts. During this time, he was first the teacher and then the partner of German artist Gabriele M\u00fcnter. He returned to Moscow in 1914 after the outbreak of World War I. Following the Russian Revolution, Kandinsky \"became an insider in the cultural administration of Anatoly Lunacharsky\" and helped establish the Museum of the Culture of Painting. However, by then, \"his spiritual outlook... was foreign to the argumentative materialism of Soviet society\" and opportunities beckoned in Germany, to which he returned in 1920. There, he taught at the Bauhaus school of art and architecture from 1922 until the Nazis closed it in 1933. He then moved to France, where he lived for the rest of his life, becoming a French citizen in 1939 and producing some of his most prominent art. He died in Neuilly-sur-Seine in 1944.\nEarly life.\nKandinsky was born in Moscow, the son of Lidia Ticheeva and Vassily Silvestrovich Kandinsky, a tea merchant. One of his great-grandmothers was Princess Gantimurova. Kandinsky learned from a variety of sources while in Moscow. He studied many fields while in school, including law and economics. Later in life, he would recall being fascinated and stimulated by colour as a child. His fascination with colour symbolism and psychology continued as he grew.\nIn 1889, at age 23, he was part of an ethnographic research group that travelled to the Vologda region north of Moscow. In \"Looks on the Past\", he relates that the houses and churches were decorated with such shimmering colours that upon entering them, he felt that he was moving into a painting. This experience, as well as his study of the region's folk art (particularly the use of bright colours on a dark background), were reflected in much of his early work.\nA few years later, he first likened painting to composing music in the manner for which he would become noted, writing \"Colour is the keyboard, the eyes are the harmony, the soul is the piano with many strings. The artist is the hand which plays, touching one key or another, to cause vibrations in the soul\".\nKandinsky was also the uncle of Russian-French philosopher Alexandre Koj\u00e8ve (1902\u20131968).\nArtistic periods.\nKandinsky's creation of abstract work followed a long period of development and maturation of intense thought based on his artistic experiences. He called this devotion to inner beauty, fervor of spirit and spiritual desire \"inner necessity\"; it was a central aspect of his art. Some art historians suggest that Kandinsky's passion for abstract art began when one day, coming back home, he found one of his own paintings hanging upside down in his studio and he stared at it for a while before realizing it was his own work, suggesting to him the potential power of abstraction.\nIn 1896, at the age of 30, Kandinsky gave up a promising career teaching law and economics to enroll in the Munich Academy where his teachers would eventually include Franz von Stuck. He was not immediately granted admission and began learning art on his own. That same year, before leaving Moscow, he saw an exhibit of paintings by Monet. He was particularly taken with the impressionistic style of \"Haystacks\"; this, to him, had a powerful sense of colour almost independent of the objects themselves. Later, he would write about this experience:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;That it was a haystack the catalogue informed me. I could not recognise it. This non-recognition was painful to me. I considered that the painter had no right to paint indistinctly. I dully felt that the object of the painting was missing. And I noticed with surprise and confusion that the picture not only gripped me, but impressed itself ineradicably on my memory. Painting took on a fairy-tale power and splendour.\u2014\u200a\nKandinsky was similarly influenced during this period by Richard Wagner's \"Lohengrin\" which, he felt, pushed the limits of music and melody beyond standard lyricism. He was also spiritually influenced by Madame Blavatsky (1831\u20131891), the best-known exponent of theosophy. Theosophical theory postulates that creation is a geometrical progression, beginning with a single point. The creative aspect of the form is expressed by a descending series of circles, triangles, and squares. Kandinsky's book \"Concerning the Spiritual in Art\" (1910) and \"Point and Line to Plane\" (1926) echoed this theosophical tenet. Illustrations by John Varley in \"Thought-Forms\" (1901) influenced him visually.\nMetamorphosis.\nIn the summer of 1902, Kandinsky invited Gabriele M\u00fcnter to join him at his summer painting classes just south of Munich in the Alps. She accepted the offer and their relationship became more personal than professional.\nArt school, usually considered difficult, was easy for Kandinsky. It was during this time that he began to emerge as an art theorist as well as a painter. The number of his existing paintings increased at the beginning of the 20th century; much remains of the landscapes and towns he painted, using broad swaths of colour and recognisable forms. For the most part, however, Kandinsky's paintings did not feature any human figures; an exception is \"Sunday, Old Russia\" (1904), in which Kandinsky recreates a highly colourful (and fanciful) view of peasants and nobles in front of the walls of a town. \"Couple on Horseback\" (1907) depicts a man on horseback, holding a woman as they ride past a Russian town with luminous walls across a blue river. The horse is muted while the leaves in the trees, the town, and the reflections in the river glisten with spots of colour and brightness. This work demonstrates the influence of pointillism in the way the depth of field is collapsed into a flat, luminescent surface. Fauvism is also apparent in these early works. Colours are used to express Kandinsky's experience of subject matter, not to describe objective nature.\nPerhaps the most important of his paintings from the first decade of the 1900s was \"The Blue Rider\" (1903), which shows a small cloaked figure on a speeding horse rushing through a rocky meadow. The rider's cloak is medium blue, which casts a darker-blue shadow. In the foreground are more amorphous blue shadows, the counterparts of the fall trees in the background. The blue rider in the painting is prominent (but not clearly defined), and the horse has an unnatural gait (which Kandinsky must have known) . This intentional disjunction, allowing viewers to participate in the creation of the artwork, became an increasingly conscious technique used by Kandinsky in subsequent years; it culminated in the abstract works of the 1911\u20131914 period. In \"The Blue Rider\", Kandinsky shows the rider more as a series of colours than in specific detail. This painting is not exceptional in that regard when compared with contemporary painters, but it shows the direction Kandinsky would take only a few years later.\nFrom 1906 to 1908, Kandinsky spent a great deal of time travelling across Europe (he was an associate of the Blue Rose symbolist group of Moscow) until he settled in the small Bavarian town of Murnau. In 1908, he bought a copy of \"Thought-Forms\" by Annie Besant and Charles Webster Leadbeater. In 1909, he joined the Theosophical Society. \"The Blue Mountain\" (1908\u20131909) was painted at this time, demonstrating his trend toward abstraction. A mountain of blue is flanked by two broad trees, one yellow and one red. A procession, with three riders and several others, crosses at the bottom. The faces, clothing, and saddles of the riders are each a single colour, and neither they nor the walking figures display any real detail. The flat planes and the contours also are indicative of Fauvist influence. The broad use of colour in \"The Blue Mountain\" illustrates Kandinsky's inclination toward an art in which colour is presented independently of form, and in which each colour is given equal attention. The composition is more planar; the painting is divided into four sections: the sky, the red tree, the yellow tree, and the blue mountain with the three riders.\nIn 1909, Wassily Kandinsky witnessed a presentation Aleksandra Unkovskaya made (at the Theosophical Congress in Budapest) regarding her innovative system in music education, sound-to-colour synesthesia or Chromesthesia which is a type of synesthesia in which sound involuntarily evokes an experience of colour, shape and movement, which led to his own discoveries in his art. Kandinsky stated: \"\"to impress a tune upon unmusical children with the help of colours... She (Unkovskaya) has constructed a special, precise method of 'translating' the colorus of nature into music, of painting the sounds of nature, of seeing sounds.\"\" This transcended the spiritual in art and led him to develop the concept and formula of a chain reaction experience (reciprocal relationship/artist and viewer): \"Emotion \u2014 sensation \u2014 the work of art \u2014 sensation \u2014 emotion.\" The concept was based on the principle of the resonance of string instruments.\nBlue Rider Period (1911\u20131914).\nKandinsky's paintings from this period are large, expressive coloured masses evaluated independently from forms and lines; these serve no longer to delimit them, but overlap freely to form paintings of extraordinary force. Music was important to the birth of abstract art since it is abstract by nature; it does not try to represent the exterior world, but expresses the inner feelings of the soul in an immediate way. Kandinsky sometimes used musical terms to identify his works; he called his most spontaneous paintings \"improvisations\" and described more elaborate works as \"compositions.\"\nIn addition to painting, Kandinsky was an art theorist; his influence on the history of Western art stems perhaps more from his theoretical works than from his paintings. He helped found the Neue K\u00fcnstlervereinigung M\u00fcnchen (Munich New Artists' Association), becoming its president in 1909. However, the group could not integrate the radical approach of Kandinsky (and others) with conventional artistic concepts and the group dissolved in late 1911. Kandinsky then formed a new group, \"The Blue Rider\" (\"Der Blaue Reiter\") with like-minded artists such as August Macke, Franz Marc, Albert Bloch, and Gabriele M\u00fcnter. The group released an almanac (\"The Blue Rider Almanac\") and held two exhibits. More of each were planned, but the outbreak of World War I in 1914 ended these plans and sent Kandinsky back to Russia via Switzerland and Sweden.\nHis writing in \"The Blue Rider Almanac\" and the treatise \"On the Spiritual in Art\" (which was released in 1910) were both a defence and promotion of abstract art and an affirmation that all forms of art were equally capable of reaching a level of spirituality. He believed that colour could be used in a painting as something autonomous, apart from the visual description of an object or other form.\nThese ideas had an almost-immediate international impact, particularly in the English-speaking world. As early as 1912, \"On the Spiritual in Art\" was reviewed by Michael Sadleir in the London-based \"Art News.\" Interest in Kandinsky grew quickly when Sadleir published an English translation of \"On the Spiritual in Art\" in 1914. Extracts from the book were published that year in Percy Wyndham Lewis's periodical \"Blast,\" and Alfred Orage's weekly cultural newspaper \"The New Age\". Kandinsky had received some notice earlier in Britain, however; in 1910, he participated in the Allied Artists' Exhibition (organised by Frank Rutter) at London's Royal Albert Hall. This resulted in his work being singled out for praise in a review of that show by the artist Spencer Frederick Gore in \"The Art News\".\nSadleir's interest in Kandinsky also led to Kandinsky's first works entering a British art collection; Sadleir's father, Michael Sadler, acquired several wood-prints and the abstract painting \"Fragment for Composition VII\" in 1913 following a visit by father and son to meet Kandinsky in Munich that year. These works were displayed in Leeds, either in the university or the premises of the Leeds Arts Club, between 1913 and 1923.\nReturn to Russia (1914\u20131921).\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;The sun melts all of Moscow down to a single spot that, like a mad tuba, starts all of the heart and all of the soul vibrating. But no, this uniformity of red is not the most beautiful hour. It is only the final chord of a symphony that takes every colour to the zenith of life that, like the fortissimo of a great orchestra, is both compelled and allowed by Moscow to ring out.\u2014\u200a\nBack in Germany and the Bauhaus (1922\u20131933).\nIn May 1922, he attended the International Congress of Progressive Artists and signed the \"Founding Proclamation of the Union of Progressive International Artists\".\nKandinsky taught the basic design class for beginners and the course on advanced theory at the Bauhaus; he also conducted painting classes and a workshop in which he augmented his colour theory with new elements of form psychology. The development of his works on forms study, particularly on points and line forms, led to the publication of his second theoretical book (\"Point and Line to Plane\") in 1926. His examinations of the effects of forces on straight lines, leading to the contrasting tones of curved and angled lines, coincided with the research of Gestalt psychologists, whose work was also discussed at the Bauhaus. Geometrical elements took on increasing importance in both his teaching and painting\u2014particularly the circle, half-circle, the angle, straight lines and curves. This period was intensely productive. This freedom is characterised in his works by the treatment of planes rich in colours and gradations\u2014as in \"Yellow \u2013 red \u2013 blue\" (1925), where Kandinsky illustrates his distance from the constructivism and suprematism movements influential at the time.\nThe \"Yellow \u2013 red \u2013 blue\" (1925) of several main forms: a vertical yellow rectangle, an inclined red cross and a large dark blue circle; a multitude of straight (or sinuous) black lines, circular arcs, monochromatic circles and scattered, coloured checker-boards contribute to its delicate complexity. This simple visual identification of forms and the main coloured masses present on the canvas is only a first approach to the inner reality of the work, whose appreciation necessitates deeper observation\u2014not only of forms and colours involved in the painting but their relationship, their absolute and relative positions on the canvas and their harmony.\nKandinsky was one of \"Die Blaue Vier\" (\"The Blue Four\"), which was a group that was formed in 1923 with Paul Klee, Lyonel Feininger and Alexej von Jawlensky at the instigation of Galka Scheyer, who promoted their work in the United States from 1924 onward. Due to right-wing hostility, the Bauhaus left Weimar for Dessau in 1925. Following a Nazi smear campaign, the Bauhaus left Dessau in 1932 for Berlin, where it remained until its dissolution in July 1933. Kandinsky then left Germany, settling in Paris.\nGreat Synthesis (1934\u20131944).\nLiving in an apartment in Paris, Kandinsky created his work in a living-room studio. Biomorphic forms with supple, non-geometric outlines appear in his paintings\u2014forms which suggest microscopic organisms but express the artist's inner life. Kandinsky used original colour compositions, evoking Slavic popular art. He also occasionally mixed sand with paint to give a granular, rustic texture to his paintings.\nThis period corresponds to a synthesis of Kandinsky's previous work in which he used all elements, enriching them. In 1936 and 1939, he painted his final two major compositions, the type of elaborate canvases he had not produced for many years. \"Composition IX\" has highly contrasted, powerful diagonals whose central form gives the impression of an embryo in the womb. Small squares of colours and coloured bands stand out against the black background of \"Composition X\" as star fragments (or filaments), while enigmatic hieroglyphs with pastel tones cover a large maroon mass which seems to float in the upper-left corner of the canvas. In Kandinsky's work, some characteristics are obvious, while certain touches are more discreet and veiled; they reveal themselves only progressively to those who deepen their connection with his work. He intended his forms (which he subtly harmonised and placed) to resonate with the observer's soul.\nKandinsky's conception of art.\nThe artist as prophet.\nWriting that \"music is the ultimate teacher\", Kandinsky embarked upon the first seven of his ten \"Compositions\". The first three survive only in black-and-white photographs taken by fellow artist and friend Gabriele M\u00fcnter. \"Composition I\" (1910) was destroyed by a British air raid on the city of Braunschweig in Lower Saxony on the night of 14 October 1944.\nWhile studies, sketches, and improvisations exist (particularly of \"Composition II\"), a Nazi raid on the Bauhaus in the 1930s resulted in the confiscation of Kandinsky's first three \"Compositions\". All three where destroyed during World War II.\nSome of Kandinsky's works such as his now-lost painting \"Zweierlei Rot\" (1916) were displayed in the state-sponsored Degenerate Art exhibition. Works confiscated during the \"degenerate art\" campaign were either sold, exchanged or destroyed. A full inventory of more than 16,000 pieces of art can be accessed through the Victory and Albert Museum website. This includes works by Kandinsky.\nFascinated by Christian eschatology and the perception of a coming New Age, a common theme among Kandinsky's first seven \"Compositions\" is the apocalypse (the end of the world as we know it). Writing of the \"artist as prophet\" in his book, \"Concerning the Spiritual in Art\", Kandinsky created paintings in the years immediately preceding World War I showing a coming cataclysm which would alter individual and social reality. Having a devout belief in Orthodox Christianity, Kandinsky drew upon the biblical stories of Noah's Ark, Jonah and the whale, Christ's resurrection, the four horsemen of the Apocalypse in the book of Revelation, Russian folktales and the common mythological experiences of death and rebirth. Never attempting to picture any one of these stories as a narrative, he used their veiled imagery as symbols of the archetypes of death\u2013rebirth and destruction\u2013creation he felt were imminent in the pre-World War I world.\nAs he stated in \"Concerning the Spiritual in Art\" (see below), Kandinsky felt that an authentic artist creating art from \"an internal necessity\" inhabits the tip of an upward-moving pyramid. This progressing pyramid is penetrating and proceeding into the future. What was odd or inconceivable yesterday is commonplace today; what is \"avant garde\" today (and understood only by the few) is common knowledge tomorrow. The modern artist\u2013prophet stands alone at the apex of the pyramid, making new discoveries and ushering in tomorrow's reality. Kandinsky was aware of recent scientific developments and the advances of modern artists who had contributed to radically new ways of seeing and experiencing the world.\n\"Composition IV\" and later paintings are primarily concerned with evoking a spiritual resonance in viewer and artist. As in his painting of the apocalypse by water (\"Composition VI\"), Kandinsky puts the viewer in the situation of experiencing these epic myths by translating them into contemporary terms (with a sense of desperation, flurry, urgency, and confusion). This spiritual communion of viewer-painting-artist/prophet may be described within the limits of words and images.\nArtistic and spiritual theorist.\nAs the \"Der Blaue Reiter Almanac\" essays and theorising with composer Arnold Schoenberg indicate, Kandinsky also expressed the communion between artist and viewer as being available to both the senses and the mind (synesthesia). Hearing tones and chords as he painted, Kandinsky theorised that (for example), yellow is the colour of middle C on a brassy trumpet; black is the colour of closure, and the end of things; and that combinations of colours produce vibrational frequencies, akin to chords played on a piano. In 1871 the young Kandinsky learned to play the piano and cello.\nKandinsky also developed a theory of geometric figures and their relationships, claiming (for example) that the circle is the most peaceful shape and represents the human soul. These theories are explained in \"Point and Line to Plane\".\nKandinsky's legendary stage design for a performance of Mussorgsky's \"Pictures at an Exhibition\" illustrates his synesthetic concept of a universal correspondence of forms, colours and musical sounds. In 1928, the stage production premiered at a theater in Dessau. In 2015, the original designs of the stage elements were animated with modern video technology and synchronized with the music according to the preparatory notes of Kandinsky and the director's script of Felix Klee.\nIn another episode with M\u00fcnter during the Bavarian abstract expressionist years, Kandinsky was working on \"Composition VI\". From nearly six months of study and preparation, he had intended the work to evoke a flood, baptism, destruction, and rebirth simultaneously. After outlining the work on a mural-sized wood panel, he became blocked and could not go on. M\u00fcnter told him that he was trapped in his intellect and not reaching the true subject of the picture. She suggested he simply repeat the word \"uberflut\" (\"deluge\" or \"flood\") and focus on its sound rather than its meaning. Repeating this word like a mantra, Kandinsky painted and completed the monumental work in a three-day span.\nSignature style.\nWassily Kandinsky's art has a confluence of music and spirituality. With his appreciation for music of his times and kinesthetic disposition, Kandinsky's artworks have a marked style of expressionism in his early years. But he embraced all types of artistic styles of his times and his predecessors i.e. Art Nouveau (sinuous organic forms), Fauvism and Blaue Reiter (shocking colours), Surrealism (mystery) and Bauhaus (constructivism) only to move towards abstractionism as he explored spirituality in art. His object-free paintings display spiritual abstraction suggested by sounds and emotions through a unity of sensation. Driven by the Christian faith and the inner necessity of an artist, his paintings have the ambiguity of the form rendered in a variety of colours as well as resistance against conventional aesthetic values of the art world.\nHis signature or individual style can be further defined and divided into three categories over the course of his art career: Impressions (representational element), Improvisations (spontaneous emotional reaction) and Compositions (ultimate works of art).\nAs Kandinsky started moving away from his early inspiration from Impressionism, his paintings became more vibrant, pictographic and expressive with more sharp shapes and clear linear qualities.\nBut eventually, Kandinsky went further, rejecting pictorial representation with more synesthetic swirling hurricanes of colours and shapes, eliminating traditional references to depth and laying out bare and abstracted glyphs; however, what remained consistent was his spiritual pursuit of expressive forms.\nEmotional harmony is another salient feature in the later works of Kandinsky. With diverse dimensions and bright hues balanced through a careful juxtaposition of proportion and colours, he substantiated the universality of shapes in his artworks thus paving the way for further abstraction.\nKandinsky often used black in his paintings to heighten the impact of brightly coloured forms while his forms were often biomorphic approaches to bring surrealism in his art.\nTheoretical writings on art.\nKandinsky's analyses on forms and colours result not from simple, arbitrary idea-associations but from the painter's inner experience. He spent years creating abstract/sensorially rich paintings, working with form and colour, tirelessly observing his own paintings (along with those of other artists) and noting their effects on his sense of colour. This subjective experience is something that anyone can do\u2014not scientific/objective observations, but inner/subjective ones, referred to by French philosopher Michel Henry as \"absolute subjectivity\" or the \"absolute phenomenological life\".\nPublished in Munich in 1911, Kandinsky's text \"\u00dcber das Geistige in der Kunst\" (\"Concerning the spiritual in art\") defines three types of painting: \"impressions\", \"improvisations\" and \"compositions\". While impressions are based on an external reality that serves as a starting point, improvisations and compositions depict images emergent from the unconscious, though \"composition\" is developed from a more formal point of view.\nPersonal life.\nAfter graduating in 1892, Kandinsky married his cousin, Anja Chimiakina, and became a lecturer in Jurisprudence at the University of Moscow.\nIn the summer of 1902, Kandinsky invited Gabriele M\u00fcnter to join him at his summer painting classes just south of Munich in the Alps. She accepted the offer and their relationship became more personal than professional. In 1911, the German expressionist painter was one of several artists joining Kandinsky in his \"Blue Rider\" (\"Der Blaue Reiter\") group, which ended with the onset of World War I.\nKandinsky and M\u00fcnter became engaged in the summer of 1903 while he was still married to Anja and travelled extensively through Europe, Russia and North Africa until 1908. He separated from Anja in 1911.\nFrom 1906 to 1908, Kandinsky travelled across Europe. In 1909, M\u00fcnter bought a summerhouse in the small Bavarian town of Murnau and the couple happily entertained colleagues there. The property is still known as Russenhaus and she would later use the basement to hide many works (by Kandinsky and others) from the Nazis. Upon returning to Munich, Kandinsky founded the Neue Kunstler Vereinigung (New Artists' Association) in 1909.\nHe returned to Moscow in 1914 when the first World War broke out. The relationship between Kandinsky and M\u00fcnter worsened due to mutual tensions and disappointments over his lack of commitment to marriage. Their relationship formally ended in 1916 in Stockholm.\nIn 1916, he met Nina Nikolaevna Andreevskaya (1899\u20131980), whom he married on 11 February 1917 when she was 17 or 18 and he was 50 years old. At the end of 1917, they had a son, Wsevolod, or Lodya as he was called in the family. Lodya died in June 1920 and there were no more children.\nAfter the Russian Revolution, he had opportunities in Germany, to which he returned in 1920. There, he taught at the Bauhaus school of art and architecture from 1922 until the Nazis closed it in 1933.\nHe then moved to France with his wife, where he lived for the rest of his life, becoming a French citizen in 1939 and producing some of his most prominent art.\nHe died in Neuilly-sur-Seine on 13 December 1944.\nArt market.\nIn 2012, Christie's auctioned Kandinsky's \"Studie f\u00fcr Improvisation 8 (Study for Improvisation 8)\", a 1909 view of a man wielding a broadsword in a rainbow-hued village, for $23\u00a0million. The painting had been on loan to the Kunstmuseum Winterthur in Switzerland since 1960 and was sold to a European collector by the Volkart Foundation, the charitable arm of the Swiss commodities trading firm Volkart Brothers. Before this sale, the artist's last record was set in 1990 when Sotheby's sold his \"Fugue\" (1914) for $20.9\u00a0million. On 16 November 2016, Christie's auctioned Kandinsky's \"Rigide et courb\u00e9\" (\"Rigid and bent\"), a large 1935 abstract painting, for $23.3\u00a0million, a new record for Kandinsky. Solomon R. Guggenheim originally purchased the painting directly from the artist in 1936, but it was not exhibited after 1949; it was then sold at auction to a private collector in 1964 by the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.\nNazi-looted art.\nIn July 2001, Jen Lissitzky, the son of artist El Lissitzky, filed a restitution claim against the Beyeler Foundation in Basel, Switzerland for Kandinsky's \"Improvisation No. 10\". A settlement was reached in 2002.\nIn 2013, the Lewenstein family filed a claim for the restitution of Kandinsky's \"Painting with Houses\" held by the Stedelijk Museum. In 2020, a committee established by the Dutch minister of culture found fault with the behaviour of the Restitution Committee, causing a scandal where two of its members, including its chairman, resigned. Later that year, a court in Amsterdam ruled that the Stedelijk Museum could retain the painting from the Jewish Lewenstein collection despite the Nazi theft. However, in August 2021, the Amsterdam City Council decided to return the painting to the Lewenstein family.\nIn 2017, Robert Colin Lewenstein, Francesca Manuela Davis and Elsa Hannchen Guidotti filed suit against Bayerische Landesbank (BLB) for the restitution of Kandinsky's \"Das Bunte Leben.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33821", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33821", "title": "Whistleblowing", "text": "Exposing of scandalous activity\nWhistleblowing (also whistle-blowing or whistle blowing) is the activity of a person, often an employee, revealing information about activity within a private or public organization that is deemed wrongful\u00a0\u2013 whether it be illegal, immoral, illicit, unsafe, unethical, or fraudulent. Whistleblowers can communicate in a variety of ways internally, and/or publicly. Over 83% of whistleblowers report internally to a supervisor, human resources, compliance, or a neutral third party within the company, hoping that the company will address and correct the issues. A whistleblower can also bring allegations to light by communicating with external entities, often becoming a source in investigative journalism or other media, or law enforcement or other government agents. Some countries legislate as to what constitutes a protected disclosure, and the permissible methods of presenting a disclosure. Whistleblowing can occur in the private sector or the public sector.\nWhistleblowers often face retaliation for their disclosure, including termination of employment. Several other actions may also be considered retaliatory, including an unreasonable increase in workloads, reduction of hours, preventing task completion, mobbing or bullying. Whistleblower protection laws in many countries offer some protection for whistleblowers and regulate whistleblowing activities. These laws tend to adopt different approaches to public and private sector whistleblowing.\nWhistleblowers do not always achieve their aims; for their claims to be credible and successful, they must have compelling evidence so that the government or regulating body can investigate them and hold corrupt companies and/or government agencies to account. To succeed, they must also persist in their efforts over what can often be years, in the face of extensive, coordinated and prolonged efforts that institutions can deploy to silence, discredit, isolate, and erode their financial and mental well-being.\nWhistleblowers have been likened to \u2018Prophets at work\u2019, but many lose their jobs, are victims of campaigns to discredit and isolate them, suffer financial and mental pressures, and some lose their lives.\nOverview.\nOrigin of term.\nAmerican civic activist Ralph Nader is said to have coined the phrase in the early 1970s in order to avoid the negative connotations found in other words such as \"informer\" and \"snitch\". However, the origins of the word date back to the 19th century.\nThe word is linked to the use of a whistle to alert the public or a crowd about such problems as the commission of a crime or the breaking of rules during a game. The phrase \"whistle blower\" attached itself to law enforcement officials in the 19th century because they used a whistle to alert the public or fellow police. Sports referees, who use a whistle to indicate an illegal or foul play, also were called whistleblowers.\nAn 1883 story in Wisconsin's Janesville Gazette called a policeman who used his whistle to alert citizens about a riot a \"whistle blower\", without the hyphen. By the year 1963, the phrase had become a hyphenated word, \"whistle-blower\". The word began to be used by journalists in the 1960s for people who revealed wrongdoing, such as Nader. It eventually evolved into the compound word \"whistleblower\".\nChannels for whistleblowing.\nInternal channels.\nMost whistleblowers are internal whistleblowers, who report misconduct on a fellow employee or superior within their company through anonymous reporting mechanisms often called hotlines. Within such situations, circumstances and factors can cause a person to either act on the spot to prevent/stop illegal and unacceptable behavior, or report it. There are some reasons to believe that people are more likely to take action with respect to unacceptable behavior, within an organization, if there are complaint systems that offer not just options dictated by the planning and control organization, but a \"choice\" of options for absolute confidentiality.\nAnonymous reporting mechanisms, as mentioned previously, help foster a climate whereby employees are more likely to report or seek guidance regarding potential or actual wrongdoing without fear of retaliation. The coming anti-bribery management systems standard, ISO 37001, includes anonymous reporting as one of the criteria for the new standard.\nExternal channels.\nExternal whistleblowers report misconduct to outside people or entities. In these cases, depending on the nature of the information, whistleblowers may report the misconduct to lawyers, the media, law enforcement or watchdog agencies, or other local, state, or federal agencies. In some cases, external whistleblowing is encouraged by offering monetary rewards.\nThird-party channels.\nSometimes organizations use external agencies to create a secure and anonymous reporting channel for their employees, often referred to as a whistleblowing hotline. In addition to protecting the identity of the whistleblower, these services are designed to inform the individuals at the top of the organizational pyramid of misconduct, usually via integration with specialized case management software.\nImplementing a third-party solution is often the easiest way for an organization to promote compliance, or to offer a whistleblowing policy where one did not previously exist. An increasing number of companies and authorities use third-party services in which the whistleblower is also anonymous to the third-party service provider, which is made possible via toll-free phone numbers and/or web or app-based solutions that apply asymmetrical encryption.\nPrivate versus public sectors.\nPrivate-sector whistleblowing.\nPrivate-sector whistleblowing is arguably more prevalent and suppressed in society today. An example of private sector whistleblowing is when an employee reports to someone in a higher position such as a manager or to external factors, such as their lawyer or the police. Whistleblowing in the private sector is typically not high-profile or openly discussed in major news outlets, though occasionally, third parties expose human rights violations and exploitation of workers.\nMany governments attempt to protect such whistleblowers. In the United States, for example, there are organizations such as the United States Department of Labor (DOL) and laws such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and the United States Federal Sentencing Guidelines for Organizations (FSGO) that protect whistleblowers in the private sector. Thus, despite government efforts to help regulate the private sector, the employees must still weigh their options. They either expose the company and stand the moral and ethical high ground; or expose the company, lose their job, their reputation and potentially the ability to be employed again. According to a study at the University of Pennsylvania, out of three hundred whistleblowers studied, sixty-nine percent had foregone that exact situation and were either fired or forced to retire after taking the ethical high ground. It is outcomes like these that make it all that much harder to accurately track the prevalence of whistleblowing in the private sector.\nPublic sector whistleblowing.\nPublic sector whistleblowing is connected to the concept of public service motivation, where a public servant's altruistic alignment to the people or communities they service overrides their adherence to their employer's rules. This connection has been demonstrated by research in many different countries, including Poland, Thailand and the United States of America.\nRecognition of the value of public sector whistleblowing has been growing over the last 50 years. Many jurisdictions have passed legislation to protect public service whistleblowing in part as a way to address unethical behaviour and corruption within public service agencies.\nIn the United States, for example, both state and Federal statutes have been put in place to protect whistleblowers from retaliation. The United States Supreme Court ruled that public sector whistleblowers are protected from retaliation by their First Amendment rights. After many federal whistleblowers were covered in high-profile media cases, laws were finally introduced to protect government whistleblowers. These laws were enacted to help prevent corruption and encourage people to expose misconduct, illegal, or dishonest activity for the good of society. People who choose to act as whistleblowers often suffer retaliation from their employer. They most likely are fired because they are an at-will employee, which means they can be fired without a reason. There are exceptions in place for whistleblowers who are at-will employees. Even without a statute, numerous decisions encourage and protect whistleblowing on grounds of public policy. Statutes state that an employer shall not take any adverse employment actions against any employee in retaliation for a good-faith report of a whistleblowing action or cooperating in any way in an investigation, proceeding, or lawsuit arising under said action. Federal whistleblower legislation includes a statute protecting all government employees. In the federal civil service, the government is prohibited from taking, or threatening to take, any personnel action against an employee because the employee disclosed information that they reasonably believed showed a violation of law, gross mismanagement, and gross waste of funds, abuse of authority, or a substantial and specific danger to public safety or health. To prevail on a claim, a federal employee must show that a protected disclosure was made, that the accused official knew of the disclosure, that retaliation resulted, and that there was a genuine connection between the retaliation and the employee's action.\nWhistleblowing in the scientific community.\nResearch fraud involves data, processes, or observations that were never there to begin with or later added on to fit a claim or narrative. A case involving the scientific community engaging in research fraudulence is that of Dr. Cyril Burt. Dr Cyril Burt was a British psychologist who proposed that he had discovered a heritable factor for intelligence based on studying twins. Dr. Oliver Gillie, a former colleague of Dr. Burt, inquired about Dr. Burt\u2019s work, doubting the authenticity of the data and the certain twins on that Dr. Burt was basing his research. Dr. Gillies's inquiry revealed that there were discrepancies to Dr. Burt\u2019s work with inconsistencies in the twin's birth dates\u00a0particularly with the absence of records for twins to participate in the study, the falsification of data, and the \u201cinvention of crucial facts to support his controversial theory that intelligence is largely inherited.\u201d \u00a0This led to the eventual retraction of Dr. Burt\u2019s work.\nData manipulation is the changing or omitting of data or outcomes in such a way that the research is not accurately portrayed in the research record. Dr. Hwang Woo-Suk, a South Korean stem cell researcher gained international recognition for his groundbreaking work on cloning and stem cell research. Dr. Hwang had a claim to successfully clone human embryos and derived patient-specific stem cell lines, forwarding the field of regenerative medicine which was published in the \"Journal of Science\". Dr. Kim Seon-Jung expressed his concerns regarding the accuracy of the research data and the ethical conduct of the experiments. Independent committees, as well as journalists, scrutinized the research data and methodology leading to an eventual retraction of his work.\nEthical violations can fall under the following: altering or making up new data to meet a specific goal, adjusting how data is shown or explained, looking at data in a biased manner, and leaving out parts about data analysis and conclusions. Dr. Paolo Macchiarini is well-known within the scientific community as a thoracic surgeon and former regenerative researcher. Dr Macchiarini claimed to have made profound advancements in trachea transplantation by using synthetic tracheal scaffolds planted with the patient\u2019s own stem cells. The goal was that the stem cells would eventually provide the patient with a suitable replacement trachea. Dr. Karl-Henrik Grinnemo, a member of Dr. Machiarini\u2019s research team, raised concerns about the accuracy of the reported results and the ethical conduct of the experiments. Dr. Macchiarini\u2019s ethical violations include exaggeration of success, failure to disclose the adverse post-operational effects, and complications of the surgery. Patients experienced severe health problems; several died post-surgery. The acts of Dr. Macchiarini led to the retractions of research articles from the Lancet, the termination of his academic positions, and criminal inquiries in Sweden. It also sparked concerns over the supervision and control of clinical trials utilizing experimental techniques.\nRisks.\nIndividual harm, damage to public trust, and threats to national security are three categories of harm that may come as a result of whistleblowing. Revealing a whistleblower's identity can automatically put their life in danger. Some media outlets associate words like \"traitor\" and \"treason\" with whistleblowers, and in many countries around the world, the punishment for treason is the death penalty, even if whoever allegedly committed treason may not have caused anyone physical harm. In some instances, whistleblowers must flee their country to avoid public scrutiny, threats of death or physical harm, and in some cases criminal charges.\nWhistleblowers are often protected under law from employer retaliation, but in many cases, punishment such as termination, suspension, demotion, wage garnishment, and/or harsh mistreatment by other employees occurs. A 2009 study found that up to 38% of whistleblowers experienced professional retaliation in some form, including wrongful termination. Following dismissal, whistleblowers may struggle to find employment due to damaged reputations, poor references, and blacklisting. The socioeconomic impact of whistleblowing through loss of livelihood and family strain may also impact whistleblowers' psychological well-being. Whistleblowers often experience immense stress as a result of litigation regarding harms such as unfair dismissal, which they often face with little or no support from unions. Whistleblowers who continue to pursue their concerns may also face long battles with official bodies such as regulators and government departments. Such bodies may reproduce the \"institutional silence\" adopted by employers, adding to whistleblowers' stress and difficulties. Thus, whistleblowers often suffer great injustice that is never acknowledged or rectified.\nIn a few cases, however, harm is done by the whistleblower to innocent people. Whistleblowers can make unintentional mistakes, and investigations can be tainted by the fear of negative publicity. An example occurred in the Canadian health ministry, when a new employee wrongly concluded that nearly every research contract she saw in 2012 involved malfeasance. The result was the sudden firing of seven people, false and public threats of a criminal investigation, and the death of one researcher by suicide. The government ultimately paid the victims millions of dollars for lost pay, slander, and other harms, in addition to CA $2.41\u00a0million spent on the subsequent 2015 investigation into the false charges.\nAttitudes toward whistleblowers.\nWhistleblowers are seen by some as selfless martyrs for public interest and organizational accountability; others view them as \"traitors\" or \"defectors\". Some even accuse them of solely pursuing personal glory and fame, or view their behavior as motivated by greed in qui tam cases. Culturally it still has connotations of betrayal, from 'snitching' at one level to 'denunciations' at the other. Speaking out is difficult, especially in a culture where this is not promoted or even actively discouraged. Some academics (such as Thomas Faunce) feel that whistleblowers should at least be entitled to a rebuttable presumption that they are attempting to apply ethical principles in the face of obstacles and that whistleblowing would be more respected in governance systems if it had a firmer academic basis in virtue ethics.\nIt is likely that many people do not even consider whistleblowing not only because of fear of retaliation but also because of fear of losing relationships both at and outside work.\nPersecution of whistleblowers has become a serious issue in many parts of the world:\nEmployees in academia, business or government might become aware of serious risks to health and the environment, but internal policies might pose threats of retaliation to those who report these early warnings. Private company employees in particular might be at risk of being fired, demoted, denied raises and so on for bringing environmental risks to the attention of appropriate authorities. Government employees could be at a similar risk for bringing threats to health or the environment to public attention, although perhaps this is less likely.\nThere are examples of \"early warning scientists\" being harassed for bringing inconvenient truths about impending harm to the notice of the public and authorities. There have also been cases of young scientists being discouraged from entering controversial scientific fields for fear of harassment.\nIn order to help whistleblowers, private organizations have formed whistleblower legal defense funds or support groups. Examples include the National Whistleblower Center in the United States and Whistleblowers UK and Public Concern at Work (PCaW) in the United Kingdom. Depending on the circumstances, it is not uncommon for whistleblowers to be ostracized by their coworkers, discriminated against by future potential employers, or even fired from their organization. A campaign directed at whistleblowers with the goal of eliminating them from the organization is referred to as mobbing. It is an extreme form of workplace bullying wherein the group is set against the targeted individual.\nPsychological impact.\nThere is limited research on the psychological impacts of whistle-blowing. However, poor experiences with whistleblowing can cause a prolonged and prominent assault on the well-being of the whistleblower. As workers attempt to address concerns, they are often met with a wall of silence and hostility by management or colleagues. Depression is often reported by whistleblowers, and suicidal thoughts may occur in up to about 10%. General deterioration in health and self-care has been described. The range of symptomatology shares many of the features of posttraumatic stress disorder, though there is debate about whether the trauma experienced by whistleblowers meets diagnostic thresholds. Increased stress-related physical illness has also been described in whistleblowers.\nThe stresses involved in whistleblowing can be huge and may deter whistleblowing out of fear of failure and reprisals. Some whistleblowers speak of overwhelming and persistent distress, drug and alcohol problems, paranoid behavior at work, acute anxiety, nightmares, flashbacks, and intrusive thoughts. This fear may indeed be justified because an individual who feels threatened by whistleblowing may plan the career destruction of the \"complainant\" by reporting fictitious errors or rumors. This technique, labelled as \"gaslighting\", is a common approach used by organizations to manage employees who cause difficulty by raising concerns. In extreme cases, this technique involves the organization or manager proposing that the complainant's mental health is unstable. Organizations also often attempt to ostracize and isolate whistleblowers by undermining their concerns by suggesting that they are groundless, carrying out inadequate investigations, or ignoring them altogether. Whistleblowers may also be disciplined, suspended, and reported to professional bodies upon manufactured pretexts.\nSuch extreme experiences of threat and loss inevitably cause severe distress and sometimes mental illness, sometimes lasting for years afterwards. This mistreatment also deters others from coming forward with concerns. Thus, poor practices remain hidden behind a wall of silence, and prevent any organization from experiencing the improvements that may be afforded by intelligent failure. Some whistleblowers who break ranks with their organizations have had their mental stability questioned, such as Adrian Schoolcraft, the NYPD veteran who alleged falsified crime statistics in his department and was forcibly committed to a mental institution. Conversely, the emotional strain of a whistleblower investigation is devastating to the accused's family.\nEthics.\nEthics is the set of moral principles that govern a person's or group's behavior. Deeper questions and theories of whistleblowing and why people choose to do so can be studied through an ethical approach. Whistleblowing is a topic of several myths and inaccurate definitions. Leading arguments in the ideological camp maintain that whistleblowing is the most basic of ethical traits and simply telling the truth to stop illegal harmful activities or fraud against the government/taxpayers. In the opposite camp, many corporations and corporate or government leaders see whistleblowing as being disloyal for breaching confidentiality, especially in industries that handle sensitive client or patient information. Hundreds of laws grant protection to whistleblowers, but stipulations can easily cloud that protection and leave them vulnerable to retaliation and sometimes even threats and physical harm. However, the decision and action has become far more complicated with recent advancements in technology and communication.\nThe ethical implications of whistleblowing can be negative as well as positive. Some have argued that public sector whistleblowing plays an important role in the democratic process by resolving principal\u2013agent problems. However, sometimes employees may blow the whistle as an act of revenge. Rosemary O'Leary explains this in her short volume on a topic called guerrilla government. \"Rather than acting openly, guerrillas often choose to remain \"in the closet\", moving clandestinely behind the scenes, salmon swimming upstream against the current of power. Over the years, I have learned that the motivations driving guerrillas are diverse. The reasons for acting range from the altruistic (doing the right thing) to the seemingly petty (I was passed over for that promotion). Taken as a whole, their acts are as awe-inspiring as saving human lives out of a love of humanity and as trifling as slowing the issuance of a report out of spite or anger.\" For example, of the more than 1,000 whistleblower complaints that are filed each year with the Pentagon's Inspector General, about 97 percent are not substantiated. It is believed throughout the professional world that an individual is bound to secrecy within their work sector. Discussions of whistleblowing and employee loyalty usually assume that the concept of loyalty is irrelevant to the issue or more commonly, that whistleblowing involves a moral choice that pits the loyalty that an employee owes an employer against the employee's responsibility to serve the public interest. Robert A. Larmer describes the standard view of whistleblowing in the \"Journal of Business Ethics\" by explaining that an employee possesses prima facie (based on the first impression; accepted as correct until proved otherwise) duties of loyalty and confidentiality to their employers and that whistleblowing cannot be justified except on the basis of a higher duty to the public good. It is important to recognize that in any relationship which demands loyalty the relationship works both ways and involves mutual enrichment.\nThe ethics of Edward Snowden's actions have been widely discussed and debated in news media and academia worldwide. Snowden released classified intelligence to the American people in an attempt to allow Americans to see the inner workings of the government. A person is diligently tasked with the conundrum of choosing to be loyal to the company or to blow the whistle on the company's wrongdoing. Discussions on whistleblowing generally revolve around three topics: attempts to define whistleblowing more precisely, debates about whether and when whistleblowing is permissible, and debates about whether and when one has an obligation to blow the whistle.\nMotivations.\nMany whistleblowers have stated that they were motivated to take action to put an end to unethical practices after witnessing injustices in their businesses or organizations. A 2009 study found that whistleblowers are often motivated to take action when they notice a sharp decline in ethical practices, as opposed to a gradual worsening. There are generally two metrics by which whistleblowers determine if a practice is unethical. The first metric involves a violation of the organization's bylaws or written ethical policies. These violations allow individuals to concretize and rationalize blowing the whistle. On the other hand, \"value-driven\" whistleblowers are influenced by their personal codes of ethics or by public service motivation which comes from an alignment of personal, cultural and organisational values. In these cases, whistleblowers have been criticized for being driven by personal biases.\nIn addition to ethics, social and organizational pressure are motivating forces. A 2012 study shows that individuals are more likely to blow the whistle when others know about the wrongdoing, because they fear the consequences of keeping silent. In cases where one person is responsible for wrongdoing, the whistleblower may file a formal report, rather than directly confronting the wrongdoer, because confrontation would be more emotionally and psychologically stressful. Furthermore, individuals may be motivated to report unethical behavior when they believe their organizations will support them. Professionals in management roles may feel responsibility to blow the whistle to uphold the values and rules of their organizations.\nLegal protection for whistleblowers.\nLegal protection for whistleblowers varies from country to country and may depend on the country of the original activity, where and how secrets were revealed, and how they eventually became published or publicized. Over a dozen countries have now adopted comprehensive whistleblower protection laws that create mechanisms for reporting wrongdoing and provide legal protections. Over 50 countries have adopted more limited protections as part of their anti-corruption, freedom of information, or employment laws.\n\"For purposes of the English Wikipedia, this section emphasizes the English-speaking world and covers other regimes only insofar as they represent exceptionally greater or lesser protections.\"\nAustralia.\nVarious state laws were in existence before the federal \"Public Interest Disclosure Act 2013\" introduced a new comprehensive framework for protecting Australian Government public sector whistleblowers.\nThe former Australian intelligence officer known as \"Witness K\", who provided evidence of Australia's controversial spying operation against the government of East Timor in 2004, in 2018 faced the possibility of jail if convicted. Charges against Witness K were dropped on 7 July 2022 by new Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus SC using his reserve powers in the \"Judiciary Act 1903\". Other whistleblowers include David McBride, who exposed crimes by the Australian Army in Afghanistan in 2018, and Richard Boyle, an employee at the Australian Taxation Office who exposed unethical debt collection practices in 2017. Boyle was released on a good behaviour bond after seven years with no conviction recorded, while McBride was sentenced to 5 years and 8 months in prison after six years.\nWhistleblowers Australia is an association for those who have exposed corruption or any form of malpractice, especially if they were then hindered or abused.\nCanada.\nThe Public Sector Integrity Commissioner (PSIC) provides a safe and confidential mechanism enabling public servants and the general public to disclose wrongdoings committed in the public sector. It also protects from reprisal public servants who have disclosed wrongdoing and those who have cooperated in investigations. The office's goal is to enhance public confidence in Canada's federal public institutions and in the integrity of public servants.\nMandated by the \"Public Servants Disclosure Protection Act\", PSIC is a permanent and independent agent of Parliament. The act, which came into force in 2007, applies to most of the federal public sector, approximately 400,000 public servants. This includes government departments and agencies, parent Crown corporations, the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and other federal public sector bodies.\nNot all disclosures lead to an investigation as the act sets out the jurisdiction of the commissioner and gives the option not to investigate under certain circumstances. On the other hand, if PSIC conducts an investigation and finds no wrongdoing was committed, the commissioner must report his findings to the discloser and to the organization's chief executive. Also, reports of founded wrongdoing are presented before the House of Commons and the Senate in accordance with the act.\nThe act also established the Public Servants Disclosure Protection Tribunal (PSDPT) to protect public servants by hearing reprisal complaints referred by the Public Sector Integrity Commissioner. The tribunal can grant remedies in favour of complainants and order disciplinary action against persons who take reprisals.\nEuropean Union.\nThe European Parliament approved a \"Whistleblower Protection Directive\" containing broad free speech protections for whistleblowers in both the public and the private sectors, including for journalists, in all member states of the European Union. The Directive prohibits direct or indirect retaliation against employees, current and former, in the public sector and the private sector. The Directive's protections apply to employees, to volunteers, and to those who assist them, including to civil society organizations and to journalists who report on their evidence. In October 2021, the EU Directorate-General for Justice and Consumers, Equality and the Rule of Law emphasized that ministries, as legal entities in the public sector, are also explicitly required to establish internal reporting channels for their employees. It provides equal rights for whistleblowers in the national security sector who challenge the denial or removal of their security clearances. Also, whistleblowers are protected from criminal prosecution and corporate lawsuits for damages resulting from their whistleblowing and are provided with psychological support for dealing with harassment stress.\nGood government observers have hailed the EU directive as setting \"the global standard for best practice rights protecting freedom of speech where it counts the most\u2014challenging abuses of power that betray the public trust,\" according to the U.S.-based Government Accountability Project. They have noted, however, that ambiguities remain in the directive regarding application in some areas, such as \"duty speech\", that is, when employees report the same information in the course of a job assignment, for example, to a supervisor, instead of whistleblowing as formal dissent. In fact, duty speech is how the overwhelming majority of whistleblowing information gets communicated and where the free flow of information is needed for an organization's proper functioning. However, it is in response to such \"duty speech\" employee communication that the vast majority of retaliation against employees occurs. These observers have noted that the Directive must be understood as applying to protection against retaliation for such duty speech because without such an understanding the Directive will \"miss the iceberg of what's needed\".\nFrance.\nIn France, several recent laws have established a protection regime for whistleblowers. Prior to 2016, there were several laws in force which created disparate legislation with sector-specific regimes. The 2016 law on transparency, the fight against corruption and modernization of economic life (known as the \"Sapin 2 Law\") provides for the first time a single legal definition of whistleblowers in France. It defines him or her as \"an individual who discloses or reports, in a disinterested manner and in good faith, a crime or an offence, a serious and manifest breach of an international commitment duly ratified or approved by France, a unilateral act of an international organization adopted on the basis of such a commitment, of the law or regulations, or a serious threat or harm to general interest, which he or she has become personally aware of.\" It excludes certain professional secrets such as national defense secrecy, medical secrecy or the secrecy of relations between a lawyer and his client.\nIn 2022, two laws were passed to transpose the European Directive 2019/1937 of 23 October 2019 on the protection of persons who report breaches of Union law. One of them strengthens the role of the D\u00e9fenseur des droits\u00a0\u2013 the French ombudsman\u00a0\u2013 tasked with advising and protecting whistleblowers. The second amends the Sapin 2 law to bring it into line with the directive and adds substantial guarantees not included in the directive among which:\nThe law allows any person to apply to the D\u00e9fenseur des droits for an opinion on his or her status as a whistleblower. A response should be given within six months after receiving the application. The organic law provides that the D\u00e9fenseur des droits will publish a report every two years on the overall functioning of whistleblower protection addressed to the French President of the Republic, the President of the National Assembly, and the President of the Senate.\nJamaica.\nIn Jamaica, the Protected Disclosures Act, 2011 received assent in March 2011. It creates a comprehensive system for the protection of whistleblowers in the public and private sectors. It is based on the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998.\nIndia.\nThe Government of India has been considering adopting a whistleblower protection law for several years. In 2003, the Law Commission of India recommended the adoption of the Public Interest Disclosure (Protection of Informers) Act, of 2002. In August 2010, the Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010 was introduced into the Lok Sabha, the lower house of the Parliament of India. The Bill was approved by the cabinet in June 2011. The Public Interest Disclosure and Protection of Persons Making the Disclosures Bill, 2010 was renamed the Whistleblowers' Protection Bill, 2011 by the Standing Committee on Personnel, Public Grievances, Law and Justice. The Whistleblowers' Protection Bill, 2011 was passed by the Lok Sabha on 28 December 2011. and by the Rajyasabha on 21 February 2014. The Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011 received Presidential assent on 9 May 2014 and the same was subsequently published in the official gazette of the Government of India on 9 May 2014 by the Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India.\nIran.\nIn 2023, the Iranian government made public whistleblowing punishable by law if a whistleblower reveals corruption to authorities that can't be proved.\nIreland.\nThe government of Ireland committed to adopting a comprehensive whistleblower protection law in January 2012. The Protected Disclosures Act (PDA) was passed in 2014. The law covers workers in the public and private sectors, and also includes contractors, trainees, agency staff, former employees and job seekers. A range of different types of misconduct may be reported under the law, which provides protections for workers from a range of employment actions as well as whistleblowers' identity.\nNetherlands.\nThe Netherlands has measures in place to mitigate the risks of whistleblowing: The House for Whistleblowers (Huis voor klokkenluiders) offers advice and support to whistleblowers, and the Parliament passed a proposal in 2016 to establish this house for whistleblowers, to protect them from the severe negative consequences that they might endure (Kamerstuk, 2013). Dutch media organizations also provide whistleblower support; on 9September 2013, a number of major Dutch media outlets supported the launch of Publeaks, which provides a secure website for people to leak documents to the media. Publeaks is designed to protect whistleblowers. It operates on the GlobaLeaks software which supports whistleblower-oriented technologies internationally.\nNew Zealand.\nIn New Zealand, the Protected Disclosures (Protection of Whistleblowers) Act 2022 provides protection to whistleblowers under some circumstances. A wide range of workers are covered, including employees, volunteers and contractors, and the legislation covers both public and private sector organisations. Protection is limited to serious misconduct and disclosure by workers. It does not cover others who learn of serious misconduct. To be protected by the Act, the disclosure must be to an Appropriate Authority. This means that disclosure to the media is not protected. Whistleblowers covered by the Act are protected from civil, criminal and disciplinary procedures as well as retaliation, and in most cases their identities must be kept confidential. The Act also requires that Public service agencies must have internal processes to support whistleblowing.\nThis Act replaced and extended the Protected Disclosures Act 2000. The genesis of the legislation was advocacy by Sir John Robertson in the 1980s, at the time New Zealand's Chief Ombudsman. The subsequent high-profile case of whistleblower Neil Pugmire who raised concerns about the release of dangerous mental health patients led to the 2000 act.\nSwitzerland.\nThe Swiss Council of States agreed on a draft amendment of the Swiss Code of Obligations in September 2014. The draft introduces articles 321abis to 321asepties, 328(3), 336(2)(d). An amendment of article 362(1) adds articles 321abis to 321asepties to the list of provisions that may not be overruled by labour and bargaining agreements.\nArticle 321ater introduces an obligation on employees to report irregularities to their employer before reporting to an authority. An employee will, however, not breach his duty of good faith if he reports an irregularity to an authority and\nArticle 321aquarter provides that an employee may exceptionally directly report to an authority. Exceptions apply in cases\nThe draft does not improve on protection against dismissal for employees who report irregularities to their employer. The amendment does not provide for employees to anonymously file their observations of irregularities.\nUnited Kingdom.\nWhistleblowing in the United Kingdom is protected by the Public Interest Disclosure Act 1998 (PIDA). Amongst other things, under the Act protected disclosures are permitted even if a non-disclosure agreement has been signed between the employer and the former or current employee; a consultation on further restricting confidentiality clauses was held in 2019.\nThe Freedom to Speak Up Review sets out 20 principles to bring about improvements to help whistleblowers in the NHS, including:\nMonitor produced a whistleblowing policy in November 2015 that all NHS organizations in England are obliged to follow. It explicitly says that anyone bullying or acting against a whistleblower could be potentially liable to disciplinary action. An observational and interviewed-based study of more than 80 Guardians found that a lack of resources, especially time, reduced their ability to respond to concerns, and to analyse and learn from data. Guardians struggled to develop their role, and create a more positive culture in which staff felt free to voice concerns. Guardians found their role stressful and received little psychological support and as a result many did not intend to stay in their role for long.\nUnited States.\nWhistleblowing tradition in what would soon become the United States had a start in 1773 with Benjamin Franklin leaking a few letters in the Hutchinson affair. The release of the communications from royal governor Thomas Hutchinson to Thomas Whately led to a firing, a duel and arguably, both through the many general impacts of the leak and its role in convincing Franklin to join the radicals' cause, the taking of another important final step toward the American Revolution.\nThe first act of the Continental Congress in favor of what later came to be called whistleblowing came in the 1777-8 case of Samuel Shaw and Richard Marven. The two seamen accused Commander in Chief of the Continental Navy Esek Hopkins of torturing British prisoners of war. The Congress dismissed Hopkins and then agreed to cover the defense cost of the pair after Hopkins filed a libel suit against them under which they were imprisoned. Shaw and Marven were subsequently cleared in a jury trial.\nTo be considered a whistleblower in the United States, most federal whistleblower statutes require that federal employees have reason to believe their employer violated some law, rule, or regulation; testify in or commence a legal proceeding on the legally protected matter; or refuse to violate the law.\nIn cases where whistleblowing on a specified topic is protected by statute, U.S. courts have generally held that such whistleblowers are protected from retaliation. However, a closely divided U.S. Supreme Court decision, \"Garcetti v. Ceballos\" (2006) held that the First Amendment free speech guarantees for government employees do not protect disclosures made within the scope of the employees' duties.\nIn the United States, legal protections vary according to the subject matter of the whistleblowing and sometimes the state where the case arises. In passing the 2002 Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act, the Senate Judiciary Committee found that whistleblower protections were dependent on the \"patchwork and vagaries\" of varying state statutes. Still, a wide variety of federal and state laws protect employees who call attention to violations, help with enforcement proceedings, or refuse to obey unlawful directions. While this patchwork approach has often been criticized, it is also responsible for the United States having more dedicated whistleblowing laws than any other country.\nThe first US law adopted specifically to protect whistleblowers was the 1863 United States False Claims Act (revised in 1986), which tried to combat fraud by suppliers of the United States government during the American Civil War. The act encourages whistleblowers by promising them a percentage of the money recovered by the government and by protecting them from employment retaliation.\nAnother US law specifically protecting whistleblowers is the Lloyd\u2013La Follette Act of 1912. It guaranteed the right of federal employees to furnish information to the United States Congress. The first US environmental law to include employee protection was the Clean Water Act of 1972. Similar protections are included in subsequent federal environmental laws, including the Safe Drinking Water Act (1974), Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (1976), Toxic Substances Control Act of 1976, Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (through 1978 amendment to protect nuclear whistleblowers), Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA, or the Superfund Law) (1980), and Clean Air Act (1990). Similar employee protections enforced through OSHA are included in the Surface Transportation Assistance Act (1982) to protect truck drivers, the Pipeline Safety Improvement Act (PSIA) of 2002, the Wendell H. Ford Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21st Century (AIR 21), and the Sarbanes\u2013Oxley Act, enacted on July 30, 2002 (for corporate fraud whistleblowers). More recent laws with some whistleblower protection include the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), Consumer Product Safety Improvement Act (CPSIA), Seamans Protection Act as amended by the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2010 (SPA), Consumer Financial Protection Act (CFPA), FDA Food Safety Modernization Act (FSMA), Moving Ahead for Progress in the 21st Century Act (MAP-21), and Taxpayer First Act (TFA).\nInvestigation of retaliation against whistleblowers under 23 federal statutes falls under the jurisdiction of the Directorate of Whistleblower Protection Program (DWPP) of the United States Department of Labor's Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). New whistleblower statutes enacted by Congress, which are to be enforced by the Secretary of Labor, are generally delegated by a Secretary's Order to the DWPP.\nThe patchwork of laws means that victims of retaliation need to be aware of the laws at issue to determine the deadlines and means for making proper complaints. Some deadlines are as short as 10 days (Arizona State Employees have 10 days to file a \"Prohibited Personnel Practice\" Complaint before the Arizona State Personnel Board), while others are up to 300 days.\nThose who report a false claim against the federal government, and suffer adverse employment actions as a result, may have up to six years (depending on state law) to file a civil suit for remedies under the US False Claims Act (FCA). Under a \"qui tam\" provision, the \"original source\" for the report may be entitled to a percentage of what the government recovers from the offenders. However, the \"original source\" must also be the first to file a federal civil complaint for recovery of the federal funds fraudulently obtained, and must avoid publicizing the claim of fraud until the US Justice Department decides whether to prosecute the claim itself. Such \"qui tam\" lawsuits must be filed under seal, using special procedures to keep the claim from becoming public until the federal government makes its decision on direct prosecution. Whistleblowers acting under the FCA are the primary enforcement tool used by the U.S. Department of Justice to target fraud, including overbilling to government programs like Medicare, Medicaid, and Tricare.\nThe Espionage Act of 1917 has been used to prosecute whistleblowers in the United States including Edward Snowden and Chelsea Manning. In 2013, Manning was convicted of violating the Espionage Act and sentenced to 35 years in prison for leaking sensitive military documents to WikiLeaks. The same year, Snowden was charged with violating the Espionage Act for releasing confidential documents belonging to the NSA.\nSection 922 of the Dodd\u2013Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank) in the United States incentivizes and protects whistleblowers. By Dodd-Frank, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) financially rewards whistleblowers for providing original information about violations of federal securities laws that results in sanctions of at least $1M. Additionally, Dodd-Frank offers job security to whistleblowers by illegalizing termination or discrimination due to whistleblowing. The whistleblower provision has proven successful; after the enactment of Dodd-Frank, the SEC charged KBR (company) and BlueLinx Holdings Inc. (company) with violating the whistleblower protection Rule 21F-17 by having employees sign confidentiality agreements that threatened repercussions for discussing internal matters with outside parties. Former President Donald Trump announced plans to dismantle Dodd-Frank in 2016. He created the Office of Accountability and Whistleblower Protection as a part of the Department of Veterans Affairs, which reportedly instead punished whistleblowers.\nThe US Department of Labor's Whistleblower Protection Program can handle many types of retaliation claims based on legal actions an employee took or was perceived to take in the course of their employment. Moreover, in the United States, if the retaliation occurred due to the perception of who the employee is as a person, the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission may be able to accept a complaint of retaliation. In an effort to overcome those fears, in 2010, the Dodd\u2013Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was put forth to provide great incentive to whistleblowers. For example, if a whistleblower gave information that could be used to legally recover over one million dollars, then they could receive ten to thirty percent of it.\nWhistleblowers have risen within the technology industry as it has expanded in recent years. Protection for these specific whistleblowers falls short; they often end up unemployed or in jail. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act offers an incentive for private sector whistleblowers but only if they go to the SEC with information. If a whistleblower acts internally, as they often do in the technology industry, they are not protected by the law. Scandals such as the Dragonfly search engine scandal and the Pompliano lawsuit against Snapchat have drawn attention to whistleblowers in technology.\nThe federally recognized National Whistleblower Appreciation Day is observed annually on July 30, on the anniversary of the country's original 1778 whistleblower protection law.\nOther countries.\nSouth Africa adopted legal protections for whistleblowers with the Protected Disclosures Act No. 26 of 2000 (PDA), in order \"to shield employees from occupational detriment when reporting misconduct\". The PDA was further strengthened by the passage of an Amendment Act in 2017.\nA number of other countries have adopted comprehensive whistleblower laws, including Ghana's Whistleblowers Act (Act 720), 2006.\nSouth Korea, Uganda, \nKenya, and Rwanda also have Whistleblower laws. The European Court of Human Rights ruled in 2008 that whistleblowing was protected as freedom of expression.\nNigeria set up a whistleblowing policy against corruption and other ills. Nigeria formulated a Whistleblowing Policy in 2016, but this has not yet been established as law. A new draft bill for Whistle-blower Protection was approved by the Federal Executive Council (FEC) as of December 2022. The new draft whistleblower protection bill was presented to the National Assembly for consideration by President Muhammadu Buhari in May 2023. Buhari's term as President ends on May 29, 2023.\nAdvocacy for protection.\nMany NGOs advocate for stronger and more comprehensive legal rights and protections for whistleblowers. Among them are the Government Accountability Project (GAP), Blueprint for Free Speech, Public Concern at Work (PCaW), the Open Democracy Advice Centre or in France, the Maison des Lanceurs d'Alerte (MLA). An international network\u00a0\u2013 the Whistleblowing International Network (WIN)\u00a0\u2013 aimed at gathering these NGOs.\nFrank Serpico, an NYPD whistleblower, prefers to use the term \"lamp-lighter\" to describe the whistleblower's role as a watchman. The Lamplighter Project, which aims to encourage law enforcement officers to report corruption and abuse of power and helps them do so, is named based on Serpico's usage of the term.\nMethods used.\nWhistleblowers who may be at risk from those they are exposing are now using encryption methods and anonymous content-sharing software to protect their identity. Tor, a highly accessible anonymity network, is frequently used by whistleblowers around the world. Tor has undergone a number of large security updates to protect the identities of potential whistleblowers who may wish to leak information anonymously.\nSpecialized whistleblowing software has been built on top of the Tor technology to incentivize and simplify its adoption for secure whistleblowing.\nConsidering the risks faced by whistleblowers, most whistleblowing software has been developed as open-source projects, allowing for public audits and transparency. Built on well-defined design principles, examples include GlobaLeaks and SecureDrop.\nWhistleblowing hotline.\nIn business, whistleblowing hotlines are usually deployed to mitigate risk, with the intention of providing secure, anonymous reporting for employees or third-party suppliers who may otherwise be fearful of reprisals from their employer. As such, implementing a corporate whistleblowing hotline is often seen as a step toward compliance and can also highlight an organization's stance on ethics. It is widely agreed that implementing a dedicated service for whistleblowers has a positive effect on organizational culture.\nA whistleblowing hotline is sometimes also referred to as an \"ethics hotline\" or \"\"Speak Up\" hotline\" and is often facilitated by an outsourced service provider to encourage potential disclosers to come forward.\nIn 2018, the \"Harvard Business Review\" published findings to support the idea that whistleblowing hotlines are crucial to keeping companies healthy, stating, \"More whistles blown are a sign of health, not illness.\"\nIn popular culture.\nOne of the subplots for season6 of the popular American TV show \"The Office\" focuses on Andy Bernard, a salesman, discovering that his company's printers catch on fire, his struggling with how to deal with the news, and the company's response to the whistleblower going public.\nThe 1998 film \"\" involves Picard and the NCC-1701-E \"Enterprise\" crew risking their Starfleet careers to blow the whistle on a Federation conspiracy with the Son'a to forcibly relocate the Ba'ku from their planet.\nIn 2014, the rock/industrial band Laibach released a song titled \"The Whistleblowers\" on their eighth studio album, \"Spectre\". It was released on 3 March 2014 under Mute Records.\nIn 2016, the rock band Thrice released a song titled \"Whistleblower\" on the album \"To Be Everywhere Is to Be Nowhere\". The song is written from the perspective of Snowden.\nIn July 2018, CBS debuted a reality television show titled \"Whistleblower\", hosted by lawyer, former judge, and police officer Alex Ferrer, that covers \"qui tam\" suits under the False Claims Act against companies that have allegedly defrauded the federal government.\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33822", "revid": "15279604", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33822", "title": "Westwood Studios", "text": "American video game developer\nWestwood Studios, Inc. was an American video game developer based in Las Vegas, Nevada. It was founded by Brett Sperry and Louis Castle in 1985 as Brelous Software, but got changed after 2 months into Westwood Associates and was renamed to Westwood Studios when Virgin Games (later Virgin Interactive Entertainment) bought the company in 1992. The company was bought by Electronic Arts alongside Virgin Interactive's North American operations in 1998. In January 2003, it was announced that Westwood, alongside Westwood Pacific (EA Pacific), would be merged into EA Los Angeles. The main studio location closed in March of that year.\nWestwood is best known for developing video games in the real-time strategy, adventure and role-playing genres. It was listed in \"Guinness World Records\" for selling 30 million copies of \"Command &amp; Conquer\" games worldwide.\nHistory.\nEarly history and company name.\nBrett Sperry and Louis Castle met in late 1983 in Las Vegas. Sperry had a background in architecture and psychology and was already working in the gaming industry. Both Sperry and Castle worked as contract programmers. The two eventually became friends and decided to form a company together and named it Brelous Software. It was later renamed Westwood Associates.\nAccording to Louis Castle, the company was named after the \"entertainment meets professional\" character of the Westwood neighborhood in Los Angeles.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nThe company's first projects consisted of contract work for companies like Epyx and Strategic Simulations, Inc. (SSI), porting 8-bit titles to 16-bit systems like Commodore Amiga and Atari ST. Proceeds from contract work allowed the company to expand into designing its own games in-house. Their first original title was \"Mars Saga\", a game developed for Electronic Arts and released in 1988. They laid the foundations for the real-time strategy genre with the release of real-time tactics game \"\", one of the more literal translations of the tabletop game \"BattleTech\".\nLater success and acquisition by Virgin Games.\nOne of the company's first great successes was \"Eye of the Beholder\" (1991), a real-time role-playing video game based on the \"Dungeons &amp; Dragons\" license, developed for SSI. Other publishers of early Westwood games included Infocom and Disney. Their company was eventually acquired by Virgin Games in 1992.\nThe company in the late 1980s was known for shipping products late, but by 1993 it had so improved that, \"Computer Gaming World\" reported, \"many publishers would assure [us] that a project was going to be completed on time \"because\" Westwood was doing it\". The magazine added that it \"not only has a solid reputation for getting product out on time, but a reputation for \"good\" product\", citing \"Eye of the Beholder\", \"The Legend of Kyrandia\", and \"Dune II\" as examples. By then Westwood had about 50 employees, including up to 20 artists. Other Westwood titles from the early 1990s include \"Lands of Lore\", \"The Lion King\" and \"Young Merlin\". Westwood's greatest commercial success would start in 1995 with the real-time strategy game \"Command &amp; Conquer\". Building on the gameplay and interface ideas of \"Dune II\", it added pre-rendered 3D graphics for gameplay sprites and video cinematics, an alternative pop/rock soundtrack with techno elements streamed from disk, and online play. \"Command &amp; Conquer\", \"Kyrandia\", and \"Lands of Lore\" spawned several sequels.\nAcquisition by EA and liquidation.\nIn August 1998, Westwood and sister company Burst Studios was acquired by Electronic Arts for $122.5\u00a0million from Virgin Interactive's North American operations, which EA also acquired. At the time, Westwood games had a 5% to 6% share of the PC game market, especially the \"Command &amp; Conquer\" franchise was considered very valuable. The 50,000 square foot building in Las Vegas included motion capture facilities, comfortable offices and was considered a showcase for the industry. According to Westwood Studios designer and programmer Joe Bostic, Electronic Arts did not interfere with Westwood's operations primarily due to Westwood co-founder Brett Sperry's efforts in keeping the corporate cultures of the two companies separate, but eventually Westwood succumbed to wishes that every game had to be a hit.\nThe last games \"\" and \"Earth &amp; Beyond\" did not meet expectations of the publisher. In January 2003, EA announced their intent to close Westwood, as well as EA Pacific, and merge them into EA Los Angeles as part of a consolidation plan. This move included \"significant layoffs\" for Westwood, which at the time employed 100 people, while the remaining people were given the option to transfer to the Los Angeles studio or EA's headquarters. Most employees were let go by January 31, while some staff stayed with Westwood transitionally until it was fully closed on March 31, 2003. Some formed Petroglyph Games in April 2003, while another three (Brett Sperry, Adam Isgreen and Rade Stojsavljevic) formed a development studio called Jet Set Games in 2008, both based in Las Vegas, Nevada.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33823", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33823", "title": "William Ames", "text": "English Puritan minister (1576\u20131633)\nWilliam Ames (; Latin: \"Guilielmus Amesius\"; 1576\u00a0\u2013 14 November 1633) was an English Puritan minister, philosopher, and controversialist. He spent much time in the Netherlands, and is noted for his involvement in the controversy between the Calvinists and the Arminians.\nEarly life and education.\nAmes was born at Ipswich, and was brought up by a maternal uncle, Robert Snelling of Boxford. He was educated at the local grammar school and from 1594 at Christ's College, Cambridge. He was considerably influenced by his tutor at Christ's, William Perkins, and by his successor Paul Bayne. Ames graduated BA in 1598 and MA in 1601, and was chosen for a fellowship in Christ's College.\nHe was popular in the university, and in his own college. One of Ames's sermons became historical in the Puritan controversies. It was delivered in the university Church of St Mary the Great, Cambridge on 21 December 1609, and in it he rebuked sharply \"lusory lotts\" and the \"heathenish debauchery\" of the students during the Twelve Days of Christmas.\nA partisan election, however, had led to the mastership at Christ's going to Valentine Carey. He quarrelled with Ames for disapproving of the surplice and other outward symbols. Ames's vehemence led to his being summoned before the Vice-Chancellor, who suspended him \"from the exercise of his ecclesiastical function and from all degrees taken or to be taken.\"\nMinistry in Holland.\nHe left Cambridge, and was offered a lecturer position at Colchester, but George Abbot, the Bishop of London, went against the wishes of the local corporation, and refused to grant institution and induction. Similar rebuffs awaited him elsewhere, and he travelled with Robert Parker to the Netherlands, helped by English merchants who wished him to controvert the supporters of the English church in Leiden. At Rotterdam, he debated with Grevinchovius (Nicholas Grevinckhoven, died 1632), minister of the Arminian party, with reasoning from \"Philippians\" ii. 13, \"It is God that worketh in us both to will and to do.\"\nThis dispute made his name in the Netherlands.\nSubsequently, Ames entered into a controversy in print with Grevinchovius on universal redemption and election, and cognate problems. He brought together all he had maintained in his \"Coronis ad Collationem Hagiensem\" (A Finishing Touch to the Hague Conference)\u2014his major book. At Leiden, Ames became intimate with Hugh Goodyear, pastor of the English church there. He was sent for to The Hague by Sir Horatio Vere, the English governor of Brill, who appointed him a minister in the army of the states-general, and of the English soldiers in their service. He married a daughter of John Burges, who was Vere's chaplain, and, on his father-in-law's return to England, succeeded to his place.\nIt was at this time he began his controversy with Simon Episcopius, who, in attacking the \"Coronis\", railed against the author as having been \"a disturber of the public peace in his native country, so that the English magistrates had banished him thence; and now, by his late printed \"Coronis\", he was raising new disturbances in the peaceable Netherlands.\" Episcopius was rebutted by Goodyear, who became a defender of Ames against the Remonstrants, and later provided Nethenus with material for his biography of Ames.\nThe \"Coronis\" had been primarily prepared for the Synod of Dort, which sat from 13 November 1618 until 9 May 1619. At this synod the position of Ames was anomalous. The High Church party in England had induced Vere to dismiss him from the chaplaincy; but he was still held in reverence. It was arranged he should attend the synod, and he was retained by the Calvinist party at four florins a day to watch the proceedings. He was adviser to Johannes Bogerman, the synod's president.\nAcademic.\nA proposal to make him principal of a theological college at Leiden was frustrated by Archbishop Abbot; and when later invited by the state of Friesland to a professoriate at Franeker, the opposition was renewed, but this time abortively. \nHe was installed at Franeker on 7 May 1622 and delivered a discourse on the occasion on \"Urim and Thummim\". \nHe brought renown to Franeker as professor, preacher, pastor and theological writer; one student of the period influenced by Ames was Johannes Cocceius. \nAnother student was Nathaniel Eaton, later of Harvard College.\nHe prepared his \"Medulla Theologiae\" (The Marrow of Theology), a manual of Calvinistic doctrine, for his students. Ames was much influenced in terms of method by Ramism, and opposed the residual teaching of Aristotle. His \"De Conscientia, ejus Jure et Casibus\" (1632), an attempt to bring Christian ethics into clear relation with particular cases of conduct and of conscience, was a new thing in Protestantism.\nMove to Rotterdam.\nHaving continued twelve years at Franeker (where he was rector in 1626), his health gave way, and he contemplated a move to New England. But another door was opened for him, with an invitation to Rotterdam. There he prepared his \"Fresh Suit against Ceremonies\"\u2014the book which made Richard Baxter a Nonconformist. It sums up the issues between the Puritan school and that of Richard Hooker, and was posthumously published.\nHaving caught a cold from a flood which inundated his house, he died in November 1633, at the age of fifty-seven, apparently in needy circumstances. He left, by a second wife Joan Fletcher, two sons and a daughter, who emigrated to Massachusetts in 1637; the sons later returned to England; his daughter Ruth married in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Edmund Angier, and their son Samuel Angier later married in 1680 Hannah Oakes, the daughter of Urian Oakes.\nInfluence.\nHis works, which the \"Biographia Britannica\" (1778) testifies were known over Europe, were collected at Amsterdam in five volumes. Only a small proportion was translated into English. Ames' thought was particularly influential in New England.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nAttribution:"}
{"id": "33825", "revid": "48643156", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33825", "title": "Wole Soyinka", "text": "Nigerian playwright, poet and novelist\nAkinwande Oluwole Babatunde Soyinka (born 13 July 1934) is a Nigerian author, best known as a playwright and poet. He has written three novels, ten collections of short stories, seven poetry collections, twenty-five plays and five memoirs. He also wrote two translated works and many articles and short stories for many newspapers and periodicals. He is widely regarded as one of Africa's greatest writers and one of the world's most important dramatists. He was awarded the 1986 Nobel Prize in Literature for his \"wide cultural perspective and poetic overtones fashioning the drama of existence\".\nBorn into an Anglican Yoruba family in Ak\u00e9, Abeokuta, Soyinka had a preparatory education at Government College, Ibadan and proceeded to the University College Ibadan. During his education, he co-founded the Pyrate Confraternity. Soyinka left Nigeria for England to study at the University of Leeds. During that period, he was the editor of the university's magazine, \"The Eagle\", before becoming a full-time author in the 1950s. In the UK, he started writing short stories and making records for the BBC Lecture series. He wrote many plays which were performed on radios and in theatres in Nigeria and the UK, especially the Royal Court Theatre.\nHe has been married to his third wife Folake Doherty since 1989. Since 1 September 2022, Soyinka has held the position of Arts Professor of Theatre at New York University Abu Dhabi.\nMany of Soyinka's novels and plays are set in Nigeria, reflecting the country\u2019s history, culture, and political struggles. Alongside these works, he produced a wide range of satirical writings that reached a broad audience and enjoyed considerable popularity. He is also an accomplished poet, with numerous individual poems and several published collections to his name. He achieved successes with his plays including \"The Swamp Dwellers\" (1958), \"The Lion and the Jewel\" (1958), and \"The Invention\", which was one of his early plays to be produced at the Royal Court Theatre. Soyinka wrote a number of other works, including \"The Interpreters\" (1965), \"Season of Anomy\" (1973), \"Chronicles from the Land of the Happiest People on Earth\", and \"Harmattan Haze on an African Spring\". In July 2024, Bola Tinubu renamed the National Arts Theatre after Soyinka during his 90th birthday.\nLife.\nEarly life.\nSoyinka is the son of Samuel Ayodele Soyinka, an Anglican minister and headmaster at St Peter's Primary School, who was a member of the royal family of the town of Isara-Remo, and Grace Soyinka (n\u00e9e Jenkins-Harrison), a shopkeeper and activist, who was a member of the Ransome-Kuti family. He was born in Ake, Abeokuta, where he was raised as a Christian. He was born on 13 July 1934, and was the second of seven children: Atinuke Aina, Femi, Yeside, Omofolabo Ajayi, and Kayode. His sister Folasade died as an infant.\nSoyinka was educated at St. Peters Primary School, where his father was the headmaster, from 1940 to 1946. He had his secondary education at Abeokuta Grammar School and university preparatory studies at Government College, Ibadan from 1946 to 1951. He was admitted into the University College Ibadan, where he studied English literature, Greek, and Western history from 1952 to 1954. During his final years in the university, he wrote \"Keffi's Birthday Treat\", a short radio play, for the Federal Radio Corporation of Nigeria, which was broadcast in July 1954. Along with his classmates including Olumuyiwa Aw\u1eb9, Ralph Opara, Aig-Imoukhuede, and Pius Olegbe, Soyinka founded the National Association of Seadogs, the first confraternity in Nigeria.\nSoyinka relocated from Nigeria to England and continued his studies in English literature at University of Leeds from 1954 to 1957 under the supervision of G. Wilson Knight, graduating in 1958. At Leeds, he served as the editor of the university's satirical magazine, \"The Eagle\", in which he wrote a column on academic life and often criticised his university peers. In August 1955, he had started recording for BBC Lecture. He also wrote many short stories, which in 1957, he won the annual oratory competition run by the University.\nWriting and publishing.\nSoyinka remained in Leeds to complete his Master's degree. He wrote and published his first play \"The Swamp Dwellers\" in 1958. A year later, he published another play \"The Lion and the Jewel\". The comedy play attracted great interest from members of London's Royal Court Theatre. Soyinka moved to London and worked as a play reader for the Royal Court Theatre. During that period, his two plays were performed in Ibadan, Nigeria and explored the difficult relationship between progress and tradition in Nigeria. In 1957, his play \"The Invention\" was produced at the Royal Court Theatre, and was his first work to achieve that fame. He wrote poems, including \"The Immigrant\" and \"My Next Door Neighbour\", which appeared in \"Black Orpheus\". Soyinka returned to Nigeria after receiving a Rockefeller Research Fellowship for his research on African theatre. In November 1959, he replaced Janheinz Jahn as the co-editor of \"Black Orpheus\" as well as produced \"The Trials of Brother Jero\", which premiered in the Mellanby Hall residence of University College Ibadan, in April 1960. In the same year, his work \"A Dance of The Forest\", became the official play for the Nigerian Independence Day and on 1 October 1960, it premiered in Lagos.\nSoyinka's first full-length play, entitled \"My Father's Burden\" was directed by Olusegun Olusola and featured on Western Nigeria Television on 6 August 1960. With the Rockefeller grant, Soyinka bought a Land Rover, and he began travelling throughout Nigeria as a researcher from the English Language department of University College Ibadan. In a 1960 essay, he criticised Leopold Senghor's N\u00e9gritude movement as \"a nostalgic and indiscriminate glorification of black African's past that ignores the potential benefits of modernisation\". Soyinka wrote essays that defended Nigerian literacy, among them, \"Death and the King's Horsemen\", and \"Towards a True Theater\" (1962), which was published by \"Transition Magazine\".\nA lecturer at Obafemi Awolowo University in If\u1eb9, Soyinka discussed current affairs with negrophiles and on several occasions, openly condemned government censorship. At the end of 1963, his first feature-length movie, \"Culture in Transition\", was released. In 1965, his book \"The Interpreters\" was published in London by Andr\u00e9 Deutsch. Along with other professionals, Soyinka founded the Drama Association of Nigeria.\nIn 1964, he resigned from his university post, as a protest against imposed pro-government behaviour by the authorities. In 1965, he was arrested for the first time, charged with holding up a radio station at gunpoint \u2013 about which he would later write in his 2006 memoir, \"You Must Set Forth at Dawn\" \u2013 and replacing the tape of a recorded speech by the premier of Western Region with a different tape containing accusations of electoral malpractice. He was released after some months of confinement, as a result of protests by the international community of writers. In the same year, he wrote two more dramatic pieces: \"Before the Blackout\" and \"Kongi's Harvest\". He also wrote \"The Detainee\", a radio play for BBC in London. On 14 September 1965, his play \"The Road\" premiered in London at the Commonwealth Arts Festival and at the Theatre Royal Stratford East. Soyinka was promoted to senior lecturer in the department of English language of the University of Lagos.\nMarriages and teaching.\nIn 1958, Soyinka married British writer Barbara Dixon, whom he met while studying at the University of Leeds in the 1950s. The couple had a son, Olaokun and a daughter, Morenike. After they separated, he married in 1963 to a Nigerian librarian, Olaide Idowu. They had three daughters: Moremi, Iyetade (1965\u20132013), Peyibomi and a son, Ilemakin. Soyinka married Folake Doherty in 1989 and had three sons: Tunlewa, Bojode and Eniara.\nFrom 1975 to 1999, Soyinka served as a Professor of Comparative literature at Obafemi Awolowo University. In the US, he taught at Cornell University as the Goldwin Smith professor for African Studies and Theatre Arts from 1988 to 1991. At Emory University, he was appointed Robert W. Woodruff Professor of the Arts in 1996 and has been a Professor of Creative Writing at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. Soyinka served as scholar-in-residence at New York University's Institute of African American Affairs and at Loyola Marymount University in Los Angeles, California. He has also taught at the universities of Cambridge, Oxford, Harvard and Yale. He was a Distinguished Scholar in Residence at Duke University in 2008.\nIn December 2017, Soyinka received the Europe Theatre Prize in the \"Special Prize\" category, awarded to someone who has \"contributed to the realization of cultural events that promote understanding and the exchange of knowledge between peoples\".\nOn 1 September 2022, Soyinka took up the appointment of Professor of Theatre at New York University Abu Dhabi.\nCivil war and imprisonment.\nAfter becoming Chair of Drama at the University of Ibadan, Soyinka became more politically active. Following the military coup of January 1966, he secretly met with Chukwuemeka Odumegwu Ojukwu, the military governor in the Southeastern Nigeria in an effort to avert the Nigerian civil war.\nSoyinka was subsequently arrested by federal authorities and imprisoned for 22 months, as civil war ensued between the Federal government of Nigeria and the secessionist state of Biafra. He wrote a significant body of poems and notes criticising the Nigerian government while in prison.\nDespite his imprisonment, his play \"The Lion and The Jewel\" was produced in Accra, Ghana, in September 1967. In November that year, \"The Trials of Brother Jero\" and \"The Strong Breed\" were produced in the Greenwich Mews Theatre in New York City. Soyinka also published a collection of his poetry, \"Idanre and Other Poems\", which was inspired by his visit to the sanctuary of the Yor\u00f9b\u00e1 deity Ogun, whom he regards as his \"companion\" deity, kindred spirit, and protector.\nIn 1968, the Negro Ensemble Company in New York produced \"Kongi's Harvest\". While still imprisoned, Soyinka translated from Yoruba a fantastical novel by his compatriot D. O. Fagunwa, entitled \"\".\nTwo films have been made about this period of his life. \"The Man Died\", directed by Awam Amkpa, is a feature film based on a fictionalized form of Soyinka's 1973 prison memoirs of the same title. \"Ebrohimie Road\", written and directed by Kola Tubosun, explores the Ibadan house where Soyinka lived between 1967, when he returned to direct the School of Drama, and 1972, when he left for exile following his released from prison.\nRelease and literary production.\nIn October 1969, when the civil war came to an end, amnesty was proclaimed, and Soyinka and other political prisoners were freed. For the first few months after his release, Soyinka stayed at a friend's farm in southern France, where he sought solitude. He wrote \"The Bacchae of Euripides\" (1969), a reworking of the Pentheus myth. He also published in London a book of poetry, \"Poems from Prison\". At the end of the year, he returned to his office as Chair of Drama at Ibadan.\nIn 1970, he produced the play \"Kongi's Harvest\", while simultaneously adapting it as a film of the same title. In June 1970, he finished another play, called \"Madmen and Specialists\". Together with the group of 15 actors of Ibadan University Theatre Art Company, he went on a trip to the United States, to the Eugene O'Neill Memorial Theatre Center in Waterford, Connecticut, where his latest play premiered.\nIn 1971, his poetry collection \"A Shuttle in the Crypt\" was published. \"Madmen and Specialists\" was produced in Ibadan that year. In April 1971, concerned about the political situation in Nigeria, Soyinka resigned from his duties at the University in Ibadan, and began years of voluntary exile.\nSoyinka travelled to Paris, France, to take the lead role as Patrice Lumumba, the murdered first Prime Minister of the Republic of the Congo, in Joan Littlewood's May 1971 production of \"Murderous Angels\", Conor Cruise O'Brien's play about the Congo Crisis. In July in Paris, excerpts from Soyinka's well-known play \"The Dance of The Forests\" were performed.\nIn 1972, his novel \"Season of Anomy\" and his \"Collected Plays\" were both published by Oxford University Press. His powerful autobiographical work \"The Man Died\", a collection of notes from prison, was also published that year. He was awarded an Honoris Causa doctorate by the University of Leeds in 1973. In the same year the National Theatre, London, commissioned and premiered the play \"The Bacchae of Euripides\", and his plays \"Camwood on the Leaves\" and \"Jero's Metamorphosis\" were also first published. From 1973 to 1975, Soyinka spent time on scientific studies. He spent a year as a visiting fellow at Churchill College, Cambridge (1973\u201374) and wrote \"Death and the King's Horseman\", which had its first reading at Churchill College.\nIn 1974, Oxford University Press issued his \"Collected Plays, Volume II\". In 1975, Soyinka was promoted to the position of editor for \"Transition Magazine\", which was based in the Ghanaian capital of Accra, where he moved. He used his columns in the magazine to criticise the \"negrophiles\" (for instance, his article \"Neo-Tarzanism: The Poetics of Pseudo-Transition\") and military regimes. He protested against the military junta of Idi Amin in Uganda. After the political turnover in Nigeria and the subversion of Gowon's military regime in 1975, Soyinka returned to his homeland and resumed his position as Chair of Comparative Literature at the University of Ife.\nIn 1976, he published his poetry collection \"Ogun Abibiman\", as well as a collection of essays entitled \"Myth, Literature and the African World\". In these, Soyinka explores the genesis of mysticism in African theatre and, using examples from both European and African literature, compares and contrasts the cultures. He delivered a series of guest lectures at the Institute of African Studies at the University of Ghana in Legon. In October 1976, the French version of \"The Dance of The Forests\" was performed in Dakar, while in Ife, his play \"Death and The King's Horseman\" premiered.\nIn 1977, \"Opera W\u1ecdny\u1ecdsi\", his adaptation of Bertolt Brecht's \"The Threepenny Opera\", was staged in Ibadan. In 1979, Soyinka both directed and acted in Jon Blair and Norman Fenton's drama \"The Biko Inquest\", a work based on the life of Steve Biko, a South African student and human rights activist who was beaten to death by apartheid police forces. In 1981 Soyinka published his autobiographical work \"\", which won a 1983 Anisfield-Wolf Book Award.\nSoyinka went on to establish another theatrical group, the Guerrilla Unit, which sought to engage directly with local communities. Its purpose was to help them reflect on their challenges and give voice to their grievances through short dramatic performances. In 1983, his play \"Requiem for a Futurologist\" had its first performance at the University of Ife. In July that year, one of his musical projects, the Unlimited Liability Company, issued a long-playing record entitled \"I Love My Country\", on which several prominent Nigerian musicians played songs composed by Soyinka. In 1984, he directed the film \"Blues for a Prodigal\", which was screened at the University of Ife. His \"A Play of Giants\" was produced the same year.\nDuring the years 1975\u201384, Soyinka was more politically active. At the University of Ife, his administrative duties included the security of public roads. He criticized the corruption in the government of the democratically elected President Shehu Shagari. When Shagari was replaced by the army general Muhammadu Buhari, Soyinka was often at odds with the military. In 1984, a Nigerian court banned his 1972 book \"\". In 1985, his play \"Requiem for a Futurologist\" was published in London by Rex Collings.\nNobel Prize laureate.\nSoyinka was awarded the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1986, becoming the first African laureate. He was described as one \"who in a wide cultural perspective and with poetic overtones fashions the drama of existence\". Reed Way Dasenbrock writes that the award of the Nobel Prize in Literature to Soyinka is \"likely to prove quite controversial and thoroughly deserved\". He also notes that \"it is the first Nobel Prize awarded to an African writer or to any writer from the 'new literatures' in English that have emerged in the former colonies of the British Empire.\" His Nobel acceptance speech, \"This Past Must Address Its Present\", was devoted to South African freedom-fighter Nelson Mandela. Soyinka's speech was an outspoken criticism of apartheid and the politics of racial segregation imposed on the majority by the National South African government.\nLater years.\nIn 1988, his collection of poems \"Mandela's Earth, and Other Poems\" was published, while in Nigeria another collection of essays, entitled \"Art, Dialogue and Outrage: Essays on Literature and Culture\", appeared. In the same year, Soyinka accepted the position of Professor of African Studies and Theatre at Cornell University. In 1989, a third novel, inspired by his father's intellectual circle, \"\u00ccsar\u00e0: A Voyage around Essay\", appeared (\"Essay\" being the nickname of his father S. A. Soyinka). In July 1991, the BBC African Service transmitted Soyinka's radio play \"A Scourge of Hyacinths\", and the next year (1992) in Siena (Italy), his play \"From Zia with Love\" had its premiere. Both works are very bitter political parodies, based on events that took place in Nigeria in the 1980s. In 1993, Soyinka was awarded an honorary doctorate from Harvard University. The following year, another part of his autobiography appeared: \"Ibadan: The Penkelemes Years (A Memoir: 1946\u20131965)\". In 1995, his play, \"The Beatification of Area Boy,\" was published. In October 1994, he was appointed UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador for the Promotion of African culture, human rights, freedom of expression, media and communication.\nIn November 1994, Soyinka fled from Nigeria on a motorcycle via the border with Benin, and then went to the United States. In 1996, his book \"The Open Sore of a Continent: A Personal Narrative of the Nigerian Crisis\" was first published. In 1997, he was charged with treason by the government of General Sani Abacha. The International Parliament of Writers (IPW) was established in 1993 to provide support for writers victimized by persecution. Soyinka became the organization's second president, serving in the role from 1997 to 2000. In 1999, a new volume of poems by Soyinka, entitled \"Outsiders\", was released. That same year, a BBC-commissioned play called \"Document of Identity\" aired on BBC Radio 3, telling the lightly-fictionalized story of the problems his daughter's family encountered during a stopover in Britain when they fled Nigeria for the US in 1996; her son, Oseoba Airewele was born in Luton and became a stateless person.\nSoyinka's play \"King Baabu\" premi\u00e8red in Lagos in 2001, a political satire on the theme of African dictatorship. In 2002, a collection of his poems entitled \"Samarkand and Other Markets I Have Known\" was published by Methuen. In April 2006, his memoir \"You Must Set Forth at Dawn\" was published by Random House. In 2006 he cancelled his keynote speech for the annual S.E.A. Write Awards Ceremony in Bangkok to protest the Thai military's successful coup against the government.\nIn April 2007, Soyinka called for the cancellation of the Nigerian presidential elections held two weeks earlier, beset by widespread fraud and violence. In the wake of the attempted bombing on a Northwest Airlines flight to the United States by a Nigerian student who had become radicalised in Britain, Soyinka questioned the British government's social logic in allowing every religion to openly proselytise their faith, asserting that it was being abused by religious fundamentalists, thereby turning England into, in his view, a cesspit for the breeding of extremism. He supported the freedom of worship, but warned against the consequence of the illogic of allowing religions to preach apocalyptic violence.\nIn August 2014, Soyinka delivered a recording of his speech \"From Chibok with Love\" to the World Humanist Congress in Oxford, hosted by the International Humanist and Ethical Union and the British Humanist Association. The Congress theme was \"Freedom of thought and expression: Forging a 21st Century Enlightenment\". He was awarded the 2014 International Humanist Award. He served as Arts Professor of Theatre at NYU's Institute of African American Affairs.\nIn December 2020, Soyinka described 2020 as the most challenging year in the nation's history, saying: \"With the turbulence that characterised year 2020, and as activities wind down, the mood has been repugnant and very negative. I don't want to sound pessimistic, but this is one of the most pessimistic years I have known in this nation and it wasn't just because of COVID-19. Natural disasters had happened elsewhere, but how have you managed to take such in their strides?\"\nSeptember 2021 saw the publication of \"Chronicles from the Land of the Happiest People on Earth\", Soyinka's first novel in almost 50 years, described in the \"Financial Times\" as \"a brutally satirical look at power and corruption in Nigeria, told in the form of a whodunnit involving three university friends.\" Reviewing the book in \"The Guardian\", Ben Okri said: \"It is Soyinka's greatest novel, his revenge against the insanities of the nation's ruling class and one of the most shocking chronicles of an African nation in the 21st century. It ought to be widely read.\"\nThe film adaptation by Biyi Bandele of Soyinka's 1975 stage play \"Death and the King's Horseman\", co-produced by Netflix and Ebonylife TV, titled \"Elesin Oba, The King's Horseman\", premiered at the Toronto International Film Festival (TIFF) in September 2022. It is Soyinka's first work to be made into a feature film internationally, and the first Yoruba-language film to premiere at TIFF.\nReligion.\nIn November 2022, during a public presentation of his two-volume collection of essays, Soyinka said in relation to religion:\n\"Do I really need one (religion)? I have never felt I needed one. I am a mythologist... No, I don't worship any deity. But I consider deities as creatively real and therefore my companions in my journey in both the real world and the imaginative world.\"\nAround July 2023, Soyinka came under severe criticism, after writing an open letter to the Emir of Ilorin, Ibrahim Sulu-Gambari, over the cancellation of the Isese festival proposed by an \"Osun\" priestess, Omolara Olatunji.\nCaroline Davis CIA allegation.\nIn a book published in 2020, University College London academic Caroline Davis examined archival evidence of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) funding of African authors in the post-independence period. One chapter of the book, titled \"Wole Soyinka, the Transcription Centre, and the CIA\", focused specifically on Soyinka's receipt of funding from CIA front organisations such as the Farfield Foundation and the Transcription Centre. The funding supported Soyinka's publishing and the global production of some of his theatre plays. The book states that even after the CIA's covert role in some of these initiatives was revealed in the 1960s, Soyinka had \"unusually close ties to the US government even to the point of frequently meeting with US intelligence in the late 1970s\".\nWhen the book was published, Soyinka vociferously denied having been a CIA agent and stated that he would \"[follow the authors] to the end of the earth and to the pit of hell until I get a retraction\".\nNigerian academic Adekeye Adebajo has argued in the \"Johannesburg Review of Books\" that Davis does not directly accuse Soyinka of being a CIA agent and that Soyinka's denials are therefore also misdirected. Adebajo states: \"Any suggestion that Soyinka was also a pro-American agent would not be borne out by his political activism, which frequently condemned US-supported Cold War clients.\" However, Adebajo also suggests that \"for all his eloquent fervour, Soyinka has not rebutted these allegations in the detailed, evidence-based manner that could have put an end to this debate.\"\nUS visa revocation.\nIn October 2025, Soyinka said that the United States had revoked his visa after comments he made characterizing Donald Trump as \"Idi Amin in white face\".\nStyle.\nScholars, including Adeniran, have noted that Soyinka\u2019s writings reflect his life.\nLegacy.\nWole Soyinka Annual Lecture Series.\nThe Wole Soyinka Annual Lecture Series was founded in 1994. It is dedicated \"to honouring one of Nigeria and Africa's most outstanding and enduring literary icons: Wole Soyinka\". It is organised by the National Association of Seadogs.\nIn 2011, the African Heritage Research Library and Cultural Centre built a writers' enclave in his honour. It is located in Adeyipo Village, Lagelu Local Government Area, Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria. The enclave includes a Writer-in-Residence Programme that enables writers to stay for a period of two, three or six months, engaging in serious creative writing. In 2013, he visited the Benin Moat as the representative of UNESCO in recognition of the Naija seven Wonders project. He is currently the consultant for the Lagos Black Heritage Festival, with the Lagos State deeming him as the only person who could bring out the aims and objectives of the Festival to the people. He was appointed a patron of Humanists UK in 2020.\nIn 2014, the collection \"Crucible of the Ages: Essays in Honour of Wole Soyinka at 80\", edited by Ivor Agyeman-Duah and Ogochwuku Promise, was published by Bookcraft in Nigeria and Ayebia Clarke Publishing in the UK, with tributes and contributions from Nadine Gordimer, Toni Morrison, Ama Ata Aidoo, Ngugi wa Thiong'o, Henry Louis Gates Jr, Margaret Busby, Kwame Anthony Appiah, Ali Mazrui, Sefi Atta, and others.\nIn 2018, Henry Louis Gates Jr tweeted that Nigerian filmmaker and writer Onyeka Nwelue visited him in Harvard and was making a documentary film on Wole Soyinka. As part of efforts to mark his 84th birthday, a collection of poems titled \"84 Delicious Bottles of Wine\" was published for Wole Soyinka, edited by Onyeka Nwelue and Odega Shawa. Among the notable contributors was Adamu Usman Garko, award-winning teenage essayist, poet and writer.\nDuring a special dialogue that he hosted with him, opened by the President of the General Conference of UNESCO, Professor Octavian Saiu described Soyinka as \u201cone of the wisest and most inspiring figures of world literature and theatre\u201d.\nAwards and honours.\nSoyinka won the Anisfield-Wolf Book Award in 1983 and 2013. He rejected an honorary degree from the University of Ibadan. In 1986 he won the Nobel Prize for Literature, as well as the Agip Prize for Literature. He was also confered the title of Commander of the Order of the Federal Republic by the military head of state, Ibrahim Babangida. Soyinka is a tribal aristocrat; one vested with the right to use the Yoruba title Oloye as a pre-nominal honorific. In 2005, he was given a chieftaincy title as the \"Akinlatun\" of Egbaland. He was honoured with the Golden Plate Award by the American Academy of Achievement. It was presented to him by the Awards Council member, Archbishop Desmond Tutu at St. George's Cathedral, Cape Town.\nIn 2018, his alma mater, University of Ibadan, renamed her arts theatre as Wole Soyinka Theatre. In 2017, he received the Special Prize category of the Europe Theatre Prize, in Rome. In August 2024, the President of Cuba, Miguel Diaz-Canel, honoured Soyinka with the Hayd\u00e9e Santamar\u00eda medal.\nIn commemoration of Nigeria's 65th Independence Day Anniversary on 1 October 2025, President Bola Ahmed Tinubu renamed the National Theatre as Wole Soyinka Center for Culture and Creative Arts. The event was graced by dignitaries cutting across government, business, traditional and the creative industry, among others.\nReferences.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nCitations.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSources.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33826", "revid": "39747830", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33826", "title": "List of independence wars", "text": ""}
{"id": "33827", "revid": "2570766", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33827", "title": "Womb", "text": ""}
{"id": "33828", "revid": "13286072", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33828", "title": "White Russian (cocktail)", "text": "Cocktail made with vodka and coffee liqueur\nA white Russian is a cocktail made with vodka, coffee liqueur (e.g. Kahl\u00faa or Tia Maria) and cream served with ice in an old fashioned glass.\nHistory.\nThe traditional cocktail known as a black Russian, which first appeared in 1949, becomes a white Russian with the addition of cream. Neither drink has any known Russian origin, but both are so-named due to vodka being the primary ingredient. It is unclear which drink preceded the other.\nThe \"Oxford English Dictionary\" refers to the first mention of \"white Russian\" in the sense of a cocktail as appearing in California's \"Oakland Tribune\" on November 21, 1965. It was placed in the newspaper as an insert: \"White Russian. 1 oz. each Southern, vodka, cream\", with \"Southern\" referring to Coffee Southern, a short-lived brand of coffee liqueur by Southern Comfort.\nThe white Russian saw a surge in popularity after the 1998 release of the film \"The Big Lebowski\". Throughout the movie, it appears as the beverage of choice for the protagonist, Jeffrey \"The Dude\" Lebowski. On a number of occasions he refers to the drink as a \"Caucasian\".\nPreparation.\nAs with all cocktails, various modes of preparation exist, varying according to the recipes and styles of particular bars or mixologists. Most common varieties have adjusted amounts of vodka or coffee liqueur, or mixed brands of coffee liqueur. Shaking the cream in order to thicken it prior to pouring it over the drink is also common. Sometimes the drink is prepared on the stove with hot coffee for a warm treat on cold days. Conversely, vanilla ice cream has been known to be used, rather than cream, to make it frozen.\nVariations.\nMany variants of the cocktail exist, such as a mudslide, Bolshevik, or blonde Russian (made with Irish cream), an Anna Kournikova (named after the tennis player, made with skimmed milk, i.e. a \"skinny\" white Russian), a white Cuban (made with rum instead of vodka), a black Russian (vodka and coffee liqueur), or a dirty Russian (with chocolate syrup added). A Colorado bulldog or tall black Russian adds a splash of cola. A white Mexican substitutes tequila for vodka.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33830", "revid": "10689882", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33830", "title": "Wellington (disambiguation)", "text": "Wellington is the capital city of New Zealand.\nWellington may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33832", "revid": "16713407", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33832", "title": "William Wallace", "text": "Scottish knight (1270\u20131305)\nSir William Wallace (, ; Norman French: ; c.\u20091270 \u2013 23 August 1305) was a Scottish knight who became one of the main leaders during the First War of Scottish Independence.\nAlong with Andrew Moray, Wallace defeated an English army at the Battle of Stirling Bridge in September 1297. He was appointed Guardian of Scotland and served until his defeat at the Battle of Falkirk in July 1298. In August 1305, Wallace was captured in Robroyston, near Glasgow, and handed over to King Edward I of England, who had him hanged, drawn and quartered for high treason and crimes against English civilians.\nSince his death, Wallace has obtained a legendary status beyond his homeland. He is the protagonist of Blind Harry's 15th-century epic poem \"The Wallace\" and the subject of literary works by Jane Porter and Sir Walter Scott, and of the Academy Award-winning film \"Braveheart\".\nBackground.\nWilliam Wallace was a member of the lesser nobility, but little is definitely known of his family history or even his parentage. William's own seal, found on a letter sent to the Hanse city of L\u00fcbeck in 1297, gives his father's name as Alan Wallace. This Alan Wallace may be the same as the one listed in the 1296 Ragman Rolls as a crown tenant in Ayrshire, but there is no additional confirmation. Others have speculated this Alan held Ellerslie, near Kilmarnock, Ayrshire, and if true, the estate could be a possible birthplace for William, though there is no record of Wallaces holding the estate in the mid-13th century. Blind Harry's late-15th-century poem offers an alternate father for William, a Sir Malcolm of Elderslie, in Renfrewshire, and has similarly given rise to a possible birthplace for William. There is no contemporary evidence linking him with either location, although both areas had connections with the wider Wallace family. Records show early members of the family as holding estates at Riccarton, Tarbolton, Auchincruive in Kyle and Stenton in East Lothian. They were vassals of James Stewart, 5th High Steward of Scotland, as their lands fell within his territory. It has been claimed that Wallace's brothers Malcolm and John are known from other sources, but there is a lack of verifiable evidence for John's relationship with William.\nThe origins of the Wallace surname and its association with southwest Scotland are also far from certain, other than the name's being derived from the Old English (pronounced 'wullish'), meaning 'foreigner' or 'Welshman'. It is possible that all the Wallaces in the Clyde area were medieval immigrants from Wales, but, as the term was also used for the Cumbric-speaking Strathclyde kingdom of the Celtic Britons, it seems equally likely that the surname refers to people who were seen as being \"Welsh\" due to their Cumbric language.\nMilitary career.\nPolitical crisis in Scotland.\nWhen Wallace was growing up, King Alexander III ruled Scotland. His reign had seen a period of peace and economic stability. On 19 March 1286, however, Alexander died after falling from his horse. The heir to the throne was Alexander's granddaughter, Margaret, Maid of Norway. As she was still a child and in Norway, the Scottish lords set up a government of guardians. Margaret fell ill on the voyage to Scotland and died in Orkney in late September 1290. The lack of a clear heir led to a period known as the \"Great Cause\", with a total of thirteen contenders laying claim to the throne. The most credible claims were John Balliol and Robert Bruce, grandfather of the future monarch, Robert the Bruce.\nWith Scotland threatening to descend into civil war, King Edward I of England was invited in by the Scottish nobility to arbitrate. Before the process could begin, he insisted that all of the contenders recognise him as Lord Paramount of Scotland. In early November 1292, at a great feudal court held in the castle at Berwick-upon-Tweed, judgment was given in favour of John Balliol having the strongest claim in law based on being senior in genealogical primogeniture even though not in proximity of blood.\nEdward proceeded to take steps to progressively undermine John's authority, treating Scotland as a feudal vassal state, demanding homage be paid towards himself and military support in his war against France\u2014even summoning King John Balliol to stand before the English court as a common plaintiff. The Scots soon tired of their deeply compromised king, and the direction of affairs was allegedly taken out of his hands by the leading men of the kingdom, who appointed a Council of Twelve\u2014in practice, a new panel of Guardians\u2014at Stirling in July 1295. They went on to conclude a treaty of mutual assistance with France\u2014known in later years as the Auld Alliance.\nIn retaliation for Scotland's treaty with France, Edward I invaded, storming Berwick-upon-Tweed and commencing the Wars of Scottish Independence. The Scots were defeated at Dunbar and the English took Dunbar Castle on 27 April 1296. Edward forced John to abdicate, which he did at Stracathro near Montrose on 10 July 1296. Here the arms of Scotland were formally torn from John's surcoat, giving him the abiding name of \"Toom Tabard\" (empty coat). By July, Edward had instructed his officers to receive formal homage from some 1,800 Scottish nobles (many of the rest being prisoners of war at that time).\nSilent years prior to the Wars of Independence.\nSome historians believe Wallace must have had some earlier military experience in order to lead a successful military campaign in 1297. Campaigns like Edward I of England's wars in Wales might have provided a good opportunity for a younger son of a landholder to become a mercenary soldier. Wallace's personal seal bears the archer's insignia, so he may have fought as an archer in Edward's army.\nWalter Bower's mid-15th-century Scotichronicon, states that Wallace was \"a tall man with the body of a giant\u00a0... with lengthy flanks\u00a0... broad in the hips, with strong arms and legs\u00a0... with all his limbs very strong and firm\". Blind Harry's late 15th-century poem The Wallace, asserts Wallace was seven feet tall, though the historical accuracy of this claim is questionable.\nStart of the uprising.\nThe first act definitely known to have been carried out by Wallace was his killing of William de Heselrig, the English High Sheriff of Lanark, in May 1297. He then joined with William the Hardy, Lord of Douglas, and they carried out the raid of Scone. This was one of several rebellions taking place across Scotland, including those of several Scottish nobles and Andrew Moray in the north.\nThe uprising suffered a blow when the nobles submitted to the English at Irvine in July. Wallace and Moray were not involved and continued their rebellions. Wallace used the Ettrick Forest as a base for raiding and attacked Wishart's palace at Ancrum. Wallace and Moray met and joined their forces, possibly at the siege of Dundee in early September.\nBattle of Stirling Bridge.\nOn 11 September 1297, an army jointly led by Wallace and Andrew Moray won the Battle of Stirling Bridge. Although vastly outnumbered, the Scottish army routed the English army. The 6th Earl of Surrey's feudal army of 3,000 cavalry and 8,000 to 10,000 infantry met disaster as they crossed over to the north side of the river. The narrowness of the bridge prevented many soldiers from crossing together (possibly as few as three men abreast), so, while the English soldiers crossed, the Scots held back until half of them had passed and then killed the English as quickly as they could cross. The infantry were sent on first, followed by heavy cavalry. The Scots' schiltron formations forced the infantry back into the advancing cavalry. A pivotal charge, led by one of Wallace's captains, caused some of the English soldiers to retreat as others pushed forward, and under the overwhelming weight, the bridge collapsed, and many English soldiers drowned. Thus, the Scots won a significant victory, boosting the confidence of their army. Hugh de Cressingham, Edward's treasurer in Scotland, died in the fighting and it is reputed that his body was subsequently flayed, and the skin cut into small pieces as tokens of the victory. The Lanercost Chronicle records that Wallace had \"a broad strip [of Cressingham's skin] ... taken from the head to the heel, to make therewith a baldrick for his sword\".\nAfter the battle, Moray and Wallace assumed the title of Guardians of the Kingdom of Scotland on behalf of King John Balliol. Moray died of wounds suffered on the battlefield sometime in late 1297.\nWallace soon mounted an invasion of northern England, crossing into Northumberland. The Scots army followed the English army fleeing south. Caught between two armies, hundreds of refugees fled to safety behind the walls of Newcastle. The Scots laid waste a swathe of countryside before turning west into Cumberland and pillaging all the way to Cockermouth, before Wallace led his men back into Northumberland and fired 700 villages. Wallace then returned from England laden with booty.\nIn a ceremony, at the 'Kirk o' the Forest' (Selkirk), towards the end of the year, Wallace was knighted. This would have been carried out by one of three Scottish earls\u2014 Carrick (Robert the Bruce), Strathearn, or Lennox.\nBattle of Falkirk.\nIn April 1298, Edward ordered a second invasion of Scotland. Two days prior to the battle 25,781 foot soldiers were paid. More than half of them would have been Welsh. There are no clear cut sources for the presence of cavalry, but it is safe to assume that Edward had roughly 1,500 horse under his command. They plundered Lothian and regained some castles, but failed to bring William Wallace to combat; the Scots shadowed the English army, intending to avoid battle until shortages of supplies and money forced Edward to withdraw, at which point the Scots would harass his retreat. The English quartermasters' failure to prepare for the expedition left morale and food supplies low, and a resulting riot within Edward's own army had to be put down by his cavalry. In July, while planning a return to Edinburgh for supplies, Edward received intelligence that the Scots were encamped nearby at Falkirk, and he moved quickly to engage them in the pitched battle for which he had long hoped.\nWallace arranged his spearmen in four schiltrons\u2014circular, defensive hedgehog formations, probably surrounded by wooden stakes connected with ropes, to keep the infantry in formation. The English, however, employed Welsh longbowmen, who swung tactical superiority in their favour. The English proceeded to attack with cavalry and put the Scottish archers to flight. The Scottish cavalry withdrew as well, due to its inferiority to the English heavy horses. Edward's men began to attack the schiltrons, which were still able to inflict heavy casualties on the English cavalry. It remains unclear whether the infantry shooting bolts, arrows and stones at the spearmen proved the deciding factor, although it is very likely that it was the arrows of Edward's bowmen. Gaps in the schiltrons soon appeared, and the English exploited these to crush the remaining resistance. The Scots lost many men, including John de Graham. Wallace escaped, though his military reputation suffered badly.\nBy September 1298, Wallace resigned as Guardian of Scotland in favour of Robert the Bruce, Earl of Carrick and future king, and John Comyn, King John Balliol's nephew.\nDetails of Wallace's activities after this are vague, but there is some evidence that he left on a mission to the court of King Philip IV of France to plead the case for assistance in the Scottish struggle for independence. There is a surviving letter from the French king dated 7 November 1300 to his envoys in Rome demanding that they should help Sir William. It also suggests that Wallace intended to travel to Rome, although it is not known if he did. There is also a report from an English spy at a meeting of Scottish leaders, where they said Wallace was in France.\nBy 1304 Wallace was back in Scotland and involved in skirmishes at Happrew and Earnside.\nCapture and execution.\nWallace evaded capture by the English until 5 August 1305, when John de Menteith, a Scottish knight loyal to Edward, turned Wallace over to English soldiers at Robroyston, near Glasgow, a site commemorated by a small monument in the form of a Celtic cross. Letters of safe conduct from Haakon V of Norway, Philip IV of France and John Balliol, along with other documents, were found in Wallace's possession and delivered to Edward by John de Segrave.\nWallace was transported to London and taken to Westminster Hall. There he was tried for treason, for which his defence was that he, unlike most of the other Scottish leaders, had never sworn allegiance to Edward. He was also charged with committing atrocities against civilians in war, \"sparing neither age nor sex, monk nor nun\". As a result, the trial has attracted the attention of modern legal scholarship as it is one of the earliest examples of what would now be considered a prosecution for war crimes. It is one of only three known pre-modern trials which raised, in today's terms, issues of international humanitarian law.\nFollowing the trial, on 23 August 1305, Wallace was taken from the hall to the Tower of London, then stripped naked and dragged through the city at the heels of a horse to the Elms at Smithfield. He was hanged, drawn and quartered\u2014strangled by hanging, but released while he was still alive, emasculated, eviscerated (with his bowels burned before him), beheaded, then cut into four parts. Wallace's head was dipped in tar and placed on a spike atop London Bridge. His preserved head was later joined by the heads of his brother John and his compatriots Simon Fraser and John of Strathbogie. Wallace's limbs were displayed, separately, in Newcastle, Berwick, Stirling and Perth. A plaque unveiled 8 April 1956 stands in a wall of St. Bartholomew's Hospital near the site of Wallace's execution at Smithfield. It includes in Latin the words (\"I tell you the truth: Freedom is what is best. Son, never live your life like a slave\"), and in Gaelic (\"Death and Victory\"), an old Scottish battle cry.\nIn 1869, the Wallace Monument was erected, close to the site of his victory at Stirling Bridge. The Wallace Sword, which supposedly belonged to Wallace, although some parts were made at least 160 years later, was held for many years in Dumbarton Castle and is now in the Wallace Monument.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nBibliography.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Refbegin/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33833", "revid": "15484855", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33833", "title": "Willard Van Orman Quine", "text": "American philosopher and logician (1908\u20132000)\nWillard Van Orman Quine ( ; known to his friends as \"Van\"; June 25, 1908 \u2013 December 25, 2000) was an American philosopher and logician in the analytic tradition, recognized as \"one of the most influential philosophers of the twentieth century\". He was the Edgar Pierce Chair of Philosophy at Harvard University from 1956 to 1978.\nQuine was a teacher of logic and set theory. He was famous for his position that first-order logic is the only kind worthy of the name, and developed his own system of mathematics and set theory, known as New Foundations. In the philosophy of mathematics, he and his Harvard colleague Hilary Putnam developed the Quine\u2013Putnam indispensability argument, an argument for the reality of mathematical entities. He was the main proponent of the view that philosophy is not conceptual analysis, but continuous with science; it is the abstract branch of the empirical sciences. This led to his famous quip that \"philosophy of science is philosophy enough\". He led a \"systematic attempt to understand science from within the resources of science itself\" and developed an influential naturalized epistemology that tried to provide \"an improved scientific explanation of how we have developed elaborate scientific theories on the basis of meager sensory input\". He also advocated holism in science, known as the Duhem\u2013Quine thesis.\nHis major writings include the papers \"On What There Is\" (1948), which elucidated Bertrand Russell's theory of descriptions and contains Quine's famous dictum of ontological commitment, \"To be is to be the value of a variable\", and \"Two Dogmas of Empiricism\" (1951), which attacked the traditional analytic-synthetic distinction and reductionism, undermining the then-popular logical positivism, advocating instead a form of semantic holism and ontological relativity. They also include the books \"The Web of Belief\" (1970), which advocates a kind of coherentism, and \"Word and Object\" (1960), which further developed these positions and introduced Quine's famous indeterminacy of translation thesis, advocating a behaviorist theory of meaning.\nBiography.\nQuine's parents were Robert Cloyd Quine and Harriet Ellis Van Orman. Quine grew up in Akron, Ohio, where he lived with his parents and older brother Robert Cloyd. His father was a manufacturing entrepreneur (founder of the Akron Equipment Company, which produced tire molds) and his mother was a schoolteacher and housewife. Quine became an atheist around the age of 9 and remained one for the rest of his life.\nEducation.\nQuine received his B.A. \"summa cum laude\" in mathematics from Oberlin College in 1930, and his Ph.D. in philosophy from Harvard University in 1932. His thesis supervisor was Alfred North Whitehead. He was then appointed a Harvard Junior Fellow, which excused him from having to teach for four years. During the academic year 1932\u201333, he travelled in Europe thanks to a Sheldon Fellowship, meeting Polish logicians (including Jan \u0141ukasiewicz, Stanislaw Lesniewski and Alfred Tarski) and members of the Vienna Circle (including Rudolf Carnap), as well as the logical positivist A. J. Ayer. It was in Prague that Quine developed a passion for philosophy, thanks to Carnap, whom he called his \"true and only \".\nWorld War II.\nQuine arranged for Tarski to be invited to the September 1939 Unity of Science Congress in Cambridge, for which the Jewish Tarski sailed on the last ship to leave Danzig before Nazi Germany invaded Poland and triggered World War II. Tarski survived the war and worked another 44 years in the US. During the war, Quine lectured on logic in Brazil, in Portuguese, and served in the United States Navy in a military intelligence role, deciphering messages from German submarines, and reaching the rank of lieutenant commander. Quine could lecture in French, German, Italian, Portuguese, and Spanish as well as his native English.\nPersonal.\nHe had four children by two marriages. Guitarist Robert Quine was his nephew.\nQuine was politically conservative, but the bulk of his writing was in technical areas of philosophy removed from direct political issues. He did, however, write in defense of several conservative positions: for example, he wrote in defense of moral censorship; while, in his autobiography, he made some criticisms of American postwar academics.\nHarvard.\nAt Harvard, Quine helped supervise the Harvard graduate theses of, among others, David Lewis, Gilbert Harman, Dagfinn F\u00f8llesdal, Hao Wang, Hugues LeBlanc, Henry Hiz and George Myro. For the academic year 1964\u20131965, Quine was a fellow on the faculty in the Center for Advanced Studies at Wesleyan University. In 1980\nQuine received an honorary doctorate from the Faculty of Humanities at Uppsala University, Sweden.\nQuine's student Dagfinn F\u00f8llesdal noted that Quine suffered from memory loss towards his final years. The deterioration of his short-term memory was so severe that he struggled to continue following arguments. Quine also had considerable difficulty in his project to make the desired revisions to \"Word and Object\". Before dying, Quine noted to Morton White: \"I do not remember what my illness is called, Althusser or Alzheimer, but since I cannot remember it, it must be Alzheimer.\" He died from the illness on Christmas Day in 2000.\nWork.\nQuine's Ph.D. thesis and early publications were on formal logic and set theory. Only after World War II did he, by virtue of seminal papers on ontology, epistemology and language, emerge as a major philosopher. By the 1960s, he had worked out his \"naturalized epistemology\" whose aim was to answer all substantive questions of knowledge and meaning using the methods and tools of the natural sciences. Quine roundly rejected the notion that there should be a \"first philosophy,\" a theoretical standpoint somehow prior to natural science and capable of justifying it. These views are intrinsic to his naturalism.\nLike the majority of analytic philosophers, who were mostly interested in systematic thinking, Quine evinced little interest in the philosophical canon: only once did he teach a course in the history of philosophy, on David Hume, in 1946.\nLogic.\nOver the course of his career, Quine published numerous technical and expository papers on formal logic, some of which are reprinted in his \"Selected Logic Papers\" and in \"The Ways of Paradox\". His most well-known collection of papers is \"From A Logical Point of View\". Quine confined logic to classical bivalent first-order logic, hence to truth and falsity under any (nonempty) universe of discourse. Hence the following were not logic for Quine:\nQuine wrote three undergraduate texts on formal logic:\n\"Mathematical Logic\" is based on Quine's graduate teaching during the 1930s and 1940s. It shows that much of what \"Principia Mathematica\" took more than 1000 pages to say can be said in 250 pages. The proofs are concise, even cryptic. The last chapter, on G\u00f6del's incompleteness theorem and Tarski's indefinability theorem, along with the article Quine (1946), became a launching point for Raymond Smullyan's later lucid exposition of these and related results.\nQuine's work in logic gradually became dated in some respects. Techniques he did not teach and discuss include analytic tableaux, recursive functions, and model theory. His treatment of metalogic left something to be desired. For example, \"Mathematical Logic\" does not include any proofs of soundness and completeness. Early in his career, the notation of his writings on logic was often idiosyncratic. His later writings nearly always employed the now-dated notation of \"Principia Mathematica\". Set against all this are the simplicity of his preferred method (as exposited in his \"Methods of Logic\") for determining the satisfiability of quantified formulas, the richness of his philosophical and linguistic insights, and the fine prose in which he expressed them.\nMost of Quine's original work in formal logic from 1960 onwards was on variants of his predicate functor logic, one of several ways that have been proposed for doing logic without quantifiers. For a comprehensive treatment of predicate functor logic and its history, see Quine (1976). For an introduction, see ch.\u00a045 of his \"Methods of Logic\".\nQuine was very warm to the possibility that formal logic would eventually be applied outside of philosophy and mathematics. He wrote several papers on the sort of Boolean algebra employed in electrical engineering, and with Edward J. McCluskey, devised the Quine\u2013McCluskey algorithm of reducing Boolean equations to a minimum covering sum of prime implicants.\nSet theory.\nWhile his contributions to logic include elegant expositions and a number of technical results, it is in set theory that Quine was most innovative. He always maintained that mathematics required set theory and that set theory was quite distinct from logic. He flirted with Nelson Goodman's nominalism for a while but backed away when he failed to find a nominalist grounding of mathematics.\nOver the course of his career, Quine proposed three axiomatic set theories.\nAll three set theories admit a universal class, but since they are free of any hierarchy of types, they have no need for a distinct universal class at each type level.\nQuine's set theory and its background logic were driven by a desire to minimize posits; each innovation is pushed as far as it can be pushed before further innovations are introduced. For Quine, there is but one connective, the Sheffer stroke, and one quantifier, the universal quantifier. All polyadic predicates can be reduced to one dyadic predicate, interpretable as set membership. His rules of proof were limited to modus ponens and substitution. He preferred conjunction to either disjunction or the conditional, because conjunction has the least semantic ambiguity. He was delighted to discover early in his career that all of first order logic and set theory could be grounded in a mere two primitive notions: abstraction and inclusion. For an elegant introduction to the parsimony of Quine's approach to logic, see his \"New Foundations for Mathematical Logic\", ch.\u00a05 in his \"From a Logical Point of View\".\nMetaphysics.\nQuine has had numerous influences on contemporary metaphysics. He coined the term \"abstract object\".\nIn his famous essay \"On What There Is\", he connected each of the three main metaphysical ontological positions\u2014realism/conceptualism/nominalism\u2014with one of three dominant schools in the modern philosophy of mathematics: logicism, intuitionism, and formalism respectively. In the same work, he coined the term \"Plato's beard\" to refer to the problem of empty names: \nSuppose now that two philosophers, McX and I, differ over ontology. Suppose McX maintains there is something which I maintain there is not. McX can, quite consistently with his own point of view, describe our difference of opinion by saying that I refuse to recognize certain entities ... When \"I\" try to formulate our difference of opinion, on the other hand, I seem to be in a predicament. I cannot admit that there are some things which McX countenances and I do not, for in admitting that there are such things I should be contradicting my own rejection of them ... This is the old Platonic riddle of nonbeing. Nonbeing must in some sense be, otherwise what is it that there is not? This tangled doctrine might be nicknamed \"Plato's beard\"; historically it has proved tough, frequently dulling the edge of Occam\u2019s razor.\nQuine was unsympathetic, however, to the claim that saying 'X does not exist' is a tacit acceptance of X's existence and, thus, a contradiction. Appealing to Bertrand Russell and his theory of \"singular descriptions\", Quine explains how Russell was able to make sense of \"complex descriptive names\" ('the present King of France', 'the author of \"Waverly\"', etc.) by thinking about them as merely \"fragments of the whole sentences\". For example, 'The author of \"Waverly\" was a poet' becomes 'some thing is such that it is the author of \"Waverly\" and was a poet, and nothing else is such that it is the author of \"Waverly\"'.\nUsing this sort of analysis with the word 'Pegasus' (that which Quine is wanting to assert does not exist), he turns Pegasus into a description. Turning the word 'Pegasus' into a description is to turn 'Pegasus' into a predicate, to use a term of First-order logic: i.e. a property. As such, when we say 'Pegasus', we are really saying 'the thing that is Pegasus' or 'the thing that \"Pegasizes\"'. This introduces, to use another term from logic, bound variables (ex: 'everything', 'something,' etc.) As Quine explains, bound variables, \"far from purporting to be names specifically...do not purport to be names at all: they refer to entities generally, with a kind of studied ambiguity peculiar to themselves.\"\nPutting it another way, to say 'I hate everything' is a very different statement than saying 'I hate Bertrand Russell', because the words 'Bertrand Russell' are a proper name that refer to a very specific person. Whereas the word 'everything' is a placeholder. It does not refer to a specific entity or entities. Quine is able, therefore, to make a meaningful claim about Pegasus' nonexistence for the simple reason that the placeholder (a thing) happens to be empty. It just so happens that the world does not contain a thing that is such that it is winged and it is a horse. \nRejection of the analytic\u2013synthetic distinction.\nIn the 1930s and 40s, discussions with Rudolf Carnap, Nelson Goodman and Alfred Tarski, among others, led Quine to doubt the tenability of the distinction between \"analytic\" statements\u2014those true simply by the meanings of their words, such as \"No bachelor is married\"\u2014 and \"synthetic\" statements, those true or false by virtue of facts about the world, such as \"There is a cat on the mat.\" This distinction was central to logical positivism. Although Quine is not normally associated with verificationism, some philosophers believe the tenet is not incompatible with his general philosophy of language, citing his Harvard colleague B. F. Skinner and his analysis of language in \"Verbal Behavior\". But Quine believes, with all due respect to his \"great friend\" Skinner, that the ultimate reason is to be found in neurology and not in behavior. For him, behavioral criteria establish only the terms of the problem, the solution of which, however, lies in neurology.\nLike other analytic philosophers before him, Quine accepted the definition of \"analytic\" as \"true in virtue of meaning alone.\" Unlike them, however, he concluded that ultimately the definition was circular. In other words, Quine accepted that analytic statements are those that are true by definition, then argued that the notion of truth by definition was unsatisfactory.\nQuine's chief objection to analyticity is with the notion of cognitive synonymy (sameness of meaning). He argues that analytical sentences are typically divided into two kinds; sentences that are clearly logically true (e.g. \"no unmarried man is married\") and the more dubious ones; sentences like \"no bachelor is married.\" Previously it was thought that if you can prove that there is synonymity between \"unmarried man\" and \"bachelor,\" you have proved that both sentences are logically true and therefore self evident. Quine however gives several arguments for why this is not possible, for instance that \"bachelor\" in some contexts means a Bachelor of Arts, not an unmarried man.\nConfirmation holism and ontological relativity.\nColleague Hilary Putnam called Quine's indeterminacy of translation thesis \"the most fascinating and the most discussed philosophical argument since Kant's \"Transcendental Deduction of the Categories\"\". The central theses underlying it are ontological relativity and the related doctrine of confirmation holism. The premise of confirmation holism is that all theories (and the propositions derived from them) are under-determined by empirical data (data, sensory-data, evidence); although some theories are not justifiable, failing to fit with the data or being unworkably complex, there are many equally justifiable alternatives. While the Greeks' assumption that (unobservable) Homeric gods exist is false and our supposition of (unobservable) electromagnetic waves is true, both are to be justified solely by their ability to explain our observations.\nThe \"gavagai\" thought experiment tells about a linguist, who tries to find out, what the expression \"gavagai\" means, when uttered by a speaker of a yet unknown, native language upon seeing a rabbit. At first glance, it seems that \"gavagai\" simply translates with \"rabbit\". Now, Quine points out that the background language and its referring devices might fool the linguist here, because he is misled in a sense that he always makes direct comparisons between the foreign language and his own. However, when shouting \"gavagai\", and pointing at a rabbit, the natives could as well refer to something like \"undetached rabbit-parts\", or \"rabbit-tropes\" and it would not make any observable difference. The behavioural data the linguist could collect from the native speaker would be the same in every case, or to reword it, several translation hypotheses could be built on the same sensoric stimuli.\nQuine concluded his \"Two Dogmas of Empiricism\" as follows:\nAs an empiricist I continue to think of the conceptual scheme of science as a tool, ultimately, for predicting future experience in the light of past experience. Physical objects are conceptually imported into the situation as convenient intermediaries not by definition in terms of experience, but simply as irreducible posits comparable, epistemologically, to the gods of Homer \u2026. For my part I do, \"qua\" lay physicist, believe in physical objects and not in Homer's gods; and I consider it a scientific error to believe otherwise. But in point of epistemological footing, the physical objects and the gods differ only in degree and not in kind. Both sorts of entities enter our conceptions only as cultural posits.\nQuine's ontological relativism (evident in the passage above) led him to agree with Pierre Duhem that for any collection of empirical evidence, there would always be many theories able to account for it, known as the Duhem\u2013Quine thesis. However, Duhem's holism is much more restricted and limited than Quine's. For Duhem, underdetermination applies only to physics or possibly to natural science, while for Quine it applies to all of human knowledge. Thus, while it is possible to verify or falsify whole theories, it is not possible to verify or falsify individual statements. Almost any particular statement can be saved, given sufficiently radical modifications of the containing theory. For Quine, scientific thought forms a coherent web in which any part could be altered in the light of empirical evidence, and in which no empirical evidence could force the revision of a given part.\nExistence and its contrary.\nThe problem of non-referring names is an old puzzle in philosophy, which Quine captured when he wrote,\nA curious thing about the ontological problem is its simplicity. It can be put into three Anglo-Saxon monosyllables: 'What is there?' It can be answered, moreover, in a word\u2014'Everything'\u2014and everyone will accept this answer as true.\nMore directly, the controversy goes:\nHow can we talk about Pegasus? To what does the word 'Pegasus' refer? If our answer is, 'Something', then we seem to believe in mystical entities; if our answer is, 'nothing', then we seem to talk about nothing and what sense can be made of this? Certainly when we said that Pegasus was a mythological winged horse we make sense, and moreover we speak the truth! If we speak the truth, this must be truth \"about something\". So we cannot be speaking of nothing.\nQuine resists the temptation to say that non-referring terms are meaningless for reasons made clear above. Instead he tells us that we must first determine whether our terms refer or not before we know the proper way to understand them. However, Czes\u0142aw Lejewski criticizes this belief for reducing the matter to empirical discovery when it seems we should have a formal distinction between referring and non-referring terms or elements of our domain. Lejewski writes further:\nThis state of affairs does not seem to be very satisfactory. The idea that some of our rules of inference should depend on empirical information, which may not be forthcoming, is so foreign to the character of logical inquiry that a thorough re-examination of the two inferences [existential generalization and universal instantiation] may prove worth our while.\nLejewski then goes on to offer a description of free logic, which he claims accommodates an answer to the problem.\nLejewski also points out that free logic additionally can handle the problem of the empty set for statements like formula_1. Quine had considered the problem of the empty set unrealistic, which left Lejewski unsatisfied.\nOntological commitment.\nThe notion of ontological commitment plays a central role in Quine's contributions to ontology. A theory is ontologically committed to an entity if that entity must exist in order for the theory to be true. Quine proposed that the best way to determine this is by translating the theory in question into first-order predicate logic. Of special interest in this translation are the logical constants known as existential quantifiers ('\u2203'), whose meaning corresponds to expressions like \"there exists...\" or \"for some...\". They are used to bind the variables in the expression following the quantifier. The ontological commitments of the theory then correspond to the variables bound by existential quantifiers. For example, the sentence \"There are electrons\" could be translated as \"\u2203\"x\" \"Electron\"(\"x\")\", in which the bound variable \"x\" ranges over electrons, resulting in an ontological commitment to electrons. This approach is summed up by Quine's famous dictum that \"[t]o be is to be the value of a variable\". Quine applied this method to various traditional disputes in ontology. For example, he reasoned from the sentence \"There are prime numbers between 1000 and 1010\" to an ontological commitment to the existence of numbers, i.e. realism about numbers. This method by itself is not sufficient for ontology since it depends on a theory in order to result in ontological commitments. Quine proposed that we should base our ontology on our best scientific theory. Various followers of Quine's method chose to apply it to different fields, for example to \"everyday conceptions expressed in natural language\".\nIndispensability argument for mathematical realism.\nIn philosophy of mathematics, he and his Harvard colleague Hilary Putnam developed the Quine\u2013Putnam indispensability thesis, an argument for the reality of mathematical entities.\nThe form of the argument is as follows.\nThe justification for the first premise is the most controversial. Both Putnam and Quine invoke naturalism to justify the exclusion of all non-scientific entities, and hence to defend the \"only\" part of \"all and only\". The assertion that \"all\" entities postulated in scientific theories, including numbers, should be accepted as real is justified by confirmation holism. Since theories are not confirmed in a piecemeal fashion, but as a whole, there is no justification for excluding any of the entities referred to in well-confirmed theories. This puts the nominalist who wishes to exclude the existence of sets and non-Euclidean geometry, but to include the existence of quarks and other undetectable entities of physics, for example, in a difficult position.\nEpistemology.\nJust as he challenged the dominant analytic\u2013synthetic distinction, Quine also took aim at traditional normative epistemology. According to Quine, traditional epistemology tried to justify the sciences, but this effort (as exemplified by Rudolf Carnap) failed, and so we should replace traditional epistemology with an empirical study of what sensory inputs produce what theoretical outputs: \nEpistemology, or something like it, simply falls into place as a chapter of psychology and hence of natural science. It studies a natural phenomenon, viz., a physical human subject. This human subject is accorded a certain experimentally controlled input\u2014certain patterns of irradiation in assorted frequencies, for instance\u2014and in the fullness of time the subject delivers as output a description of the three-dimensional external world and its history. The relation between the meager input and the torrential output is a relation that we are prompted to study for somewhat the same reasons that always prompted epistemology: namely, in order to see how evidence relates to theory, and in what ways one's theory of nature transcends any available evidence... But a conspicuous difference between old epistemology and the epistemological enterprise in this new psychological setting is that we can now make free use of empirical psychology.\nAs previously reported, in other occasions Quine used the term \"neurology\" instead of \"empirical psychology\".\nQuine's proposal is controversial among contemporary philosophers and has several critics, with Jaegwon Kim the most prominent among them.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33835", "revid": "248739", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33835", "title": "World Calendar", "text": "Proposed reform of Gregorian calendar\nThe World Calendar is a proposed reform of the Gregorian calendar created by Elisabeth Achelis of Brooklyn, New York in 1930.\nFeatures.\nThe World Calendar is a 12-month, perennial calendar with equal quarters.\nEach quarter begins on a Sunday and ends on a Saturday. The quarters are equal: each has exactly 91 days, 13 weeks, or 3 months. The three months in each quarter have 31, 30, and 30 days respectively. Each quarter begins with the 31-day months of January, April, July, or October.\nThe World Calendar also has the following two additional days to maintain the same new year days as the Gregorian calendar.\n The last day of the year following Saturday 30 December. This additional day is dated \"W\" and named Worldsday, a year-end world holiday. It is followed by Sunday, 1 January in the new year.\n This day is similarly added at the end of the second quarter in leap years. It is also dated \"W\" and named Leapyear Day. It is followed by Sunday, 1 July within the same year.\nThe World Calendar treats Worldsday and Leapyear Day as a 24-hour waiting period before resuming the calendar again. These off-calendar days, also known as \"intercalary days\", are not assigned weekday designations. They are intended to be treated as holidays.\nBecause any three-month sequence repeats with the same arrangement of days, the World Calendar can be expressed concisely:\nBackground and history.\nThe World Calendar has its roots in the proposed calendar of the Abbot Marco Mastrofini, a proposal to reform the Gregorian calendar year so that it would always begin on Sunday, 1 January, and would contain equal quarters of 91 days each. The 365th day of the solar cycle would be a year-end, \"intercalary\" and optionally holiday. In leap years, a second \"intercalary day\" follows Saturday, 30 June.\nAround 1887 French astronomer Gaston Armelin proposed a calendar based on this idea and roughly identical to the World Calendar.\nElisabeth Achelis founded The World Calendar Association (TWCA) in 1930 with the goal of worldwide adoption of the World Calendar. It functioned for most of the next twenty-five years as The World Calendar Association, Inc. Throughout the 1930s, support for the concept grew in the League of Nations, the precursor of the United Nations. Achelis started the Journal of Calendar Reform in 1931, publishing it for twenty-five years, and wrote five books on the calendar concept.\nFollowing World War II, Achelis solicited worldwide support for the World Calendar. As the movement gained international appeal with legislation introduced in the United States Congress, awaiting international decisions, Achelis accepted advice that the United Nations was the proper body to act on calendar reform. At the United Nations in 1955, the United States significantly delayed universal adoption by withholding support \"unless such a reform were favoured by a substantial majority of the citizens of the United States acting through their representatives in the Congress of the United States.\" Also, Achelis wrote in 1955 (JCR Vol. 25, page 169), \"While Affiliates and Committees have over the years and still are able to approach all branches of their governments, the Incorporated (International) Association was prevented from seeking legislation in the United States lest it lose its tax exempt status. Because of this I have been prevented from doing in my own country that which I have been urging all other Affiliates to do in theirs.\"\nBy 1956, she dissolved The World Calendar Association, Incorporated. It continued as the International World Calendar Association through the rest of the century with several directors including Molly E. Kalkstein, who is related to Achelis, and who provided the Association's first official website during her 2000\u20132004 tenure. The association reorganised in 2005 as The World Calendar Association, International. It was last active on 2013 as it had resumed efforts towards adoption of the World Calendar in 2017 and 2023. The World Calendar Association's last director was Wayne Edward Richardson of Ellinwood, Kansas who died on 29 May 2020.\nReception.\nBenefits.\nAs with other calendar reform proposals, supporters point out several benefits to the World Calendar over the current Gregorian calendar.\nProponents refer to its simple structure. Each day is assigned an exact, repetitive date relative to week and month. Quarterly statistics are easier to compare, since the four-quarters are the same length each year. Economic savings occur from less need to print calendars because only the year number changes. Work and school schedules do not need to unnecessarily reinvent themselves, at great expense, year after year. The World Calendar can be memorised by anyone and used similarly to a clock.\nBecause the World Calendar is perpetual, there is no need to churn out copies of it every year. Dates in the World Calendar occur with no more than two days difference from Gregorian calendar dates.\nReligious objections.\nThe main opponents of the World Calendar in the 20th century were leaders of religions that worship according to a seven-day cycle. For Jews, Christians and Muslims, particular days of worship are ancient and fundamental elements of their faith.\nJews observe Saturday as \"Shabbat\", on the basis of the Decalogue's injunction to \"remember the sabbath day, to keep it holy\" (Exodus 20:8). Most Christians worship on Sunday, the Lord's Day, on which they believe Christ rose from the dead. Muslims perform the \"jumu'ah\" prayer in Mosques on Fridays, the day they believe Adam was created. Likewise, Seventh-day Adventists are required to worship every Saturday.\nAdherents of these religions object that intercalary days are counted outside the usual seven-day week and disrupt the traditional weekly cycle. A week with a Worldsday would be eight days long. Some adherents of these religions insist that they would have to continue observing their holidays every seventh day, causing the worship days to drift by one day each year (two on a leap year), relative to the World Calendar week. The day of rest would then no longer coincide with the weekend.\nThese concerns played a role in the United States government's decision, at the United Nations, in 1955, not to recommend further study.\nSupporters of the World Calendar do not deny that their system is at odds with the traditions of a significant portion of the world's population, but argue that Worldsdays and Leapyear Days can be treated as \"double\" holidays by those who wish to maintain the seven-day week sequence.\nInternational standards.\nThe World Calendar, unlike some other proposals, is not compatible with the international standard ISO 8601, which is based upon, but differs from, the Gregorian calendar. They differ regarding the first weekday of the week (Sunday vs. Monday), and ISO 8601 does not support intercalary dates (e.g. in notation). The World Calendar, however, modifies the Gregorian calendar less than other calendar reform proposals to achieve the sought after improvements of a simpler and perpetual calendar.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33860", "revid": "12583600", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33860", "title": "Witch hunt (disambiguation)", "text": "A witch hunt is a search for suspected or alleged witches. It is also used as a metaphor for investigation with real purpose of harming opponents.\nWitch hunt may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSee also.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33861", "revid": "48986655", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33861", "title": "White wedding", "text": "Traditional formal or semi-formal wedding originating in Great Britain\nA white wedding is a traditional formal or semi-formal wedding originating in Great Britain.\nThe term originates from the white colour of the wedding dress, popularised by Victorian era elites after Queen Victoria wore a white lace dress at her 1840 wedding to Prince Albert. The white wedding style was given another significant boost in 1981, when 750 million people watched the wedding of Diana Spencer to Charles, Prince of Wales, which saw her wear an elaborate ivory taffeta dress with an 8 m train.\nThe full white wedding experience today typically requires the family to arrange for or purchase printed or engraved wedding invitations, musicians, decorations such as flowers or candles, clothes and flowers for bridesmaids, groomsmen, a flower girl and a ring bearer. They may also add optional features such as a guest book or commemorative wedding leaflets. It is common to have a celebration after the wedding ceremony, normally featuring a large wedding cake with white icing. The term now also encapsulates the entire Western wedding routine, especially in the Christian religious tradition, which generally includes a church service during which the marriage begins, followed by a reception.\n\u201cColor Wheel Pro\u201d describes white in association with light, goodness, innocence, purity and virginity. As for other significant meanings for white on a wedding day, \u201ccolormeaning.com\u201d says, \u201cIn color psychology, white is the color of new beginnings \u2014 wiping the slate clean. The color white is a blank canvas, just waiting to be written on.\u201d White is the color in Western culture most often associated with beginnings. Religious rites and the clothing associated with them have always been important, and white is often a common color used to express high religious commitment and purity.\nHistory of the white dress and traditions.\nThough Mary, Queen of Scots, wore a white wedding gown in 1559 when she married her first husband, Francis Dauphin of France, the tradition of a white wedding dress is commonly credited to Queen Victoria's choice to wear a white court dress at her wedding to Prince Albert in 1840. Debutantes had long been required to wear white court dresses and long white gloves for their first presentation at court, at a \"Drawing Room\" where they were introduced to the queen for the first time.\nRoyal brides before Victoria did not typically wear white, instead choosing \"heavy brocaded gowns embroidered with white and silver thread,\" with red being a particularly popular colour in Western Europe more generally. During this time, European and American brides wore a variety of colours, including blue, yellow, and practical colours like black, brown, or gray. As accounts of Victoria's wedding spread across the Atlantic and throughout Europe, fashionable people followed her lead.\nThe traditional white wedding was not necessarily defined by the color of the dress only. The wedding of Queen Victoria's daughter Victoria to Prince Fredrick William of Prussia in 1858 also introduced choral music to the processional when standard practice had been to have music of any kind only during a party after the wedding ceremony.\nBecause of the limitations of laundering techniques before the later part of the 20th century, white dresses provided an opportunity for conspicuous consumption. They were favored primarily as a way to show the world that the bride's family was so wealthy and so firmly part of the leisure class that the bride would choose an elaborate dress that could be ruined by any sort of work or spill.\nWomen were required to wear veils in many Christian churches through the mid-20th century; the resurgence of the wedding veil as a symbol of the bride, and its use even when not required by the bride's religion, coincided with societal emphasis on women being modest and well-behaved.\nEtiquette books then began to turn the practice into a tradition and the white gown soon became a popular symbol of status that also carried \"a connotation of innocence and virginal purity.\" The story put out about the wedding veil was that decorous brides were naturally too timid to show their faces in public until they were married.\nBy the end of the 19th century the white dress was the garment of choice for elite brides on both sides of the Atlantic. However, middle-class British and American brides did not adopt the trend fully until after World War II. With increased prosperity in the 20th century, the tradition also grew to include the practice of wearing the dress only once. As historian Vicky Howard writes, \"[i]f a bride wore white in the nineteenth century, it was acceptable and likely that she wore her gown again\". Even Queen Victoria had her famous lace wedding dress re-styled for later use.\nAfter World War I, as full-scale formal weddings began to be desired by the mothers of brides who did not have a permanent social secretary, the position of the wedding planner, who could coordinate the printer, florist, caterer and seamstress, began to assume importance. The first edition of \"Bride's Magazine\" was published in 1934 as a newspaper advertising insert called \u2018So You're Going to Get Married!\u2019 in a column entitled \u2018To the Bride\u2019 and its rival \"Modern Bride\" began publishing in 1949. \nThe portrayal of weddings in Hollywood movies, particularly immediately after World War II, helped crystallize and homogenize the white wedding into a normative form.\nParticipants.\nTraditional weddings require, in addition to the bride and groom, a marriage officiant, which is a minister, priest, pastor, vicar, rabbi, imam, or civil officer who is authorized to perform marriages and will read out of a Bible, Quran, or Civil document.\nTypical white weddings also include a wedding party, which consists of some or all of the following:\nTypically these positions are filled by either close friends or family members (or both) of the bride and groom; being asked to serve in these capacities is seen as an honor and typically entails some expense.\nThe ceremony.\nWhen the guests arrive for a wedding, the ushers, if any, help the guests take their places. In a typical white wedding ceremony, which is derived primarily from the Christian tradition (inclusive of denominations such as Lutheranism and Anglicanism, for example), the bride and groom will stand side by side at the front of the church before the chancel throughout most or all the ceremony. Consequently, some guests prefer to sit on the side closer to the person they know best. Typically, this means that the bride's family sits on the house left and the groom's family on house right. The front rows are generally reserved for close family members or friends.\nSome couples make a ceremony of having their grandparents, step-parents, and parents escorted to their seats immediately before the wedding procession begins. In other cases, these relatives form part of the wedding procession.\nDepending on the country, her age and situation, and her personal preferences, the bride may walk alone or be escorted by her father, both of her parents, one or more relatives she wishes to honor, or the groom. In Swedish white weddings, the bride and groom usually go down the aisle together. Similarly, some couples choose to have the groom escorted to the altar by his family.\nWhether the bride is the first or the last of the wedding party to enter the church varies by country. In the US, the bride is typically last, being preceded by the rest of the wedding party. In the UK, she leads the procession, followed by any bridesmaids, flower girls and page boys. Sometimes the groom is already present in the church; other times, he and any groomsmen form part of the procession. The music played during this procession is commonly called a \"wedding march\", no matter what songs are played.\nIf the wedding is part of a religious service, then technically the service begins after the arrival of the participants, commonly with a prayer, blessing, or ritual greeting. During the ceremony, each partner in the couple makes marriage vows to the other in front of the marriage officiant. The ceremony might include the playing of a prelude, the singing of hymns, and Bible readings, as well as Holy Communion in accordance with the Christian marriage liturgy of the church at which the wedding is held, e.g. Lutheran, Catholic, Presbyterian, Anglican, Methodist, Baptist, Mormon, Calvinist, Unitarian, Protestant, Orthodox, etc.\nAfter the wedding ceremony itself ends, the bride, groom, officiant, and two witnesses generally go off to a side room to sign the wedding register in the United Kingdom or the state-issued marriage license in the United States. Without the signing of the register or the marriage license, a marriage has not legally occurred.\nAfterward, guests may cheer the departure of the couple from the church by throwing flower petals, confetti, birdseed, or rice over them. Miniature containers of bubbles are often provided to guest to blow at the couple instead of throwing the previously mentioned items.\nThe reception.\nAfter this, the celebrations shift to a reception at which the newly married couple, as the guests of honor, and the hosts and perhaps members of the wedding party greet the guests in a receiving line. Although now commonly called a reception no matter the style of party, wedding celebrations range from simple receptions to dinner parties to grand wedding balls.\nFood is served, particularly including a wedding cake. Wedding cakes are often multi-tiered layer cakes that are elaborately decorated with white icing. Cutting the wedding cake is often turned into a ritual, complete with sharing a symbolic bite of the cake in a rite that harks back to the pagan confarreatio weddings in ancient Rome.\nDuring the reception, a number of short speeches or toasts may be given in honor of the couple.\nIf there is dancing, the bride and groom, as the guests of honor, are expected to be the first people to begin dancing. This is usually termed the \"bridal waltz\", even if the couple has arranged for a different style of music. Some families then contrive a series of arranged dances between the newlyweds and their parents, or other members of the wedding party, with guests expected to watch the performances.\nAt some point, the married couple may become the object of a charivari, a good-natured hazing of the newly married couple. The nature depends upon the circumstances. The guests might tie tin cans or a sign saying \"Just Married\" to the bumper of the couple's car, if they depart in their own car rather than a hired one.\nAs the guests of honor, the newly married couple is the first to leave the party. From ancient Rome through the Middle Ages in Europe, wheat kernels were thrown at the bride in a wish for affluence; now it is typical to throw rice, as a symbol of fertility, at the couple as they depart.\nGallery.\nPhotographs from late 19th century, early 20th century, and mid 20th century weddings. The first two images show the bride in a black or dark dress. The photographic styles of capturing weddings continues to evolve from posed somber expressions to candid moments showing emotion and joy."}
{"id": "33862", "revid": "14606274", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33862", "title": "Wannsee Conference", "text": "1942 Holocaust planning meeting\nThe Wannsee Conference (, ) was a meeting of senior government officials of Nazi Germany and \"Schutzstaffel\" (SS) leaders, held in the Berlin suburb of Wannsee on 20 January 1942. The purpose of the conference, called by the director of the Reich Security Main Office SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" Reinhard Heydrich, was to ensure the co-operation of administrative leaders of various government departments in the implementation of the Final Solution to the Jewish Question, whereby most of the Jews of German-occupied Europe would be deported to occupied Poland and murdered. Conference participants included representatives from several government ministries, including state secretaries from the Foreign Office, the justice, interior, and state ministries, and representatives from the SS. In the course of the meeting, Heydrich outlined how European Jews would be rounded up and sent to extermination camps in the General Government (the occupied part of Poland), where they would be murdered.\nDiscrimination against Jews began immediately after the Nazi seizure of power on 30 January 1933. Violence and economic pressure were used by the Nazi regime to encourage Jews to voluntarily leave the country. After the invasion of Poland in September 1939, the extermination of European Jews began, first through mobile death squads like the \"Einsatzgruppen,\" and the murders continued and accelerated after the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941. On 31 July 1941, Hermann G\u00f6ring gave written authorization to Heydrich to prepare and submit a plan for a \"total solution of the Jewish question\" in territories under German control and to coordinate the participation of all involved government organisations. At the Wannsee Conference, Heydrich emphasised that once the deportation process was complete, the fate of the deportees would become an internal matter under the purview of the SS. A secondary goal was to arrive at a definition of who was Jewish.\nOne copy of the Protocol with circulated minutes of the meeting survived the war. It was found by Robert Kempner in March 1947 among files that had been seized from the German Foreign Office. It was used as evidence in the subsequent Nuremberg trials. The Wannsee House, site of the conference, is now a Holocaust memorial.\nBackground.\nLegalized discrimination against Jews in Germany began immediately after the Nazi seizure of power in January 1933. The ideology of Nazism brought together elements of antisemitism, racial hygiene, and eugenics and combined them with pan-Germanism and territorial expansionism with the goal of obtaining more \"Lebensraum\" (living space) for the Germanic people. Nazi Germany attempted to obtain this new territory by invading Poland and the Soviet Union, intending to deport or exterminate the Jews and Slavs living there, who were viewed as being inferior to the Aryan master race.\nDiscrimination against Jews, long-standing but extra-legal throughout much of Europe at the time, was codified in Germany immediately after the Nazi seizure of power on 30 January 1933. The Law for the Restoration of the Professional Civil Service, passed on 7 April of that year, excluded most Jews from the legal profession and the civil service. Similar legislation soon deprived other Jews of the right to practise their professions. Violence and economic pressure were used by the regime to force Jews to leave the country. Jewish businesses were denied access to markets, forbidden to advertise in newspapers, and deprived of access to government contracts. Citizens were harassed and subjected to violent attacks and boycotts of their businesses.\nIn September 1935, the Nuremberg Laws were enacted, prohibiting marriages between Jews and people of Germanic extraction, extramarital sexual relations between Jews and Germans, and the employment of German women under the age of 45 as domestic servants in Jewish households. The Citizenship Law stated that only those of German or related blood were defined as citizens; thus, Jews and other minority groups were stripped of their German citizenship. A supplementary decree issued in November defined as Jewish anyone with three Jewish grandparents, or two grandparents if the Jewish faith was followed. By the start of World War II in Europe in 1939, around 250,000 of Germany's 437,000 Jews had immigrated to the United States, British Mandatory Palestine, Great Britain, and other countries.\nAfter the invasion of Poland in September 1939, Hitler ordered that the Polish leadership and intelligentsia be destroyed. The \"Sonderfahndungsbuch Polen\" (Special Ledger of Wanted Persons\u2013Poland)\u2014lists of people to be located so they could be interned or killed\u2014had been drawn up by the SS as early as May 1939. The \"Einsatzgruppen\" (special task forces) performed these murders with the support of the \"Volksdeutscher Selbstschutz\" (Germanic Self-Protection Group), a paramilitary group consisting of ethnic Germans living in Poland. Members of the SS, the \"Wehrmacht\" (German Armed Forces), and the \"Ordnungspolizei\" (Order Police; Orpo) also shot civilians during the Polish campaign. Approximately 65,000 civilians were killed by the end of 1939. In addition to leaders of Polish society, they murdered Jews, prostitutes, Romani people, and the mentally ill.\nOn 31 July 1941, Hermann G\u00f6ring gave written authorization to SS-\"Obergruppenf\u00fchrer\" (Senior Group Leader) Reinhard Heydrich, Chief of the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA), to prepare and submit a plan for a \"total solution of the Jewish question\" in territories under German control and to coordinate the participation of all involved government organisations. The resulting \"Generalplan Ost\" (General Plan for the East) called for deporting the population of occupied Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union to Siberia, for use as slave labour or to be murdered. The minutes of the Wannsee Conference estimated the Jewish population of the Soviet Union to be five\u00a0million, including nearly three\u00a0million in Ukraine.\nIn addition to eliminating Jews, the Nazis also planned to reduce the population of the conquered territories by 30\u00a0million people through starvation in an action called the Hunger Plan devised by Herbert Backe. Food supplies would be diverted to the German army and German civilians. Cities would be razed and the land allowed to return to forest or resettled by German colonists. The objective of the Hunger Plan was to inflict deliberate mass starvation on the Slavic civilian populations under German occupation by directing all food supplies to the German home population and the Wehrmacht on the Eastern Front. According to the historian Timothy Snyder, \"4.2\u00a0million Soviet citizens (largely Russians, Belarusians, and Ukrainians) were starved\" by the Nazis (and the Nazi-controlled \"Wehrmacht\") in 1941\u20131944 as a result of Backe's plan.\nHarvests were poor in Germany in 1940 and 1941 and food supplies were short, as large numbers of forced labourers had been brought into the country to work in the armaments industry. If these workers\u2014as well as the German people\u2014were to be adequately fed, there must be a sharp reduction in the number of \"useless mouths\", of whom the millions of Jews under German rule were, in the light of Nazi ideology, the most obvious example.\nAt the time of the Wannsee Conference, the mass-murder of Jews in the Soviet Union had already been underway for more than half a year. Right from the start of Operation Barbarossa\u2014the invasion of the Soviet Union\u2014\"Einsatzgruppen\" were assigned to follow the army into the conquered areas and round up and murder Jews. In a letter dated 2 July 1941, Heydrich communicated to his SS and police leaders that the \"Einsatzgruppen\" were to execute Comintern officials, ranking members of the Communist Party, extremist and radical Communist Party members, people's commissars, and Jews in party and government posts. Open-ended instructions were given to execute \"other radical elements (saboteurs, propagandists, snipers, assassins, agitators, etc.)\". He instructed that any pogroms spontaneously initiated by the occupants of the conquered territories were to be quietly encouraged. On 8 July, he announced that all Jews were to be regarded as partisans, and gave the order for all male Jews between the ages of 15 and 45 to be shot. By August, the net had been widened to include women, children, and the elderly\u2014the entire Jewish population. By the time planning was underway for the Wannsee Conference, hundreds of thousands of Polish, Serbian, and Russian Jews had already been murdered. The initial plan was to implement \"Generalplan Ost\" after the conquest of the Soviet Union. European Jews would be deported to occupied parts of Russia, where they would be worked to death in road-building projects.\nPlanning the conference.\nOn 29 November 1941, Heydrich sent invitations for a ministerial conference to be held on 9 December at the offices of the International Criminal Police Commission, the forerunner of Interpol, at \"Am Kleinen Wannsee 16\". He changed the venue on 4 December to the eventual location of the meeting. He enclosed a copy of a letter from G\u00f6ring dated 31 July that authorised him to plan the so-called Final Solution to the Jewish Question. The ministries to be represented were those responsible for Jewish issues, including the Reich Chancellery, the Foreign Office, Interior, Justice, Propaganda, the Four Year Plan, and the Ministry for the Occupied Eastern Territories. Representatives from Party and SS components with special interests in the race issue were invited, including the Party Chancellery, the SS Race and Settlement Main Office, and the Office of the Reich Commissioner for the Consolidation of German Nationhood (RKFDV). Representatives from the General Government of occupied Poland were also added to the list.\nBetween the date the invitations to the conference went out (29 November) and the date of the cancelled first meeting (9 December), the situation changed. On 5 December 1941, the Red Army began a counter-offensive in front of Moscow ending the prospect of a rapid conquest of the Soviet Union. On 7 December 1941, the Japanese carried out an attack on Pearl Harbor, causing the U.S. to declare war on Japan the next day. Germany declared war on the U.S. on 11 December. Some invitees were involved in these preparations, so Heydrich postponed his meeting. Somewhere around this time, Hitler resolved that the Jews of Europe were to be exterminated immediately, rather than after the war, which now had no end in sight. At the Reich Chancellery meeting of 12 December 1941 he met with top party officials and made his intentions plain. On 18 December, Hitler discussed the fate of the Jews with Himmler in the \"Wolfsschanze\". Following the meeting, Himmler made a note on his service calendar, which simply stated: \"Jewish question/to be destroyed as partisans\".\nThe original intention was to deport the Jews to camps in occupied areas of the Soviet Union and murder them there, but because victory over the Soviet Union was not forthcoming, the plans had to be changed. Heydrich decided that the Jews currently living in the General Government (the German-occupied area of Poland) would be murdered in extermination camps set up in occupied areas of Poland, as would Jews from the rest of Europe.\nOn 8 January 1942, Heydrich sent new invitations to a meeting to be held on 20 January. The venue for the rescheduled conference was a villa at \"Am Gro\u00dfen Wannsee 56\u201358\", overlooking the Gro\u00dfer Wannsee. The villa had been purchased from Friedrich Minoux in 1940 by the \"Sicherheitsdienst\" (Security Force; SD) for use as a conference centre and guest house.\nAttendees.\nThe attendees from the Reich civilian ministries were high level administrators. Most were either the state secretary or an undersecretary. With the cabinet not meeting regularly, meetings between the state secretaries were the chief means of policy coordination among agencies. The process of disseminating information about the fate of the Jews was already well underway by the time the meeting was held, and several of the attendees were aware that changes to the Jewish policy were already underway. In addition to the invited guests, Heydrich instructed several SS officials from his RSHA component to attend. In all, 15 officials attended the conference. Half the attendees were under forty years of age and only two were over fifty. They were well educated, with ten having a university education (of whom eight held academic doctorates), and eight were lawyers.\nProceedings.\nIn preparation for the conference, Eichmann drafted a list of the total numbers of Jews in the various European countries. Countries were listed in two groups, \"A\" and \"B\". \"A\" countries were those under direct German control or occupation (or partially occupied and quiescent, in the case of Vichy France); \"B\" countries were allied or client states, neutral, or at war with Germany. The numbers reflect the estimated Jewish population within each country; for example, Estonia is listed as \"Judenfrei\" (free of Jews), since the 4,500 Jews who remained in Estonia after the German occupation had been murdered by the end of 1941. Occupied Poland was not on the list because by 1939 the country was split three ways among Polish areas annexed by Nazi Germany in the west, the territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union in the east, and the General Government where many Polish and Jewish expellees had already been resettled.\nHeydrich opened the conference with an account of the anti-Jewish measures taken in Germany since the Nazi seizure of power in 1933. He reported that about 537,000 Jews had emigrated by 31 October 1941, including 360,000 from Germany, 147,000 from Austria, and 30,000 from the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia. He said that between 1933 and October 1941, 537,000 German, Austrian, and Czech Jews had emigrated. This information was taken from a briefing paper prepared for him the previous week by Eichmann.\nHeydrich reported that there were approximately eleven\u00a0million Jews in the whole of Europe, of whom half were in countries not under German control. He explained that since further Jewish emigration had been prohibited by Himmler, a new solution would take its place: \"evacuating\" Jews to the east. This would be a temporary solution, a step towards the \"final solution of the Jewish question\".\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Under proper guidance, in the course of the final solution the Jews are to be allocated for appropriate labor in the East. Able-bodied Jews, separated according to sex, will be taken in large work columns to these areas for work on roads, in the course of which action doubtless a large portion will be eliminated by natural causes. The possible final remnant will, since it will undoubtedly consist of the most resistant portion, have to be treated accordingly, because it is the product of natural selection and would, if released, act as the seed of a new Jewish revival.\nGerman historian Peter Longerich notes that vague orders couched in terminology that had a specific meaning for members of the regime were common, especially when people were being ordered to carry out criminal activities. Leaders were given briefings about the need to be \"severe\" and \"firm\"; all Jews were to be viewed as potential enemies that had to be dealt with ruthlessly. The wording of the Wannsee Protocol\u2014the distributed minutes of the meeting\u2014made it clear to participants that evacuation east was a euphemism for murder.\nHeydrich went on to say that in the course of the \"practical execution of the final solution\", Europe would be \"combed through from west to east\", but that Germany, Austria, and the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia would have priority, \"due to the housing problem and additional social and political necessities\". This was a reference to increasing pressure from the Gauleiters (regional Nazi Party leaders) in Germany for the Jews to be removed from their areas to allow accommodation for Germans made homeless by Allied bombing, as well as to make space for laborers being imported from occupied countries. The \"evacuated\" Jews, he said, would first be sent to \"transit ghettos\" in the General Government, from which they would be transported eastward. Heydrich said that to avoid legal and political difficulties, it was important to define who was a Jew for the purposes of \"evacuation\". He outlined categories of people who would not be killed. Jews over 65 years old, and Jewish World War I veterans who had been severely wounded or who had won the Iron Cross, might be sent to Theresienstadt concentration camp instead of being killed. \"With this expedient solution\", he said, \"in one fell swoop, many interventions will be prevented.\"\nThe situation of people who were half or quarter Jews, and of Jews who were married to non-Jews, was more complex. Under the Nuremberg Laws of 1935, their status had been left deliberately ambiguous. Heydrich announced that \"Mischlinge\" (mixed-race persons) of the first degree (persons with two Jewish grandparents) would be treated as Jews. This would not apply if they were married to a non-Jew and had children by that marriage. It would also not apply if they had been granted written exemption by \"the highest offices of the Party and State\". Such persons would be sterilised or deported if they refused sterilisation. A \"\"Mischling\" of the second degree\" (a person with one Jewish grandparent) would be treated as German, unless he or she was married to a Jew or a \"Mischling\" of the first degree, had a \"racially especially undesirable appearance that marks him outwardly as a Jew\", or had a \"political record that shows that he feels and behaves like a Jew\". Persons in these latter categories would be killed even if married to non-Jews. In the case of mixed marriages, Heydrich recommended that each case should be evaluated individually, and the impact on any German relatives assessed. If such a marriage had produced children who were being raised as Germans, the Jewish partner would not be killed. If they were being raised as Jews, they might be killed or sent to an old-age ghetto. These exemptions applied only to German and Austrian Jews, and were not always observed even for them. In most of the occupied countries, Jews were rounded up and murdered \"en masse\", and anyone who lived in or identified with the Jewish community in any given place was regarded as a Jew.\nHeydrich commented: \"In occupied and unoccupied France, the registration of Jews for evacuation will in all probability proceed without great difficulty\", but in the end, the great majority of French-born Jews survived. More difficulty was anticipated with Germany's allies Romania and Hungary. \"In Romania the government has [now] appointed a commissioner for Jewish affairs\", Heydrich said. In fact the deportation of Romanian Jews was slow and inefficient despite a high degree of popular antisemitism. \"In order to settle the question in Hungary\", Heydrich said, \"it will soon be necessary to force an adviser for Jewish questions onto the Hungarian government\". The Hungarian regime of Mikl\u00f3s Horthy continued to resist German interference in its Jewish policy until the spring of 1944, when the \"Wehrmacht\" invaded Hungary. Very soon, Eichmann\u00a0\u2013 with the collaboration of Hungarian authorities\u00a0\u2013 would send 600,000 Jews of Hungary (and parts of Czechoslovakia, Romania, and Yugoslavia occupied by Hungary) to be murdered in the extermination camps, primarily Auschwitz.\nHeydrich spoke for nearly an hour. Then followed about thirty minutes of questions and comments, followed by some less formal conversation. Otto Hofmann (head of the SS Race and Settlement Main Office; RuSHA) and Wilhelm Stuckart (State Secretary of the Interior Ministry) pointed out the legalistic and administrative difficulties over mixed marriages, and suggested compulsory dissolution of mixed marriages or the wider use of sterilisation as a simpler alternative. Erich Neumann from the Four Year Plan argued for the exemption of Jews who were working in industries vital to the war effort and for whom no replacements were available. Heydrich assured him that this was already the policy; such Jews would not be killed. Josef B\u00fchler, State Secretary of the General Government, stated his support for the plan and his hope that the killings would commence as soon as possible.\nTowards the end of the meeting cognac was served, and after that the conversation became less restrained. Eichmann said: &lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\"The gentlemen were standing together, or sitting together and were discussing the subject quite bluntly, quite differently from the language which I had to use later in the record. During the conversation they minced no words about it at all\u00a0... they spoke about methods of killing, about liquidation, about extermination.\"\nEichmann recorded that Heydrich was pleased with the course of the meeting. He had expected much resistance, Eichmann recalled, but instead, he had found \"an atmosphere not only of agreement on the part of the participants, but more than that, one could feel an agreement which had assumed a form which had not been expected\".\nEichmann's list.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Col-begin/styles.css\"/&gt;\nWannsee Protocol.\nShorthand notes for the minutes were taken by Eichmann's secretary, Ingeburg Werlemann, and the minutes were written by Eichmann in consultation with Heydrich. At the conclusion of the meeting, Heydrich gave Eichmann firm instructions about what was to appear in the minutes. They were not to be verbatim: Eichmann ensured that nothing too explicit appeared in them. He said at his trial: \"How shall I put it \u2013 certain over-plain talk and jargon expressions had to be rendered into office language by me.\"\nEichmann condensed his records into a document outlining the purpose of the meeting and the intentions of the regime. He stated at his trial that it was personally edited by Heydrich, and thus reflected the message he intended the participants to take away from the meeting. Copies of the minutes (known by the German word for \"minutes\" as the \"Wannsee Protocol\") were sent by Eichmann to all the participants after the meeting. Most of these copies were destroyed at the end of the war as participants and other officials sought to cover their tracks. It was not until 1947 that Luther's copy (number 16 out of 30 copies prepared) was found by Robert Kempner, a U.S. prosecutor in the International Military Tribunal at Nuremberg, in files that had been seized from the German Foreign Office.\nInterpretation.\nThe Wannsee Conference lasted only about ninety minutes. The enormous importance which has been attached to the conference by post-war writers was not evident to most of its participants at the time. Heydrich did not call the meeting to make fundamental new decisions on the Jewish question; mass-murder of Jews in the conquered territories in the Soviet Union and Poland were ongoing. A new extermination camp was under construction at Belzec at the time of the conference, and other extermination camps were in the planning stages. The decision to exterminate the Jews had already been made, and Heydrich, as Himmler's emissary, held the meeting to ensure the cooperation of the various departments in conducting the deportations. Observations from historian Laurence Rees support Longerich's position that the decision over the fate of the Jews was determined before the conference; Rees notes that the Wannsee Conference was really a meeting of \"second-level functionaries\", and stresses that Himmler, Goebbels, and Hitler were not present. According to Longerich, a primary goal of the meeting was to emphasise that once the deportations had been completed, the fate of the deportees became an internal matter of the SS, totally outside the purview of any other agency. A secondary goal was to determine the scope of the deportations and arrive at definitions of who was Jewish and who was \"Mischling\". \"The representatives of the ministerial bureaucracy had made it plain that they had no concerns about the principle of deportation \"per se\". This was indeed the crucial result of the meeting and the main reason why Heydrich had detailed minutes prepared and widely circulated\", said Longerich. Their presence at the meeting also ensured that all became accomplices and accessories to the murders that were about to be undertaken.\nEichmann's biographer David Cesarani agrees with Longerich's interpretation; he notes that Heydrich's main purpose was to impose his own authority on the various ministries and agencies involved in Jewish policy matters, and to avoid any repetition of the objections to the deportations and genocide from his military and civilian subordinates that had occurred earlier in the annihilation campaign. \"The simplest, most decisive way that Heydrich could ensure the smooth flow of deportations\", he writes, \"was by asserting his total control over the fate of the Jews in the Reich and the east, and [by] cow[ing] other interested parties into toeing the line of the RSHA\".\nHouse of the Wannsee Conference.\nIn 1965, historian Joseph Wulf proposed that the Wannsee House should be made into a Holocaust memorial and document centre, but the West German government was not interested at that time. The building was in use as a school, and funding was not available. Despondent at the failure of the project, and at the West German government's failure to pursue and convict Nazi war criminals, Wulf committed suicide in 1974.\nOn 20 January 1992, on the fiftieth anniversary of the conference, the site was finally opened as a Holocaust memorial and museum known as the \"Haus der Wannsee-Konferenz\" (House of the Wannsee Conference). The museum also hosts permanent exhibits of texts and photographs that document events of the Holocaust and its planning. The Joseph Wulf Bibliothek / Mediothek on the second floor houses a large collection of books on the Nazi era, plus other materials such as microfilms and original Nazi documents.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33863", "revid": "1316912185", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33863", "title": "West Point (disambiguation)", "text": "West Point is the United States Military Academy, at West Point, New York.\nWest Point may also refer to:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:TOC_right/styles.css\" /&gt;\nOther uses.\nTopics referred to by the same term\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Dmbox/styles.css\" /&gt;\n This page lists associated with the title ."}
{"id": "33864", "revid": "7611264", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33864", "title": "Wombat", "text": "Species of marsupials\nWombats are short-legged, muscular quadrupedal marsupials of the family Vombatidae that are native to Australia. Living species are about in length with small, stubby tails and weigh between . They are adaptable and habitat tolerant, and are found in forested, mountainous, and heathland areas of southern and eastern Australia, including Tasmania, as well as an isolated patch of about in Epping Forest National Park in central Queensland.\nEtymology.\nThe name \"wombat\" comes from the now nearly extinct Dharug language spoken by the aboriginal Dharug people, who originally inhabited the Sydney area. It was first recorded in January 1798, when John Price and James Wilson, Europeans who had adopted aboriginal ways, visited the area of what is now Bargo, New South Wales. Price wrote: \"We saw several sorts of dung of different animals, one of which Wilson called a 'Whom-batt', which is an animal about high, with short legs and a thick body with a large head, round ears, and very small eyes; is very fat, and has much the appearance of a badger.\" Wombats were often called badgers by early settlers because of their size and habits. Because of this, localities such as Badger Creek, Victoria, and Badger Corner, Tasmania, were named after the wombat. The spelling went through many variants over the years, including \"wambat\", \"whombat\", \"womat\", \"wombach\", and \"womback\", possibly reflecting dialectal differences in the Darug language.\nEvolution and taxonomy.\nThough genetic studies of the Vombatidae have been undertaken, evolution of the family is not well understood. Wombats are estimated to have diverged from other Australian marsupials relatively early, as long as 40 million years ago, while some estimates place divergence at around 25\u00a0million years. Some prehistoric wombat genera greatly exceeded modern wombats in size. The largest known wombat, \"Phascolonus\", which went extinct approximately 40,000 years ago, is estimated to have had a body mass of up to .\nCharacteristics.\nWombats dig extensive burrow systems with their rodent-like front teeth and powerful claws. One distinctive adaptation of wombats is their backward pouch. The advantage of a backward-facing pouch is that when digging, the wombat does not gather soil in its pouch over its young. Although mainly crepuscular and nocturnal, wombats may also venture out to feed on cool or overcast days. They are not commonly seen, but leave ample evidence of their passage, treating fences as minor inconveniences to be gone through or under.\nWombats leave distinctive cube-shaped faeces. As wombats arrange these feces to mark territories and attract mates, it is believed that the cubic shape makes them more stackable and less likely to roll, which gives this shape a biological advantage. The method by which the wombat produces them is not well understood, but it is believed that the wombat intestine stretches preferentially at the walls, with two flexible and two stiff areas around its intestines. The adult wombat produces between 80 and 100, pieces of feces in a single night, and four to eight pieces each bowel movement. In 2019 the production of cube-shaped wombat feces was the subject of the Ig Nobel Prize for Physics, won by Patricia Yang and David Hu.\nAll wombat teeth lack roots and are ever-growing, like the incisors of rodents. Wombats are herbivores; their diets consist mostly of grasses, sedges, herbs, bark, and roots. Their incisor teeth somewhat resemble those of rodents (rats, mice, etc.), being adapted for gnawing tough vegetation. Like many other herbivorous mammals, they have a large diastema between their incisors and the cheek teeth, which are relatively simple. The dental formula of wombats is 1.0.1.41.0.1.4\u00d7\u20092 = 24.\nWombats' fur can vary from a sandy colour to brown, or from grey to black. All three known extant species average around in length and weigh between .\nMale wombats have penile spines, a non-pendulous scrotum, and three pairs of bulbourethral glands. The testes, prostate, and bulbourethral glands enlarge during the breeding season. Female wombats give birth to a single young after a gestation period of roughly 20\u201330 days, which varies between species. All species have well-developed pouches, which the young leave after about six to seven months. Wombats are weaned after 15 months, and are sexually mature at 18 months.\nA group of wombats is known as a wisdom, a mob, or a colony.\nWombats typically live up to 15 years in the wild, but can live past 20 and even 30 years in captivity. The longest-lived captive wombat lived to 34 years of age.\nIn 2020, biologists discovered that wombats, like many other Australian marsupials, display bio-fluorescence under ultraviolet light.\nEcology and behaviour.\nWombats have an extraordinarily slow metabolism, taking around 8 to 14 days to complete digestion, which aids their survival in arid conditions. They generally move slowly. Wombats defend home territories centred on their burrows, and they react aggressively to intruders. The common wombat occupies a range of up to , while the hairy-nosed species have much smaller ranges, of no more than .\nDingos and Tasmanian devils prey on wombats. Extinct predators were likely to have included \"Thylacoleo\" and possibly the thylacine (Tasmanian tiger). Their primary defence is their toughened rear hide, with most of the posterior made of cartilage. This, combined with its lack of a meaningful tail, makes it difficult for any predator that follows the wombat into its tunnel to bite and injure its target. When attacked, wombats dive into a nearby tunnel, using their rumps to block a pursuing attacker. According to an urban legend, wombats sometimes allow an intruder to force its head over the wombat's back, and then use its powerful legs to crush the skull of the predator against the roof of the tunnel. However, there is no evidence to support this.\nWombats are generally quiet animals. Bare-nosed wombats can make a number of different sounds, more than the hairy-nosed wombats. Wombats tend to be more vocal during mating season. When angered, they can make hissing sounds. Their call sounds somewhat like a pig's squeal. They can also make grunting noises, a low growl, a hoarse cough, and a clicking noise.\nSpecies.\nThe three extant species of wombat are all endemic to Australia and a few offshore islands. They are protected under Australian law.\nHuman relations.\nHistory.\nDepictions of the animals in rock art are exceptionally rare, though examples estimated to be up to 4,000 years old have been discovered in Wollemi National Park. The wombat is depicted in aboriginal Dreamtime as an animal of little worth. The mainland stories tell of the wombat as originating from a person named Warreen whose head had been flattened by a stone and tail amputated as punishment for selfishness. In contrast, the Tasmanian aboriginal story first recorded in 1830 tells of the wombat (known as the \"drogedy\" or \"publedina\") the great spirit Moihernee had asked hunters to leave alone. In both cases, the wombat is regarded as having been banished to its burrowing habitat. Estimates of wombat distribution prior to European settlement are that numbers of all three surviving species were prolific and that they covered a range more than ten times greater than that of today.\nAfter the ship \"Sydney Cove\" ran aground on Clarke Island in February 1797, the crew of the salvage ship \"Francis\" discovered wombats on the island. A live animal was taken back to Port Jackson. Matthew Flinders, who was travelling on board the \"Francis\" on its third and final salvage trip, also decided to take a wombat specimen from the island to Port Jackson. Governor John Hunter later sent the animal's corpse to Joseph Banks at the Literary and Philosophical Society to verify that it was a new species. The island was named Clarke Island after William Clark.\nWombats were classified as vermin in 1906, and a bounty was introduced in 1925. This and the removal of a substantial amount of habitat have greatly reduced their numbers and range.\nAttacks on humans.\nIn addition to being bitten, humans can receive puncture wounds from wombat claws. Startled wombats can also charge humans and bowl them over, with the attendant risks of broken bones from the fall. One naturalist, Harry Frauca, once received a bite deep into the flesh of his leg\u2014through a rubber boot, trousers and thick woollen socks. A UK newspaper, \"The Independent\", reported that on 6 April 2010, a 59-year-old man from rural Victoria state was mauled by a wombat (thought to have been angered by mange), causing a number of cuts and bite marks requiring hospital treatment. He resorted to killing it with an axe.\nCultural significance.\nSome farmers consider common wombats to be a nuisance due primarily to their burrowing behaviour. \"Fatso the Fat-Arsed Wombat\" was the tongue-in-cheek \"unofficial\" mascot of the 2000 Sydney Olympics. Since 2005, an unofficial holiday called Wombat Day has been observed on 22 October.\nWombat meat has been a source of bush food from the arrival of Aboriginal Australians to the arrival of Europeans. Due to the protection of the species, wombat meat as food is no longer part of mainstream Australian cuisine, but wombat stew was once one of the few truly Australian dishes. In the 20th century, the more easily found rabbit meat was more commonly used. (Rabbits are now considered an invasive pest in Australia.) The name of the dish is also used by a popular children's book and musical.\nWombats have featured in Australian postage stamps and coins. The hairy-nosed wombats have featured mainly to highlight their elevated conservation status. The northern hairy-nosed wombat featured on an Australian 1974 20-cent stamp and also an Australian 1981 five-cent stamp. The common wombat has appeared on a 1987 37-cent stamp and an Australian 1996 95-cent stamp. The 2006 Australian Bush Babies stamp series features an AU$1.75-stamp of a baby common wombat, and the 2010 Rescue to Release series features a 60-cent stamp of a common wombat being treated by a veterinarian. Wombats are rarely seen on circulated Australian coins, an exception is a 50-cent coin which also shows a koala and lorikeet. The common wombat appeared on a 2005 commemorative $1 coin and the northern hairy-nosed wombat on a 1998 Australia Silver Proof $10 coin.\nMany places in Australia have been named after the wombat, including a large number of places where they are now locally extinct in the wild. References to the locally extinct common wombat can be found in parts of the Central Highlands of Victoria, for example the Wombat State Forest and Wombat Hill in Daylesford. Other significant places named after the wombat includes the town of Wombat, New South Wales and the suburb of Quoiba, Tasmania. Numerous less significant Australian places, including hotels, are named after the animals. Prominent sculptures of wombats include in South Australia: \"The Big Wombat\" at Scotdesco Aboriginal Community (Tjilkaba) and Wudinna visitor information centre, Adelaide Zoo and Norwood; New South Wales: Wombat, New South Wales; Victoria: Daylesford, Trentham, Victoria and Kinglake; Tasmania: Steppes State Reserve.\nWombats have also been a feature of Australian television. While wombats are not generally kept as pets, a notable depiction of a common wombat as a pet is Fatso from the Australian television show \"A Country Practice\". The Brisbane television show \"Wombat\" was also named for the animals.\nAustralian literature contains many references to the wombat. Examples are Mr. Walter Wombat from the adventures of \"Blinky Bill\" and one of the main antagonists in \"The Magic Pudding\" by Norman Lindsay.\nConservation.\nAll species of wombats are protected in every Australian state.\nThe northern hairy-nosed wombat is a critically endangered species under Queensland's \"Nature Conservation Act 1992\", the Commonwealth \"Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999\", and on the International Union for Conservation of Nature's Red List of Threatened Species. The biggest threats the species faces are its small population size, predation by wild dogs, competition for food because of overgrazing by cattle and sheep, and disease. The only known wild populations of this species exist in two locations in Queensland, the Epping Forest National Park, and a smaller colony being established by translocating wombats to the Richard Underwood Nature Refuge at Yarran Downs. This second colony is being created through the Xstrata reintroduction project, which is being funded by Xstrata, a Swiss global mining company. From a low of just 35 wombats across the state when surveyed in the 1980s, the population had increased to a total of around 315 by May 2021.\nDespite its name, the common wombat is no longer as common as it once was, and is under significant threat. However, in eastern Victoria, they are not protected, and they are considered by some to be pests, especially due to the damage they cause to rabbit-proof fences. Opportunistic research studies have been conducted on the immune system of common wombats, which could be used as a tool for future conservation efforts. \nWomSAT, a citizen science project, was established in 2016 to record sightings of wombats across the country. The website and mobile phone app can be used to log sightings of live or deceased wombats and wombat burrows. Since its establishment the project has recorded over 23,000 sightings across New South Wales, Victoria, Tasmania and South Australia. More recently, the citizen science project has published findings on wombat roadkill and sarcoptic mange incidence across Australia.\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33865", "revid": "49989474", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33865", "title": "Warhead", "text": "Section of a device that contains the explosive agent or toxic material\nA warhead is the section of a device that contains the explosive agent or toxic (biological, chemical, or nuclear) material that is delivered by a missile, rocket, torpedo, or bomb.\nClassification.\nTypes of warheads include:\nOften, a biological or chemical warhead will use an explosive charge for rapid dispersal and enhanced damage.\nDetonators.\nExplosive warheads contain detonators to trigger the explosion.\nTypes of detonators include:"}
{"id": "33867", "revid": "212624", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33867", "title": "WTrO", "text": ""}
{"id": "33868", "revid": "35936988", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33868", "title": "Casorati\u2013Weierstrass theorem", "text": "Mathematical theorem\nIn complex analysis, a branch of mathematics, the Casorati\u2013Weierstrass theorem describes the behaviour of holomorphic functions near their essential singularities. It is named for Karl Theodor Wilhelm Weierstrass and Felice Casorati. In Russian literature it is called Sokhotski's theorem, because it was discovered independently by Sokhotski in 1868.\nFormal statement of the theorem.\nStart with some open subset formula_1 in the complex plane containing the number formula_2, and a function formula_3 that is holomorphic on formula_4, but has an essential singularity at formula_2\u00a0. The \"Casorati\u2013Weierstrass theorem\" then states that \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt; if formula_6 is any neighborhood of formula_2 contained in formula_1, then formula_9 is dense in formula_10.\nThis can also be stated as follows: \n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;z-z_0\nOr in still more descriptive terms:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Block indent/styles.css\"/&gt;formula_3 comes arbitrarily close to \"any\" complex value in every neighborhood of formula_2.\nThe theorem is considerably strengthened by Picard's great theorem, which states, in the notation above, that formula_3 assumes \"every\" complex value, with one possible exception, infinitely often on formula_6.\nIn the case that formula_3 is an entire function and formula_16, the theorem says that the values formula_17 approach every complex number and formula_18, as formula_19 tends to infinity.\nIt is remarkable that this does not hold for holomorphic maps in higher dimensions, as the famous example of Pierre Fatou shows.\nExamples.\nThe function \"f\"(\"z\") = exp(1/\"z\") has an essential singularity at 0, but the function \"g\"(\"z\") = 1/\"z\"3 does not (it has a pole at 0).\nConsider the function\nformula_20\nThis function has the following Laurent series about the essential singular point at 0:\nformula_21\nBecause formula_22 exists for all points \"z\" \u2260 0 we know that \"f\"(\"z\") is analytic in a punctured neighborhood of \"z\" = 0. Hence it is an isolated singularity, as well as being an essential singularity. \nUsing a change of variable to polar coordinates formula_23 our function, \"f\"(\"z\") = \"e\"1/\"z\" becomes:\nformula_24\nTaking the absolute value of both sides:\nformula_25\nThus, for values of \"\u03b8\" such that cos \"\u03b8\" &gt; 0, we have formula_26 as formula_27, and for formula_28, formula_29 as formula_27.\nConsider what happens, for example when \"z\" takes values on a circle of diameter 1/\"R\" tangent to the imaginary axis. This circle is given by \"r\" = (1/\"R\") cos \"\u03b8\". Then,\nformula_31\nand\nformula_32\nThus,formula_33 may take any positive value other than zero by the appropriate choice of \"R\". As formula_34 on the circle, formula_35 with \"R\" fixed. So this part of the equation:\nformula_36\ntakes on all values on the unit circle infinitely often. Hence \"f\"(\"z\") takes on the value of every number in the complex plane except for zero infinitely often.\nProof of the theorem.\nA short proof of the theorem is as follows:\nTake as given that function \"f\" is meromorphic on some punctured neighborhood \"V\" \\ {\"z\"0}, and that \"z\"0 is an essential singularity. Assume by way of contradiction that some value b exists that the function can never get close to; that is: assume that there is some complex value b and some \"\u03b5\" &gt; 0 such that for all z in V at which f is defined.\nThen the new function:\nformula_37\nmust be holomorphic on \"V\" \\ {\"z\"0}, with zeroes at the poles of \"f\", and bounded by 1/\u03b5. It can therefore be analytically continued (or continuously extended, or holomorphically extended) to \"all\" of \"V\" by Riemann's analytic continuation theorem. So the original function can be expressed in terms of \"g\":\nformula_38\nfor all arguments \"z\" in \"V\" \\ {\"z\"0}. Consider the two possible cases for\nformula_39\nIf the limit is 0, then \"f\" has a pole at \"z\"0\u00a0. If the limit is not 0, then \"z\"0 is a removable singularity of \"f\"\u00a0. Both possibilities contradict the assumption that the point \"z\"0 is an essential singularity of the function \"f\"\u00a0. Hence the assumption is false and the theorem holds.\nHistory.\nThe history of this important theorem is described by Collingwood and Lohwater. It was published by Weierstrass in 1876 (in German) and by Sokhotski in 1868 in his Master thesis (in Russian). So it was called Sokhotski's theorem in the Russian literature and Weierstrass's theorem in the Western literature. The same theorem was published by Casorati in 1868, and by Briot and Bouquet in the \"first edition\" of their book (1859).\nHowever, Briot and Bouquet \"removed\" this theorem from the second edition (1875)."}
{"id": "33870", "revid": "1777127", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33870", "title": "Walt Whitman", "text": "American poet, essayist and journalist (1819\u20131892)\nWalter Whitman Jr. (; May 31, 1819\u00a0\u2013 March 26, 1892) was an American poet, essayist, and journalist; he also wrote two novels. He is considered one of the most influential poets in American literature and world literature. Whitman incorporated both transcendentalism and realism in his writings and is often called the father of free verse. His work was controversial in his time, particularly his 1855 poetry collection \"Leaves of Grass\", which was described by some as obscene for its overt sensuality.\nWhitman was born in Huntington on Long Island and lived in Brooklyn as a child and through much of his career. At age 11, he left formal schooling to go to work. He worked as a journalist, a teacher, and a government clerk. Whitman's major poetry collection, \"Leaves of Grass\", first published in 1855, was financed with his own money and became well known. The work was an attempt to reach out to the common person with an American epic. Whitman continued expanding and revising \"Leaves of Grass\" until his death in 1892.\nDuring the American Civil War, he went to Washington, D.C., and worked in hospitals caring for the wounded. His poetry often focused on both loss and healing. On the assassination of Abraham Lincoln, whom Whitman greatly admired, he authored a number of poems, including \"O Captain! My Captain!\" and \"When Lilacs Last in the Dooryard Bloom'd\", and gave a series of lectures on Lincoln. After suffering a stroke towards the end of his life, Whitman moved to Camden, New Jersey, where his health further declined. When he died at age 72, his funeral was a public event.\nWhitman's influence on poetry remains strong. Art historian Mary Berenson wrote, \"You cannot really understand America without Walt Whitman, without \"Leaves of Grass\"... He has expressed that civilization, 'up to date,' as he would say, and no student of the philosophy of history can do without him.\" Modernist poet Ezra Pound called Whitman \"America's poet... He is America.\" According to the Poetry Foundation, he is \"America's world poet\u2014a latter-day successor to Homer, Virgil, Dante, and Shakespeare.\"\nLife and work.\nEarly life.\nWhitman was born on May 31, 1819, in West Hills, New York, the second of nine children of Quaker parents Walter and Louisa Van Velsor Whitman, of English and Dutch descent respectively. He was immediately nicknamed \"Walt\" to distinguish him from his father. At the age of four, Whitman moved with his family from Huntington to Brooklyn, living in a series of homes, in part due to bad investments. Whitman looked back on his childhood as generally restless and unhappy, given his family's difficult financial struggles. One happy moment that he later recalled was when he was lifted in the air and kissed on the cheek by the Marquis de Lafayette during a celebration of the setting of the Brooklyn Apprentices' Library's cornerstone by Lafayette in Brooklyn on July 4, 1825. Whitman later worked as a librarian at that institution.\nAt the age of 11, Whitman ended his formal schooling and sought employment to assist his family, which was struggling financially. He was an office boy for two lawyers and later was an apprentice and printer's devil for the weekly Long Island newspaper the \"Patriot\", edited by Samuel E. Clements. There, Whitman learned about the printing press and typesetting. He may have written \"sentimental bits\" of filler material for occasional issues. Clements aroused controversy when he and two friends attempted to dig up the corpse of the Quaker minister Elias Hicks to create a plaster mold of his head. Clements left the \"Patriot\" shortly afterward, possibly as a result of the controversy.\nCareer.\nThe following summer Whitman worked for another printer, Erastus Worthington, in Brooklyn. His family moved back to West Hills, New York, on Long Island in the spring, but Whitman remained and took a job at the shop of Alden Spooner, editor of the leading Whig weekly newspaper the \"Long-Island Star\". While at the \"Star\", Whitman became a regular patron of the local library, joined a town debating society, began attending theater performances, and anonymously published some of his earliest poetry in the \"New-York Mirror\". At the age of 16 in May 1835, Whitman left the \"Star\" and Brooklyn. He moved to New York City to work as a compositor though, in later years, Whitman could not remember where. He attempted to find further work but had difficulty, in part due to a severe fire in the printing and publishing district, and in part due to a general collapse in the economy leading up to the Panic of 1837. In May 1836, he rejoined his family, now living in Hempstead, Long Island. Whitman taught intermittently at various schools until the spring of 1838, though he was not satisfied as a teacher.\nAfter his teaching attempts, Whitman returned to Huntington, New York, to found his own newspaper, the \"Long-Islander\". Whitman served as publisher, editor, pressman, and distributor and even provided home delivery. After ten months, he sold the publication to E. O. Crowell, whose first issue appeared on July 12, 1839. There are no known surviving copies of the \"Long-Islander\" published under Whitman. By the summer of 1839, he found a job as a typesetter in Jamaica, Queens, with the \"Long Island Democrat\", edited by James J. Brenton. He left shortly thereafter, and made another attempt at teaching from the winter of 1840 to the spring of 1841. One story, possibly apocryphal, tells of Whitman's being chased away from a teaching job in Southold, New York, in 1840. After a local preacher called him a \"Sodomite\", Whitman was allegedly tarred and feathered. Biographer Justin Kaplan notes that the story is likely untrue, because Whitman regularly vacationed in the town thereafter. Biographer Jerome Loving calls the incident a \"myth\". During this time, Whitman published a series of ten editorials, called \"Sun-Down Papers\u2014From the Desk of a Schoolmaster\", in three newspapers between the winter of 1840 and July 1841. In these essays, he adopted a constructed persona, a technique he would employ throughout his career.\nWhitman moved to New York City in May, initially working a low-level job at the \"New World\", working under Park Benjamin Sr. and Rufus Wilmot Griswold. He continued working for short periods of time for various newspapers; in 1842 he was editor of the \"Aurora\" and from 1846 to 1848 he was editor of the \"Brooklyn Eagle\". While working for the latter institution, many of his publications were in the area of music criticism, and it is during this time that he became a devoted lover of Italian opera through reviewing performances of works by Bellini, Donizetti, and Verdi. This new interest had an impact on his writing in free verse. He later said, \"But for the opera, I could never have written \"Leaves of Grass\".\"\nThroughout the 1840s, Whitman contributed freelance fiction and poetry to various periodicals, including \"Brother Jonathan\" magazine edited by John Neal. Whitman lost his position at the \"Brooklyn Eagle\" in 1848 after siding with the free-soil \"Barnburner\" wing of the Democratic party against the newspaper's owner, Isaac Van Anden, who belonged to the conservative, or \"Hunker\", wing of the party. Whitman was a delegate to the 1848 founding convention of the Free Soil Party, which was concerned about the threat slavery would pose to free white labor and northern businessmen moving into the newly colonized western territories. Abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison derided the party philosophy as \"white manism\".\nHaving previously published two novellas \u2014 \"Franklin Evans\" (1842) and \"The Half-Breed\" (1846) \u2014 in 1852, he serialized another, \"Life and Adventures of Jack Engle\", in six installments of New York's \"The Sunday Dispatch\". In 1858, Whitman published a 47,000 word series, \"Manly Health and Training\", under the pen name Mose Velsor. Apparently he drew the name Velsor from Van Velsor, his mother's family name. This self-help guide recommends beards, nude sunbathing, comfortable shoes, bathing daily in cold water, eating meat almost exclusively, plenty of fresh air, and getting up early each morning. Present-day writers have called \"Manly Health and Training\" \"quirky\", \"so over the top\", \"a pseudoscientific tract\", and \"wacky\".\n\"Leaves of Grass\".\nWhitman claimed that after years of competing for \"the usual rewards\", he determined to become a poet. He first experimented with a variety of popular literary genres that appealed to the cultural tastes of the period. As early as 1850, he began writing what would become \"Leaves of Grass\", a collection of poetry that he would continue editing and revising until his death. Whitman intended to write a distinctly American epic and used free verse with a cadence based on the Bible. At the end of June 1855, Whitman surprised his brothers with the already-printed first edition of \"Leaves of Grass\". George \"didn't think it worth reading\".\nWhitman paid for the publication of the first edition of \"Leaves of Grass\" himself and had it printed at a local print shop during its employees' breaks from commercial jobs. A total of 795 copies were printed. No author is named; instead, facing the title page was an engraved portrait done by Samuel Hollyer, but 500 lines into the body of the text he calls himself \"Walt Whitman, an American, one of the roughs, a kosmos, disorderly, fleshly, and sensual, no sentimentalist, no stander above men or women or apart from them, no more modest than immodest\". The inaugural volume of poetry was preceded by a prose preface of 827 lines. The succeeding untitled twelve poems totaled 2315 lines with 1336 lines belonging to the first untitled poem, later called \"Song of Myself\". The book received its strongest praise from Ralph Waldo Emerson, who wrote a flattering five-page letter to Whitman and spoke highly of the book to friends. Emerson called it \"the most extraordinary piece of wit and wisdom that America has yet contributed.\" Emerson had called for the first truly American poet, saying that aspects of America \"are yet unsung. Yet America is a poem in our eyes.\"\nThe first edition of \"Leaves of Grass\" was widely distributed and stirred up significant interest, in part due to Emerson's praise, but was occasionally criticized for the seemingly \"obscene\" nature of the poetry. Geologist Peter Lesley wrote to Emerson, calling the book \"trashy, profane &amp; obscene\" and the author \"a pretentious ass\". Whitman embossed a quote from Emerson's letter, \"I greet you at the beginning of a great career\", in gold leaf on the spine of the second edition. Of this action, Laura Dassow Walls, professor emerita of English at the University of Notre Dame, wrote: \"In one stroke, Whitman had given birth to the modern cover blurb, quite without Emerson's permission.\"\nOn July 11, 1855, a few days after \"Leaves of Grass\" was published, Whitman's father died at the age of 65. In the months following the first edition of \"Leaves of Grass\", critical responses began focusing on what some found offensive sexual themes. Though the second edition was already printed and bound, the publisher almost did not release it. In the end, the edition went to retail, with 20 additional poems, in August 1856. \"Leaves of Grass\" was revised and re-released in 1860, again in 1867, and several more times throughout the remainder of Whitman's life. Several well-known writers admired the work enough to visit Whitman, including Amos Bronson Alcott and Henry David Thoreau.\nDuring the first publications of \"Leaves of Grass\", Whitman had financial difficulties and was forced to work as a journalist again, specifically with Brooklyn's \"Daily Times\" starting in May 1857. As an editor, he oversaw the paper's contents, contributed book reviews, and wrote editorials. He left the job in 1859, though it is unclear whether he was fired or chose to leave. Whitman, who typically kept detailed notebooks and journals, left very little information about himself in the late 1850s.\nCivil War years.\nAs the American Civil War was beginning, Whitman published his poem \"\" as a patriotic rally call for the Union. Whitman's brother George had joined the Union army in the 51st New York Infantry Regiment and began sending Whitman several vividly detailed letters of the battle front. On December 16, 1862, a listing of fallen and wounded soldiers in the \"New-York Tribune\" included \"First Lieutenant G. W. Whitmore\", which Whitman worried was a reference to his brother George. He made his way south immediately to find him; his wallet was stolen on the way. \"Walking all day and night, unable to ride, trying to get information, trying to get access to big people\", Whitman later wrote, he eventually found George alive, with only a superficial wound on his cheek. Whitman, profoundly affected by seeing the wounded soldiers and the heaps of their amputated limbs, left for Washington, D.C., on December 28, 1862, with the intention of never returning to New York.\nIn Washington, D.C., Whitman's friend Charley Eldridge helped him obtain part-time work in the army paymaster's office, leaving time for Whitman to volunteer as a nurse in the army hospitals. He would write of this experience in \"The Great Army of the Sick\", published in a New York newspaper in 1863 and, 12\u00a0years later, in a book called \"Memoranda During the War\". He then contacted Emerson, this time to ask for help in obtaining a government post. Another friend, John Trowbridge, passed on a letter of recommendation from Emerson to Salmon P. Chase, Secretary of the Treasury, hoping he would grant Whitman a position in that department. Chase, however, did not want to hire the author of such a disreputable book as \"Leaves of Grass\".\nThe Whitman family had a difficult end to 1864. On September 30, 1864, Whitman's brother George was captured by Confederate forces in Virginia, and another brother, Andrew Jackson, died of tuberculosis compounded by alcoholism on December 3. That month, Whitman committed his brother Jesse to the Kings County Lunatic Asylum. Whitman's spirits were raised, however, when he finally got a better-paying government post as a low-grade clerk in the Bureau of Indian Affairs in the Department of the Interior, thanks to his friend William Douglas O'Connor. O'Connor, a poet, daguerreotypist, and an editor at \"The Saturday Evening Post\" wrote to William Tod Otto, Assistant Secretary of the Interior, on Whitman's behalf. Whitman began the new appointment on January 24, 1865, with a yearly salary of $1,200. A month later, on February 24, 1865, George was released from capture and granted a furlough because of his poor health. By May 1, Whitman received a promotion to a slightly higher clerkship and published \"Drum-Taps\".\nEffective June 30, 1865, however, Whitman was fired from his job. His dismissal came from the new Secretary of the Interior, former Iowa Senator James Harlan. Though Harlan dismissed several clerks who \"were seldom at their respective desks\", he may have fired Whitman on moral grounds after finding an 1860 edition of \"Leaves of Grass\". O'Connor protested until J. Hubley Ashton had Whitman transferred to the Attorney General's office on July 1. O'Connor, though, was still upset and vindicated Whitman by publishing a biased and exaggerated biographical study, \"The Good Gray Poet\", in January 1866. The fifty-cent pamphlet defended Whitman as a wholesome patriot, established the poet's nickname and increased his popularity. Also aiding in his popularity was the publication of \"O Captain! My Captain!\", a conventional poem on the death of Abraham Lincoln, the only poem to appear in anthologies during Whitman's lifetime.\nPart of Whitman's role at the Attorney General's office was interviewing former Confederate soldiers for presidential pardons. \"There are real characters among them\", he later wrote, \"and you know I have a fancy for anything out of the ordinary.\" In August 1866, he took a month off to prepare a new edition of \"Leaves of Grass\" which would not be published until 1867 after difficulty in finding a publisher. He hoped it would be its last edition. In February 1868, \"Poems of Walt Whitman\" was published in England thanks to the influence of William Michael Rossetti, with minor changes that Whitman reluctantly approved. The edition became popular in England, especially with endorsements from the highly respected writer Anne Gilchrist. Another edition of \"Leaves of Grass\" was issued in 1871, the same year it was mistakenly reported that its author died in a railroad accident. As Whitman's international fame increased, he remained at the attorney general's office until January 1872. He spent much of 1872 caring for his mother, who was now nearly eighty and struggling with arthritis. He also traveled and was invited to Dartmouth College to give the commencement address on June 26, 1872.\nHealth decline and death.\nAfter suffering a paralytic stroke in early 1873, Whitman was induced to move from Washington to the home of his brother\u2014George Washington Whitman, an engineer\u2014at 431 Stevens Street in Camden, New Jersey. His mother, having fallen ill, was also there and died that same year in May. Both events were difficult for Whitman and left him depressed. He remained at his brother's home until buying his own in 1884. However, before purchasing his home, he spent the greatest period of his residence in Camden at his brother's home on Stevens Street. While in residence there he was very productive, publishing three versions of \"Leaves of Grass\" among other works. He was also last fully physically active in this house, receiving both Oscar Wilde and Thomas Eakins. His other brother, Edward, an \"invalid\" since birth, lived in the house.\nWhen his brother and sister-in-law were forced to move for business reasons, he bought his own house at 328 Mickle Street (now 330 Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard). First taken care of by tenants, he was completely bedridden for most of his time in Mickle Street. During this time, he began socializing with Mary Oakes Davis\u2014the widow of a sea captain. She was a neighbor, boarding with a family in Bridge Avenue just a few blocks from Mickle Street. She moved in with Whitman on February 24, 1885, to serve as his housekeeper in exchange for free rent. She brought with her a cat, a dog, two turtledoves, a canary, and other assorted animals. During this time, Whitman produced further editions of \"Leaves of Grass\" in 1876, 1881, and 1889.\nWhile in South Jersey, Whitman spent a good portion of his time in the then quite pastoral community of Laurel Springs, between 1876 and 1884, converting one of the Stafford Farm buildings to his summer home. The restored summer home has been preserved as a museum by the local historical society. Part of his \"Leaves of Grass\" was written here, and in his \"Specimen Days\" he wrote of the spring, creek and lake. To him, Laurel Lake was \"the prettiest lake in: either America or Europe\".\nAs the end of 1891 approached, he prepared a final edition of \"Leaves of Grass\", a version that has been nicknamed the \"Deathbed Edition\". He wrote, \"L. of G. \"at last complete\"\u2014after 33 y'rs of hackling at it, all times &amp; moods of my life, fair weather &amp; foul, all parts of the land, and peace &amp; war, young &amp; old.\" Preparing for death, Whitman commissioned a granite mausoleum shaped like a house for $4,000 and visited it often during construction. In the last week of his life, he was too weak to lift a knife or fork and wrote: \"I suffer all the time: I have no relief, no escape: it is monotony\u2014monotony\u2014monotony\u2014in pain.\"\nWalt Whitman died on March 26, 1892, at his home in Camden, New Jersey at the age of 72. An autopsy revealed his lungs had diminished to one-eighth their normal breathing capacity, a result of bronchial pneumonia, and that an egg-sized abscess on his chest had eroded one of his ribs. The cause of death was officially listed as \"pleurisy of the left side, consumption of the right lung, general miliary tuberculosis and parenchymatous nephritis\". A public viewing of his body was held at his Camden home; more than 1,000 people visited in three hours. Whitman's oak coffin was barely visible because of all the flowers and wreaths left for him. Four days after his death, he was buried in his tomb at Harleigh Cemetery in Camden. Another public ceremony was held at the cemetery, with friends giving speeches, live music, and refreshments. Whitman's friend, the orator Robert Ingersoll, delivered the eulogy. Later, the remains of Whitman's parents and two of his brothers and their families were moved to the mausoleum. His brain was donated to the American Anthropometric Society in Philadelphia, but it was accidentally destroyed.\nWriting.\nWhitman's work broke the boundaries of poetic form and is generally prose-like. Its signature style deviates from the course set by his predecessors and includes \"idiosyncratic treatment of the body and the soul as well as of the self and the other.\" It uses unusual images and symbols, including rotting leaves, tufts of straw, and debris. Whitman openly wrote about death and sexuality, including prostitution. He is often labeled the father of free verse, though he did not invent it.\nPoetic theory.\nWhitman wrote in the preface to the 1855 edition of \"Leaves of Grass\": \"The proof of a poet is that his country absorbs him as affectionately as he has absorbed it.\" He believed there was a vital, symbiotic relationship between the poet and society. He emphasized this connection especially in \"Song of Myself\" by using an all-powerful first-person narration. An American epic, it deviated from the historic use of an elevated hero and instead assumed the identity of the common people. \"Leaves of Grass\" also responded to the impact of rapid urbanization in the United States on the masses.\nLifestyle and beliefs.\nAlcohol.\nWhitman was a vocal proponent of temperance and in his youth he rarely drank alcohol. He once stated he did not taste \"strong liquor\" until he was 30 and occasionally argued for prohibition. His first novel, \"Franklin Evans, or The Inebriate\", published November 23, 1842, is a temperance novel. Whitman wrote the novel at the height of the popularity of the Washingtonian movement, a movement that was plagued with contradictions, as was \"Franklin Evans\". Years later Whitman claimed he was embarrassed by the book and called it \"damned rot\". He dismissed it by saying he wrote the novel in three days solely for money while under the influence of alcohol. Even so, he wrote other pieces recommending temperance, including \"The Madman\" and a short story \"Reuben's Last Wish\". Later in life he was more liberal with alcohol, enjoying local wines and champagne.\nReligion.\nWhitman was deeply influenced by deism. He denied any one faith was more important than another, and embraced all religions equally. In \"Song of Myself\", he gave an inventory of major religions and indicated he respected and accepted all of them\u2014a sentiment he further emphasized in his poem \"With Antecedents\", affirming: \"I adopt each theory, myth, god, and demi-god, / I see that the old accounts, bibles, genealogies, are true, without exception\". In 1874, he was invited to write a poem about the Spiritualism movement, to which he responded: \"It seems to me nearly altogether a poor, cheap, crude humbug.\" Whitman was a religious skeptic: though he accepted all churches, he believed in none. God, to Whitman, was both immanent and transcendent and the human soul was immortal and in a state of progressive development. \"American Philosophy: An Encyclopedia\" classes him as one of several figures who \"took a more pantheist or pandeist approach by rejecting views of God as separate from the world.\"\nAccording to literary critic Harold Bloom:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;\nSexuality.\nThough biographers continue to debate Whitman's sexuality, he is usually described as either homosexual or bisexual in his feelings and attractions. Whitman's sexual orientation is generally assumed on the basis of his poetry, though this assumption has been disputed. His poetry depicts love and sexuality in a more earthy, individualistic way common in American culture before the medicalization of sexuality in the late 19th century. Though \"Leaves of Grass\" was often labeled pornographic or obscene, only one critic remarked on its author's presumed sexual activity: in a November 1855 review, Rufus Wilmot Griswold suggested Whitman was guilty of \"that horrible sin not to be mentioned among Christians\". The manuscript of his love poem \"Once I Pass'd through a Populous City\", written when Whitman was 29, indicates it was originally about a man. Late in his life, when Whitman was asked outright whether his \"Calamus\" poems were homosexual\u2014John Addington Symonds inquired about \"athletic friendship\", \"the love of man for man\", or \"the Love of Friends\"\u2014he chose not to respond.\nWhitman had intense friendships with many men and boys throughout his life. Some biographers have suggested that he did not have sexual relationships with males, while others cite letters, journal entries, and other sources that they claim as proof of the sexual nature of some of his relationships. English poet and critic John Addington Symonds spent 20 years in correspondence trying to pry the answer from him. In 1890, Symonds wrote to Whitman: \"In your conception of Comradeship, do you contemplate the possible intrusion of those semi-sexual emotions and actions which no doubt do occur between men?\" In reply, Whitman denied that his work had any such implication, asserting \"[T]hat the calamus part has even allow'd the possibility of such construction as mention'd is terrible\u2014I am fain to hope the pages themselves are not to be even mention'd for such gratuitous and quite at this time entirely undream'd &amp; unreck'd possibility of morbid inferences\u2014wh' are disavow'd by me and seem damnable\", and insisting that he had conceived six illegitimate children. Some contemporary scholars are skeptical of the veracity of Whitman's denial or the existence of the children he claimed. In a letter dated August 21, 1890, Whitman claimed: \"I have had six children\u2014two are dead.\" This claim has never been corroborated.\nPeter Doyle may be the most likely candidate for the love of Whitman's life. Doyle was a bus conductor whom Whitman met around 1866, and the two were inseparable for several years. Interviewed in 1895, Doyle said: \"We were familiar at once\u2014I put my hand on his knee\u2014we understood. He did not get out at the end of the trip\u2014in fact went all the way back with me.\" In his notebooks, Whitman disguised Doyle's initials using the code \"16.4\" (P.D. being the 16th and 4th letters of the alphabet). Oscar Wilde met Whitman in the United States in 1882 and later told the homosexual-rights activist George Cecil Ives \"I have the kiss of Walt Whitman still on my lips.\" The only explicit description of Whitman's sexual activities is second hand. In 1924, Edward Carpenter told Gavin Arthur of a sexual encounter in his youth with Whitman, the details of which Arthur recorded in his journal.Another possible lover was Bill Duckett. As a teenager, he lived on the same street in Camden and moved in with Whitman, living with him a number of years and serving him in various roles. Duckett was 15 when Whitman bought his house at 328 Mickle Street. From at least 1880, Duckett and his grandmother, Lydia Watson, were boarders, subletting space from another family at 334 Mickle Street. Because of this proximity, Duckett and Whitman met as neighbors. Their relationship was close, the youth sharing Whitman's money when he had it. Whitman described their friendship as \"thick\". Some biographers describe Duckett as a boarder; others identify him as a lover. Their photograph together is described as \"modeled on the conventions of a marriage portrait\", part of a series of portraits of the poet with his young male friends, and encrypting male\u2013male desire. Another young man with whom Whitman had an intense relationship was Harry Stafford, with whose family Whitman stayed when at Timber Creek, and whom he first met in 1876, when Stafford was 18. Whitman gave Stafford a ring, which was returned and re-given over the course of a stormy relationship lasting several years. Of that ring, Stafford wrote to Whitman: \"You know when you put it on there was but one thing to part it from me, and that was death.\"\nThere is also some evidence that Whitman had sexual relationships with women. He had a romantic friendship with a New York actress, Ellen Grey, in the spring of 1862, but it is not known whether it was also sexual. He still had a photograph of her decades later, when he moved to Camden, and he called her \"an old sweetheart of mine\". Toward the end of his life, he often told stories of previous girlfriends and sweethearts and denied an allegation from the \"New York Herald\" that he had \"never had a love affair\". As Whitman biographer Jerome Loving wrote, \"the discussion of Whitman's sexual orientation will probably continue in spite of whatever evidence emerges.\"\nShakespeare authorship.\nWhitman was an adherent of the Shakespeare authorship question, refusing to believe in the historical attribution of the works to William Shakespeare of Stratford-upon-Avon. In 1888, Whitman commented in \"November Boughs\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Conceiv'd out of the fullest heat and pulse of European feudalism\u2014personifying in unparalleled ways the medieval aristocracy, its towering spirit of ruthless and gigantic caste, with its own peculiar air and arrogance (no mere imitation)\u2014only one of the \"wolfish earls\" so plenteous in the plays themselves, or some born descendant and knower, might seem to be the true author of those amazing works\u2014works in some respects greater than anything else in recorded literature.\nSlavery.\nLike many in the Free Soil Party who were concerned about the threat slavery would pose to free white labor and northern businessmen exploiting the newly colonized western territories, Whitman opposed the extension of slavery in the United States and supported the Wilmot Proviso. At first he was opposed to abolitionism, believing the movement did more harm than good. In 1846, he wrote that the abolitionists had, in fact, slowed the advancement of their cause by their \"ultraism and officiousness\". His main concern was that their methods disrupted the democratic process, as did the refusal of the Southern states to put the interests of the nation as a whole above their own. In 1856, in his unpublished \"The Eighteenth Presidency\", addressing the men of the South, he wrote \"you are either to abolish slavery or it will abolish you\". Whitman also subscribed to the widespread opinion that even free African-Americans should not vote and was concerned at the increasing number of African-Americans in the legislature; as David Reynolds notes, Whitman wrote in prejudiced terms of these new voters and politicians, calling them \"blacks, with about as much intellect and calibre (in the mass) as so many baboons.\" George Hutchinson and David Drews have written that \"what little is known about the early development of Whitman's racial awareness suggests that he imbibed the prevailing white prejudices of his time and place, thinking of black people as servile, shiftless, ignorant, and given to stealing,\" but that despite his views remaining largely unchanged, \"readers of the twentieth century, including black ones, imagined him as a fervent antiracist.\"\nNationalism.\nWhitman is often described as America's national poet, creating an image of the United States for itself. \"Although he is often considered a champion of democracy and equality, Whitman constructs a hierarchy with himself at the head, America below, and the rest of the world in a subordinate position.\" In his study \"The Pragmatic Whitman: Reimagining American Democracy\", Stephen John Mack suggests that critics, who tend to ignore it, should look again at Whitman's nationalism: \"Whitman's seemingly mawkish celebrations of the United States[...] [are] one of those problematic features of his works that teachers and critics read past or explain away\" (xv\u2013xvi). Nathanael O'Reilly in an essay on \"Walt Whitman's Nationalism in the First Edition of \"Leaves of Grass\"\" claims that \"Whitman's imagined America is arrogant, expansionist, hierarchical, racist and exclusive; such an America is unacceptable to Native Americans, African-Americans, immigrants, the disabled, the infertile, and all those who value equal rights.\" Whitman's nationalism avoided mentioning the ongoing Native American genocide in the United States. As George Hutchinson and David Drews further suggest in an essay \"Racial attitudes\": \"Clearly, Whitman could not consistently reconcile the ingrained, even foundational, racist character of the United States with its egalitarian ideals. He could not even reconcile such contradictions in his own psyche.\" The authors concluded their essay with:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;Because of the radically democratic and egalitarian aspects of his poetry, readers generally expect, and desire for, Whitman to be among the literary heroes that transcended the racist pressures that abounded in all spheres of public discourse during the nineteenth century. He did not, at least not consistently; nonetheless his poetry has been a model for democratic poets of all nations and races, right up to our own day. How Whitman could have been so prejudiced, and yet so effective in conveying an egalitarian and antiracist sensibility in his poetry, is a puzzle yet to be adequately addressed.\nIn reference to the Mexican\u2013American War, Whitman wrote in 1864 that Mexico was \"the only [country] to whom we have ever really done wrong.\" In 1883, celebrating the 333rd anniversary of Santa Fe, Whitman argued that the indigenous and Spanish-Indian elements would supply leading traits in the \"composite American identity of the future.\"\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;As to our aboriginal or Indian population\u2014the Aztec in the South, and many a tribe in the North and West\u2014I know it seems to be agreed that they must gradually dwindle as time rolls on, and in a few generations more leave only a reminiscence, a blank. But I am not at all clear about that. As America, from its many far-back sources and current supplies, develops, adapts, entwines, faithfully identifies its own\u2014are we to see it cheerfully accepting and using all the contributions of foreign lands from the whole outside globe\u2014and then rejecting the only ones distinctively its own\u2014the autochthonic ones? As to the Spanish stock of our Southwest, it is certain to me that we do not begin to appreciate the splendor and sterling value of its race element. Who knows but that element, like the course of some subterranean river, dipping invisibly for a hundred or two years, is now to emerge in broadest flow and permanent action?\nLegacy and influence.\nWhitman has been claimed as the first \"poet of democracy\" in the United States, a title meant to reflect his ability to write in a singularly American character. An American-British friend of Whitman, Mary Whitall Smith Costelloe, wrote: \"You cannot really understand America without Walt Whitman, without \"Leaves of Grass\" ... He has expressed that civilization, 'up to date,' as he would say, and no student of the philosophy of history can do without him.\" Andrew Carnegie called him \"the great poet of America so far\". Whitman considered himself a messiah-like figure in poetry. Others agreed: one of his admirers, William Sloane Kennedy, speculated that \"people will be celebrating the birth of Walt Whitman as they are now the birth of Christ\".\nLiterary critic Harold Bloom wrote, as the introduction for the 150th anniversary of \"Leaves of Grass\":\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;If you are American, then Walt Whitman is your imaginative father and mother, even if, like myself, you have never composed a line of verse. You can nominate a fair number of literary works as candidates for the secular Scripture of the United States. They might include Melville's \"Moby-Dick\", Twain's \"Adventures of Huckleberry Finn\", and Emerson's two series of \"Essays\" and \"The Conduct of Life\". None of those, not even Emerson's, are as central as the first edition of \"Leaves of Grass\", whose 150th anniversary we now mark.\nIn his own time, Whitman attracted an influential coterie of disciples and admirers. Among his admirers were the Eagle Street College, an informal group established in 1885 at the home of James William Wallace on Eagle Street in Bolton, England, to read and discuss the poetry of Whitman. The group subsequently became known as the Bolton Whitman Fellowship or Whitmanites. Its members held an annual \"Whitman Day\" celebration around the poet's birthday. Whitman's niece, Jessie Louisa Whitman, also contributed to his legacy by allowing Ralph L. Fansler to record her memories of Whitman during a series of interviews that took place between 1939 and 1943. In the interviews Jessie is noted for her faithfulness and lifelong interest in her uncle. Jessie held letters written by Whitman, which were given to the Missouri Historical Society in 1960.\nAmerican poets.\nWhitman is one of the most influential American poets. Modernist poet Ezra Pound called Whitman \"America's poet ... He \"is\" America.\" His April 1913 poem, \"A Pact,\" begins: \"I make truce with you, Walt Whitman\u2014 I have detested you long enough.\" To poet Langston Hughes, who wrote \"I, too, sing America\", Whitman was a literary hero. Whitman's vagabond lifestyle was adopted by the Beat movement and its leaders such as Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac in the 1950s and 1960s, as well as anti-war poets such as Adrienne Rich, Alicia Ostriker, and Gary Snyder. Lawrence Ferlinghetti numbered himself among Whitman's \"wild children\", and the title of Ferlinghetti's 1961 collection \"Starting from San Francisco\" is a reference to Whitman's \"Starting from Paumanok\". June Jordan published a pivotal essay entitled \"For the Sake of People's Poetry: Walt Whitman and the Rest of Us\", praising Whitman as a democratic poet whose works speak to ethnic minorities from all backgrounds. United States poet laureate Joy Harjo, who is a Chancellor of the Academy of American Poets, counts Whitman among her influences.\nLatin American poets.\nWhitman's poetry influenced Latin American and Caribbean poets in the 19th and 20th centuries, starting with Cuban poet, philosopher, and nationalist leader Jos\u00e9 Mart\u00ed, who published essays in Spanish on Whitman's writings in 1887. \u00c1lvaro Armando Vasseur's 1912 translations further raised Whitman's profile in Latin America. Peruvian vanguardist C\u00e9sar Vallejo, Chilean poet Pablo Neruda, and Argentine Jorge Luis Borges acknowledged Walt Whitman's influence.\nEuropean authors.\nSome, like Oscar Wilde and Edward Carpenter, viewed Whitman both as a prophet of a utopian future and of same-sex desire\u2014the passion of comrades. This aligned with their own desires for a future of brotherly socialism. Whitman also influenced Bram Stoker, author of \"Dracula\", and was a model for the character of Dracula. Stoker said in his notes that Dracula represented the quintessential male which, to Stoker, was Whitman, with whom he corresponded until Whitman's death.\nFilm and television.\nWhitman's life and verse have been referenced in a substantial number of works of film and video. In \"Dead Poets Society\" (1989) by Peter Weir, teacher John Keating, portrayed by Robin Williams, inspires his students with the works of Whitman, Thoreau, Frost, Shakespeare and Byron.\nIn the movie \"Beautiful Dreamers\" (Hemdale Films, 1992) Whitman was portrayed by Rip Torn. Whitman visits an insane asylum in London, Ontario, where some of his ideas are adopted as part of an occupational therapy program.\nWhitman's poem \"Yonnondio\" influenced both a book (\"Yonnondio: From the Thirties\", 1974) by Tillie Olsen and a sixteen-minute film, \"Yonnondio\" (1994) by Ali Mohamed Selim.\nWhitman's poem \"I Sing the Body Electric\" (1855) was used by Ray Bradbury as the title of a short story and a short story collection. Bradbury's story was adapted for the \"Twilight Zone\" episode of May 18, 1962, in which a bereaved family buys a made-to-order robot grandmother to forever love and serve the family.\n\"I Sing the Body Electric\" inspired the showcase finale in the movie \"Fame\" (1980), a diverse fusion of gospel, rock, and orchestra.\nMusic and audio recordings.\nWhitman's poetry has been set to music by more than 500 composers; indeed it has been suggested that his poetry has been set to music more than that of any other American poet except for Emily Dickinson and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. Those who have set his poems to music include John Adams; Ernst Bacon; Leonard Bernstein; Benjamin Britten; Harry Burleigh; Rhoda Coghill; David Conte; Ronald Corp; George Crumb; Frederick Delius; Howard Hanson; Karl Amadeus Hartmann; Hans Werner Henze; Bernard Herrmann;Jennifer Higdon; Paul Hindemith; Joel Puckett; Ned Rorem; Roger Sessions; Howard Skempton; Eva Ruth Spalding; Williametta Spencer; Charles Villiers Stanford; Robert Strassburg; Ananda Sukarlan; Ivana Marburger Themmen; Ralph Vaughan Williams; Rossini Vrionides; Kurt Weill; Helen L. Weiss; and Charles Wood. \"Crossing\", an opera composed by Matthew Aucoin and inspired by Whitman's Civil War diaries, premiered in 2015.\nIn 2014, German publisher H\u00f6rbuch Hamburg issued the bilingual double-CD audio book of the \"Kinder Adams/Children of Adam\" cycle, based on translations by Kai Grehn in the 2005 \"Children of Adam from Leaves of Grass\" (Galerie Vevais), accompanying a collection of nude photography by Paul Cava. The audio release included a complete reading by Iggy Pop, as well as readings by Marianne S\u00e4gebrecht; Martin Wuttke; Birgit Minichmayr; Alexander Fehling; Lars Rudolph; Volker Bruch; Paula Beer; Josef Osterndorf; Ronald Lippok; Jule B\u00f6we; and Robert Gwisdek. In 2014 composer John Zorn released \"On Leaves of Grass\", an album inspired by and dedicated to Whitman.\nNamesake recognition.\nWhitman's importance in American culture is reflected in schools, roads, rest stops, and bridges named after him. Among them are the Walt Whitman High School in Bethesda, Maryland and Walt Whitman High School on Long Island, Walt Whitman Elementary School in Woodbury, New York, Walt Whitman Boulevard in Cherry Hill, New Jersey, and a service area on the New Jersey Turnpike in Cherry Hill, and others.\nThe Walt Whitman Bridge, which crosses the Delaware River between Philadelphia and Gloucester City, New Jersey near Whitman's home in Camden, New Jersey, opened on May 16, 1957. The \"Statue of Walt Whitman\" by Jo Davidson is located at the entrance to the Walt Whitman Bridge and another casting resides in the Bear Mountain State Park. The controversy that surrounded the naming of the Walt Whitman bridge has been documented in a series of letters from members of the public, which are held in the University of Pennsylvania library. The web page about this matter states: \"The bridge was meant to be named after a person of note who had lived in New Jersey, but some area citizens opposed the name 'Walt Whitman Bridge'... Many objecting to the choice of his name for the bridge saw Whitman's work as sympathizing with communist ideals and criticized him for his egalitarian view of humanity.\"\nIn 1997, the Walt Whitman Community School in Dallas opened, becoming the first private high school catering to LGBT youth. His other namesakes include the Walt Whitman Shops in Huntington Station, New York, near his birthplace, and Walt Whitman Road, which spans Huntington Station to Melville on Long Island.\nWhitman was inducted into the New Jersey Hall of Fame in 2009, and, in 2013, he was inducted into the Legacy Walk, an outdoor public display in Chicago that celebrates LGBT history and people.\nIn 1948, a coed summer camp in Piermont, New Hampshire opened and is named after Whitman.\nA crater on Mercury is named for him.\nWorks.\nWorks compiled by Horace Traubel.\nThe following works compiled by Horace Traubel include both Traubel's own writings and observations during his time with Whitman, and materials authored by Whitman such as manuscripts, poems, letters, and Whitman's will and testament. \nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33872", "revid": "18891628", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33872", "title": "Weierstrass approximation theorem", "text": ""}
{"id": "33873", "revid": "50236799", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33873", "title": "World Trade Organization", "text": "Intergovernmental trade organization\nThe World Trade Organization (WTO) is an intergovernmental organization that regulates and facilitates international trade. Established on 1 January 1995, pursuant to the 1994 Marrakesh Agreement, it succeeded the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), which was created in 1948. As the world's largest international economic organization, the WTO has 166 members, representing over 98% of global trade and global GDP. It is headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland.\nThe WTO's primary functions are to provide a framework for negotiating trade agreements and to resolve trade disputes among its members. Its agreements, which are negotiated and signed by the majority of the world's trading nations and ratified in their parliaments, cover trade in goods, services, and intellectual property. The organization operates on the principle of non-discrimination\u2014enshrined in the most-favoured-nation and national treatment provisions\u2014but allows for exceptions for environmental protection, national security, and other objectives.\nThe WTO's highest decision-making body is the Ministerial Conference, which convenes biennially and makes decisions by consensus. Day-to-day business is managed by the General Council, composed of representatives from all member states. The organization is administered by a Secretariat led by the Director-General; since 2021, this position has been held by Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of Nigeria. The WTO's annual budget is approximately 200 million USD, contributed by members based on their share of international trade.\nEconomic studies generally find that the WTO has boosted trade and reduced trade barriers. However, it has faced significant criticism. Critics argue that the benefits of WTO-facilitated free trade are not shared equally, that its agreements may disadvantage developing countries, and that commercial interests have been prioritised over environmental and labour concerns. The organization has also been central to major trade disputes and stalled negotiations, such as the Doha Development Round and the paralysis of its Appellate Body, which have raised questions about its future efficacy.\nHistory.\nThe WTO precursor, General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), was established by a multilateral treaty of 23 countries in 1947 after the end of World War II, in the wake of other new multilateral institutions dedicated to international economic cooperation\u2014such as the World Bank (founded 1944) and the International Monetary Fund (founded 1944\u20131945). A comparable international institution for trade, named the International Trade Organization (ITO), never started, since the United States and other signatories did not ratify the establishment treaty, and so the GATT slowly became a \"de facto\" international organization.\nGATT negotiations before Uruguay.\nSeven rounds of negotiations occurred under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (1949 to 1979). The first real GATT trade rounds (1947 to 1960) concentrated on further reducing tariffs. Then the Kennedy Round in the mid-sixties brought about a GATT anti-dumping agreement and a section on development. The Tokyo Round during the seventies represented the first major attempt to tackle trade barriers that do not take the form of tariffs, and to improve the system, adopting a series of agreements on non-tariff barriers, which in some cases interpreted existing GATT rules, and in others broke entirely new ground. Because not all GATT members accepted these plurilateral agreements, they were often informally called \"codes\". (The Uruguay Round amended several of these codes and turned them into multilateral commitments accepted by all WTO members. Only four remained plurilateral (those on government procurement, bovine meat, civil aircraft, and dairy products), but in 1997 WTO members agreed to terminate the bovine meat and dairy agreements, leaving only two.) Despite attempts in the mid-1950s and 1960s to establish some form of institutional mechanism for international trade, the GATT continued to operate for almost half a century as a semi-institutionalized multilateral treaty r\u00e9gime on a provisional basis.\nUruguay Round: 1986\u20131994.\nWell before GATT's 40th anniversary (due in 1987\u20131988), GATT members concluded that the GATT system was straining to adapt to a globalizing world economy. In response to problems identified in the 1982 Ministerial Declaration (structural deficiencies, spill-over impacts of certain countries' policies on world trade which GATT could not manage, etc.), a meeting in Punta del Este, Uruguay, launched the eighth GATT round\u2014known as the \"Uruguay Round\"\u2014in September 1986.\nIn the biggest negotiating mandate on trade ever agreed, the Uruguay Round talks aimed to extend the trading system into several new areas, notably trade in services and intellectual property, and to reform trade in the sensitive sectors of agriculture and textiles; all the original GATT articles were up for review. The Final Act concluding the Uruguay Round and officially establishing the WTO regime was signed on 15 April 1994, during the ministerial meeting at Marrakesh, Morocco\u2014hence known as the Marrakesh Agreement.\nThe GATT still exists as the WTO's umbrella treaty for trade in goods, updated as a result of the Uruguay Round negotiations (a distinction is made between \"GATT 1994\", the updated parts of GATT, and \"GATT 1947\", the original agreement which is still the heart of GATT 1994). GATT 1994 is not, however, the only legally binding agreement included via the Final Act at Marrakesh; a long list of about 60 agreements, annexes, decisions, and understandings was adopted. The agreements fall into six main parts:\nIn terms of the WTO's principle relating to tariff \"ceiling-binding\" (No. 3), the Uruguay Round has been successful in increasing binding commitments by both developed and developing countries, as may be seen in the percentages of tariffs bound before and after the 1986\u20131994 talks.\nMinisterial conferences.\nThe highest decision-making body of the WTO, the Ministerial Conference, usually meets every two years. It brings together all members of the WTO, all of which are countries or customs unions. The Ministerial Conference can take decisions on all matters under any of the multilateral trade agreements. Some meetings, such as the inaugural ministerial conference in Singapore (1996) and the inaugural ministerial conference in Canc\u00fan, Mexico (2003) involved arguments between developed nations and low-income and lower-middle income countries, referred to as the \"Singapore issues\", such as agricultural subsidies; while others such as the Seattle conference in 1999 provoked large demonstrations. The fourth ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar in 2001 approved China's entry to the WTO and launched the Doha Development Round which was supplemented by the sixth WTO ministerial conference in Hong Kong, which agreed to phase out agricultural export subsidies and to adopt the European Union's Everything but Arms initiative to phase out tariffs for goods from the least developed countries. At the sixth WTO Ministerial Conference of 2005 in December, WTO launched the Aid for Trade initiative and it is specifically to assist developing countries in trade as included in the Sustainable Development Goal 8 which is to increase aid for trade support and economic growth.\nThe Twelfth Ministerial Conference (MC12) was due to be held in Nur-Sultan, Kazakhstan, in June 2020, but was canceled because of the COVID-19 pandemic. It was later held in Geneva, Switzerland from 12\u201317 June 2022. The Thirteenth Ministerial Conference (MC13) was held in Abu Dhabi, UAE on 26\u201329 February 2024, and extended to Friday 1 March 2024 to complete deliberations.\nDoha Round (Doha Agenda): 2001\u2013present.\nThe WTO launched the current round of negotiations, the Doha Development Round, at the fourth ministerial conference in Doha, Qatar in November 2001. This was to be an ambitious effort to make globalization more inclusive and help the world's poor, particularly by slashing barriers and subsidies in farming. The initial agenda comprised both further trade liberalization and new rule-making, underpinned by commitments to strengthen substantial assistance to developing countries.\nProgress stalled over differences between developed nations and the major low-income and lower-middle income countries on issues such as industrial tariffs and non-tariff barriers to trade particularly against and between the EU and the US over their maintenance of agricultural subsidies\u2014seen to operate effectively as trade barriers. Repeated attempts to revive the talks proved unsuccessful, though the adoption of the Bali Ministerial Declaration in 2013 addressed bureaucratic barriers to commerce.\nAs of \u00a02012[ [update]], the future of the Doha Round remained uncertain: the work programme lists 21 subjects in which the original deadline of 1 January 2005 was missed, and the round remains incomplete. The conflict between free trade in industrial goods and services but retention of protectionism on farm subsidies to domestic agricultural sectors (requested by developed countries) and the substantiation of fair trade on agricultural products (requested by developing countries) remain the major obstacles. This impasse has made it impossible to launch new WTO negotiations beyond the Doha Development Round. As a result, there have been an increasing number of bilateral free trade agreements between governments. As of July\u00a02012[ [update]] there were various negotiation groups in the WTO system for the current stalemated agricultural trade negotiation.\nFunctions.\nThe WTO has several functions:\nDifferences between GATT and WTO.\nDecisions in GATT were, in practice, made through consensus, and member states were allowed numerous exceptions for not complying with GATT rules if GATT conflicted with legitimate domestic objectives. Many of the GATT's rules were ambiguous and flexible. GATT members could also block a dispute settlement if it was unlikely to lead to a mutually acceptable ruling. These organizational design decisions reflected a wariness among member states to delegate too much power to the international organization and fears that GATT would not allow member states to respond to domestic political pressures. Cooperation in GATT tended to be the outcome of shared norms, rather than explicit rules and threats of punishment.\nWTO was created in order to accommodate more issue areas (such as services and intellectual property) and a vastly enlarged membership. In comparison to GATT, the WTO included vastly more numerous and more precise obligations on member states. Member states that were non-compliant were subject to punishment or to dispute settlements that could produce adverse outcomes. The consensus-based nature of rule changes has contributed to deadlock in the WTO and discontent among member states, as they are unable to resolve problems.\nKey Publications.\nThe WTO is recognized for producing authoritative annual reports that provide clarity on the complexities of global trade, such as:\nPrinciples of the trading system.\nThe WTO establishes a framework for trade policies; it does not define or specify outcomes. That is, it is concerned with setting the rules of \"trade policy\". Five principles are of particular importance in understanding both the pre-1994 GATT and the WTO:\nThere are three types of provision in this direction:\nExceptions to the MFN principle also allow for preferential treatment of developing countries, regional free trade areas and customs unions.\nOrganizational structure.\nThe highest authority of the WTO is the Ministerial Conference, which must meet at least every two years. The Ministerial Conference met most recently in June 2022 in Geneva.\nIn between each Ministerial Conference, the daily work is handled by three bodies whose membership is the same; they only differ by the terms of reference under which each body is constituted:\nThe General Council, whose Chair as of 2020 is David Walker of New Zealand, has the following subsidiary bodies which oversee committees in different areas: \nThe Service Council has three subsidiary bodies: financial services, domestic regulations, GATS rules, and specific commitments. The council has several different committees, working groups, and working parties. There are committees on the following: Trade and Environment; Trade and Development (Subcommittee on Least-Developed Countries); Regional Trade Agreements; Balance of Payments Restrictions; and Budget, Finance and Administration. There are working parties on the following: Accession. There are working groups on the following: Trade, debt and finance; and Trade and technology transfer.\nAs of 31 December 2022, the number of WTO staff on a regular budget is 340 women and 283 men.\nDecision-making.\nThe WTO describes itself as \"a rules-based, member-driven organization\u2014all decisions are made by the member governments, and the rules are the outcome of negotiations among members\". The WTO Agreement foresees votes where consensus cannot be reached, but the practice of consensus dominates the process of decision-making.\nRichard Harold Steinberg (2002) argues that although the WTO's consensus governance model provides law-based initial bargaining, trading rounds close through power-based bargaining favoring Europe and the U.S., and may not lead to Pareto improvement.\nDispute settlement.\nThe WTO's dispute-settlement system \"is the result of the evolution of rules, procedures and practices developed over almost half a century under the GATT 1947\". In 1994, the WTO members agreed on the Understanding on Rules and Procedures Governing the Settlement of Disputes (DSU) annexed to the \"Final Act\" signed in Marrakesh in 1994. Dispute settlement is regarded by the WTO as the central pillar of the multilateral trading system, and as a \"unique contribution to the stability of the global economy\". WTO members have agreed that, if they believe fellow-members are violating trade rules, they will use the multilateral system of settling disputes instead of taking action unilaterally.\nThe operation of the WTO dispute settlement process involves case-specific panels appointed by the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), the Appellate Body, the Director-General and the WTO Secretariat, arbitrators, and advisory experts.\nThe priority is to settle disputes, preferably through a mutually agreed solution, and provision has been made for the process to be conducted in an efficient and timely manner so that \"If a case is adjudicated, it should normally take no more than one year for a panel ruling and no more than 16 months if the case is appealed... If the complainant deems the case urgent, consideration of the case should take even less time. WTO member nations are obliged to accept the process as exclusive and compulsory.\nAccording to a 2018 study in the \"Journal of Politics\", states are less likely and slower to enforce WTO violations when the violations affect states in a diffuse manner. This is because states face collective action problems with pursuing litigation: they all expect other states to carry the costs of litigation. A 2016 study in \"International Studies Quarterly\" challenges that the WTO dispute settlement system leads to greater increases in trade.\nHowever, the dispute settlement system cannot be used to resolve trade disputes that arise from political disagreements. When Qatar requested the establishment of a dispute panel concerning measures imposed by the UAE, other GCC countries and the US were quick to dismiss its request as a political matter, stating that national security issues were political and not appropriate for the WTO dispute system.\nSince 2019, when the Donald Trump administration blocked appointments to the body, the Appellate Body has been unable to enforce WTO rules and punish violators of WTO rules. In March 2020, the European Union and 15 other WTO members agreed to a \"Multiparty Interim Appeal Arbitration Arrangement\" (MPIA). This gave access to an alternative appellate mechanism (arbitration as an appellate mechanism) while the Appellate Body is not functional.\nAccession and membership.\nThe process of becoming a WTO member is unique to each applicant country, and the terms of accession are dependent upon the country's stage of economic development and the current trade regime. The process takes about five years, on average, but it can last longer if the country is less than fully committed to the process or if political issues interfere. The shortest accession negotiation was that of the Kyrgyz Republic, while the longest was that of Russia, which, having first applied to join GATT in 1993, was approved for membership in December 2011 and became a WTO member on 22 August 2012. Kazakhstan also had a long accession negotiation process. The Working Party on the Accession of Kazakhstan was established in 1996 and was approved for membership in 2015. The second longest was that of Vanuatu, whose Working Party on the Accession of Vanuatu was established on 11 July 1995. After a final meeting of the Working Party in October 2001, Vanuatu requested more time to consider its accession terms. In 2008, it indicated its interest to resume and conclude its WTO accession. The Working Party on the Accession of Vanuatu was reconvened informally on 4 April 2011 to discuss Vanuatu's future WTO membership. The re-convened Working Party completed its mandate on 2 May 2011. The General Council formally approved the Accession Package of Vanuatu on 26 October 2011. On 24 August 2012, the WTO welcomed Vanuatu as its 157th member. An offer of accession is only given once consensus is reached among interested parties.\nA 2017 study argues that \"political ties rather than issue-area functional gains determine who joins\" and shows \"how geopolitical alignment shapes the demand and supply sides of membership\". The \"findings challenge the view that states first liberalize trade to join the GATT/WTO. Instead, democracy and foreign policy similarity encourage states to join.\"\nAccession process.\nA country wishing to accede to the WTO submits an application to the General Council, and has to describe all aspects of its trade and economic policies that have a bearing on WTO agreements. The application is submitted to the WTO in a memorandum which is examined by a working party open to all interested WTO Members.\nAfter all necessary background information has been acquired, the working party focuses on issues of discrepancy between the WTO rules and the applicant's international and domestic trade policies and laws. The working party determines the terms and conditions of entry into the WTO for the applicant nation and may consider transitional periods to allow countries some leeway in complying with the WTO rules.\nThe final phase of accession involves bilateral negotiations between the applicant nation and other working party members regarding the concessions and commitments on tariff levels and market access for goods and services. The new member's commitments are to apply equally to all WTO members under normal non-discrimination rules, even though they are negotiated bilaterally. For instance, as a result of joining the WTO, Armenia offered a 15 per cent ceiling bound tariff rate on accessing its market for goods. Together with the tariff bindings being ad valorem there are no specific or compound rates. Moreover, there are no tariff-rate quotas on both industrial and agricultural products. Armenia's economic and trade performance growth was noted since its first review in 2010, especially its revival from the 2008 financial crisis, with an average annual 4% GDP growth rate, despite some fluctuations. Armenia's economy was marked by low inflation, diminishing poverty, and essential progress in enhancing its macroeconomic steadiness in which trade in goods and services, which is the equivalent of 87% of GDP, played a growing role.\nWhen the bilateral talks conclude, the working party sends to the general council or ministerial conference an accession package, which includes a summary of all the working party meetings, the Protocol of Accession (a draft membership treaty), and lists (\"schedules\") of the member to be commitments. Once the general council or ministerial conference approves of the terms of accession, the applicant's parliament must ratify the Protocol of Accession before it can become a member. Some countries may have faced tougher and a much longer accession process due to challenges during negotiations with other WTO members, such as Vietnam, whose negotiations took more than 11 years before it became an official member in January 2007.\nMembers and observers.\nThe WTO has 166 members and 23 observer governments. Most recently, on 26 February 2024 at the 13th Ministerial Conference in Abu Dhabi, Comoros and Timor Leste were approved to became the 165th and 166th members. In addition to states, the European Union, and each EU country in its own right, is a member. WTO members do not have to be fully independent states; they need only be a customs territory with full autonomy in the conduct of their external commercial relations. Thus Hong Kong has been a member since 1995 (as \"Hong Kong, China\" since 1997) predating the People's Republic of China, which joined in 2001 after 15 years of negotiations. Taiwan acceded to the WTO in 2002 as the \"Separate Customs Territory of Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen and Matsu.\" The WTO Secretariat omits the official titles (such as Counsellor, First Secretary, Second Secretary and Third Secretary) of the members of Taiwan's Permanent Mission to the WTO, except for the titles of the Permanent Representative and the Deputy Permanent Representative.\nAs of 2007, WTO members represented 96.4% of global trade and 96.7% of global GDP. Iran, followed by Algeria, are the economies with the largest GDP and trade outside the WTO, using 2005 data. With the exception of the Holy See, observers must start accession negotiations within five years of becoming observers. A number of international intergovernmental organizations have also been granted observer status to WTO bodies. Ten UN members have no affiliation with the WTO.\nAgreements.\nThe WTO oversees about 60 different agreements which have the status of international legal texts. Member countries must sign and ratify all WTO agreements on accession. A discussion of some of the most important agreements follows.\nThe Agreement on Agriculture came into effect with the establishment of the WTO at the beginning of 1995. The AoA has three central concepts, or \"pillars\": domestic support, market access and export subsidies.\nThe General Agreement on Trade in Services was created to extend the multilateral trading system to service sector, in the same way as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) provided such a system for merchandise trade. The agreement entered into force in January 1995.\nThe Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights sets down minimum standards for many forms of intellectual property (IP) regulation. It was negotiated at the end of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in 1994.\nThe Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures\u2014also known as the SPS Agreement\u2014was negotiated during the Uruguay Round of GATT, and entered into force with the establishment of the WTO at the beginning of 1995. Under the SPS agreement, the WTO sets constraints on members' policies relating to food safety (bacterial contaminants, pesticides, inspection, and labeling) as well as animal and plant health (imported pests and diseases).\nThe Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade is an international treaty of the World Trade Organization. It was negotiated during the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and entered into force with the establishment of the WTO at the end of 1994. The object ensures that technical negotiations and standards, as well as testing and certification procedures, do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade\".\nThe Agreement on Customs Valuation, formally known as the Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of GATT, prescribes methods of customs valuation that Members are to follow. Chiefly, it adopts the \"transaction value\" approach.\nIn December 2013, the biggest agreement within the WTO was signed and known as the Bali Package.\nOffice of director-general.\nThe procedures for the appointment of the WTO director-general were updated in January 2003, and include quadrennial terms. Additionally, there are four deputy directors-general. As of 2018[ [update]] under director-general Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, the four deputy directors-general are:\nList of directors-general.\nSource: Official website\n2020 Director-General selection.\nIn May 2020, Director-General Roberto Azevedo announced that he would step down on 31 August 2020. As of October 2020[ [update]], a nomination and selection process is currently under way with eight candidates and the final selection is expected on 7 November 2020 with the consensus of 164 member countries. A strong consensus had formed around the candidacy of Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala but on 28 October it emerged that the US representative was opposed to her appointment.\nWTO members made history on 15 February 2021 when the General Council agreed by consensus to select Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of Nigeria as the organization's seventh Director-General.\nOkonjo-Iweala became the first woman and the first African to be chosen as Director-General.\nBudget.\nThe WTO derives most of the income for its annual budget from contributions by its Members. These are established according to a formula based on their share of international trade.\nCriticism.\nAlthough tariffs and other trade barriers have been significantly reduced thanks to GATT and WTO, the promise that free trade will accelerate economic growth, reduce poverty, and increase people's incomes has been questioned by many critics. \nEconomist Ha-Joon Chang argues that there is a \"paradox\" in neo-liberal beliefs regarding free trade because the economic growth of developing countries was higher in the 1960\u20131980 period compared to the 1980\u20132000 period even though its trade policies are now far more liberal than before. Also, there are results of research that show that new countries actively reduce trade barriers only after becoming significantly rich. From the results of the study, WTO critics argue that trade liberalization does not guarantee economic growth and certainly not poverty alleviation. He also cites the example of El Salvador; in the early 1990s, El Salvador removed all quantitative barriers to imports and also cut tariffs. However, the country's economic growth remained weak. On the other hand, Vietnam, which only began reforming its economy in the late 1980s, saw a great deal of success by deciding to follow China's economic model and liberalizing slowly along with implementing safeguards for domestic commerce. Vietnam has largely succeeded in accelerating economic growth and reducing poverty without immediately removing substantial trade barriers.\nCritics also put forward the view that the benefits derived from WTO facilitated free trade are not shared equally. This criticism is usually supported by historical accounts of the outcomes of negotiations and/or data showing that the gap between the rich and the poor continues to widen, especially in China and India, where economic inequality was growing at the time even though economic growth is very high. In addition, WTO approaches aiming to reduce trade barriers can harm developing countries. Trade liberalization that is too early without any prominent domestic barriers is feared to trap the developing economies in the primary sector, which often does not require skilled labor. Also, when these developing countries decide to advance their economy utilizing industrialization, the premature domestic industry cannot immediately skyrocket as expected, making it difficult to compete with other countries whose industries are more advanced.\nOn 24 September, 2025, China announced that it will no longer request so-called Special and Differential Treatment (SDT) benefits, which arise from its developing country status, in WTO negotiations on future deals.\nThe WTO has been criticized for not sufficiently preventing monopolistic behavior by individual countries, as exemplified by the rare earths trade dispute.\nImpact.\nStudies show that the WTO boosted trade. Research shows that in the absence of the WTO, the average country would face an increase in tariffs on their exports by 32 percentage points. The dispute settlement mechanism in the WTO is one way in which trade is increased. A 2023 study suggests that WTO membership has not enhanced trade for the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries. \nAccording to a 2017 study in the \"Journal of International Economic Law\", \"nearly all recent preferential trade agreements (PTAs) reference the WTO explicitly, often dozens of times across multiple chapters. Likewise, in many of these same PTAs we find that substantial portions of treaty language\u2014sometime the majority of a chapter\u2014is copied verbatim from a WTO agreement... the presence of the WTO in PTAs has increased over time.\"\nSee also.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Div col/styles.css\"/&gt;\nNotes and references.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33874", "revid": "1461430", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33874", "title": "World Trade Organisation", "text": ""}
{"id": "33875", "revid": "16185737", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33875", "title": "Wenceslaus I, Duke of Bohemia", "text": "Duke of Bohemia from 921 to 935\nWenceslaus I ( ; c. 907 \u2013 28 September 935), Wenceslas I or \"V\u00e1clav the Good\" was the Prince (\"kn\u00ed\u017ee\") of Bohemia from 921 until his death, probably in 935. According to the legend, he was assassinated by his younger brother, Boleslaus the Cruel.\nHis martyrdom and the popularity of several biographies gave rise to a reputation for heroic virtue that resulted in his sainthood. He was posthumously declared to be a king and patron saint of the Czech state. He is the subject of the well-known \"Good King Wenceslas\", a carol for Saint Stephen's Day.\nBiography.\nWenceslaus was the son of Vratislaus I, Duke of Bohemia from the P\u0159emyslid dynasty. His grandfather, Bo\u0159ivoj I of Bohemia, and grandmother, Ludmila, had been converted by Cyril and Methodius to Byzantine Christianity in a still unified Christendom, before the Great Schism. His mother, Drahom\u00edra, was the daughter of a chief of the Havelli, but was baptized at the time of her marriage. His paternal grandmother, Ludmila of Bohemia, saw to it that he was educated in the Old Church Slavonic liturgical language and, at an early age, Wenceslaus was sent to the college at Bude\u010d.\nIn 921, when Wenceslaus was about 13, his father died and his grandmother became regent. Jealous of the influence Ludmila wielded over Wenceslaus, Drahom\u00edra arranged to have her killed. Ludmila was at Tet\u00edn Castle near Beroun when assassins murdered her on 15 September 921. She is said to have been strangled by them with her veil. She was at first buried in the church of St. Michael at Tet\u00edn, but her remains were later removed, probably by Wenceslaus, to the church of St. George in Prague, which had been built by his father.\nDrahom\u00edra then assumed the role of regent and immediately initiated measures against Christians. When Wenceslaus was 18, those Christian nobles who remained rebelled against Drahomira. The uprising was successful, and Drahomira was sent into exile to Bude\u010d.\nReign.\nWith the nobles' support, Wenceslaus took control of the government. He reined in the dependent dukes who had become restive under the regency and used Christianity to strengthen his state.\nAfter the fall of Great Moravia, rulers of the Bohemian Duchy had to deal both with continuous raids by the Magyars and the forces of the Saxon and East Frankish king Henry the Fowler, who had started several eastern campaigns into the adjacent lands of the Polabian Slavs, Wenceslaus's mother's homeland. To withstand Saxon overlordship, Wenceslaus's father Vratislaus had forged an alliance with the Bavarian duke Arnulf, a fierce opponent of King Henry at that time. The alliance became worthless when Arnulf and Henry reconciled at Regensburg in 921.\nEarly in 929, the joint forces of Duke Arnulf of Bavaria and King Henry I the Fowler reached Prague in a sudden attack that forced Wenceslaus to resume payment of a tribute first imposed by the East Frankish king Arnulf of Carinthia in 895. Henry had been forced to pay a huge tribute to the Magyars in 926 and needed the Bohemian tribute, which Wenceslaus probably refused to pay after Arnulf and Henry reconciled. Another possible reason for the attack was the formation of the anti-Saxon alliance between Bohemia, the Polabian Slavs, and the Magyars.\nWenceslaus introduced German priests into his realm and favoured the Latin rite instead of the old Slavic, which had gone into disuse in many places for want of priests. He also founded a rotunda consecrated to St. Vitus at Prague Castle in Prague that was the basis of present-day St. Vitus Cathedral.\nAssassination.\nIn September 935, a group of nobles allied with Wenceslaus's younger brother Boleslav plotted to kill him. After Boleslav invited Wenceslaus to a celebration of the feast of Saints Cosmas and Damian in Star\u00e1 Boleslav, three of Boleslav's companions (Tira, \u010cesta, and Hn\u011bvsa) fell on the duke and stabbed him to death. As the duke fell, Boleslav ran him through with a lance.\nAccording to Cosmas of Prague's \"Chronica Bo\u00ebmorum\" of the early 12th century, one of Boleslav's sons was born on the day of Wenceslaus's death. Because of the ominous circumstance of his birth, the infant was named Strachkvas, which means \"a dreadful feast\".\nThere is also a tradition that Wenceslaus's loyal servant Podevin avenged his death by killing one of the chief conspirators, an act for which Boleslav executed him.\nWenceslaus's assassination has been characterized as an important turning point in early Bohemian history, as the rule of Boleslav I saw him renounce the Franks, centralize power in Bohemia, and expand the territory of the polity.\nVeneration.\nWenceslaus was considered a martyr and saint immediately after his death, when a cult of Wenceslaus arose in Bohemia. Within a few decades, four biographies of him were in circulation. These hagiographies had a powerful influence on the High Middle Ages concept of the \"rex justus\" (righteous king), a monarch whose power stems mainly from his great piety as well as his princely vigor.\nReferring approvingly to these hagiographies, the chronicler Cosmas of Prague wrote circa 1119:\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Template:Blockquote/styles.css\" /&gt;But his deeds I think you know better than I could tell you; for, as is read in his \"Passion\", no one doubts that, rising every night from his noble bed, with bare feet and only one chamberlain, he went around to God\u2019s churches and gave alms generously to widows, orphans, those in prison and afflicted by every difficulty, so much so that he was considered, not a prince, but the father of all the wretched.\nSeveral centuries later, Pope Pius II asserted this legend as fact.\nAlthough Wenceslaus was only a duke during his lifetime, Holy Roman Emperor Otto I posthumously \"conferred on him the regal dignity and title\", which is why he is referred to as \"king\" in legend and song.\nThe hymn \"Svat\u00fd V\u00e1clave\" (Saint Wenceslaus) or \"Saint Wenceslas Chorale\" is one of the oldest known Czech songs. Traceable to the 12th century, it is still among the most popular religious songs in the Bohemian lands. In 1918, at the founding of the modern Czechoslovak state, the song was discussed as a possible national anthem. During the Nazi occupation, it was often played along with the Czech anthem.\nWenceslaus's feast day is celebrated on September 28. On this day, celebrations and a pilgrimage are held in the city of Star\u00e1 Boleslav, whereas the translation of his relics, which took place in 938, is commemorated on 4 March. Since 2000, the September 28 feast day has been a public holiday in the Czech Republic, celebrated as Czech Statehood Day.\nIn legend.\nLegends of Wenceslaus began to appear around the second half of the 10th century, several decades after his death, and spread both in Bohemia and abroad, including Italy, Germany, and even Russia. Such legends include the first Old Slavic legend from the 10th century, the Latin legend Crescente fide, Gumpold's legend, and Christian's legend.\nAccording to legend, one Count Radislas rose in rebellion and marched against Wenceslaus. The latter sent a deputation with offers of peace, but Radislas viewed this as cowardice. The two armies were drawn up opposite each other in battle array when Wenceslaus, to avoid shedding innocent blood, challenged Radislas to single combat. As Radislas advanced toward the king, he saw by Wenceslaus's side two angels, who cried: \"Stand off!\" Thunderstruck, Radislas repented his rebellion, threw himself from his horse at Wenceslaus's feet, and asked for pardon. Wenceslaus raised him and kindly received him again into favour.\nA second enduring legend claims an army of knights sleeps under Blan\u00edk, a mountain in the Czech Republic. They will awake and, under Wenceslaus's command, bring aid to the Czech people in their ultimate danger. There is a similar legend in Prague which says that when the Motherland is in danger or in its darkest times and close to ruin, the equestrian statue of King Wenceslaus in Wenceslaus Square will come to life, raise the army sleeping in Blan\u00edk, and upon crossing the Charles Bridge his horse will stumble and trip over a stone, revealing the legendary sword of Bruncv\u00edk. With this sword, Wenceslaus will slay all the enemies of the Czechs, bringing peace and prosperity to the land.\nLegacy.\nWenceslaus is the subject of the popular Saint Stephen's Day (celebrated on December 26 in the West) carol \"Good King Wenceslas\". It was published by John Mason Neale in 1853, and may be a translation of a poem by Czech poet V\u00e1clav Alois Svoboda. A supposed American spelling of the duke's name, \"Wenceslaus\", is occasionally encountered in later textual variants of the carol, although it was not used by Neale, and in the U.S. the name usually is spelled Wenceslas, as in the carol. Wenceslaus is not to be confused with King Wenceslaus I of Bohemia (Wenceslaus I Premyslid), who lived more than three centuries later.\nAt the beginning of the Hussite Wars Wenceslaus's name was often invoked, and it was only later that he was overshadowed by Hussite warrior Jan \u017di\u017eka. Later, even when the Hussites and Protestants gained the upper hand in Bohemia and the cult of Wenceslaus faded, he remained a venerated figure throughout Bohemia, with Jan Hus himself often referencing Wenceslaus in his sermons. During his reign, Charles IV often used Wenceslaus's image as a saint and martyr in his enterprises at home and abroad, and when the systematic Germanization of Bohemia began, Wenceslaus came to be considered a representation of the Czech national consciousness.\nAn equestrian statue of Saint Wenceslaus and other patrons of Bohemia (St. Adalbert, St. Ludmila, St. Prokop, and St. Agnes of Bohemia) are on Wenceslaus Square in Prague. The statue is a popular meeting place. Demonstrations against the Communist regime were held there.\nHis helmet and armour are on display inside Prague Castle.\nIn popular culture.\nThe 1930 silent film \"St. Wenceslas\" was at the time the most expensive Czech film ever made.\nOgden Nash wrote a comic epic poem, \"The Christmas that Almost Wasn't\" (1957), in which a boy awakens Wenceslaus and his knights to save the kingdom of Lullapat from usurpers who have outlawed Christmas, with elements from the legend of Wenceslas.\nThe 1994 television film \"Good King Wenceslas\" is a fictionalized account of his early life. The film stars Jonathan Brandis, supported by Leo McKern, Stefanie Powers, and Joan Fontaine as Ludmila.\nNotes.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;\nReferences.\n&lt;templatestyles src=\"Reflist/styles.css\" /&gt;"}
{"id": "33876", "revid": "11292982", "url": "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki?curid=33876", "title": "WINAD", "text": ""}
